

Advance Praise for Prying Eyes 
"At a time when many Americans are worried about losing their privacy, Prying 
Eyes provides a broad, useful survey of the issues as well as practical tips on 
how to protect oneself. This book is a terrific guide for every citizen, written by 
one of America's rising stars." 
David Gergen, Kennedy School of Government, 
Harvard University and Editor-at-Large, 
U.S. News & World Report 
"Eric Gertler has produced a comprehensive, eye-opening, and—above all— 
useful guide to protecting personal privacy against a host of modern intruders. 
I learned a lot from this book, and I think that readers at every level of techni-
cal sophistication will find surprising tips and insights." 
James Fallows, National Correspondent, The Atlantic Monthly 
"One of the great historical and self-evident truths about Americans is that they 
want control of their lives and their identities. Eric Gertler's Prying Eyes outlines 
the many ways Americans' privacy is at risk and the surprising number of 
strategies they have to protect themselves. This is an indispensable guide for 
thinking about citizenship in the 21st Century." 
Lee Rainie, Director, Pew Internet & American Life Project 
"The invasion of privacy is a 21st Century crime and it affects us all. Identity 
theft and financial fraud are the most serious issues I encounter every day in 
the credit card processing business. In Prying Eyes, Gertler not only reveals 
the real risks we all face, but also the real ways in which we can reduce our 
exposure." 
Raf Sorrentino, Senior Vice President of Risk and Fraud Management, First Data Corp. 
"For the first time, an author has collected in one place the legal rights, techno-
logical tools, and practical steps available to each of us to protect our own pri-
vacy. Prying Eyes is an indispensable guide to life in the information age." 
Fred H. Cate, Distinguished Professor of Law and Director of 
the Indiana University Center for Applied Cybersecurity Research 
and author of Privacy in the Information Age 


PryingEyes 
PROTECT YOUR PRIVACY 
FROM PEOPLE WHO SELL TO YOU, 
SNOOP ON YOU, 
AND STEAL FROM YOU 
Eric J.Gertler 
RANDOM HOUSE 
REFERENCE 
New York 

Prying Eyes: Protect your privacy from people who sell to you, snoop on you, and steal 
from you 
Copyright © 2004 by Eric J. Gertler 
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. 
Published in the United States by Random House Reference, a member of The Random 
House Information Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and 
simultaneously in Canada by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. No part of this 
book may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without the 
written permission of the publisher. All inquiries should be addressed to Random House 
Reference, Random House Information Group, 1745 Broadway, New York, NY 10019. 
RANDOM HOUSE is a registered trademark of Random House, Inc. 
Please address inquiries about electronic licensing of reference products for use on a 
network, in software or on CD-ROM to the Subsidiary Rights Department, Random House 
Reference, fax 212-572-6003. 
This book is available for special discounts for bulk purchases for sales promotions or 
premiums. Special editions, including personalized covers, excerpts of existing books, and 
corporate imprints, can be created in large quantities for special needs. For more 
information, write to Random House, Inc., Special Markets/ Premium Sales, 1745 
Broadway, MD 6-2, New York, NY, 10019 or e-mail specialmarkets@randomhouse.com. 
Cover design by Tigist Getachew 
Book design by Tina R. Malaney 
This book is not intended to provide legal advice, nor does it endorse any of the products 
referenced. 
Visit the Random House website: www.randomhouse.com 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available. 
First Edition 
0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 
ISBN: 0-375-72093-6 

Contents 
Acknowledgments • vii 
Introduction: Your Life • xi 
1. What Privacy Means to You • 
l 
2. Your Personal Information and the Public Record • 16 
3. Your Identity • 51 
4. Your Credit • 76 
5. Your Money • 100 
6. Your Shopping • 134 
7. Your Computer and the Internet • 169 
8. Your Home • 217 
9. Your Workplace • 256 
10. Your Health • 293 
11. Your Everyday Life • 325 
12. I Spy, You Spy • 367 
13. The Future of Privacy • 394 
Notes • 400 
Resources • 415 
Index • 417 
V 


Acknowledgments 
YOU LIVE IN A WORLD WHERE EXCITING NEW TECHNOLOGIES AND DEVELOPMENTS a r e 
introduced every day. In so many unprecedented ways, these emerging tech-
nologies make your life more productive and more fulfilling and permit you to 
protect and keep connected to your loved ones, friends, and colleagues. At the 
same time, whether you realize it or not, these conveniences often compro-
mise your privacy and result in your sensitive personal information being 
used against you in unlimited ways. You cannot possibly keep abreast of the 
adverse effects that these new technologies have on your life, nor can legisla-
tion keep pace with these changes. 
Through my experience as CEO at Privista, an identity theft and credit 
protection company, I became exposed to the horrors caused by identity theft 
and the world of personalized information and data marketing. In time, it 
became clear that most people have little understanding of how their personal 
information is used, both positively and negatively. Privista was widely recog-
nized as a premier company that helped to educate and protect consumers. 
Prying Eyes is intended to further help you understand how your personal 
information may be accessed and by whom, and provide you with the tools 
necessary to gain as much control as possible in these changing times. It seeks 
to educate you and empower you as a consumer and as a citizen. In this way, I 
hope that this book enriches your life. 
Prying Eyes may be a book about privacy, but it is not a book about 
anonymity. Many colleagues, friends, family, and loved ones deserve recogni-
tion and credit for their invaluable input and support of this book. Prying Eyes 
is very much a product of their collective efforts, and I am deeply indebted to 
them. 
First and foremost, I would like to thank the Random House Information 
Group for taking a chance with a first time book author. From the beginning, 
they grasped the changing nature of privacy in our country and fully sup-
ported this project. Indeed, their enthusiasm and recognition of the serious-
ness of the subject matter were such that they wanted to publish the book 
VII 

• Acknowledgments • 
within months of their offer. For me, it was indeed a daunting challenge that 
never would have been realized without the guidance, encouragement, and tal-
ent of my editor Jena Pincott. From the initial outline to the first page and in 
chapter after chapter, Jena kept me focused and motivated and shaped my 
words and thoughts into a level of quality that I would never have reached on 
my own. I deeply appreciate her contribution to this effort. In addition, Laura 
Neilson conducted first-rate research and work that helped to strengthen key 
topics of the book. I also want to thank David Naggar, the president of the 
Random Information Group, and Sheryl Stebbins, the publisher, who ensured 
that this book received the necessary resources to achieve its goal. I would also 
be remiss if I failed to recognize Bonnie Ammer, Jeanne Kramer, Ellen 
Browne, and Erica Kestenbaum. 
I was also truly blessed to have enjoyed the assistance of a strong group of 
researchers. Ginger Thoerner, a long time friend and associate who worked 
with me years ago at U.S. News & World Report, focused on the chapters about 
home, work, and everyday life. I knew her work would be exceptional and of 
the highest quality. But her friendship, support, and sharp intellect combined 
with her wonderful sense of humor energized me in times of great need dur-
ing this project. Raya Kuzyk provided important and detailed research, and 
helped to uncover many of the interesting anecdotes in the book. I could not 
have been more fortunate to have her involved, as her devotion to this book 
was invaluable. Jardine Libaire provided extraordinary work on the chapters 
about health, spying, and shopping. Molly Townsend contributed superb 
research on the computer chapter. 
Others helped to inspire me, took the time to review certain chapters in 
the book, or offered guidance on certain parts of the book. Harry Evans' initial 
support reassured me that this book deserved to be published and provided 
invaluable guidance to start me on my way. Bob Brody, my former business 
partner and someone of the highest integrity and intellect, introduced me to 
important parts of the information business years ago and then provided great 
feedback on the credit chapter. Raf Sorrentino has provided unique insights 
into the world of identity theft and financial scams and Matt Breitfelder 
helped shape my views on this subject years ago and gave me important feed-
back throughout the writing process. Fred Cate thoroughly reviewed the entire 
manuscript and provided valuable feedback. Dr. James Underberg, Gerry Gold-
VIII 

• Acknowledgments • 
stein, Bruce Menin, Julie Menin, Marc Kramer, Jerry Lefcourt, Nathan 
Hochman, Jeff Bandman, Jay Rosensweig, F. Josiah Leicht, Leslie Stern, and 
Barnet L. Liberman all reviewed different parts of the book and provided 
much needed feedback and encouragement. 
Much of this book was written in my office. I need to thank Ken Landis 
and Eva Jeanbart-Lorenzotti; I am privileged to have them as friends. Julie 
Subotky, Carly Sacher, and Sarah Swanson also supported this project in 
numerous ways. 
Writing this book in such a concentrated period of time meant that I was 
less responsive to important people in my life. Thankfully, I have been blessed 
with an immediate and extended family that has always provided a strong 
support system through both the good and more challenging times. My par-
ents, Pauline and David, and my brothers, Andrew and Jamie, have been 
always been loving and encouraging. I also want to recognize my uncle Mort 
for his support on this project and over the years, and my dear aunts Carmen, 
Nettie, and Sylvia, who have always been there for me. Countless friends and 
others patiently understood when I did not return phone calls or emails, con-
tinuously rescheduled plans, and regrettably missed important events in their 
lives. 
Most importantly, I would like to acknowledge Jessica Gerstle, whose 
love, unwavering support, and constructive criticism were my bedrock 
throughout this demanding project. Her inspiration was invaluable to me 
throughout this process. Words alone cannot express my love and gratitude. 
I sincerely hope that this book meets the expectations of all those who 
contributed to it. To you, the reader, please continue turning the pages. Enjoy, 
learn, and, above all, take control of your personal information. 
I welcome your feedback at pryingeyesbook@yahoo.com. 
IX 


Introduction: Your Life 
TONIGHT, LIKE ON EVERY OTHER NIGHT OF THE WEEK, you can sit down in front of 
your television set to watch a reality show based on someone else's personal 
life. Featuring real people instead of actors, the latest sweep of reality-based 
shows runs the gamut from The Simple Life, in which two rich kids are planted 
at a farm in Arkansas, to The Bachelor, in which you can watch a bevy of 
women vie to marry the contestant, to The Apprentice, in which ambitious job 
seekers compete to win a job with Donald Trump's real estate corporation. As 
you might expect, these shows are immensely popular. For The Apprentice 
alone, more than 15 million Americans have tuned in weekly to witness 
Trump fire some poor soul. 
But there is a reality show that is even more popular, although you may 
not be aware that it's broadcast. This show is called Your Life, and it's on every 
day of the week. In fact, the show is on twenty-four hours a day for every day 
of your life, and you are the star. As in other reality shows, you expose your 
entire life to people you have never met, and these strangers get to see every 
intimate detail of your existence. But Your Life features some twists that are 
different from the reality shows on television: you don't know what informa-
tion you reveal, you don't know how your audience obtains it, and you don't 
know what they do with it. Your audience may watch Your Life out of simple 
curiosity. They may also watch it to sell something to you, or, worse, to steal 
something from you. Unlike other reality shows, Your Life isn't edited and no 
one can pull the plug. 
In Your Life, you don't compete for money, or a job, or for love. There are 
no prizes. You may discover that Your Life is being watched only when you 
suffer from identity theft or when someone uses your information to imper-
sonate you; when you discover that your image is being filmed by a hidden 
camera operated by a total stranger; when someone uses your credit card to 
spend your money on items you never purchased; or when an intimate or 
embarrassing piece of information about you is revealed to your friends and 
others. Sounds like a fun show, right? 
XI 

•i Introduction: Your Life f 
Of course, in reality Your Life does not exist as a show. But in your every-
day life, you are, in different ways, constantly tracked and monitored. 
Whether you like it or not, and whether you believe it or not, you (and every-
body else around you) are likely to be exposed to millions of prying eyes, 
including snoops, spies, and thieves, over a lifetime. This is the reality of living 
in the twenty-first century. 
Don't believe it? Perhaps statistics on the increasing number of identity 
thefts might convince you. Identity theft happens when a thief uses your per-
sonal information such as your name, social security number, or credit card 
number to commit fraud or other crimes. The more your personal information 
is exposed, the more likely you are to become a victim of identity theft. In the 
past five years, more than 27 million Americans had their identities stolen. 
Almost 10 million Americans had their identities stolen in 2003 alone. Iden-
tity theft is so rampant that it is the leading consumer fraud complaint to the 
Federal Trade Commission. As discussed in chapter 3, "Your Identity," the issue 
you face is no longer if you will have your identity stolen, but when you will 
have your identity stolen and how to deal with it. 
Not only are you likely to have your identity stolen, but given the stagger-
ing number of surveillance cameras, camcorders, and other video devices, 
chances are good that people will also steal glimpses of you wherever you go. 
Most of the memorable images you see on television were never intended for 
public consumption. Do you remember the camcorder footage of the Los 
Angeles policemen beating Rodney King? Riots erupted around the country 
when that footage was broadcast. Were you appalled when you saw the tape of 
the Indiana woman beating her daughter in a public parking lot? Do you recall 
the heartbreaking images of an unknown man approaching eleven-year-old 
Carlie Brucia outside of a car wash in Sarasota, Florida? The girl's corpse was 
later discovered a few miles from the car wash. None of these images came 
from television crews stationed at these sites; instead, these pictures came 
from one of the myriad cameras that unblinkingly record the world. 
It is nearly impossible to travel anywhere without a video camera filming 
you. Planning to go to New York City to see a Broadway show? Walk through 
Times Square, for example, and within a six-block radius almost three hun-
dred surveillance cameras, many on private property, will capture you and 
your date rushing to get to the theater on time. Want to visit the Smithsonian 
XII 

* Introduction: Your Life f 
in Washington, DC? Authorities there are building a network that will link the 
hundreds of existing surveillance cameras with new cameras that will feed 
hundreds of images into a single command center that oversees the entire city. 
Eventually, cameras in the nation's capitol will be omnipresent. But Washing-
ton, DC, is just beginning to scratch the surface of surveillance. By comparison, 
London is years ahead, with 1.5 million video cameras in public places. The 
typical Londoner is photographed three hundred times per day on average. 
Getting the picture yet? Layer on top of that today's sophisticated satellite 
technology, which can cover and focus in with high quality and resolution on 
almost any location in the world. Did you know that the Federal National 
Imagery and Mapping Agency used spy satellite technology to assist the 
Secret Service and FBI with security during the Winter Olympics in Salt Lake 
City? Given the increasing number of cameras and the limited resources of 
law enforcement, one entrepreneur has even proposed the establishment of a 
citizen task force to help monitor all these cameras and thereby assist with the 
country's national security protection. 
If you believe that the increased numbers of surveillance cameras are the 
byproduct of antiterrorist initiatives in big cities or at big events, think again. 
The government, law enforcement agencies, private businesses, and individu-
als are setting up cameras all over America, including in small towns. Some 
record your selection of soft drinks at your local convenience store. Others 
monitor whether you stop at red lights or gauge your speed to determine if 
you violate speed limits. Others may record your comings and goings in public 
places and at work. Perhaps your ex-husband has planted a camera in your 
bedroom ceiling. Some cameras, in the hands of cell phone camera owners, 
may catch you bending down to pick up a quarter. Yet others tape you as you 
cross the street and go about the everyday business of Your Life. 
But remember that your reality show reveals much more about you than 
your face. Identity thieves and marketers can't get much information about 
you from surveillance cameras and satellite monitoring alone. Instead, they 
rely on numerous sources. For example, the public record. From the moment 
you are born, information about you gets recorded in public documents that 
others can examine and copy. Every major transition in your life, no matter 
how sensitive or sentimental, including your marriage or divorce, home pur-
chase or home sale, is recorded and may be accessed. Your achievements, sor-
XIII 

* Introduction: Your Life f 
rows, and life-changing events are public records for your neighbors, friends, 
and strangers to discover. Chapter 2, "Your Personal Information and the Pub-
lic Record," examines these issues in greater detail. 
Wherever you go and whatever you do, you dispense vital information 
about yourself. Chapter 4, "Your Credit," reveals how when you apply for credit 
cards, loans, and mortgages, your information gets compiled in credit reports 
that credit bureaus provide to banks and other financial institutions. Chapter 
5, "Your Money," reveals what your bank knows about you and what it can dis-
close to other businesses. Chapter 6, "Your Shopping," discusses the ways 
retailers and stores collect information about you. When you complete sur-
veys and return warranty cards, or enroll in a loyalty card program, a retailer 
gathers and retains information about you so the retailer can market to you 
more efficiently in the future. Chapter 10, "Your Health," describes how your 
health history is circulated among doctors, insurance companies, and billing 
facilities that can view your entire record. 
When you enter the online world, every action you take is tracked. When 
you send an e-mail, buy a gift online, or surf the Internet, information about 
you and your activities is captured and stored by websites, Internet Service 
Providers (ISPs) and others, including users of spyware. As chapter 7, "Your 
Computer and the Internet," discusses, your information and data can be com-
piled and compared with certain patterns to develop a detailed profile of you 
that predicts what kind of person you are, your spending habits, and the adver-
tising you might like to see. The sensitive information that you unknowingly 
reveal as you surf the Web, participate in chat rooms, and go to bulletin boards 
can be combined with information that you personally provide to websites 
when you visit or shop. 
In the workplace, your employer has the almost-complete right to watch 
over you and your daily job activities. For example, your boss may monitor 
your activities in some obvious ways, perhaps with the use of a video camera 
as you enter and exit your building. Your employer may also require you to 
wear a badge that lets you into the building, and provides or denies access to 
certain areas of it, thereby tracking your daily whereabouts. Your employer 
also watches over you in less-obvious ways. It may be reading your e-mails, 
listening to your voice mail, eavesdropping on some of your conversations, 
or installing software on your computer to track every website you visit. 
XIV 

* Introduction: Your Life * 
Although your employer's actions may appear to be a little ominous, they fall 
within its legal rights, as chapter 9, "Your Workplace," points out. 
You cannot even enjoy the comfort of being in the privacy of your own 
home. Your home is a ripe target for telemarketers who constantly bombard 
you during dinnertime. Direct marketers also deluge you with offers for every 
imaginable credit card and insurance product. Even actions within your home 
can be monitored, as chapter 8, "Your Home" describes. For example, if you 
subscribe to TiVo, your television habits are monitored and a viewer profile of 
you is developed. The profile is so detailed that TiVo is able to suggest upcom-
ing shows that you might enjoy watching. 
The technologies and inventions that you rely on to improve your life also 
infringe on your privacy in unforeseen ways. As chapter 11, "Your Everyday 
Life," reveals, your cell phone or car may include a global positioning system 
(GPS) that can pinpoint your location at all times. When you fly, new systems 
may link your airline reservation to various commercial databases revealing cer-
tain personal and consumer information about you. The airline may not view 
your medical information or see your bank account information, but it may learn 
about your consumer habits, your magazine subscriptions, or your family life. 
The reality of Your Life is that everything you do, say, type, work on, or get 
examined can now be tracked and monitored. Is there anything you can do to 
protect yourself? The answer is that you have more control than you might 
think. The crucial first step is to be aware of all the ways in which you expose 
yourself when you're at home, at work, at the mall, and on your computer or 
phone. In many situations you can control how much you reveal. For example, 
to keep a low profile in marketing databases, you can opt out of information 
sharing programs and avoid loyalty and warranty cards. To keep your sensitive 
conversations private, you can use landline phones and avoid making calls at 
work. To reduce the number of entities that see your medical file, you can exer-
cise certain new privacy rights. To limit your chances of identity theft, you can 
shred your junk mail and watch out for scams. This book discusses these steps 
and dozens of others to protect what's left of your privacy. 
The synopsis: In Your Life you still have choices. Remember, you're the 
star of the show. You can decide if you want your character's complete life his-
tory revealed at first glance, or if you would prefer that prying eyes turn their 
gaze elsewhere. 
XV 


What Privacy 
Means to You 
SCOTT MCNEALY, CEO OF SUN MICROSYSTEMS, shocked the nation in 1999 when 
he said "You have zero privacy. Get over it." Some people interpreted his state-
ment as a foreshadowing of an Orwellian state in which citizens would suffer 
from an oppressive government or uncontrollable business interests. Others 
have come to see the loss of privacy as a harsh reality of living in the infor-
mation age, and not an altogether bad thing if it means reducing the chances 
of terrorist attacks. Still others view the diminishment of privacy as a neces-
sary evil for the conveniences you enjoy with the emergence of the Internet, 
wireless devices, and other new technologies. 
What does privacy mean to you? Ask your friends and family the same 
question. No doubt, you almost certainly will have a different view from any-
one you ask. You may view privacy as freedom from annoying everyday dis-
1 

ruptions such as telemarketers and junk mail. Your friends may define pri-
vacy as the ability to write personal e-mails from work without someone else 
reading them, get a blood test without others knowing the results, cross the 
street without being caught on video, or pay for a meal with a credit card 
without the fear of identity theft. Your spouse may define privacy as security 
for your family, such as protection from cyberstalkers who may approach 
your children with sexual advances. Ironically, your children may define pri-
vacy as the freedom to do what they want without your oversight as a parent. 
If everyone had the same definition, there would be little discussion on 
this subject. But privacy means different things to different people, and every-
one takes a different approach to protecting it. Lawyers, philosophers, archi-
tects, doctors, historians, soldiers, politicians, political scientists, and teachers 
all have different views on privacy. Political scientist Alan Westin has articu-
lated four separate definitions of privacy: 
1. Privacy is equated with solitude. According to this definition, you seek to 
distance yourself so other people cannot observe you, whether by actual 
observation or indirect observation through various forms of audio or 
video devices, or other technology. 
2. Privacy may be defined in the context of your intimate relationships with 
certain individuals or between certain groups of people. This definition 
certainly encompasses your activities as a lover, as a spouse, and within 
your family. But it also applies to certain encounters in society where you 
expect privacy, such as with your lawyer, where you are protected by 
attorney-client privileges, or with your psychiatrist or psychologist, or 
with your priest or rabbi, or even in business negotiations you conduct 
with other companies. 
3. Privacy may be "reserve," meaning that you have no desire or obligation 
to reveal certain aspects of yourself to others. 
4. Privacy may be akin to anonymity, or the concept of not being identified 
in a public setting. If you are aware you are being watched in public, you 
will become self-conscious and that will ultimately disrupt your 
enjoyment of being in public. 
Today, the debate about privacy is largely a question of the nature and 
extent of personal information about you that may be collected, stored, and 
used. It concerns the balance between the needs of government and busi-
2 

• What Privacy Means to You • 
nesses to track and store your personal information versus your right to pro-
tect it. The debate rages about what information can be collected, in what con-
text, and in what ways you can control or access any information that is 
collected. If information is collected for one pur-
pose, may that information be disclosed for another 
purpose? If your personal information is collected, 
will it be stored or kept in a secure manner, prevent-
ing others from exploiting it? 
You probably assume 
that privacy is your legal 
right as a U.S. citizen. 
In fact, the Constitution 
does not provide an 
explicit right to privacy. 
Do You Have a Constitutional 
Right to Privacy? 
You probably assume that privacy is your legal right as a U.S. citizen. In fact, 
the Constitution does not provide an explicit right to privacy. Indeed, for a 
country developed on the notion of "life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness" 
and the individualistic associations related to this concept, it is surprising that 
the Constitution does not provide for a right to privacy. 
Does this mean that there is no right to privacy? Of course not. The Con-
stitution does not convey the right to do many things you take for granted— 
including, for example, the right to marriage, which has become a divisive 
issue of late for gay couples who demand the same legal privileges of marriage 
that heterosexual couples enjoy. Rather, the Constitution was written as a 
framework for what government can do, or more precisely, it articulates the 
limited rights and powers given to the federal government. The Bill of Rights 
sought to protect certain individual liberties, and thereby outlines what gov-
ernment may not do. For example, the First Amendment restricts the govern-
ment from passing laws to abridge your freedom of speech or religion; the 
government may not search or seize your property without due process of law 
by virtue of the Fifth Amendment; and the Sixth Amendment provides that 
the government may not jail you indefinitely without a trial. Therein lies the 
balance of our governing documents: the Constitution limiting what govern-
ment may do and the Bill of Rights identifying what government may not do. 
In this way, the Founding Fathers created the Constitution to reflect that a 
government needed flexibility, and the Constitution needed to be able to stand 
for generations. 
3 

It is in this context that you can understand your legal right to privacy in 
the United States. The push to define privacy and establish laws to protect it in 
the wake of new technologies began more than one hundred years ago. In his 
2000 book Ben Franklin's Web Site: Privacy and Curiosity from Plymouth Rock 
to the Internet, Robert Ellis Smith shows a direct link between the privacy con-
cerns voiced in the 1890s when the camera, telephone, and the tabloid news-
paper were invented through to the 1990s, when the Internet and cell phones 
and other wireless devices became widely used. 
Scholars gave little thought to privacy until 1890, when Samuel Warren 
and Louis Brandeis penned their law review article entitled "The Right to Pri-
vacy." As legend has it, they were upset that the Saturday Evening Gazette had 
invaded the privacy of Warren's family when it published a gossip column 
about a breakfast party that Warren had hosted for his daughter's wedding. In 
many ways, the article provided an initial definition of privacy that was just as 
relevant then as it is now. In the words of Warren and Brandeis: 
Recent inventions and business methods all call attention to the 
next step which must be taken for the protection of the public and 
for securing to the individual what Judge Cooley calls the right to 
be let alone. Instantaneous photographs and newspaper enterprise 
have invaded the sacred precincts of private and domestic life; and 
numerous mechanical devices threaten to make good the predic-
tion that "what is whispered in the closet shall be proclaimed from 
the housetops." The intensity and complexity of life attended upon 
advanced civilization have rendered necessary some retreat from 
the world. And man under the refining influence of culture has 
become more sensitive to publicity so that solitude and privacy 
have become more essential to the individual; but modern enter-
prise and invention have through invasions upon his privacy sub-
jected him to mental pain and distress far greater than what can be 
inflicted by mere bodily injury. 
Warren and Brandeis foresaw that invasions of privacy affect people in 
both tangible and intangible ways, and their article broadened the legal con-
cept of privacy. Brandeis continued to influence the debate on privacy even 
4 

* What Privacy Means to You f 
after he became a Supreme Court justice. Almost forty years after he and War-
ren wrote their famous law review article, the Supreme Court ruled in the 
1928 case of Olmstead v. United States. Roy Olmstead, the defendant, was a 
suspected bootlegger, and federal agents installed wiretaps in the basement of 
Olmstead's office building and in the streets near his home without judicial 
approval. Olmstead was later convicted with evidence obtained from the wire-
taps. In his dissent in this case, Justice Brandeis wrote: 
The makers of our Constitution... sought to protect Americans in 
their beliefs, their thoughts, their emotions and their sensations. 
They conferred as against the Government, the right to be let 
alone—the most comprehensive of the rights of man and the right 
most valued by civilized men. 
In 1965, Justice William Douglas picked up where Brandeis and Warren 
left off. In Griswoldv. Connecticut, a landmark case concerning the privacy of a 
married couple's decision to use contraceptives, Douglas concluded that the 
state could not interfere with family planning services, laying the groundwork 
for the right to a safe and legal abortion. While acknowledging that there is no 
explicit right to privacy in the Constitution, Douglas asserted that the First 
Amendment's right of association, the Third Amendment's prohibition 
against quartering soldiers in citizens' homes, the Fourth Amendment's pro-
tection against illegal searches of homes, the Fifth Amendment's protection 
against self-incrimination, and the Ninth Amendment's statement that indi-
viduals may enjoy rights not specifically defined in the Constitution create in 
combination what he called the penumbra, or shadows, of a right to privacy. 
Striking down state laws that made the use of contraceptives by married cou-
ples illegal, Justice William Douglas wrote in the majority opinion, "Specific 
guarantees in the Bill of Rights have penumbras, formed by emanations from 
those guarantees that help give them life and substance 
Various guaran-
tees that create zones of privacy." 
Then, on January 22, 1973, the U.S. Supreme Court announced its decision 
in Roe v. Wade, a challenge to a Texas statute that made it a crime to perform an 
abortion unless a woman's life was at stake. The case involved an unmarried 
woman called Jane Roe who wanted safely and legally to end her pregnancy. Sid-
5 

ing with Roe, the Court struck down the Texas law. In its ruling, the Court recog-
nized for the first time that the constitutional right to privacy "is broad enough 
to encompass a woman's decision whether or not to terminate her pregnancy." 
Despite the Supreme Court's decisions in Griswold and Roe, the Supreme 
Court has not applied the right to privacy in a consistent manner and to all 
areas of life. One example is the Supreme Court's treatment of one's right to 
sexual privacy, particularly with respect to consensual sex between adults of 
the same sex. In 1986, the Supreme Court ruled in the case of Bowers v. Hard-
wick, which involved the arrest of Michael Hardwick for violating the Georgia 
criminal antisodomy statute. The arrest took place after the police walked into 
Hardwick's bedroom and witnessed Hardwick having sex with another man. 
Here, the Court refused to hold that Georgia's antisodomy laws were unconsti-
tutional, even if the prohibited sexual activity involved two mutually consent-
ing adults in their own home. In 2003, however, the Supreme Court came to 
the opposite conclusion in a case that involved almost identical facts. In this 
case, Lawrence and Garner v. State of Texas, the Supreme Court overruled Bow-
ers by extending the right to privacy and declaring state antisodomy laws 
unconstitutional. (See chapter 8, "Your Home," for specific details.) 
New Challenges to Your Privacy 
The privacy rights established in the family planning cases and the reversal of 
antisodomy laws exemplify the struggle for privacy rights. Today's most press-
ing concerns involve new challenges to individual privacy resulting from tech-
nology—the same issue that Brandeis and Warren wrote about in 1890, 
following the invention of instant photographs and tabloids, that "what is whis-
pered in the closet shall be proclaimed from the housetops." The same desire to 
preserve "the sacred precincts of private and domestic life" applies today 
The Internet and other new technologies, such as camera cell phones and 
other wireless devices are exciting and important developments but are still in 
their early stages, so the full scope of their threat and risks has not been fully 
explored. Many of these technologies have already led to an increase in crime, 
including the creation of computer viruses, the destruction and theft of sensi-
tive personal information, Internet cyberstalkers, credit card theft, identity 
theft, and much more. 
6 

ûmm*:«m m^^m•**>-m:**- . •
; * » - * » 
What you may not realize 
is that the ways in which 
your sensitive personal 
information may be used 
against you are unlimited. 
• What Privacy Means to You • 
If you're like some people, you may not really care about privacy until you 
lose it. For example, you probably don't think about unwanted privacy inva-
sions until that telemarketing call wakes you up or interrupts your dinner, or 
until identity theft or credit card fraud depletes your 
bank account, demolishes your credit, and creates 
havoc in your life. 
What you may not realize is that the ways in 
which your sensitive personal information may be 
used against you are unlimited. For example, you 
may innocently share personal information in an 
online user group whose members are HIV-
positive, or you might buy illicit items and later discover that information 
about your purchases has been entered in a database and combined with other 
personal information about you. When the database is purchased or shared, it 
is possible that you could be hurt if, say, an employer, insurance company, 
spouse, or others see the sensitive information that you don't want disclosed. 
Notwithstanding these risks to you, governments and businesses gather 
and rely on your personal information for a variety of important reasons. The 
government may use it to test the effectiveness of new medical drugs, for 
example. Courts use personal information to track down deadbeat dads who 
fail to pay their child obligations. Law enforcement agencies use it to track 
down criminals. People in need of organ and blood donations or bone mar-
row transfers depend on accurate and up-to-date databanks on donors. 
Businesses use personal information to better understand their markets 
so they may develop new products, improve customer service, or even 
develop personalized services that consumers demand. Over the long term, 
the collection of such data may lead to more effective marketing and theoret-
ically helps reduce the consumer price for goods. 
Nevertheless, networked commercial databases that maintain personal 
information about you are a growing threat to your privacy. Today, nearly 
every company that markets consumer products is compiling databases to 
track and monitor its customer base. In addition, although estimates vary, pri-
vacy experts believe hundreds if not thousands of data aggregators are in the 
business of maintaining comprehensive information about you. Companies 
use these lists to solicit consumers with special promotions or offers. For 
7 

* Prying Eyes f 
example, Acxiom, a database company based in Arkansas, has developed and 
maintains a real-time database that collects and processes information on 
nearly every American household. The company's clients can use the compre-
hensive information stored in its database to 
develop and deepen relationships with customers 
based on all sorts of criteria, including zip code, 
income, lifestyle, or even a profile of "timeless eld-
ers" or "Single City Struggles." Companies will 
often buy lists from data aggregators and combine 
these lists with their own customer databases. 
The information that many companies track 
and maintain goes far beyond simple demographic 
data, such as your name, how much you make, and 
where you live. Indeed, the extent of available infor-
mation is limited only by technology itself. Each 
individual electronic transaction you make—from 
the use of a credit, debit, or ATM card to "loyalty" 
cards, online bill payment, and check payment— 
provides clues to parts of your life. When these individual pieces of informa-
tion are integrated, they create a vivid picture of you and your personal life. 
For example, when a supermarket clerk swipes your loyalty card through a 
scanner, a database links your identity with the bar code on every item you 
have purchased. Although you may not consider your taste for frozen pizza 
dinners an especially tantalizing piece of information, when combined with 
your age, credit standing, ethnicity, religion, and marital status, such informa-
tion becomes quite interesting to marketers. 
The number of companies that offer personalized marketing is growing. 
The technology these companies use is increasingly efficient, enabling busi-
nesses to sort and categorize data to target specific people for specialized mar-
keting purposes. For example, a class-action lawsuit against Metromail 
Corporation revealed the types of information contained in its database. The 
computer file on one individual, Beverly Dennis, included nine hundred per-
sonal details printed out on twenty-five pages and dating back an entire 
decade. Among other things, Metromail knew Dennis's income, hobbies, and 
ailments, her preferred brand of antacid tablets, whether she had dentures, 
Each individual electronic 
transaction you make— 
from the use of a credit, 
debit, or ATM card to 
"loyalty" cards, online 
bill payment, and check 
payment—provides clues 
to parts of your life. 
When these individual 
pieces of information are 
integrated, they create a 
vivid picture of you and 
your personal life. 
8 

* What Privacy Means to You t 
and how often she used room deodorizers, sleeping aids, and hemorrhoid 
remedies. Another company, the New York-based firm American Student 
Lists, sells the personal information it gathers on millions of high school stu-
dents from such diverse sources as driver's licenses, student directories, maga-
zine subscriptions, yearbook publishers, class ring vendors, formal wear 
companies, fast food companies, and book clubs. There are also companies 
that sell lists of people with particular medical conditions, ranging from 
patients who are clinically depressed, women who have yeast infections, and 
diabetics, to people who suffer from Alzheimer's disease, birth defects, Parkin-
son's disease, or physical handicaps. The extent to which businesses engage in 
the trade of personal information is astounding. 
September 11 and Your Privacy 
Any discussion of privacy rights must be put into the context of the devastat-
ing effects of the September 11 terrorist attacks and the consequences associ-
ated with the attacks. Without question, September 11 was a watershed in 
terms of its effect on the American public's views of privacy. Principles and 
laws established by Brandeis and Douglas and others had set a precedent 
toward more privacy rights, but September n had the opposite effect. As a 
result of the terrorist attacks, national security became Americans' primary 
concern and invariably trumped concern for individual privacy. 
Prior to September 11, privacy was a key issue in the minds of Americans. 
One survey conducted in 1999 by the Wall Street Journal and NBC indicated 
that privacy was the issue of greatest concern facing Americans at the turn of 
the 21st century—more important, ironically, than terrorist attacks on Ameri-
can soil, overpopulation, or global warming. In early 2001, Chief Justice 
William Rehnquist stated, "Technology now permits millions of important 
and confidential conversations to occur through a vast system of electronic 
networks. These advances however raise significant privacy concerns. We are 
placed in the uncomfortable position of not knowing who might have access 
to our personal and business e-mails, our medical and financial records, or our 
cordless and cellular telephone conversations." 
In the months before September 11, Americans viewed a company's com-
mitment to an individual's privacy as essential for doing business. In a 
9 

After September 1 1 , 
privacy and the individual 
rights associated with it 
were outweighed by an 
interest in enhanced 
national security. 
• Prying Eyes • 
national survey conducted in September 2000 by the Privacy Council and 
Privista, survey respondents stated that a company's commitment to privacy 
was as important as maintaining product satisfaction, offering customer dis-
counts, or having an 800 number for consumer feed-
back. Moreover, companies that failed—whether 
intentionally or not—to respect or manage privacy 
concerns had to deal with the serious consequences 
of real or perceived privacy violations. For example, 
after a hostile public reaction, DoubleClick, a suc-
cessful Internet and technology company, aban-
doned its plans to integrate its online database of 
customer profiles with the offline database it had 
secured when it acquired the company Abacus. Another company, Geocities, 
now part of Yahoo, was the subject of a privacy violation complaint by the Fed-
eral Trade Commission for sharing customer information in a manner incon-
sistent with its privacy policy. As a result, the company experienced a serious 
drop in its stock price, though the stock later regained much of its value. The 
bottom line was clear: companies had to take a serious look at their privacy 
commitment to their customers. 
At the same time, numerous privacy laws were being considered in Con-
gress and in the statehouses. The emphasis on the protection of privacy was 
moving in the direction of creating new legal rights to privacy, and legislators 
in both the Democratic and Republican parties were working in tandem to 
pass legislation. In 2000, for example, fifty privacy bills were pending in Con-
gress, dealing with both online and offline privacy concerns. Such initiatives 
reflected consumer reactions and polls, and thus both the states and Congress 
wanted to enhance individual privacy rights. 
In the aftermath of September 11, consumer, legislative, and public senti-
ment changed. The overwhelming desire to achieve greater national security 
trumped all other concerns. From all perspectives, the world had changed 
overnight, and the Bush administration sought and achieved a new means of 
dealing with the foreign threat of terrorism. In the world's greatest democracy, 
privacy and the individual rights associated with it were outweighed by an 
interest in enhanced national security. What followed stoked unwelcome 
memories of steps the country had taken in earlier times of great national anx-
10 

* What Privacy Means to You * 
iety, such as the quarantine of the Japanese during World War II and the out-
ing of Communist Party members during the 1950s. 
Forty-five days after the terrorist attacks of September 11, with little debate 
or scrutiny in Congress, the government passed the Uniting and Strengthening 
America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct 
Terrorism Act, more commonly known as the USA Patriot Act or the Patriot 
Act. The name of the act itself seems to characterize even mild criticism of the 
act's provisions as unpatriotic—implying that if you're against the Patriot Act, 
you're unpatriotic. The act considerably expanded the investigative powers of 
the government and turned two hundred years of jurisprudence on its head. 
Under the act, the government no longer needs to abide by the standards of 
"probable cause" required for a search warrant. Rather, law enforcement agents 
only need to certify that the information they are seeking is relevant to an 
ongoing criminal investigation. Accordingly, law enforcement agents can 
broadly access any information relevant to their investigation, including infor-
mation regarding your personal financial information, your medical records, 
and your school and library records. You name it, and they can obtain it. More 
importantly, you may never even know you are being investigated, because law 
enforcement officials are no longer required to tell you. 
In addition to the Patriot Act, the government also sought to develop what 
it called a Total Information Awareness program. This program would have 
empowered the government to create a massive database to track all your per-
sonal information. With this centralized database, the government would have 
had the ability to comb through your bank records, tax filings, driver's license 
information, your credit card purchases, your magazine subscriptions, your 
online activities, your medical prescriptions, your educational records, and 
much more. Public outcry ultimately shut down this program in 2003. Despite 
the demise of the Total Information Awareness program, the government con-
tinues to use Carnivore, a computer system developed by the FBI that, when 
connected to the network of an Internet Service Provider (ISP), can intercept 
millions of e-mail messages per second. The system monitors the e-mails of 
both its target and innocent people who use the same ISP. The genie is out of 
the bottle now that the technology and database capabilities are able to track 
electronic correspondence. 
When the Patriot Act was passed, citizens did not seem upset about the 
11 

* Prying Eyes * 
act's provisions, and Congress, the state legislatures, and the courts seemed to 
agree. Throughout the country, previous legislative initiatives in support of 
privacy rights were put on the back burner. In keeping with this spirit, in 
2002, the United States Foreign Intelligence Sur-
veillance Court of Review issued its first-ever ruling 
in twenty-five years of existence in which it 
expanded the government's right to use wiretap 
surveillance in criminal investigations. 
As time has passed and the country has moved 
further from the horrible events of September 11, 
the public again has demanded legislation that will 
protect the privacy of citizens from intrusions of 
both government and business. Beginning in 2003, 
a number of important legislative actions have 
taken place in addition to the shutdown of the Total 
program. For example, on January 1, 2004, the Fair 
and Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003 went into effect helping to pro-
tect you against identity theft. The act requires credit bureaus to provide you 
with one free credit report per year, requires merchants and lenders to provide 
you with early notification of missed payments, and requires merchants to 
truncate your credit card number on receipts to the last five digits, among 
other things (see chapter 3, "Your Identity," for additional details). In 2003, the 
Do Not Call Registry, a federal program that restricts commercial telemar-
keters from calling you after you register, went into effect. The registry was 
designed to reduce unwanted phone calls to consumers, especially during the 
dinner hour. As expected, the response was overwhelmingly positive: more 
than 7 million telephone numbers were registered on the program's first day; 
more than 56 million numbers were registered by January 2004 (refer to chap-
ter 8, "Your Home," for more information). In addition, on January 1, 2004, a 
federal Internet anti-spamming bill called the Can-Spam Act went into effect, 
restricting commercial e-mail companies or spammers from using false identi-
ties and misleading subject lines. (Chapter 7, "Your Computer and the Inter-
net," provides more details.) In addition, about 250 municipalities around the 
country have passed legislation supporting individual rights in direct contra-
vention of the Patriot Act. In December 2003, two federal appeals courts 
As time has passed and 
the country has moved 
further from the horrible 
events of September 1 1 , 
the public again has 
demanded legislation 
that will protect the 
privacy of citizens from 
intrusions of both 
government and business. 
Information Awareness 
12 

* What Privacy Means to You f 
rejected the Bush administration's policy with respect to captives suspected of 
being terrorists. A New York federal appeals court ruled that the Bush admin-
istration lacked authority to detain indefinitely a U.S. citizen arrested in the 
United States simply by declaring the citizen "an enemy combatant"; and a 
San Francisco appeals court ruled that it was unconstitutional to imprison 
noncitizens captured in the Afghan War in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, without 
access to an attorney 
Privacy and the Rest of the World 
If you compare an individual's right to privacy in the United States with the 
rights enjoyed by citizens of other countries, you are faced with a paradox. You 
might be surprised to learn that as a United States citizen you enjoy far fewer 
privacy rights, at least in a commercial context, than your counterparts in 
other parts of the world, including other democracies. Indeed, the country that 
most respects individualism does the least to protect an individual's privacy, at 
least in the private sector. Some legal scholars argue that, even with the pas-
sage of the Patriot Act, federal and state laws in the U.S. do more than other 
countries to protect individual privacy in the public sector. 
Nevertheless, take a look at the privacy laws in Europe. There, strict and 
comprehensive rules govern how governments and companies may collect 
or use almost any type of information, including such personal data as your 
age, marital status, buying patterns, and even the information on a standard 
business card. European retailers are required to seek permission to collect 
data, use information for their own marketing purposes, share data with 
marketing partners, or sell it—practices that data collectors in the United 
States can do without asking permission. European companies must allow 
consumers access to any personal information that is stored and the ability 
to correct any erroneous information. The privacy laws also broadly restrict 
how European companies collect and maintain information on employees— 
ranging from files and statistics to video surveillance tapes—and how long 
they can keep it. European privacy laws even regulate the manner in which 
European companies may transmit personal information to other countries, 
including the United States. The United States regulates privacy in far more 
limited ways. 
13 

-+ Prying Eyes f-
Today, Canada, South 
America, Australia, New 
Zealand, and Japan, 
among others, have 
adopted privacy standards 
or values similar to those 
in the European Union. As 
the European Union 
increases the number of 
its member countries, the 
jurisdiction of these 
privacy laws will expand. 
Current U.S. antiterrorism measures conflict with European views on pri-
vacy as well as privacy laws. For example, U.S. carriers are required to collect 
passenger names and other information so that customs officials can assess 
security threats prior to a flight's arrival in the 
United States, while European privacy laws gener-
ally prevent European airlines flying from Europe 
to disclose such information. To date, a number of 
flights to the United States, especially during the 
2003 Christmas holidays, have been cancelled 
because of American security concerns. For the 
moment, officials from the European Union and 
American authorities are seeking a compromise 
and European airlines are cooperating with United 
States requirements. It remains to be seen if this 
cooperation is the result of joint security goals or a 
concern that noncompliance could lead to fines or 
the loss of U.S. landing rights. 
European privacy laws, which started to take shape in the mid-1990s, are 
being used to model privacy laws around the world. They restrict companies 
and governments much more than do the laws in the United States. As a 
result, some multinational corporations have been forced to change some of 
their business conduct. In one example, General Motors was reprimanded for 
compiling a directory of home phone numbers of European executives with-
out first obtaining their permission, a standard practice for many American 
businesses. Today, Canada, South America, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan, 
among others, have adopted privacy standards or values similar to those in the 
European Union. As the European Union increases the number of its member 
countries, the jurisdiction of these privacy laws will expand. 
In the United States, you do not own your privacy, at least in terms of the 
personal information that defines you. In simple terms, in the United States, 
everything is permissible except what is prohibited. In Europe, the opposite is 
the case, and everything is prohibited except what is permissible. But even in 
Europe, citizens don't have perfect privacy. While data is regulated in the EU, 
surveillance images, for example, are not. Video surveillance cameras are even 
more widespread in certain parts of Europe than they are in the United States. 
14 

* What Privacy Means to You f 
Where Do You Go From Here? 
In a world of widespread monitoring, is avoiding new computer technologies, 
cell phone cameras, credit cards, and any newfangled gadget the final answer 
to the privacy problem? Of course not. 
In the past, any improvements in technology have been double-edged, giv-
ing people more privacy on the one hand and endangering their privacy on 
the other. Consumer cameras allow people to take private and informal pic-
tures to record their lives, but the photos themselves could end up in the 
wrong hands and candid photos of unsuspecting subjects could be seen as a 
violation of privacy. The invention of envelopes with adhesive flaps boosted 
expectations of private letter writing between people, but also boosted an 
unrealistic expectation of privacy. The invention of the telephone brought 
direct and private communications over long distances, but subjects people to 
the dangers of wiretapping. 
The same is true of today's new technologies. Cell phones allow you to 
make calls in a private place but make you vulnerable to tapping; the Internet 
brings the world's largest library (and mall) to the privacy of your home but 
subjects you to the dangers of spyware, spam, and viruses; the video camera 
makes it possible for you to film home videos, but anyone who gets their 
hands on your videos could make unlimited copies of them or post them over 
the Web for millions to see. 
Can you imagine living your life without the technologies that make it 
easier? Would you really stop using a credit card even though your credit 
card company records all your purchases? Would you stop using an E-Z Pass 
if it meant an increase in waiting time at tollbooths? Or stop using the Inter-
net because of spammers? 
The reality is that you must embrace progress and new technologies. The 
Luddites, the notorious workers who destroyed new technologies during the 
Industrial Revolution, failed to stop technological progress, and modern Lud-
dites will also fail. Just as power looms eventually led the way to a better stan-
dard of living, so, too, have today's technologies made possible the many 
benefits that you enjoy and probably could not forego. Understanding the pri-
vacy risks associated with them is just a part of enjoying the freedoms they 
offer. 
15 

Your Personal 
Information and the 
Public Record 
Your only brush with the law took place when you were in high 
school and you were charged with a misdemeanor for drinking and 
getting too rowdy at your high school graduation. You've gone on to 
complete your master's degree in education at an Ivy League univer-
sity. You assume that your high school misdemeanor is sealed in the 
court records and forgotten for good. But it isn't—and you discover 
this fact during your sixth interview with a prospective employer. 
You look into your purse and notice your wallet is not there. A few 
days earlier you had misplaced the same purse and gone through 
the hassle of replacing IDs and canceling checks, only to find the 
purse later with all the contents intact. Should you repeat the 
16 

4 Your Personal Information and the Public Record t 
process or should you assume the wallet will turn up, like the last 
time? Unfortunately, this time the wallet had really been stolen, 
along with your driver's license, credit cards, checkbook, and social 
security number. Within days, thieves use the information to drain 
your personal bank account of thousands of dollars. 
You go to the Department of Motor Vehicles to replace your li-
cense. The clerk behind the desk types your name into her com-
puter, looks you in the eye, and tells you that the picture she has on 
file doesn't look at all like you. She swivels the monitor in your di-
rection. You see your name, address, birth date, and driver's license 
number. But you have to agree with the clerk—the woman smiling 
widely in the photo, the one who recently renewed your license, 
doesn't look even remotely like you. 
One of life's little ironies is that your most private information is in fact 
quite public. Almost every major event in your life, no matter how sensitive or 
sentimental, gets recorded in a public record that you and many others can 
easily access. From your birth to your death, marriage to divorce, home pur-
chase to home sale, income and taxes to bankruptcy, the public record reflects 
your life's achievements and sorrows. Needless to say, given the existence of 
such public records, it is very difficult for you to protect your most personal 
information and your privacy. 
By way of background, a public record is any record, file, or information 
that any unit of federal, state, or local government maintains about a particular 
individual. A plethora of personal information about you exists in government 
files—far beyond the standard fare of name, address, and social security num-
ber. The public record includes birth, marriage, divorce, and death certificates, 
court records, voter data, and much more, as you'll see below. 
You should protect your personal information in the same way you pro-
tect your material and tangible possessions such as your home and jewelry. 
Quite a bit of sensitive information is in the public record, but some of this 
information isn't always readily available, such as your social security number. 
It is prudent to keep information such as your social security number as pri-
vate as possible, so identity thieves cannot access it through public records and 
17 

use it to create a detailed profile of you. If this happens, you may suffer from 
the loss of something even more valuable than your pearls or your great-
grandfather's gold watch: your identity. 
This chapter focuses on the general nature of the information contained 
in public records and how accessible it is, as well as an overview of the most 
important personal documents that you must monitor and protect. When it 
comes to your personal documents and the public record, the best way to pro-
tect yourself is to make sure your information is accurate and limited to the 
extent possible. 
Information Contained in Public Records 
Public records not only record the important transitions in your life, such as 
your birth, marriage, and death, they may also identify your occupation, your 
political beliefs, and even your hobbies. What might be learned about you 
from the public record? Almost anything, including: 
• what you look like (your sex, age, height, weight, eye color) 
• your marital status 
• where you were born 
• your occupation 
• how you spend some of your leisure time (such as certain hobbies) 
• any physical property you own 
• whether you have certain medical conditions 
• details of your stock ownership in public companies 
• details of your home ownership (including the price you paid for your 
home, home loans that you have incurred, and the assessed value of 
your home) 
• your car(s) 
• whether you own a boat or airplane 
• your political views (likelihood of voting and political contributions) 
• and much, much more 
Where does this information come from? It comes from federal, state, and 
local public files, including driver's licenses and driving records; motor vehicle 
18 

• Your Personal Information and the Public Record • 
registration and titles from the Department of Motor Vehicles; boat, aircraft, 
and other vehicle titles; land titles and property tax records; voting registra-
tion and political contribution records; occupational licenses; firearms per-
mits and hunting and fishing licenses; certain communications use licenses; 
filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission; and address records 
from the U.S. Postal Service. In addition, there are public files about any inter-
action you may have had with either civil courts or criminal courts. These files 
may include court records related to bankruptcy, civil actions, divorces, juror 
information, and general court docket information. In criminal matters, public 
files may include criminal court records, law enforcement records, police blot-
ters, jail lists, and compiled criminal history records. 
The amount of information about you that is included in public records 
depends upon the state in which you live, because different states maintain 
different records or may have different laws that regulate their state public 
records. For example, New Jersey and South Dakota are among the most 
restrictive states; Florida and Indiana are among the most open. 
Access to Public Records 
Liam Youens contacted Docusearch, an Internet-based investigation 
and information service that relies heavily on public records, and re-
quested information about Amy Lynn Boyer, a twenty-year-old 
woman who had spurned his romantic advances back in high school. 
For about $150, Youens secured Boyer's employment information 
and social security number (which Docusearch secured from a credit 
reporting agency). On October 15, 1999, Youens went to the den-
tist's office where Boyer worked and fatally shot her as she was leav-
ing. Then Youens committed suicide. Youens maintained a website 
that detailed his obsession with Boyer. The site included his com-
ment that "It's actually obsene [sic] what you can find out about peo-
ple on the Internet. " Boyer's family lobbied for Amy Boyer's Law, 
which would have prohibited the display and certain uses of social 
security numbers without the holder's permission, with certain ex-
ceptions. Consumer and privacy groups opposed the proposal, not-
19 

Today, anyone can sit 
on a favorite lounge chair, 
place his or her feet on 
the accompanying 
ottoman, and access 
almost any public record 
with a few keystrokes. 
• Prying Eyes • 
ing the statute's significant exceptions for commercial use of social 
security numbers and public records. 
Are you hiding a dirty little secret? Let's hope 
that if it is dirty, it is little, because it is not likely to 
be secret. Today, in the eyes of the government, or 
anyone with access to public record files, you can-
not expect to be anonymous. 
In the past, anyone who wanted to access a 
public record had to research the appropriate 
agency that might possess the particular record, 
travel to the agency, enter during appropriate hours 
of inspection, hope that the desired file was com-
plete, and then copy the document. Before the advent of the Internet, your 
entire public record consisted of paper documents physically located in differ-
ent locations, many of which were spread throughout the country. Today, any-
one can sit on a favorite lounge chair, place his or her feet on the 
accompanying ottoman, and access almost any public record with a few key-
strokes. 
How? Some public records are available online at government offices and 
public records sites. Sources of public record information on the Internet are 
data aggregators such as ChoicePoint, West Group, Accurint (Seisint, Inc.), and 
Lexis-Nexis. These aggregators cull public records including (subject to indi-
vidual state laws): indexes of civil and criminal court cases; bankruptcies, 
judgments, and liens; property records; professional license information; 
Department of Motor Vehicles data; voter registration data; and certain stock 
ownership in public companies. They may also collect information from 
sources that aren't in the public record, including surveys, sweepstakes ques-
tionnaires, loyalty-card programs, and monitoring of Internet shopping (see 
chapter 6, "Your Shopping," and chapter 7, "Your Computer and the Internet"). 
Data aggregators sell their information to individuals and various busi-
nesses. Marketing companies buy certain information to target their products 
to the best customers. The various credit bureaus use public records to moni-
tor name changes (as a result of marriage or divorce) or address changes so 
their consumer credit files are up-to-date. Private investigators and attorneys 
20 

* Your Personal Information and the Public Record * 
DATA AGGREGATORS AND UNCLE SAM 
Data aggregation is a booming, multibillion-dollar business in the United 
States. Marketing companies spend fortunes collecting aggregated infor-
mation from the public record and other sources, and so does the govern-
ment. In 1993, the 1RS approached several data aggregation companies to 
obtain lists of people living the high life—those buying expensive yachts, 
homes, planes, and more. The agency wanted to compare such data with 
tax returns to check if these individuals underreported their incomes. 
The symbiotic relationship between data aggregators and government 
has become increasingly controversial since September 11 and the passage 
of the Patriot Act. Atlanta-based ChoicePoint, for example, has thirty-five 
government contracts worth millions of dollars. It sells personal informa-
tion to federal law-enforcement agencies, including the FBI, the Drug 
Enforcement Administration (DEA), the U.S. Marshals Service, and thou-
sands of police departments across the country. 
Privacy advocates are worried not only about an Orwellian government, 
but also about individuals in government offices using the information for 
corrupt purposes or developing detailed profiles to single out certain indi-
viduals. In addition, information in public records may contain inaccurate 
data about individuals. Such information may be combined with other 
information in marketers' extensive databases and then such inaccurate 
information may continue to circulate as marketers sell the information to 
others. Citizens don't have easy access to their profiles. (Most commercial 
data aggregators offer subscriptions only to businesses or government. 
ChoicePoint is one exception: it allows people to purchase access to certain 
data through its KnowX subsidiary.) Moreover, citizens cannot easily cor-
rect any inaccuracies that might mislead authorities. The Fair Credit 
Reporting Act (see chapter 4, "Your Credit") allows you to make corrections 
to your credit file, but data aggregators don't provide you with similar 
access to their extensive databases. 
21 

Some public records that 
government agencies 
keep are deemed 
confidential and are 
generally inaccessible to 
the general public. 
• Prying Eyes • 
access these records to bolster their cases. Employers do background checks 
on prospective employees by using public records to compile sensitive infor-
mation on employees, including arrest records and court files. Finally, even 
federal agencies, such as the FBI, have contracts 
with warehouse companies that aggregate personal 
information (see page 21). 
From a public policy perspective, access to pub-
lic records has multiple benefits. Political scientists 
argue that public access furthers the democratic 
principles of an open and accessible government 
and society, enables citizens to check the activities 
of government, and maintains an active and 
informed citizenry. For example, the press accesses public records to investi-
gate the wrongdoings of government officials, or to reveal misconduct of those 
responsible for the public safety of others, such as airline pilots or school bus 
drivers. The organization Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD) has used 
motor vehicle records to identify drivers with a record of previous alcohol 
abuses. 
On the other hand, public access to your records may infringe on your pri-
vacy in many ways. Access to such records can encourage law enforcement 
officials to pry into your personal records. Public officials can unwittingly 
release information about you to the general public. Your friends may learn 
what you paid for your new house and neighbors may learn the intimate 
details of your recent divorce case. Finally, criminals and identity thieves can 
fraudulently and illegally use your personal information to commit various 
crimes against you, including identity theft. 
Despite the public nature of this information, some public records that 
government agencies keep are deemed confidential and are generally inacces-
sible to the general public. Certain information is restricted to protect foreign 
policy or national defense interests, to foster law enforcement investigations, 
to support the deliberative processes of government, and to protect the confi-
dentiality of private business information in government files. One notable 
example is your tax records. Your tax records are considered private and confi-
dential, so access to your Internal Revenue Service (1RS) file is generally 
denied to others. 
22 

• Your Personal Information and the Public Record • 
The following public records are generally confidential: 
• tax records 
• wage and personal property tax records 
• health/medical records 
• school records (except directory information) 
• military records 
• juvenile criminal proceedings 
• welfare and other benefit records (such as food stamps) 
• social security number 
Notwithstanding the sensitive and confidential nature of these records, 
even this personal information can be accessed and made available in certain 
circumstances. For example, your tax information can be revealed if you are 
involved in a court action where tax issues are relevant; in the event you owe 
child support payments; if you are seeking financial aid under a state pro-
gram; when your tax information is needed for government statistical or 
administrative purposes; or if law enforcement agencies require the informa-
tion. Your social security number may be released to insurance companies, 
banks, courts, employers, and others. 
Do you wonder when confidential really means confidential? It helps to 
keep in mind the motto of the Aspen Daily News "If you don't want it printed, 
don't let it happen." Since you cannot prevent your personal information from 
being filed in various public records, expect it to be made public at some point. 
The Privacy Act of 1974 and the Freedom 
of Information Act 
George Culpepper, a junior at the Metropolitan State College of 
Denver, claimed that his professor violated the Family Educational 
and Privacy Act of 1974 when she published information about 
Culpepper's grades in a December 2003 article in the Denver Post. 
The act requires schools to have written permission from the stu-
dent to release any information in a student's education record. 
23 

Since you cannot prevent 
your personal information 
from being filed in various 
public records, expect it 
to be made public 
at some point. 
• Prying Eyes • 
For almost twenty years, reporter Seth Rosenfeld fought to obtain 
FBI records about the bureau's illegal and covert activities at the Uni-
versity of California in the 1950s. Rosenfeld sued the bureau three 
times for withholding information that he 
thought should have been revealed under the 
Freedom of Information Act. He finally got his 
story when the FBI was forced in court to re-
lease two hundred thousand pages of informa-
tion that revealed the agency's incriminating 
activities. One censored item was FBI Director 
J. Edgar Hoover's infuriated response when he 
was informed of an optional test question on 
the university's 1959 English aptitude test, "What are the dangers to 
a democracy of a national police organization like the FBI which op-
erates secretly and is unresponsive to public criticism?" 
Much of your personal information might be public, but that doesn't 
mean you don't have any rights or that all your information is available carte 
blanche to whoever orders it. 
Given the public policy considerations and the sensitive nature of the infor-
mation contained in your public records, many different laws at the federal, 
state, and local levels govern the specific categories of information available for 
public access, or the nature of such access, as the case may be. Two principal 
federal privacy laws govern access to personal information within federal gov-
ernment agencies. These laws are the Privacy Act of 1974 and the Freedom of 
Information Act. As their respective names suggest, the Privacy Act ensures 
that individuals can maintain confidentiality with respect to their government 
records, and the Freedom of Information Act assists those who seek to open 
government records. Combined, these two laws seek to balance public policy 
considerations with respect to access to public records. Every state has similar 
laws that incorporate many of the principles of the federal laws to govern both 
the privacy and access to information at a state or local level. 
The Privacy Act of 1974. The Privacy Act gives you certain rights to protect 
your personal information contained in public records. These rights include: 
24 

-• Your Personal Information and the Public Record *-
• to see and copy those records that the federal government keeps on you 
• to discover who has had access to your personal information 
• to change any inaccurate or irrelevant information contained in your 
public record 
Under the Freedom of 
Information Act you may 
even order a copy of your 
FBI file—for a fee. 
Moreover, the Privacy Act imposes certain 
requirements on government agencies that main-
tain public records. For instance, the agency may 
only use the information for the purpose for which 
it was initially gathered. If you make a request to 
see your information, the responsible agency must respond to your request 
within ten days. To initiate the process, write the government agency that 
maintains your public file. (Use the website of the United States Government 
Printing Office at www.gpoaccess.gov, which contains descriptions of the 
records maintained on individuals and the rules agencies follow to assist indi-
viduals who request information about their records.) The agency that main-
tains the information has the right to deny your request, particularly if your 
circumstances involve law enforcement activities, the Central Intelligence 
Agency (CIA), litigation, or confidential government sources, among others. If 
you are denied access to your records, or if you believe your records have been 
improperly disclosed, you have the right to appeal to or sue the government 
agency. 
The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA). Enacted in 1966, the FOIA was the 
first law that gave Americans the right to access the records of federal agencies. 
It allows U.S. citizens to keep an eye on their government's activities by access-
ing and obtaining information contained in government files. In this case, the 
responsible agency must respond within twenty days to your request for access. 
Under the Freedom of Information Act you may even order a copy of your FBI 
file—for a fee. As with the Privacy Act, your access to information will be 
restricted if it involves certain parties such as the CIA and law enforcement, or 
if it involves certain circumstances such as litigation, sensitive government 
information (internal agency memos, personnel matters, classified documents, 
confidential government sources), and violations of an individual's privacy 
interests. The press uses this act to initiate requests for information it seeks to 
25 

include in stories compiled for public consumption. If you are denied, you may 
appeal to the agency itself or sue the agency in court. 
Your Personal Documents 
Among your most essential personal documents are your social security card, 
your driver's license, and your passport. Your social security information and 
your driver's license information are contained in public records and are avail-
able to varying degrees depending upon your state, but your passport infor-
mation is private. Whether part of the public record or not, your essential 
documents need to be carefully guarded against identity theft and checked for 
accuracy. 
Social Security Information 
Fraud with respect to social security numbers is so widespread that 
even the social security numbers of top government officials, in-
cluding Central Intelligence Agency Director George Tenet, Attor-
ney General John Ashcroft, and chief political adviser Karl Rove, are 
available for purchase on the Internet. The California-based Foun-
dation for Taxpayer and Consumer Rights said it purchased the so-
cial security numbers and home addresses of these top political 
appointees for $26 each. 
Social security numbers came into being after the passage of the Social 
Security Act in 1935. The act was the result of President Franklin Roosevelt's 
desire to provide citizens with the monetary benefits they needed to offset 
the effects of the Great Depression. To distribute the benefits, the government 
implemented a system that assigned each citizen a social security number. 
The system first provided only retirement benefits; now social security also 
pays survivor and disability benefits. 
Although it was never intended to be so, your social security number is 
the key to accessing much of your private and essential personal information. 
It is part of your public record, although it is considered a confidential piece 
of information. Nevertheless, many entities are able to access your number. 
26 

* Your Personal Information and the Public Record f 
Your social security 
number is used to connect 
multiple records about 
you, tracking you through 
every move, making 
data compilation easy 
for government and 
business alike. 
The government uses your social security number to access all the informa-
tion available about you in its various databases and the various public 
records about you. Your number can also be released to insurance companies, 
banks, attorneys, and process servers. Your social 
security number is used as your main record-
keeping number in a variety of other contexts, 
including employee files, medical records, health 
insurance accounts, credit and banking accounts, 
and university ID cards, among others. Your social 
security number is used to connect multiple 
records about you, tracking you through every 
move, making data compilation easy for govern-
ment and business alike. 
Because your social security number is used for 
so many purposes, and is the key to unlocking so much information about you, 
you must use extra precaution to prevent someone from stealing or otherwise 
fraudulently using it. Given how accessible it is to so many people, it is rela-
tively easy for someone to use it to assume your identity and gain access to your 
bank account, credit accounts, utilities records, and other sources of personal 
information. An identity thief will use your social security card to set up credit 
lines, drain your savings accounts, and even obtain a credit card. 
Your social security information consists of two documents: your social 
security card or number and your annual social security statement. It's impor-
tant for you to understand these pieces of information and know how to pro-
tect them. 
Your Social Security Number or Card. Your social security card has your name 
and social security number printed on it. If you have never been issued a social 
security card, if you need a replacement card, or if you have changed your 
name, you can apply for a new card without charge. To apply for a social secu-
rity card, you must complete Form SS-5. To obtain this form, the instructions 
for completing the form, and the location of the nearest Social Security office, 
call 800/772-1213 or log on to www.ssa.gov/ssnumber. This URL also provides 
information about how to obtain a number for your child, an adopted child, or 
a foreign-born adopted child, and how to obtain a new number if you are the 
27 

• Prying Eyes • 
victim of domestic abuse. You can submit your application by mail or in per-
son, but you must supply certain supporting documentation to prove your 
identity. The above link provides details on the documents needed. 
tM^iÊÊ^ÊÈ'MÊ^3Ê>ëim:'M^^âMi^M^' 
An identity thief will 
use your social security 
card to set up credit lines, 
drain your savings 
accounts, and even 
obtain a credit card. 
Your Social Security Statement. Your social secu-
rity statement is a personal record of your past 
earnings that represent the amounts upon which 
your social security taxes have been based. It also 
provides a summary of the estimated benefits you 
and your family may receive in the future. Typi-
cally, you will receive a statement annually about 
three months before your birthday. You can also 
request your statement at any time free of charge by submitting Form SSA-
7004 by mail or contacting the Social Security Administration through their 
website. Retain your annual statements and check your statement each year 
for accuracy. 
Mistakes on your social security statement may prevent you from receiv-
ing all the social security benefits you have earned; it may also mean that 
someone has assumed your identity and is diverting income from your state-
ment or receiving benefits in your name. If the information about your past 
earnings is incorrect, call the Social Security Administration at 800/772-1213 
(and have in hand your W-2 or tax returns for those years) or access 
www.ssa.gov/mystatement. The sooner you identify those mistakes, the easier 
it will be to correct them. 
In the event that your social security number is lost or stolen, carefully 
read the information about identity theft in chapter 3, "Your Identity," as well 
as chapter 4, "Your Credit." Follow the practical tips identified in those chap-
ters and here: 
*- Don't disclose your social security number unless it is absolutely necessary. 
Disclose your social security number only when you are required to do so. 
For example, some government agencies may require your social security 
number for their purposes, and you must reveal it. Private businesses, on 
the other hand, may request your number, and unless you must give it to 
them, you should not do so. Be extra cautious when merchants ask you to 
28 

* Your Personal Information and the Public Record f 
write your social security number on your checks or payment slips. Be 
equally wary when a company wants your social security number for added 
protection. Be careful about disclosing your social security number regard-
less of whether it is requested in person, on the phone, in an application, or 
online, especially when you have not previously had any transactions with 
the organization. Use your best judgment and always err on the side of 
caution. 
-fc Limit access to your social security number. There are a number of steps 
you can take to limit the chances of someone gaining access to your social 
security number. First, avoid using your social security number as your per-
sonal identifier by not including it on your checks or other personal forms. 
Do not use your social security number as a password or personal identifica-
tion number. Do not carry your social security card (or any other card con-
taining your social security number) in your purse or wallet in case your 
purse or wallet is lost or stolen. Do not write the number on a piece of paper 
that you carry around with you. 
^ 
Prevent others from using your social security number to identify you. In 
many cases, other people or companies will use your social security number 
as the primary means of identifying you. Try to prevent this. For example, if 
your employer displays your social security number on your employee file or 
other company files, insist that it use a different number instead. If your 
bank, credit union or other financial service provider uses your social secu-
rity number as a personal identification number or as the identifier for bank-
ing by phone or the Internet, request that the bank assign you a different 
identification number. If your state's Department of Motor Vehicles uses 
your social security number as your driver's license number, or if your univer-
sity uses your social security number for your student number, ask for an 
alternate number. 
^ Review your credit report regularly. Order a copy of your credit report from 
all three credit bureaus at least annually. If you are a victim of identity theft, 
the credit report will contain evidence of credit or banking fraud committed 
by a thief using your name and social security number. It will also show other 
29 

social security numbers associated with your name. Find more information 
on this subject in chapter 3, "Your Identity," and chapter 4, "Your Credit." 
-*- Review your social security personal earnings and benefits estimate state-
ment. The Social Security Administration (SSA) mails a copy of your social 
security statement to you each year about three months before your birth-
day. Be certain the information in the file is correct. You can contact the 
administration at 800/772-1213 to obtain this free report if you haven't 
received it. If the statement contains incorrect information, contact the 
Social Security Administration immediately. Someone may be fraudulently 
using your social security number for employment purposes. You can reach 
the Social Security Administration's fraud department at 800/269-0271. 
To access your social security information or find further information on 
social security benefits, contact: 
Social Security Administration 
Office of Public Inquiries 
Windsor Park Building 
6401 Security Blvd. 
Baltimore, MD 21235 
Phone: 800/772-1213 
www.ssa.gov/ssnumber/ 
www.ssa.gov/mystatement/ 
Your Driver's License and Record 
Rebecca Schaeffer was an actress who starred in the show My Sister 
Sam, a 1980s sitcom. Robert Bardo, a deranged fan, hired a private 
investigator to locate Schaeffer's home address from a branch of the 
California Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). With the address in 
hand, Bardo disguised himself as a flower deliveryman. He easily 
gained entry into Schaeffer's home and murdered her. As with John 
Lennon's killer, Mark David Chapman, before him, Bardo had a copy 
ofJ.D. Salinger's Catcher in the Rye in his possession at the time of 
his arrest. Bardo had been able to discover enough personal informa-
30 

* Your Personal Information and the Public Record f 
tion to devise a plan to murder Schaeffer, so laws were later estab-
lished to protect private information contained in driver's licenses. 
Sensitive information is contained on your driver's license and in your 
driving record. Although the specific information may vary by state, your state 
likely keeps records on you as a driver (such as driver's license and driver his-
tory information), and about your vehicle (such as ownership information). 
The information stored about you in your public record is a direct product of 
the requirements you must complete to get a driver's license. This information 
may include your: 
• name 
• address 
• social security number 
• physical description (height, weight, eye color) 
• date of birth 
• driver's license status 
• need for corrective lenses while driving 
• record of any moving violations for which you have been convicted, 
including drunk driving 
• medical conditions that may affect your ability to drive 
• enrollment in organ donation programs 
Given the sensitivity of driver's license information, and as a response to 
Rebecca Schaeffer's murder, Congress passed a federal law known as the 
Driver's Privacy Protection Act of 1994 (DPPA), which regulates how personal 
information from records in state motor vehicle departments may be released 
and shared. Before the DPPA, many states sold drivers' personal information 
to the highest bidder—usually direct marketing data aggregators. 
The DPPA restricts states from releasing your personal information to 
direct marketers or the public at large. The restricted personal information 
includes your: 
• photograph 
• social security number 
• driver identification number 
31 

* Prying Eyes f 
• address (but not your five-digit zip code) 
• telephone number 
• medical information or disability information 
Information concerning traffic accidents, traffic violations, and the status 
of your license is not considered personal information by the DPPA. This infor-
mation may be available with certain restrictions to anyone, including your 
employer, your parents, and your neighbor. 
The DPPA shields your personal information by requiring states to pass 
measures that require your express consent in order to share your information 
with others. Access to your personal information is restricted unless you 
explicitly consent (by checking a box on your application for your driver's 
license or vehicle registration) or federal law authorizes such access. For exam-
ple, only if you check the box on your driver's license application is your state 
permitted to use, rent, or sell your personal information to businesses for sur-
veys and marketing purposes, or to solicit you for a variety of products and 
services. If you do not check the opt-out box, then only those entities author-
ized by federal law may access your record. 
Because the DPPA requires each state to establish guidelines, access to 
your personal information and driving record depends on the laws in the state 
in which you live. For example, in some states, your driver's license photo-
graph, social security number, and medical or disability information receive 
special protection. In New York State, the Department of Motor Vehicles will 
not release your photograph, your social security number, medical or disability 
information, or your telephone number, even to those persons who request 
the information and have a permissible use for it. 
Nevertheless, the DPPA does provide for certain exceptions under which 
the personal information contained in your driving record can be released 
without your consent. Such cases require a permissible purpose, and what con-
stitutes a permissible purpose is expressly outlined in the DPPA. Permissible 
purposes include government agencies needing to carry out their responsibili-
ties, for automobile safety purposes (such as recalling a motor vehicle) or for 
use by a licensed private investigator. To review the entire list of permissible 
purposes, go to http://www.accessreports.com/statutes/DPPAi.htm. 
Finally, the DPPA restricts access to your driving record to those who 
32 

-• Your Personal Information and the Public Record •-
Of particular concern to 
you should be the 
information that is 
available to your 
prospective employer 
when you apply for a 
job, such as your 
driving activity. 
have a permissible use under the act. Of particular concern to you should be 
the information contained in your driving record that is available to your 
prospective employer when you apply for a job, such as your driving activ-
ity. Entries for moving violations usually remain on your record for three 
years; serious offenses or alcohol-related convic-
tions can remain for as long as ten years. Depend-
ing on the state, your driving record may include 
the class of driver's license you hold, endorse-
ments and restrictions, current status, expiration 
date, accidents, moving traffic violation convic-
tions (including alcohol or drug-related convic-
tions), license suspensions, and revocations. In 
principle, your prospective employer should access 
your driving record only to verify information you 
submit; in the event that he or she needs to prevent fraud, such as in an 
insurance case; or if driving is integral to the job for which you are applying 
(delivery person, bus driver). In addition, an employer may obtain any other 
personal information that he or she specifies in a waiver with your written 
consent. 
Use the following practical tips to protect your driver's license information: 
-fc Don't opt in. Do not check the box on your driver's license application or 
registration form that gives your consent to release your personal informa-
tion. Remember, your information may still be accessed without your con-
sent by government agencies and others. 
* 
Demand that your social security number not be printed on your license. 
Some states use the driver's social security number as a default driver's 
license number. This practice exposes drivers to identify theft. Make sure to 
request that your driver's license number not be your social security number. 
^ Order your driving record. For employment, insurance, and personal rea-
sons, you should confirm that the information on your DMV record is correct 
and current before you apply for a job or auto insurance. If you want to 
review your driving record, go to www.dmv.org/newindex2.php?linkid=149. 
33 

-*- Understand the information that is included in your driver's license and 
record. Your driver's license and driving record contain a great deal of infor-
mation about you, including your name, date of birth, mailing address, sex,
height, weight, eye color, vision correction, and any medical conditions that 
may affect your ability to drive. Your driving record may show the class of dri-
ver's license you hold, in addition to specifics about your driving history, 
including endorsements and restrictions, current status, expiration date, acci-
dents, tickets and moving violation convictions, suspensions and revocations, 
and alcohol and drug-related convictions for the past five or more years. 
-fc Make sure the information is correct and current. Because this information 
is sensitive and accessible to others in many situations, you should verify 
that all information on your license is correct and up-to-date. For example, 
has the Department of Motor Vehicles indicated the proper driving classifi-
cation? Should you have any driving restrictions? 
^ 
Be responsible if you lose your driver's license. If you lose, misplace, or 
need to renew your driver's license, act promptly. Report a loss immediately. 
Don't risk identity theft. You can get a new license at your local office of the 
state department of motor vehicles. Many states and localities also offer 
license renewals and replacement through their website. To obtain the 
address of your local office, and to learn what you need to do in case of loss 
or reapplying, use the helpful links at www.dmv.org. 
-* Think twice before you get a personalized license plate for your car. Per-
sonalized plates are much more memorable, so don't get one if you are con-
cerned about being easily identified. 
Passport 
When Abdulaziz Alomari was studying electrical engineering at the 
University of Colorado in 1995, a briefcase containing his passport 
was stolen from his apartment. Six years later, the FBI discovered 
that a man using Alomari's identity was one of the terrorists on the 
flight that hit the North Tower of the World Trade Center on Sep-
34 

* Your Personal Information and the Public Record f 
tember 11. Alomarl had reported the theft, but no single worldwide 
agency keeps track of stolen passports. Although the Colorado po-
lice department may have informed the Saudi Embassy, the embassy 
wouldn't necessarily inform the U.S. State Department or the 
Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
Your passport is not part of the public record, but you must take steps to 
guard this document. Your passport contains sensitive personal information 
such as your full name, passport number, date of birth, photograph, and signa-
ture. If you lose your passport, you will increase your chances of being victim-
ized by identity fraud. 
Follow these tips to protect the privacy of your passport: 
& Report lost or stolen passports. If your passport is lost or stolen, report it 
immediately. By so doing, you protect yourself from identity fraud and 
reduce the risk that others, including possible terrorists, are using your pass-
port to pass themselves off as U.S. citizens. To report a lost or stolen pass-
port, you must provide detailed answers to all questions on Form DS-64, 
Statement Regarding A Lost or Stolen Passport. Contact: 
U.S. Department of State 
Passport Services 
Consular Lost/Stolen Passport Section 
1 1 1 1 19th Street, NW, Suite 500 
Washington, DC 20036 
202/955-0430 
www.travel.state.gov/report_ppt.html 
Remember that if you report your passport lost or stolen, the document 
is invalidated and cannot be used for travel if you happen to find it later. If 
you need to obtain a first-time passport, renew or replace a passport, or get 
copies of your passport records, go to www.travel.state.gov/passport_ 
services.htm. 
-£ Keep copies of your passport. Make two copies of your passport identifica-
tion page before you travel. The copies facilitate replacement if your pass-
35 

port is lost or stolen. Leave one copy at home with friends or relatives, and 
carry the other with you in a separate place from your passport. 
# 
Guard your passport. You should protect your passport at all times. At 
home, keep your passport in a secure place, such as a locked file cabinet. 
When you travel, you may find that many hotels require guests to leave their 
passports at the front desk. It may not be possible, but you should avoid 
leaving your passport with the front desk. 
Official Certificates 
The most important official certificates about your life are on file in the pub-
lic record. For example, you (and others) can generally access your birth cer-
tificate, marriage certificate, and divorce certificate. Unless you have 
superhuman qualities, you will not be able to access your death certificate, 
but others can. 
Birth Certificate 
To steal auto body shop owner Dave Feakes's identity, Allan Ray Rick 
simply called the relevant agency within the state of North Dakota 
and bought a copy of Feakes's birth certificate, a feat easily carried 
out in some states. One day Feakes got a call from a bank demand-
ing payment for $9,000 in returned checks. Soon thereafter, he was 
humiliated in department stores when the clerks refused to accept 
his checks. When he went to the DMV to renew his driver's license, 
the clerk typed his name into the computer and an image of 
Feakes's driver's license came up with Allan Ray Rick's picture on it. 
With a birth certificate, an identity thief can get a driver's license, a 
duplicate social security number, and much more. 
Birth certificates are contained in the public records. An official certificate 
of every birth is on file in the locality where the birth occurred. Birth records 
usually contain the name of the child, date and time of birth, the city and the 
hospital in which the child was born, the parents' names, and the attending 
36 

• Your Personal Information and the Public Record • 
physician's name. Depending upon state and county laws, a requester may 
obtain a certified copy of any birth certificate by writing or going to the vital 
statistics office in the state or area where the birth occurred. With the excep-
tion of some states, the records are released only to the individual, if of legal 
age, or to parents or legal guardians. Anyone requesting a birth certificate on 
the behalf of someone else may need to notarize the application. To learn the 
address and procedure for obtaining a copy of a birth certificate in your state, 
log on to www.cdc.gov/nchs/howto/w2w/w2welcom.htm. 
Marriage Certificate 
Imagine one Parisian woman's surprise when she discovered she 
had been married and divorced, both without her knowledge! A 
foreign national she had never met stole her personal identity card, 
"married" her for four years (and got a marriage certificate to prove 
it), and divorced her once he obtained French citizenship. 
An official certificate of every marriage is on file in the locality where the 
marriage occurred. The certificate generally includes the names of the bride 
and groom, the date of the marriage, and the country in which the certificate 
was filed. Policies regarding access vary by state. A certified copy of any mar-
riage certificate can be requested by writing or going to the vital statistics 
office in the state or area where the event occurred. To learn the addresses and 
procedures for obtaining a copy of a marriage certificate in your state, log on 
towww.cdc.gov/nchs/howto/w2w/w2welcom.htm. 
If you execute a public record search (see chapter 12, "I Spy, You Spy"), you 
can check if anyone has married you without your knowledge. 
Divorce Certificate 
Since 1994, in Hamilton County, Ohio, court documents have been 
available on the county's website, www.courtclerk.org. In 2002, a 
search feature was added to the site that allowed visitors to search 
for cases by typing in a single name. If you search divorce cases, 
you can dig up anything from tax returns to love letters. 
37 

Imagine that you have just undergone a difficult divorce and are looking 
for a job so you can earn the income you lost as a result. The details of your 
divorce could be damaging if anyone were to uncover them. How nervous 
would you be if your prospective employer ran an extensive background 
search on you? 
Anyone can request an official certificate of any divorce in the public file in 
the locality where the divorce occurred but access varies by state. In New York, 
for example, if you are not a party to the divorce, you must have a court order or 
show legal cause to obtain the record. By contrast, in Florida anyone can gener-
ally acquire anyone else's divorce certificate. To obtain a certified copy of the 
divorce information, write or go to the vital statistics office in the state or area 
where the event occurred. For the address and procedure for obtaining a copy 
of a divorce decree in your state log on to www.cdc.g0v/nchs/howto/w2w/ 
w2welc0m.htm. 
Death Certificate 
A television station discovered the names of fifteen thousand de-
ceased people on the active voting lists in Georgia just days before 
an upcoming election. In one case, a deceased person had voted a 
total of three times since his death. 
Jose Sison Fernandez, a World War II veteran, suddenly stopped re-
ceiving his monthly pension after five years. When he spoke with a 
Philippine Veterans Affairs Office supervisor about the problem, he 
was informed that a woman named Aurora had submitted a death 
certificate on his behalf, and that his checks were now being for-
warded to a different address. "I never requested the PVAO to 
change my mailing address, " he says, adding, "I am very much alive. " 
As with the other official certificates, an official certificate of every death 
is a public record in the locality where the death occurred. Access to death cer-
ticates varies by state. Those states that do consider death certificates as public 
information (Florida and North Dakota, for example) do not provide cause of 
death unless the requester is a family member. A certified copy of any death 
38 

* Your Personal Information and the Public Record f 
certificate is available through the vital statistics office in the state or area 
where the death occurred. To learn the addresses and procedures for obtaining 
a copy of a death certificate in your state, log on to www.cdc.gov/nchs/ 
howto/w2w/w2welcom.htm. 
A thief who steals a death certificate has the deceased's legal name and 
social security number—all the thief needs to apply for new credit and rack up 
thousands of dollars in fraudulent purchases. Protect the memory of your 
loved ones by filing copies of their death certificates with the three credit 
reporting agencies (see Resources). Filing allows agencies to be aware of fraud-
ulent activity if anyone tries to open a credit account. 
A public record search (see chapter 12, "I Spy, You Spy") will reveal if any-
one has filed a death certificate in your name. 
Government-Related Documents 
In 2000, two New Jersey men obtained the names and social secu-
rity numbers of several hundred high-ranking active-duty and re-
tired U.S. military officers. They accessed the information from a 
public website that copied it from the Congressional Record. They 
used the information to apply for credit cards and bank and corpo-
rate credit in the officers' names. 
Your government-related documents consist of your military records, citi-
zenship/immigration records, civilian records, jury records, and voting 
records. Categories that are generally accessible include jury records, arrest 
records, and court records. 
Citizenship/Immigration Documents 
Citizenship and immigration papers are part of the public record. The Freedom 
of Information Act stipulates that any person has a right to request access to 
immigration records and makes exceptions only for those records exempted by 
the Privacy Act (e.g., classified national security, business proprietary, personal 
privacy, and investigative). Anyone searching for a citizenship/immigration doc-
ument can go to uscis.gov./graphics/aboutus/foia/request.htm. 
39 

The Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services (BCIS) within the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS) handles citizenship and immigra-
tion matters. To order immigration forms, call 800/870-3676 or go to the Web 
link: uscis.gov. 
Jury Records 
Jury records are public records and, with limited exceptions, are accessible to 
the public. A potential juror must reveal his or her name, address, and other 
personal information during the juror selection process known as the voir dire. 
In most states (with the exception of New York and Minnesota, among others), 
the voir dire becomes part of the public court records. In criminal cases, this 
information is part of the court record, but is generally sealed to the public for 
the jurors' protection. 
Some courts have adopted the practice of referring to jurors by numbers 
rather than names during both voir dire and trial. This is a common practice 
in the Los Angeles Superior Court, and was first used for criminal trials in 
which retaliation from defendants or jury tampering were major concerns. 
Later it became a popular use during high profile trials, like the O.J. Simpson 
and Oklahoma City bombing trials, to prevent media contact with jurors. 
You should retain any records from the county clerk or records indicating 
your completion of jury service for several reasons: (1) in case the court inad-
vertently thinks you failed to show up for jury service and finds you in con-
tempt of court; (2) to serve as proof of your service in the event that you missed 
work to serve and your employer may request proof of your service; and (3) in 
case your state summons you prematurely to serve again. 
Military Records 
A Navy retiree discovered his identity had been stolen when he re-
ceived a call from American Express. It turned out that a lawyer 
stole the retiree's social security number from a database of veter-
ans who had filed their DD 214s with their county courthouses. 
Under the provisions of the Privacy Act of 1974, requests for military 
records are considered only if the individual whose records are involved has 
40 

4 Your Personal Information and the Public Record t 
provided written consent. The Privacy Act does not apply to deceased military 
personnel, although the Department of Defense requires the written consent 
of the next of kin. 
Veterans or next of kin of a deceased veteran use one type of form to 
request military records; all others use a different form. Instructions on how 
to obtain your military records are available from www.archives.gov/facili-
ties/mo/st louis/military personnel records/standardform 180.html. 
Here are some tips for former military personnel: 
^ 
Safeguard your DD 214 form. Soldiers who leave active duty receive a 
report of separation from the military or a Form DD 214, which contains the 
veteran's social security number and birth date. As a result, guard your cer-
tificate as you do your social security card and birth certificate. 
^ Do not file your DD 214 with your local courthouse. In the past, veterans 
were advised to file the form with their local courthouses to ensure that they 
would always be able to get a certified copy. Once the DD 214 is filed at a 
local county courthouse, however, it may become a public record. Privacy 
advocates now advise former military personnel not to file this document in 
the local courthouse. 
Civilian Records 
Civilian records are the personnel records of former federal civilian employ-
ees. As with military records, written authorization by the person of record, or 
proof of that person's death, is needed to access a civilian record. Requests for 
information from personnel or any other type of records must be made in 
writing; requests cannot be made by telephone or e-mail. 
To obtain information on how to obtain civilian personnel records, log on 
towww.archives.gov/facilities/mo/st_louis/civilian personnel_records.html. 
Voting Records 
By comparing voter rolls with social security data, the Indianapolis 
Star discovered the names of more than three hundred deceased 
individuals who were currently registered to vote in the 2000 presi-
41 

* Prying Eyes * 
dential election, most of them in Lake County, an area notorious for 
voter fraud. 
Where your voting records are stored depends 
on the state in which you live, but this information 
is generally kept with the county clerk's office. The 
voter information that is in the public record is 
generally limited to your name, city, zip code, and 
party affiliation. Political candidates and organiza-
tions seeking to use voter registration information 
for academic, journalistic, political, or governmen-
tal purposes can often buy voter registration infor-
mation that may also include your home address 
and telephone number. 
Log on to the website of the Federal Election 
Commission (www.fec.gov) for details about voter registration in your state 
and a list of polling locations in your district. 
Arrest Records 
North Carolina sold basic criminal and civil-case information to 
data aggregators, which in turn sold the records to potential em-
ployers, landlords, and others running background checks. It 
seemed like a sensible thing to do: fewer people were packing the 
courthouses, and the data-harvesting companies contributed to 
the state's tax base. The courts were supposed to update their in-
formation daily, but at least one missed a day. The result? Five 
North Carolina residents with expunged criminal records were 
listed in the databases as having criminal records. 
Rush fans sent angry letters to the Naples Daily News when it re-
ported the arrest of guitarist Alex Lifeson for assault. One writer 
accused the editor of being a "scumsucking pig, " and another 
reader asserted that the paper violated Lifeson's privacy by pub-
lishing his address. The editor responded that the newspaper rou-
Political candidates and 
organizations seeking 
to use voter registration 
information for academic, 
journalistic, political, 
or governmental purposes 
can often buy voter 
registration information 
that may also include 
your home address and 
telephone number. 
42 

* Your Personal Information and the Public Record f 
finely published the ages and local addresses of people who have 
been arrested, and that this information is a matter of public 
record. 
Given that information 
about an arrest is stored 
electronically, data 
aggregators can now 
access various databases 
to compile "rap sheets" 
by searching arrest 
records and court files 
that are public records. 
Arrest records are public records. Arrest 
records for federal crimes are generally available 
to the public. State records, however, are more 
restricted and vary by state. The public record 
may include details about your arrest, the inci-
dent leading to your arrest, and the victim 
involved. In certain cases, arrest records are not 
accessible, particularly if accessing the informa-
tion would impair an ongoing investigation or 
endanger individual citizens. Further, if you are arrested and later found 
innocent, you may request that the record be sealed and therefore generally 
not accessible to the public. Not all states make arrest records available 
online. 
A record of criminal history (which is different from an arrest record) is 
accessible to the public depending on the state, and is generally accessible to 
law enforcement agencies, attorneys working on a case involving the individ-
ual, probation or parole officers, state agencies that need the information to 
license an individual, and employers, under limited circumstances. However, 
given that information about an arrest is stored electronically, data aggrega-
tors can now access various databases to compile "rap sheets" by searching 
arrest records and court files that are public records. Employers can use this 
information to run background checks on prospective employees. 
Court Records and Inmate Records 
Edward Socorro, a sales manager with Hilton Hotels Corp., commit-
ted a minor infraction in Illinois. He later had his record expunged. 
Hilton hired IMI Data Search, Inc., to run background checks on new 
employees, and the search wrongly determined that Socorro had 
spent six months in jail. Socorro was fired, and it took him seven 
months to find a new job. 
43 

• Prying Eyes • 
Court records generally are considered public records. Unless a judge has 
sealed part of the court record, or if the record involves a juvenile, you (and 
anyone else) can generally access information contained in court records, 
which includes names, dates, and details of cases and their outcomes. 
SEX OFFENDERS BY ZIP CODE 
Sex offenders have had little privacy since Megan's Law went into effect 
in October 1996. The law was named after seven-year-old Megan Kanka, 
a New Jersey girl who was raped and killed by a twice-convicted child 
molester who had moved across the street from the family. In response to 
Megan's murder, the Kankas sought to have a law that would require 
local communities to warn the public about sex offenders in the area. 
Megan's Law provides the public with information about dangerous sex 
offenders so families can protect themselves and their children. Megan's 
Law also authorizes local law enforcement to notify the public about 
high-risk and serious sex offenders who reside in, are employed in, or fre-
quent the community. The law is not intended to punish the offender 
and specifically prohibits using the information to harass or commit any 
crime against the offender. 
Convicted sex offenders are required to register their current addresses 
with local law enforcement agencies, and it is a crime to fail to do so. Nev-
ertheless, a high number of sex offenders fail to comply by either not reg-
istering after they leave jail or failing to provide an updated address. For 
example, over the years, the State of California has lost track of more than 
one-fifth of its approximately one hundred thousand registered sex 
offenders. 
The information available on registered sex offenders includes: 
• name and known aliases 
• age and sex 
• physical description, including scars, marks, and tattoos 
• photograph, if available 
• crimes resulting in registration (including rape and other sexual 
assault and the age of the victim[s]) 
44 

* Your Personal Information and the Public Record f 
• county of residence 
• zip code (based on last registration) 
Your local police department has a listing of the sex offenders in your 
area. Most states also maintain online databases of these offenders, includ-
ing pictures. A listing of sex offender registries by state can be found at 
www.klaaskids.org/pg-legmeg2.htm. Most databases allow users to search 
by name or zip code. 
Privacy advocates challenge the practice of making sex offender infor-
mation available—especially online. They have cited problems such as the 
harassment of sex offenders, the harassment of innocent people who hap-
pen to have bought a sex offender's home, and the fact that such exposure 
may publicly identify victims of sexual abuse (such as when the offender is 
a parent). 
Information about inmates is also available on public record. Information 
about inmates can include name, sex, date of birth, race/ethnicity, custody sta-
tus, housing/releasing facility, date received, date released, county of commit-
ment, and a description of the crime)s). 
Depending upon the case, anyone can request a court record in the court 
clerk's office. The office of the court clerk maintains a file of all civil and crim-
inal cases, including the various filings in the case and the parties involved. 
Like arrest records, not all states provide court records online and not all court 
records, particularly criminal court records, are accessible to the public in any 
form. Some states post lists of criminals online, to the chagrin of privacy rights 
groups that argue that easy access to this information makes it more difficult 
for convicted felons to reenter society. 
Property Holdings 
Real estate records are also accessible to the general public. When you pur-
chase a home or other real estate, a record of the transaction is made by the 
county assessor and the county recorder. The files about your property include 
information about: 
45 

• the location of the property 
• your name and address 
• the name(s) of the previous owner(s) 
• date of sale 
• description of the property 
• approximate value of the real estate holding 
Like many other public records, these files are increasingly made avail-
able on the Internet by county government agencies and by information 
brokers. 
To protect the privacy of your real estate records: 
& Set up a trust. If it is important to you that your name is not associated with 
the purchase of a property, you might consider asking your attorney to open 
a trust. A trust designates another representative, such as a bank or trust 
company, as the name on the deed and other real estate documents, 
although you still own the property. 
See chapter 8, "Your Home," for further details on privacy and your 
property. 
Foreclosures 
If a bank forecloses on your home, a notice of action and foreclosure sale dates 
become a part of the public record. You have little privacy if your lender fore-
closes on your property. The foreclosure announcement is listed at the county 
courthouse, in your local newspaper, and, increasingly, online. Information 
brokers commonly sell listings of foreclosures and even properties that may 
become foreclosures. The foreclosure announcement may include informa-
tion about foreclosure numbers, owner and/or grantor names, attorney names, 
and legal addresses of the properties to be foreclosed. 
Bankruptcies 
If you have filed for bankruptcy, you have little privacy. Bankruptcy informa-
tion usually stays on your court records for ten years as public record. (See 
chapter 3, "Your Credit," for information on bankruptcy and your credit 
report.) The bankruptcy information in the record may include: 
46 

* Your Personal Information and the Public Record * 
• Name, address, social security number 
• Answers to official questions and intentions regarding the disposition 
of assets and liabilities 
• Lists of all assets owned; liens, if any, including real estate; personal 
property, contingency claims; potential causes of action; rights 
owned; ownership interests in partnerships and corporations; and 
contingency claims to property 
• Docket information, hearing schedules, deadlines, motions filed against 
debtors, answers filed by debtors, and reaffirmation agreements 
• Common court orders appearing in files, including dismissals, 
conversions, reaffirmations, motions to lift stay, modifications, 
confirmations, and discharge 
Privacy advocates have argued that the personal information contained in 
public records on bankruptcy is the most vulnerable to identity theft. More 
than other public records, information about bankruptcy contains sensitive 
data such as social security numbers, financial information, credit informa-
tion, income, and other details that may be a treasure trove for thieves. More-
over, privacy advocates argue that the commercial sale of such information by 
the government may constitute violations of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (see 
chapter 4, "Your Credit"). 
Protecting Your Most Personal Documents 
Whether you like it or not, many different entities, including marketers, 
credit agencies, prospective employers, government agencies, the press, pri-
vate investigators, and others may access your information in the public 
record. If these groups are accessing your personal information and possibly 
judging you on it, it's a good idea to review your documents yourself to 
ensure their accuracy. Remember that the data that becomes part of a record 
is often subject to human error. The best protection is to be sure you under-
stand what is contained in your files and that the information is accurate. Fol-
low these easy and practical tips as a first and crucial step toward guarding 
your privacy: 
47 

* Prying Eyes * 
# Locate your important documents. If you are like most people, you'll need 
to retrieve your documents from their hiding places throughout your home. 
Use the list below to identify these essential personal documents. If you can-
not locate certain documents, or you need to replace some documents, you 
can use the helpful hints, tips, and Web links provided above in this chapter 
to access the public records to get your own information. 
^ Read your documents. Are the dates correct? Is your address correct? Cru-
cially, are the details correct? Take immediate steps to correct any inaccu-
rate information in your public record. If information is wrong in your files, it 
will be wrong in the public files, and the repercussions of any errors may be 
very serious, even rejection for a mortgage or a job. 
# File your documents. If you do not already have your own system to file and 
store your documents, follow these suggestions: 
Find or purchase a legal-size file folder at any office supply store. Within 
the file folder, label individual files with the titles indicated below. Use the 
list below as a guide for the types of documents that should go in each file. 
Your filing system will be beneficial in your day-to-day life and essential in 
the event of an emergency. 
Essential Documents 
• Social security card and statement 
• Driver's license and record 
• Passport 
Official Certificates 
• Birth certificate)s) 
• Death certificate(s) of family members 
• Marriage certificate)s) 
• Divorce certificate(s) 
Government-Related Documents 
• Military records 
• Civilian records 
• Citizenship/Immigration records 
48 

4 Your Personal Information and the Public Record t 
• Jury records 
• Voting records 
Real Estate Records 
• Closing documents 
• Foreclosure records 
Miscellaneous Records 
• Arrest records 
• Court records 
This list is not exhaustive. Your personal documents may contain other 
documents that are important to you, such as any contracts you have 
signed, banking information, or any other record that isn't in the public 
record but is necessary to protect. 
# Store your documents. Store the folder containing your original documents 
in a safe place, such as a locked fireproof file cabinet or a safety deposit 
box. You may want to keep a copy of the documents in at least one other 
safe place: (1) in your safety deposit box; (2) with your personal or family 
attorney; or (3) in another safe place in the house. Identify the location of 
the original and the copies on a separate checklist that is also kept securely. 
THE BOTTOM LINE 
• Even your most personal documents are public and accessible to others. 
The personal information about you that is contained in public records has 
never been easier for others to access. 
• Be cautious about revealing personal information without being sure how 
it will be used and whether it will be shared. Be extra cautious about 
disclosing your social security number. 
• You may not be able to escape your past. Accept it and be prepared to 
explain it if necessary, for example, in a job interview. Assume your 
prospective employer, landlord, or creditor has done a background check 
on you in the public record. 
Marketers, credit 
agencies, prospective 
employers, government 
agencies, the press, 
private investigators, 
and others may access 
your information in the 
public record. 
49 

• Get organized. Develop a system to organize, manage, and protect your 
most important personal documents and information. Do not delay in 
gathering your most important personal documents and keeping them in a 
safe place. You will immediately see the benefits and enjoy the peace of 
mind. 
50 

Your Identity 
You open your credit card bill and discover thousands of dollars in 
charges for diamonds and Rolex watches that you never purchased. 
A collection agency repeatedly calls and sends you letters to collect 
on an account for tens of thousands of dollars of new furniture. The 
problem? You didn't buy any Louis XIV chairs or antique canopy 
beds. In fact, your house contains the same furniture you had when 
you moved into it ten years ago. 
You paid off the mortgage on the house you've lived in for a 
decade. With a little spare cash, you take off for a long vacation in 
the Bahamas. When you return in the spring you are horrified to dis-
51 

cover that your house has been sold. Worse, as you try to sort out 
the problem, you are forced to live out of a hotel room. 
You receive a congratulatory letter informing you that you have 
been approved for a $10,000 line of credit. The credit is being of-
fered to you by a bank that you have never heard of and in a city 
you have never visited. 
Did you know there are thousands of people who want to be you? Don't 
be too flattered. To be more accurate, there are thousands of people who want 
to steal everything you have to your name: your house, your credit cards, your 
bank account, and your good reputation. 
Identity theft is among the worst invasions of privacy possible. An iden-
tity thief steals various pieces of your personal information, such as your 
social security number, your driver's license, or your credit card, and then 
uses this personal information to commit fraud and theft in your name. By 
impersonating you, identity thieves can use your name to request credit, take 
out loans, withdraw funds from your bank account, purchase a car, sell your 
house and pocket the proceeds, and much worse. In the worst cases of iden-
tity theft, you can be arrested for crimes you did not commit, fired from jobs 
for acts you had nothing to do with, rejected for educational loans you need 
to complete your studies, and rejected for the mortgage you need to buy the 
dream house for which you've been saving all your working life. If you are 
the victim of this crime, once you discover it, you are left to pick up the 
pieces—such as clearing your financial and credit troubles and sometimes 
restoring your personal reputation. 
Take what happened to Eldrick T. Woods. Anthony Taylor of Sacramento 
stole Eldrick's identity by stealing Eldrick's social security number, falsely 
obtaining a driver's license in Eldrick's name, and then applying for and 
receiving credit cards in Eldrick's name. With Eldrick's credit card in hand, 
Taylor went on a year-long shopping spree, purchasing more than $17,000 in 
television sets, VCRs, furniture, and other items. He stored the purchases in a 
rented locker. He even rented a moving truck to transport his goods around. 
Taylor ultimately was caught, convicted, and sentenced to jail in California. 
How did the police finally put an end to Taylor's shopping exploits? Well, 
things got a little suspicious when Taylor attempted to buy a used luxury car. 
52 

Identity theft is so 
rampant today that 
it is no longer if you 
will become a victim, 
but when you will 
become a victim. 
• Your Identity • 
The problem was that Eldrick T. Woods is really Tiger Woods, the world's most 
famous golfer. It was a little difficult for the car dealer to believe that Tiger 
Woods wanted to buy a used car, especially given that the Buick car company 
was among the golfer's many multimillion-dollar 
endorsements. 
Other celebrities, and wealthy people on the 
Forbes 400 list, including Ted Turner, Oprah Win-
frey, and Steven Spielberg, have had their identities 
stolen. But identity theft doesn't happen just to 
celebrities; the fact is, it's likely to happen to you. 
Identity theft is so rampant today that the question 
is no longer if you will become a victim, but when 
you will become a victim. 
Identity theft is not only the fastest growing crime in the United States, 
but also the leading consumer fraud complaint in the country. No organization 
knows the exact number of identity thefts that occur each year or the total 
impact of the crime, in part because many people either do not understand 
that they have fallen victim or do not report the crime. According to the Fed-
eral Trade Commission (FTC), there were approximately 9.9 million victims of 
identity theft in 2003 alone, and identity theft complaints were up 53 percent 
in 2002 over 2001. This crime costs consumers huge amounts of time and 
money. In 2002 alone, consumers spent almost $5 billion and 300 million 
hours trying to resolve the aggravations related to identity theft. Business 
spent upward of $48 billion annually. In the aggregate, the Federal Trade Com-
mission estimates that identity theft costs America approximately $53 billion 
each year—and the numbers are rising. 
How to Reduce Your Chances of Being a Victim 
One Saturday evening, Chris went out to run a few errands and get 
some cash to pay the babysitter. He went to his local ATM, where he 
discovered that his checking account was frozen and overdrawn by 
$750. He tried to get a cash advance on his credit card, but the ATM 
denied the transaction. Because it was a weekend and the bank was 
closed, Chris was cashless. He and his wife had to cancel their night 
53 

• Prying Eyes • 
out. On Monday morning, Chris immediately went to the bank to re-
solve the situation. It didn't take long to discover several clearly 
forged checks posted against his account. When he tried to tem-
porarily resolve the situation by moving funds from his money market 
account, he discovered that the money market 
account had also vanished, and with it $6,000 
he been saving toward his son's college tuition. 
This was just the beginning of Chris's problems. 
To inflict the most 
damage, identity thieves 
must get a hold of your 
most sensitive documents, 
such as your social 
security number, your 
driver's license, and 
your credit card. 
Amos Price helped his daughter buy a house. 
In the normal course of business, he shared his 
financial information with his mortgage broker 
who, in turn, used Price's good credit to ob-
tain a mortgage to buy a $340,000 house. After the identity thief 
stopped making mortgage payments, the mortgage lender tracked 
down Price to pressure him for payments. Even after the crime was 
realized, Price has damaged credit and health problems due to the 
aggravation. According to the financial research firm Toer Group, al-
most ten thousand identity theft victims had home loans—totaling 
about $300 million—taken out in their names in 2002. 
What can you do to ward off identity thieves? The bad news is that you 
cannot completely prevent identity theft from happening to you, much in the 
way that you cannot prevent someone from breaking into your home even if 
you use an alarm and put bars on the windows. The good news is that you can 
significantly reduce the likelihood of this crime happening to you by follow-
ing some practical advice. 
To inflict the most damage, identity thieves must get a hold of your most 
sensitive documents, such as your social security number, your driver's 
license, or your credit card. Consider how often your social security number is 
used in your daily life. You need your social security number to access your 
medical records, health insurance accounts, bank accounts, university records, 
and much more. With these items in hand, an identity thief is like a kid in a 
candy store. With your social security number alone, think of how an identity 
thief could theoretically ruin your life the next time you're on vacation: 
54 

• Your Identity • 
1. Steal a social security number from a health insurance card, credit 
header, social security card, or other source 
2. Use the social security number to order your credit report online to find 
out the address of your house and whether you have a mortgage 
3. Use the social security number to open a false bank account in your name 
4. Use the information described above to apply for a credit card in your 
name and have the bills sent to a P.O. box or other address 
5. Use all the information described above to remortgage your house in 
your name and keep any cash associated with the refinancing 
Your vulnerability to identity theft depends upon how you lead your life. 
The focus of your efforts is to minimize a thief's access to your personal 
information, reduce the amount of information a thief can obtain if he or 
she accesses your personal information, and ensure that you will be made 
aware of the crime as soon as possible in the event that you are a victim of 
identity theft. 
Because there are so many ways to reduce your exposure to identity theft, 
this section organizes identity theft protection tips into three categories: top-
priority very important, and important. 
Top-Priority Steps 
Sheila received a call from the local police department informing 
her that someone had made a fake driver's license in her name. She 
wondered how the identity thief got a hold of her personal informa-
tion. Sheila later remembered that she had offered her license as 
identification when she applied for a job at a large drugstore chain. 
She learned that after the chain completed its hiring, an employee 
at the chain tossed all the old job applications into the trash without 
shredding them first. Sheila's identity thief did some old-fashioned 
Dumpster-diving for some valuable information, including Sheila's 
personal data. 
No matter how little time you have, these top-priority tips are crucial. 
They should help protect you from identity theft or limit the damage inflicted 
by identity thieves. 
55 

* Prying Eyes * 
*- Order your credit report and monitor it annually. Did you know that even if 
you check your credit card statement every month, and even if every line 
item seems legitimate, you still can be a victim of credit card fraud? 
Thieves are tricky: they apply for credit cards in your name, but they have 
billing statements mailed to an address that is different than your home 
address, such as a post office box. Unless you check your credit report, 
you may never know that a thief has applied for and received a credit card 
in your name. Any new credit card or credit account ultimately appears on 
your credit report, so you can check whether new accounts are legitimate. 
You cannot rely on anyone else to perform this task because you are the 
only person who would know if a particular card or line of credit is yours. 
That is the reason why you must monitor your credit report. 
Ordering your credit report and reviewing it thoroughly is your first 
line of defense in resolving a problem before a thief inflicts even greater 
financial ruin. Periodic monitoring enables you to correct a problem on 
your timetable. As discussed in chapter 4, "Your Credit," your credit 
report identifies all your accounts, including your credit cards, bank loans, 
mortgages, and any other lines of credit. If you are monitoring your 
report, you will immediately be able to identify any fraud, including any 
account you did not open or spending you did not authorize. 
Order a copy of your credit report from all three major credit bureaus 
at least once per year. The three bureaus are Equifax, Experian, and 
TransUnion. To order your report, contact the bureaus directly or go to their 
respective websites. (See credit bureaus in "Resources.") 
Given the sensitive information in your credit report (see chapter 4, 
"Your Credit"), you should use extra caution when ordering your credit 
report online. Refer to chapter 7, "Your Computer and the Internet," when 
ordering any item online. 
# 
Protect your social security number. Your social security number is the 
most important piece of personal information to identity thieves. They can 
obtain your social security number in many mischievous ways, such as 
stealing your wallet or purse to get your social security card; stealing or 
diverting your mail; scouring the Web for unsecured database pages; mas-
querading as an employer, landlord, or someone else with legitimate 
56 

Your social security 
number is the most 
important piece of 
personal information 
to identity thieves. 
• Your Identity • 
access to your social security number; and stealing from or establishing 
contacts at institutions like schools, banks, and workplaces. Do whatever 
you can to limit an identity thief's access to your social security number. 
For example: 
• Do not place your social security card in your wallet or purse. 
• Give your social security number only when it 
is required, and, if possible, request to use 
other pieces of identifying information instead. 
• If your driver's license number (or other identi-
fication) is the same as your social security 
number, request to change your driver's 
license number. 
• Do not have your social security number printed on your personal checks. 
• Leave your actual social security card in a secure place, as discussed in 
chapter 2. 
^ Be vigilant with your wallet or purse. The most common way for a thief to 
steal your identity is for the thief to steal your wallet or purse. To that end, 
remember to: 
• Never leave your purse or wallet unattended in public places. 
• Be especially careful in the workplace; keep your purse or wallet in a safe 
place such as a locked cabinet. 
• Do not leave your purse or wallet in open view, even in your locked car. 
• Limit the identification information (such as social security card, birth cer-
tificate, or passport) and the number of credit, debit, or ATM cards that 
you carry in your wallet or purse to what you actually need. This way, if 
your purse or wallet is stolen, you can limit the amount of damage and 
financial ruin a thief can inflict upon you. 
Very Important Steps 
A Los Angeles man discovered his mail had been stolen when he 
began receiving late notices from his utility and credit card compa-
nies. Then a collection company called him about his overdue ac-
57 

count for $8,000 of Dell Computer equipment. An identity thief had 
obtained the man's social security number from a piece of mail con-
taining his student loan payment. With this information in hand, the 
thief was able to wreak considerable damage by opening credit ac-
counts with Dell, Sears, and other stores. The embarrassed victim 
notes, "I have been fighting this for years." 
The steps to preventing identity theft aren't only for the paranoid. A sig-
nificant number of identity thefts happen when victims are careless about 
their mail (including their junk mail), their passwords, and their personal iden-
tification numbers. Never underestimate how much information a thief can 
secure by old-fashioned Dumpster-diving. 
•fc Guard your mail. Your mail is a target for identity thieves. Thieves have been 
known to rifle through mail to steal information they can use to commit 
identity theft. For example, they will take one of the many pre-approved 
credit offers you receive in the mail and then submit applications in your 
name but with the bills diverted to a different address. This diversion makes 
you completely unaware of the credit card that has been opened in your 
name. What to do to protect your mail? Consider the following: 
• Make sure your mailbox is locked, even if you have to install a lockbox. 
• Remove your mail from your mailbox every day. 
• If you cannot pick up your mail for an extended period (such as vacation), 
call the U.S. Postal Service at 800/275-8777 to request a vacation hold. 
The Postal Service will hold your mail at your local post office until you 
can pick it up or return home to receive it. 
• Deposit your outgoing mail in post office collection boxes or at your local 
post office, rather than in an unsecured mailbox. 
-fc Shred your credit card receipts and other important information. To coun-
teract the dangers of Dumpster-divers, you should shred or destroy any sen-
sitive information such as credit card receipts, utility bills, copies of credit 
applications, insurance forms, medical forms, financial statements, checks 
and bank statements, expired charge cards, and any credit offers (especially 
58 

* Your Identity f 
those pre-approved credit card offers) you receive in the mail before tossing 
them into the garbage. 
Identity thieves will pick through your trash or the recycling bins of 
companies that accept credit cards (such as restaurants and stores) in an 
effort to find receipts that patrons discard on their way out. Since you can't 
control how companies discard their trash, you need to take care of your 
own garbage. For example, when you pay with a credit card for your dinner 
or go shopping, tear your receipt into tiny pieces or store the receipt in a 
safe place. As discussed later in this chapter as well as in chapter 4, "Your 
Credit," a new identity theft law that went into effect on January 1 , 2004 
requires merchants to truncate your credit card number on receipts, but 
you shouldn't take any chances. 
-*- Protect your passwords and personal identification numbers (PINs). If 
possible, memorize your most frequently used passwords and PINs so 
you do not have to write them down. If you have to write them down, do 
not carry any record or paper containing those passwords or PINs in your 
purse or wallet. Keep this information in a secure place. Make sure no 
one is watching when you enter your PIN or password at an ATM by cov-
ering the keyboard the best you can. There have been cases of thieves 
using binoculars or cameras to zoom in on your fingers as you enter your 
pin code. (See chapter 5, "Your Money," for other tips on how to protect 
your PIN.) 
* 
Be very cautious about the information you release. You must be particu-
larly cautious about giving any credit card, bank, or social security informa-
tion to anyone by telephone, mail, or the Internet, unless you are sure that 
the recipient is trustworthy and legitimate or unless you have initiated the 
contact by mail or going to the particular website. 
•fr Watch out for scams. Identity thieves often create scams to entice you to 
release information (see page 62). They may also pose as representatives of 
banks, Internet service providers (ISPs), and government agencies to get 
you to reveal your important personal information. If you are unsure of a 
caller's identity, take a proactive approach by writing down the caller's 
59 

phone number and returning the call, or e-mail the company directly. Ask 
probing questions about how the information will be used, whether it is 
secure, the extent to which it will be shared with others, and how the infor-
mation will be discarded. 
Important Steps 
A twenty-four-year-old identity thief applied for sixty-one credit 
cards under false names; forty-five of the applications 
were 
granted. Although some of the identities were fictitious, many of 
them were real people the perpetrator had known from her school 
days and whose credit she subsequently destroyed. She even 
wrongly named one of the victims as her co-offender and mentor in 
the frauds. 
For more peace of mind, consider these additional tips to further reduce 
your chances of being a victim of identity theft. Most of these steps involve 
protection of your credit card account. Considering that more than 150 to 200 
million credit cards are issued in North America every year, it's no surprise 
that identity thieves are so successful. 
# 
Protect your banking and credit accounts. It may be common sense, but 
you are not likely alone in forgetting to take these basic steps to protect 
your bank accounts: 
• Reconcile your checking and savings accounts as well as your monthly 
credit card statements in a timely fashion. 
• Destroy all checks immediately after you close a checking account. 
• Consider picking up any new checks at your bank, instead of having them 
mailed to you at your home address. 
• Keep a list of all your credit accounts and bank accounts (including 
account numbers, expiration dates, and telephone numbers of customer 
service and fraud departments) in a secure place so you can quickly call 
the issuers to inform them about missing or stolen cards. 
60 

* Your Identity f 
• Pay attention to billing cycles. A missing credit card bill could mean an 
identity thief has taken over your account and changed your billing 
address, rendering you unaware that you are a victim of identity theft. If 
you do not receive your bills at the usual time, follow up with the com-
pany immediately. 
0- Limit the number of credit cards you have. How many credit cards does 
your family have? The average American household has seven to ten credit 
cards. Reducing the number of credit cards you have reduces the chances 
that thieves can obtain one of your cards (as a bonus, it probably also 
makes good financial sense!). If you have an inactive account or credit card, 
close it. Why give a thief the ability to use an account that you don't use? 
# Review all utility and subscription bills. Make sure the charges are yours. 
+ Use passwords on your credit accounts. Using passwords makes it more 
difficult for identity thieves to take over your accounts. Follow these pass-
word tips: 
• Do not use common passwords like pet names, birthdays, or the word 
"password." 
• Avoid using personally identifying information (like your mother's maiden 
name, your birth date, your social security number, your phone number, 
consecutive numbers or letters) as your password or PINs. Many forms 
and banks request your mother's maiden name as a security password, 
but they do not require that you use this word. For safety's sake, use a 
different password. Of course, if you do so, make sure you remember 
that password! 
*- Protect your personal information at home. Keep your documents in a 
secure place in your home. This is particularly important if you have room-
mates, employ help, or have service work done in your home. See chapter 
2, "Your Personal Information and the Public Record," for tips on how to 
keep your documents safe and secure. 
61 

IDENTITY THEFT SCAMS 
Be on the alert for scams that seek any personal information from you, 
especially on the Internet. Internet fraud alone cost American consumers 
almost $200 million in 2003, with victims losing an average of $195. The 
total loss to fraud was more than $437 million, about $228 per victim. 
Remember, identity thieves are sneaky. They will stoop to any level, 
including sending announcements of fake contests that offer enticing 
prizes or official-looking memos that scare you into parting with your infor-
mation. Many Internet scams contained misspelled words and grammati-
cally incorrect phrases, so be on the lookout for these. In particular, look out 
for ploys to get you to provide your personal information on online forms. 
Also known as phishing, this is a successful tactic that scammers use to get 
your bank account numbers, credit card numbers, social security number, 
and other information. All scams have one common goal: to extract sensi-
tive personal information from you. Some popular scams include: 
The "We Need You to Update Your Account" Scam 
Dear Customer: We have recently updated our system. In an attempt 
to keep our database current, we need you to return to our website 
and update your credit card information. Please click on the link below 
and update your information. 
Be very very careful if you get a message like the one above. Beginning 
in 2003, thousands of PayPal's customers received an e-mail requesting 
that they update their accounts. The e-mail looked like an official PayPal 
communiqué and had an urgent message regarding maintenance of the 
account. Customers were asked to enter sensitive information into an 
online form. Customers of eBay, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, the Internal 
Revenue Service (1RS), and America Online (AOL) have also been the 
recipients of such scams. 
Different versions of this "phishing" scam include: 
• "Account Maintenance." This e-mail tells you the company is per-
forming basic maintenance and your account has been randomly 
selected for verification of contact information. 
62 

* Your Identity f 
• "Account Verification." This e-mail tells you your account has been 
suspended temporarily since the company is unable to verify your 
account information. The e-mail closes with the following: "If you do 
not verify this information within X days, your account will be per-
manently closed." 
• "New Terms of Service." This e-mail mentions new terms of service 
and asks you to click the link below to read the terms. Once you click 
the link, it asks you for your login and password. 
• "Paypal.com Credit Card Application." This e-mail seems to come 
from eBay or PayPal and lists full information and rates about avail-
able credit cards. The e-mail offers you a link to a site where you can 
fill out an application. Of the complaints received by the FTC in 
2003, auction-related scams comprised the largest number of Inter-
net-related fraud complaints, accounting for 48 percent of the total. 
The "Help Me Get My Money Out of My Country and I Will Give 
You Some of It" Scam 
/ am an accountant with CITIZEN INTERNTIONAL BANK, My name is 
Mr Hanny kuta a Banker ... On 30 JAN 2000, my client, his wife, and 
their three children were involved in the the Kenya Airways flight with 
registration number 5Y-BEN which departed from Nairobi to desti-
nation Lagos and they all family died in this fatal aircrash on 30 JAN 
2000 ... I have contacted you to assist in repatriating the money and 
property left behind by my client before they get confiscated or de-
clared unserviceable by the bank where these huge deposits 
were lodged.... 
If you use e-mail, you likely have received a horribly misspelled and 
grammatically incorrect e-mail from a foreign person who is trying to get 
a large sum of money out of his or her country. These so-called wealthy 
foreigners—including Mobutu's widowed wife in the Congo, Saddam 
Hussein's former bodyguards in Iraq, and Nigerian businessmen—say 
they will give you millions of dollars for helping them. Many of these let-
ters ask you to simply give them your bank account information so that 
they can "make a deposit." No matter how tragic or heartbreaking the 
63 

story, you must not respond to e-mails like the ones above—and most, of 
all, never give your bank account information to them. Clearly, these e-
mails are being sent by devious scam artists posing as known or sympa-
thetic foreigners. 
The "Patriot Act" Scam 
Department of Homeland Security Director Tom Ridge has advised the 
FDIC to suspend all deposit insurance on your bank account because 
of suspected violations of the USA Patriot Act. All deposit insurance 
will be suspended until you can verify your identity. Click on the link be-
low to verify your identity. 
Invoking the authority of the Patriot Act, this bank account scam 
requires you to send all your personal information to an "official website" 
that will verify your identity to unlock your bank account and reinstate your 
deposit insurance. The bank scam has many incarnations, including one 
sent by post that included fake 1RS forms, which you are asked to fill out 
and fax to an enclosed fax number. 
The Law on Identity Theft 
Robert Christopher Lawrence of Laurel, Maryland, fraudulently ob-
tained and used credit cards by using the personal information, such 
as dates of birth and social security numbers, of patients and em-
ployees of Kaiser Permanente, where he worked as a phlebotomist. 
Lawrence purposely chose to use the personal information of indi-
viduals whose names were similar to his. On the applications for the 
credit cards Lawrence listed his home address or the address of the 
house next door to his, and on some of the applications he used his 
home or work phone number. He was sentenced to thirty-three 
months imprisonment, to be followed by three years of supervised 
release, during which he had to pay restitution of $78,672.67. 
64 

If prosecuted, an identity 
thief can be sentenced to 
up to fifteen years of 
imprisonment and a fine, 
and may forfeit any 
personal property used to 
commit the crime. 
• Your Identity • 
Recognizing the consequences of identity theft, Congress has passed sev-
eral laws to deter potential identity thieves. The Identity Theft and Assump-
tion Deterrence Act makes it a crime under federal law or a felony under state 
or local law to use someone else's personal identifi-
cation—which is broadly interpreted to include 
name, social security number, cellular telephone, or 
electronic serial number. Several agencies, includ-
ing the U.S. Secret Service, the FBI, the U.S. Postal 
Inspection Service, and the Social Security Admin-
istration's Office of the Inspector General, may 
investigate and bring actions under this law. If 
prosecuted, an identity thief can be sentenced to 
up to fifteen years of imprisonment and a fine, and 
may forfeit any personal property used to commit the crime. Moreover, some 
identity theft schemes may lead to violations of other statutes, such as those 
pertaining to credit card fraud, computer fraud, mail fraud, wire fraud, finan-
cial institution fraud, or social security fraud. The crime may thus encompass 
other felonies and can lead to even more time in jail, more fines, and criminal 
forfeiture. 
Congress also overhauled the credit laws with the passage of the Fair and 
Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003. When fully enforced at the end of 
2004, this act will ultimately protect you in the following ways: 
• Provides you with one free credit report per year from each of the 
three credit bureaus 
• Gives you notification if merchants and lenders report missed 
payments to credit bureaus, thereby making you aware of identity 
theft possibly committed against you much sooner than ever before 
• Restricts credit bureaus from sharing your sensitive personal 
information with businesses 
• Establishes a nationwide system for placing fraud alerts on your credit 
file, including a process for overseas military personnel to place special 
alerts on their files 
• Requires merchants to omit all but the last five digits of your credit 
card number from credit card receipts. 
65 

This act sets national standards for identity theft that preempt most state 
laws. Some states that have already passed laws related to identity theft may 
now consider passing tougher laws in this area. States must also decide crimi-
nal penalties for identity thieves and limits on sharing social security numbers 
among companies. Further, identity theft crimes may also be actionable under 
other state laws. Contact your state attorney general's office or local consumer 
protection agency or visit the FTC website—www.ftc.gov—to learn more 
about other laws related to identity theft. Read chapter 4, "Your Credit," to 
learn more details. 
What to Do if You Are a Victim 
Ain Jones lost her wallet. During the months that followed her loss, 
she watched her car insurance double in price, had her driver's li-
cense usurped, had warrants issued for her arrest for crimes that 
she did not commit, and had to pay a $300 court fine. Fraud warn-
ings and notices appeared on every digital record of her person, 
from credit bureaus to the motor vehicle agencies. As a result of 
these events, Ain carries a "golden file" with her at all times. The 
file contains copies of her birth certificate, court documents, letters 
from her lawyer, and other paperwork she needs to prove she is 
who she claims to be. "I am still me. But I still have to prove I am 
me, " she says. 
Even if you take all the right precautions, you still can be a victim of iden-
tity theft. All it takes is a stolen pocketbook, a credit card forgotten at the cash 
register, a dropped receipt. One Chicago schoolteacher and artist endured such 
hardships after a pickpocket stole her wallet. As soon as she realized her wallet 
had been stolen, she reported the loss, put a stop on her checking accounts, 
and notified her credit card companies. Despite these precautions, the thief 
was able to get a driver's license in the teacher's name, use the license to obtain 
a $3,200 loan from her credit union, and then use the loan as a down payment 
on a $24,000 Toyota. The thief also withdrew more than $36,000 from the 
teacher's checking and money market accounts and charged more than $8,000 
on her credit cards. Ultimately, the teacher was not financially liable for the 
66 

• Your Identity • 
purchases made in her name, but she endured a living nightmare while she 
cleaned up the mess. 
The most worrisome part of identity theft is that victims typically have 
no idea they have been victimized. In many cases, victims may not know 
SHOULD YOU BUY IDENTITY THEFT INSURANCE? 
Many companies offer insurance or similar products that claim to protect 
you against the costs associated with resolving an identity theft case. There 
are a number of different insurance products, so make sure you under-
stand what you are buying beforehand. For example, some of these offer-
ings may be freestanding policies, while others may be riders to your 
existing homeowner's or renter's insurance. In addition, coverage levels 
run the gamut from $5,000 to $30,000 and more, and the benefits vary but 
do not typically provide for fraudulent credit card charges. Those charges 
must be resolved with your credit card company. 
Most plans are not formal insurance policies but offer you assistance if 
you are victimized—by sending you identity theft information, connecting 
you with an identity theft specialist who can provide advice, finding an 
attorney for you, if needed, and paying the attorney's legal fees up to a cer-
tain dollar amount. Some policies also include reimbursement for other 
costs incurred such as mailing or loan reapplication costs. Finally, because 
of the enormous amount of time it takes to straighten out all the problems 
arising from having your identity stolen (an average of six hundred hours 
of making phone calls, writing letters, and preparing documentation often 
over a period of years), some policies reimburse you up to a certain cap for 
lost wages from taking time off from work. 
Today, almost all insurance companies offer some type of identity theft 
insurance. Some credit issuers such as Citibank market credit cards with 
identity theft protection features. Identity theft insurance certainly can off-
set the costly burden associated with regaining your good name and repu-
tation. But even if you take out a policy, you still have to spend the time 
talking to and interacting directly with creditors, credit card companies, 
banks, and others if your identity is stolen. Unfortunately, there is no insur-
ance policy that will take over that task for you. 
67 

l^mm;^:\^^^::;^^^!^~^m!^ 
The most worrisome part 
of identity theft is that 
victims typically have no 
idea they have been 
victimized. In many cases, 
victims may not know 
about the crime for a 
year or longer. 
• Prying Eyes • 
about the crime for a year or longer. A thief may change the mailing 
address on a particular credit account so you will not see or receive the bills 
or statements. As you lead your normal day-to-day life, trying to make an 
honest living and keeping your head above water, 
an identity thief may be applying for credit cards, 
buying thousands of dollars of merchandise, tak-
ing out loans, and applying for a cellular service 
in your name. The thief may also be committing 
crimes for which the police want you and, should 
you get pulled over for a minor traffic infraction, 
may arrest you. 
If you are a victim of identity theft, you need 
to work as quickly and as methodically as possi-
ble to resolve the situation. The longer you delay 
in resolving your situation, the longer the identity theft perpetuates itself, 
and the more disastrous the situation may be for you. Unfortunately, the 
burden of proof is on you. Until you can prove that you are a victim, credit 
institutions will think you are just another deadbeat trying to avoid paying 
your bills. The consequences of identity theft may linger for years, prima-
rily because solving each case takes a long time. And each one is so compli-
cated, depending upon the type of theft, whether the thief sold or passed 
your information on to other thieves, whether the thief is caught, and how 
many problems you face correcting your credit report. Moreover, many vic-
tims have to wait for legal proceedings to conclude (if the thief was caught). 
Beyond the financial and credit implications, you should be prepared for a 
time-consuming and expensive ordeal. 
As mentioned above, the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 
2003 provides protections for consumers, but it does not require full compli-
ance until the end of 2004. If you are a victim of identity theft, the act gives 
you more assistance to resolve your situation. Nevertheless, given its recent 
enactment, you still should follow these steps to remedy the situation: 
^ 
Place a fraud alert on your account. A fraud alert is a notice that a credit 
bureau attaches to your credit report. When anyone, including you, seeks to 
establish a credit account by getting a new credit card, car loan, cell phone, 
68 

4 Your Identity t 
and so on, the lender will contact you by phone to confirm you want to 
open the new account. If you cannot be reached, the new account will not 
be opened. As soon as one credit bureau confirms your fraud alert, the 
other two credit bureaus will receive the request and automatically place 
fraud alerts on your credit report. Unfortunately, this step does not com-
pletely solve the problem. Even if you place a fraud alert on your account, 
you still should monitor your credit report for any new credit accounts or 
inquiries you have not authorized. Moreover, fraud alerts monitor only new 
credit accounts and do not affect your current credit cards, mortgages, or 
checking accounts. If you are a resident of California, you can also apply to 
freeze your credit under a new law called California SB 168, which enables 
you to freeze all access to your credit file. 
Placing a fraud alert on your account is a routine process for a credit 
bureau. Within a day of your telephone call to any of three credit bureaus to 
request a fraud alert, an alert will be placed on your credit file at all three 
major credit bureaus because the request for a fraud alert is automatically 
sent to the other bureaus. Contact Equifax, Experian, or TransUnion to place 
a fraud alert on your credit file (see "Resources"). 
Before you decide to place a fraud alert on your account, be prepared 
to be inconvenienced. If you want to open a new credit account, you must 
be available at either your work phone or home phone to approve the credit 
account, or the opening of any new account will be delayed. Moreover, if 
you are not reachable by phone, the lender will likely refuse to open the 
credit account. Creditors are not legally required to call you, so opening a 
particular account may be more difficult than you like. You also will not 
receive any pre-approved credit offers in the mail for up to two years, but 
that may not necessarily be a bad thing 
-fc Review your credit report. Once you place a fraud alert on your account, 
each of the three bureaus will send a credit report. Make sure you review 
each of the credit reports from the three major credit bureaus as soon as 
you receive them. As explained in chapter 4, "Your Credit," your credit 
report will show any new accounts that have been opened in your name, any 
new credit inquiries that might have been made by someone trying to open 
accounts in your name, or any debts that are not yours. Bring any inaccura-
69 

• Prying Eyes • 
cies, whether due to fraud or error, to the attention of the credit bureaus as 
soon as possible. Even after you correct your reports, continue to monitor 
them to ensure that new fraudulent activity does not occur. 
In 2002 alone, consumers 
spent 297 million hours 
resolving problems related 
to identity theft, and the 
average consumer spent 
up to 600 hours making 
numerous phone calls and 
mailing tons of letters in 
connection with that effort. 
-fc File a police report. A police report is helpful for 
two reasons: as an important document to send 
to creditors to prove that you are a victim of 
identity theft, and as further proof to dispute 
fraudulent charges. The police report should be 
sent to each of the three bureaus so they may 
block the information you are disputing in your 
credit reports. By law, the credit bureaus may 
remove the block if they believe it was wrongly 
placed. To file a report, go to your local police 
precinct and report what happened to you as an identity theft crime. It is 
important to report the crime in person, because the police sometimes 
mark a different crime on the report, in which case you won't have the 
proof to show that you have been a victim of identity theft. After the report 
is completed, make sure to get a copy of it for your files, or record the 
report number if you cannot get a copy of the report. To facilitate the 
process of filing the police report, you should show the police as much 
supporting documentation as possible, including collection letters, credit 
reports, an ID theft affidavit, and any other evidence of the identity theft. 
The new identity theft law forces businesses to give you any records 
related to fraudulent charges when you give them your police report. 
-$• Report the theft to the Federal Trade Commission and file an ID theft 
affidavit. You should report the theft to the FTC by filing a complaint 
using the information below. The FTC serves as a federal clearinghouse 
for complaints of identity theft. Your complaint is entered into a search-
able database that is accessible to law enforcement agencies. Law 
enforcement agencies use complaints filed with the FTC to aggregate 
cases, spot patterns, and track growth in identity theft. This information 
improves investigations: If there is a pattern of cases in a certain area, local 
70 

• Your Identity • 
authorities may give your case more attention. The FTC will provide you 
with an identity theft affidavit, which you can send to the credit bureaus 
and credit institutions to close any fraudulent accounts and debts that 
have been opened in your name. 
THE VIRTUES OF BEING ORGANIZED 
Victims of identity theft know that it takes hundreds of hours and thou-
sands of dollars to resolve the problems associated with the theft. In 2002 
alone, consumers spent 297 million hours resolving problems related to 
identity theft, and the average consumer spent up to 600 hours making 
numerous phone calls and mailing tons of letters in connection with that 
effort. It can take many months, if not years, before you have restored 
your credit and financial health and fully regained your good name. To 
keep track of the myriad details involved in the process, you must be extra 
organized and keep detailed records of everything you do. Being organ-
ized and documenting your efforts will contribute to the successful reso-
lution of your case. As you work to resolve your case, keep in mind the 
following tips: 
• Keep detailed notes of every conversation you have, including the 
name of the person to whom you spoke, his or her title and company, 
and the date of the conversation. 
• Follow up in writing (using certified mail and return receipt 
requested) with all people with whom you speak and maintain a 
copy of all letters and documents that you send. 
• Maintain the originals of all documents, including police reports, 
company fraud forms, and notarized letters to and from creditors. If 
an institution requests a document, send only copies. 
• Consider using the FTC sample chart to document your efforts at 
www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/pubs/credit/idtheft.htm#intro 
• Document the time and money you devote to resolving your identity 
theft case (in some cases, you may be reimbursed for these efforts, 
especially if you have identity theft insurance). 
71 

To file a complaint, contact the FTC: 
By phone: 
Toll-free 877/438-4338; TDD: 202/326-2502 
By mail: 
Identity Theft Clearinghouse 
Federal Trade Commission 
600 Pennsylvania Ave., NW 
Washington, DC 20580 
Online: 
www.ftc.gov to print out the Online ID Theft Complaint Form 
•fr Contact credit institutions and close unauthorized credit accounts and/or 
resolve fraudulent charges. You must close any accounts that have been 
opened without your authorization and dispute any charges that you did not 
personally undertake. Such accounts may include bank accounts, credit 
cards, mortgages, phone and other utility services, and other credit 
accounts. Unfortunately, the process for closing these accounts or disputing 
charges is neither routine nor consistent from company to company. As a first 
step, contact the fraud department at the institution that holds the credit 
account and ask them what they require in the way of proof or evidence to 
resolve the situation. The frustrating part of this step is that each institution 
may require slightly different supporting documentation. For example, it may 
require a completed ID theft affidavit, a police report, or its own fraud dis-
pute form. After you resolve the problem, make sure you get a letter from 
the institution stating that they have closed the disputed accounts and have 
discharged you of any fraudulent debt. This letter should be kept with your 
other records. 
In addition, if your credit, debit, or ATM card has been used without 
your permission, you should cancel the card immediately and then request a 
new card. You should also change your PIN or password before you use your 
new credit, debit, or ATM card. In the case of missing or stolen personal 
checks, you should simultaneously and immediately close your checking 
account and inform your bank that your checks have been stolen. In these 
cases, if you don't act quickly enough, you may not be able to recover some 
of your assets. 
72 

4 Your Identity t 
# Contact other government agencies. Depending on your individual case, 
you may need to contact other government agencies: 
• Post Office: If you think an identity thief either has submitted a change-
of-address form with the post office to redirect your mail, or has used the 
mail to commit frauds involving your identity, contact the local office of 
the Postal Inspection Service. 
• Social Security Administration: If you suspect that your social security 
number is being fraudulently used, call the Social Security Administration 
at 800/269-0271 to report the fraud. 
• Internal Revenue Service: If you suspect the improper use of identifica-
tion information in connection with tax violations, call the Internal Rev-
enue Service at 800/829-0433 to report the violations. 
• Police and Law Enforcement Agencies: If you believe that the identity 
thief has committed crimes in your name, you should get in touch 
with the arresting or citing law enforcement agency. The procedure to 
correct your criminal record varies by state and county. A good place 
to start is the police department that originally arrested the person 
who stole your identity or the court that issued the warrant for your 
arrest. 
Long-Term Consequences 
A Norfolk, Virginia, resident had her purse stolen from her SUV 
while she was waiting in line at a local post office. She spent 
forty-five minutes on the phone with police, and then visited a 
government website for advice on what to do next. Although she 
managed to shut down all her personal accounts within hours, 
the thief wrote forty-five bad checks in her name, a situation she 
has spent months trying to rectify, "Not because [the informa-
tion] was not available, " she says, "but because as a small busi-
ness owner, wife, homemaker, and mother of two teenage boys, 
there [are] just not enough hours in the day. That and it takes a 
little while to get over the fact you have been violated in a most 
personal way. " 
73 

When Terri McDermott moved across the country for an exciting 
new job, she wasn't prepared for her new employer's news on her 
first day. The employer told Terri that the standard background 
check had turned up a nine-page criminal record that included for-
gery and burglary. Terri knew that she had not committed those 
crimes, but could not start work until she cleared her name. 
In most cases, you will not be responsible for paying the bills that an iden-
tity thief has racked up in your name. However, you are still left with a precar-
ious credit situation, and you must handle the emotional stress of regaining 
your good name. As you try to put your credit life back in order, you may also 
endure years of headaches in obtaining loans, credit cards, mortgages, apart-
ment rentals, and jobs. The faster you discover the identity theft and react to 
correct the situation, the less damaging the consequences will be. 
What are the financial consequences of identity theft? Chapter 5, "Your 
Money," specifically outlines your financial exposure, but here is the overview: 
Credit Cards. If you report the loss of your credit card before it is used, the 
card issuer cannot hold you responsible for any unauthorized charges. If a 
thief uses your credit card before you report it missing, the most you will owe 
for unauthorized charges is $50 per card. 
ATM and Debit Cards. You can be responsible for ATM and debit card charges 
if you fail to report unauthorized charges within a timely manner. Generally, 
the amount for which you are liable depends on how long it takes you to 
report the missing ATM or debit card. For example, if you report your ATM or 
debit card lost or stolen within two business days of discovering the loss or 
theft, your liability is limited to $50. If you wait more than sixty days before 
you report the loss or theft of your ATM or debit card, you can lose any money 
taken from your account after the end of the sixty days and before you report 
the card missing. The benefits of promptly reporting the loss of your ATM or 
debit card to your bank are clear. 
Personal Checks. Your liability varies, but if you take appropriate and timely 
action to resolve the situation and notify your bank, you will likely not be 
74 

• Your Identity • 
held responsible for losses from forged checks. Unfortunately, no federal law 
caps your losses if someone steals your checks and forges your signature, so 
you need to rely on the laws in your state to protect you. Most states hold the 
bank responsible for losses from a forged check, 
provided you care for your account in a reasonable 
way and notify the bank in a timely manner that 
a check was lost or stolen. Act accordingly because 
an explicit rule does not exist. 
Lightning can strike twice, 
and so can identity theft. 
Lightning can strike twice, and so can identity theft. Unfortunately, being 
a victim does not immunize you from a recurrence of identity theft. Even after 
you have reported the identity theft crime, you should continue to monitor 
your credit reports and other credit and financial accounts for several months. 
Keep alert for other signs of identity theft. 
THE BOTTOM LINE 
• Oprah knows best. Identity theft happened to Oprah Winfrey, and it can 
happen to you. Identity theft is rampant today, and it is only a matter of 
time before it happens to you. 
• Give yourself some credit. The most effective way to stay on top of identity 
theft is to monitor your credit report. Order copies of your report at least 
once a year. Under the new federal credit laws, it won't cost you any 
money to get a copy from each of the bureaus once a year. 
• Always be on guard. Identity thieves are devious, and they are always 
looking for ways to entice you to reveal sensitive and personal 
information. Expect to encounter scams, and think twice before you 
release your valuable information. 
• Tick-tock. With identity theft, the clock is always ticking. The faster you 
discover identity theft, and the faster you react to resolve the problem, the 
less severe the consequences will be. 
• Detail the details. To properly resolve identity theft, take detailed notes 
about everything you do and keep your notes and documents organized. 
Remember that it may take years to resolve identity theft. 
75 

Your Credit 
Cï*gojv*tXZi. 
"Somebody in Boise needs my help. Run a credit check. " 
You and your husband decide to move from San Francisco to Boston. 
You have two weeks before your new job starts, and you spend the 
time running errands and setting up your new life. You submit an ap-
plication to rent an apartment in the Back Bay of Boston, lease a new 
BMW that you have been coveting, purchase a new cell phone with 
Verizon, and open a new charge account at Filene's 
department 
store. You didn't know it at the time, but your credit report recorded 
and detailed each of these actions. Three weeks later, your new boss 
casually asks you how your new BMW is riding. 
Your credit report may be the single most important piece of personal 
information about you. If you are like most Americans, you may not even 
76 

* Your Credit f 
know what is contained in your credit report and how this report and its 
accompanying credit score can dramatically affect your life. Your credit report 
contains valuable personal information about you, including your social secu-
rity number, home address, employer, your housing 
situation, all your credit accounts, and much more. 
Your credit report also includes sensitive infor-
Employers, insurers, 
mation that you probably want to protect. Ever 
a n d , a n d l o r d s r e l y h e a v M y 
been arrested? Ever filed for bankruptcy? Were you 
on credit reports-
late in paying your Macy's bill last spring? If so, 
a n d s o d o criminals, 
that information will show up on your credit 
report. You will be able to see it and so will your prospective employer, land-
lord, insurer, or anyone else who has access to the report. 
All of this may make you nervous, but the national credit bureaus do serve 
a vital purpose in our country. Indeed, the development of the bureaus as cen-
tral repositories to predict one's likelihood to repay any indebtness has 
enabled lenders to extend credit to the middle and lower classes to buy homes, 
cars, and receive credit cards. The great American dream of home ownership 
is furthered by the developments of these bureaus. 
As a result, your credit report and credit information are more important 
but less secure today than they were five years ago. Employers, insurers, and 
landlords rely heavily on credit reports—and so do criminals. Identity thieves 
find a treasure trove of personal information in credit reports. Enhanced 
access to reports through networked systems and the Internet has resulted in 
more people getting a hold of your credit information without appropriate 
authorization, giving rise to crimes and other violations of your credit privacy. 
How easy is it to steal credit information? At times, quite easy. Theft and 
privacy violations continue unabated despite greater consumer awareness, 
higher security concerns by credit bureaus, and new laws passed by Congress 
and the states to curb such abuses. Given the sensitive information in your 
credit report, you must take extra efforts to learn about your report and all the 
details in it as well as how to safeguard and restrict access to it. 
77 

Your Credit Report Is More Important Than You Think 
Ronnie Rodgers is a self-employed architect and builder whose 
business rests on his good name and credit. He is especially careful 
to make all his payments on time: "I have all kinds of credit cards, 
and I've never been late on a credit card payment. I mean, I'm one 
of the best and most reliable borrowers around, " he once boasted. 
So when the time came for Rodgers to apply for a loan, he was 
shocked to discover a $500 lien he couldn't account for on his 
credit report. 
None of the department store managers in southern California 
wanted to hire Bronti Kelly, and he couldn't figure out why. Even 
though he had ten years of sales experience, he was either rejected 
for a position or fired after a few days on a job. Jobless, Kelly filed 
for bankruptcy and lost his home. Later he discovered that an iden-
tity thief had given authorities Kelly's personal information when ar-
rested for shoplifting and other crimes. Every time potential 
employers pulled up Kelly's credit report as part of their routine 
background checks, they discovered a fraudulent criminal record 
that did not bode well for Kelly's future in sales. 
If you have ever applied for a loan, you know that prospective lenders 
always review your credit history. You learned very quickly that your credit 
report, your credit score, and the likelihood of obtaining the loan at the rate 
you want are related. This is a reality: Your ability to obtain credit entirely 
depends on your credit report and your credit score. 
But did you know that, due to the widespread use of credit information, 
your credit report and score affects your day-to-day life even more dramati-
cally? Today, more and more companies—and not just credit card issuers and 
mortgage and automobile lenders—take a look at your credit report to assess 
you as a credit risk. 
For example, did you know that approximately 90 percent of auto insurers 
use your credit score to determine not only whether to offer you insurance but 
also how much to charge you? Based on a combination of historical and statis-
78 

:jpi;iii'::lp:;^;;^g§i^;a»> y - ^ ^ j 
Employers might rely 
on your credit report to 
learn important details 
about your life. 
• Your Credit • 
tical equations, auto insurers see a direct correlation between your credit his-
tory and score and the degree to which you are able to undertake risk. In other 
words, your credit score plays an important part in determining whether you 
are a potential risk to insure. 
Potential employers also value this informa-
tion. They examine your credit reports to assess 
your stability in the workplace. In the view of some 
employers, you are a more reliable and trustworthy 
employee if you have a track record of paying your 
bills on time and accumulating less debt. In addi-
tion, employers might rely on your credit report to learn other important 
details about your life. Credit reports reveal mundane information you are 
likely to be comfortable in revealing, such as your current employer or current 
address, and more sensitive personal information that you are unlikely to 
want to reveal, such as whether you have been sued or arrested, or if you have 
ever filed for bankruptcy. 
The bottom line? Even if you are not in search of a mortgage for your 
dream home or an auto loan to finance your new BMW convertible, you must 
review and understand your credit report and score and ensure that you main-
tain accurate information in your credit report. Make sure that the people who 
legitimately access your credit information are seeing an accurate version of it, 
and that the people who shouldn't see it are prevented from doing so. 
What's In Your Credit Report? 
When Barbara applied for a credit card, she expected that the ap-
plication would be approved on the spot. After all, she and her hus-
band had a consistent record of paying their bills on time, a strong 
credit record, and good jobs. But the application was turned down. 
The reason? Their adult son had a tendency to submit late payment 
to the same credit card company. 
Your credit report indicates how much money you spend, also whether 
you pay your bills on time and even some of the places where you shop. Your 
79 

report shows how many credit cards you have. It can reveal whether you have 
a mortgage on your house or financing on your car. From the various applica-
tions you submit for credit and loans, the credit bureaus also collect sensitive 
personal information about you, such as your address, your social security 
number, your employer, and more. So the next time you complete an applica-
tion for a credit card—whether an American Express card, a Citibank Visa 
card, a Bloomingdale's retail card, or a United Airlines mileage card—you 
should remember that the information you provide to get that card is sent to a 
credit bureau. Moreover, a record of anyone you allow to access your credit 
report, including car dealers and landlords, will also be recorded in your 
report. And there is nothing you can do about it. 
Your credit report contains the following information: 
• Your name 
• Current and previous addresses 
• Phone number 
• Social security number 
• Date of birth 
• Current and previous employers 
• Spouse's name (may appear on your version of the credit report but 
not on the one sent to lenders) 
• Details about each of your credit accounts, such as the date opened, 
credit limit or loan amount, balance, monthly payment and payment 
history in the previous years 
• Bankruptcy filings, if any, as well as state and county court records of 
tax liens and monetary judgments against you 
• Record of those who have accessed or reviewed your credit report 
• Disputed facts or statements (by both consumer and creditor) as to 
account status. These are included when a consumer officially disputes 
the status of an account, or when an investigation of the account has 
resulted in a disagreement between consumer and creditor 
In addition, the federal law specifies what information may remain on 
your report indefinitely, including: 
• An application for a credit transaction or life insurance information 
involving an amount of $150,000 or more 
80 

• Your Credit • 
• Information about a job with a salary of more than $75,000 
• Tax liens that are not paid 
• Records of criminal convictions (these may remain on your credit 
report indefinitely under federal law, but some states require that 
records of arrest or misdemeanor complaints be removed after seven 
years) 
On the flip side, certain other pieces of personal information cannot be in 
your credit report without your consent or must be removed after a certain 
time period. These include: 
• Information about a lawsuit or an unpaid judgment against you (can 
only be reported for seven years or until the statute of limitations runs 
out, whichever is longer) 
• Medical history and information (Note that overdue medical bills can 
appear on your report, and these bills contain enough information for 
a reader to infer details about you. Anyone looking at this information 
will be able to see that you had cosmetic surgery or underwent fertility 
treatment, that you visited a mental health provider, or that you are 
visiting an AIDS clinic.) 
• A bankruptcy that occurred more than ten years ago 
• Debts (including delinquent child support payments) that are more 
than seven years old 
• Sensitive information such as your race, sex, marital status, national 
origin, religious or political preference, and personal lifestyle (although 
some of this may be implied by the detail that is provided, including 
your last name and your debts) 
How Credit Bureaus Get Your Personal Information 
Where does the sensitive information on a credit report come from? 
Some of it comes from public records (see chapter 2, "Your Personal Informa-
tion and the Public Record"). Public record sources might include judgments 
or warnings that have been recorded with a county official or in public 
records. Through these sources, the credit bureaus will learn whether any liens 
81 

* Prying Eyes f 
or legal actions are pending against you or your house, including any 1RS tax 
liens. The bureaus will also discover whether you have ever filed for bank-
Much of the information on your credit report 
comes directly from you. When you complete and 
submit applications to lenders and merchants, they 
send information to the Equifax, Experian, and 
TransUnion credit bureaus, which maintain files on 
nearly 90 percent of American adults. Every time 
you apply for credit or a loan, a credit bureau 
records the information in your credit report. Your 
credit report will not itemize the sofa you pur-
chased at Bloomingdale's, but it certainly will show 
that you owe Bloomingdale's the cost of the couch if 
you fail to pay the department store in time. In addition, your report will list, 
for example, that you have a credit card with First USA Bank or a new per-
sonal line of equity at Chase Manhattan Bank. 
Your credit report may contain most, but not all, of your credit accounts. 
Major credit card issuers and large department and retail stores invariably will 
report your credit account to a credit bureau. Smaller and local retailers, auto 
dealers, gasoline card companies, or credit unions may use their own stan-
dards and practices to determine whether you are worthy of obtaining credit, 
and they may not report your information to a credit bureau unless you fail to 
pay your bills in a timely fashion. On the other hand, overdue bills from med-
ical institutions or your cellular company may be part of your credit file. Even 
if your particular ailment or calls to chat lines are not listed on your credit 
report, the inclusion of that information may still be sensitive, if, for example, 
your medical bill is from a medical institution known to treat specific diseases. 
Each of the three credit bureaus is likely to have a slightly different credit 
report about you in their databases. The reason is that some creditors main-
tain different relationships with each of the bureaus. For example, if you live 
in Atlanta and have a credit card with a local merchant, the merchant may 
send your information only to Equifax and not to TransUnion and Experian. A 
local retailer in Chicago may report only to TransUnion and not to the other 
bureaus. Moreover, every creditor has a different policy about when they 
ruptcy or been arrested. 
When you complete and 
submit applications to 
lenders and merchants, 
they send information to 
the Equifax, Experian, and 
TransUnion credit bureaus, 
which maintain files on 
nearly 90 percent of 
American adults. 
82 

* Your Credit f 
report their accounts and negative information to a credit bureau. If you apply 
for a credit card in late March, your credit report for one bureau may not 
reflect that change until April, while another one may not register the change 
until early May. Finally, some creditors may wait until your account is sixty 
days overdue before they notify a credit bureau about an untimely payment or 
delinquency, while others may do so at the time they turn over your account to 
a collection agency. 
ORDER YOUR REPORT NOW 
Review your credit report at least once a year from each of the three credit 
bureaus. By law, you are entitled to a copy of your credit report, and it is 
quite simple to obtain a report. All you need to do is contact one of the 
three main credit bureaus: 
Equifax 
Box 740241 
Atlanta, GA 30374 
800/685-1111 
www.equifax.com 
Experian 
Box 2002 
Allen, TX 75013 
888/397-3742 
www.experian.com 
TransUnion 
Box 1000 
Chester, PA 19022 
800/888-4213 
www.tvc.com 
When you order a credit report from any of these credit bureaus, you must 
provide your name, address, telephone number, social security number, and 
credit card information, which the bureaus will use to verify your identity. 
83 

If you are not entitled to a free copy of your credit report, as explained 
below, you may be charged $9 to get a copy of your credit report. The FTC 
establishes this fee. If you live in the states of Connecticut, Maine, Min-
nesota, California, or Montana, you will be charged a reduced fee. If you 
live in Colorado, Georgia, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, or Ver-
mont, you can request a free report. 
You can obtain your credit report free of charge, regardless of which state 
you live in, under the following circumstances: (1) you are unemployed and 
plan to seek employment within sixty days; (2) you are on welfare; (3) your 
report is inaccurate due to fraud; or (4) a company has taken action against 
you as a result of information supplied by a credit bureau. In this last case, 
you have the legal right to know if information in your file has been used 
against you. Anyone who uses information from a credit report to take 
action against you—such as denying an application for credit, insurance, or 
employment—must inform you, and give you the name, address, and 
phone number of the credit bureau that provided your credit report. 
Once the federal Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 is 
fully effective at the end of 2004, you will be able to obtain a free credit 
report one time each year from each of the three bureaus. When contacting 
a bureau to order a report, ask whether the law is in effect before you pay 
for your credit report. 
What Laws Protect You? 
In the spring of 2002, the following e-mail made its way into the inbox of mil-
lions of Americans, who then forwarded it to others: 
"Just wanted to let everyone know who hasn't already heard, the 
four major credit bureaus in the U.S. will be allowed, starting July 1, 
to release your credit info, mailing addresses, phone numbers . . . 
to anyone who requests it. If you would like to 'opt out' of this re-
84 

* Your Credit f 
lease of Information, you can call 888/567-8688. It only takes a cou-
ple of minutes to do. " 
The warning was completely baseless, but it terrified and confused many 
people and prompted a flood of calls to the toll-free number. As it turned out, 
the opt-out number connected callers with the division at the Credit Reporting 
Industry that handled opting out of unsolicited offers of credit cards or insur-
ance products. The information in the e-mail wasn't exactly true—creditors 
can't release your information to just anyone who requests it—but the e-mail 
tapped into the public opinion that the companies that track personal infor-
mation hold unimaginable power over all of us. 
Recognizing that credit reports exert so much power over the lives of citi-
zens, Congress passed the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) in 1970 to ensure 
accuracy in consumer reports and to protect the privacy of the information 
contained in them. The FCRA protects you by ensuring that credit bureaus do 
not disclose inaccurate and arbitrary personalized information about con-
sumers. In addition, the act governs how credit bureaus may disclose your 
information to third parties. You also enjoy additional rights under state laws. 
Contact your state attorney general or local consumer protection agency for 
more information. To review the full text of the FCRA or learn which state 
agencies you should contact, log on to www.ftc.gov. 
In 2003, Congress passed the Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act, a 
federal credit law that was designed to combat the steady increase in identity 
theft in the country, but also affects your credit rights. As a beneficiary of this 
law, you are entitled to one free credit report per year from each of the three 
credit bureaus and notification if merchants and lenders report missed pay-
ments to credit bureaus. This law also sets a national standard for identity 
theft with which states must comply See chapter 3, "Your Identity," for more 
information about how this law protects you against identity theft. The credit 
bureaus have until the end of 2004 to fully comply with this new law. 
85 

Your Credit Score 
The owner and director of a company opened a cellular phone ac-
count for the company in his name. For business purposes he left 
the country and put his relative in charge of the business, including 
the bills. The relative neglected to pay the cell phone company, the 
cell phone service was turned off, and the cell phone company sent 
the account to a collection agency. Later, when the owner saw his 
credit statement he saw that his credit score was compromised due 
to the bad debt. He paid the debt and requested that the bad 
credit rating be transferred to his relative who was supposed to 
have paid the bills. 
In addition to your credit report, you have a credit score. Just like a credit 
report, a credit score can affect you in important ways and can be accessed by 
the same people who access your credit report. 
A credit score is created through a statistical model developed by the 
company Fair Isaac and derives a number that ranges between 300 and 850. 
This number, or FICO score, represents a summary of your credit history. It 
also compares you and other consumers with similar profiles with regard to 
your credit performance. The model awards points for each factor that helps 
predict who is most likely to repay a debt. The score is used as a predictor of 
your creditworthiness or your likelihood to repay a loan and make the pay-
ments on time. Many lenders and companies have also developed their own 
scoring models to predict the likelihood of an individual defaulting on a 
given loan. 
The scoring model is a complex algorithm that takes into account a num-
ber of different factors. These factors are assigned different proportions, so it 
is difficult to know the precise ways or time it will take for you to improve 
your score. These scoring models generally evaluate the following five factors 
and information in your credit report to determine your score (in order of 
importance): 
1. Payment history. Do you pay your bills on time? Your score is reduced 
or negatively impacted if you have a history of paying bills late, have 
had an account sent to collection, or have filed for bankruptcy. Timing 
86 

* Your Credit f 
is also important. A recent late payment is worse than one that 
occurred years ago. 
2. Outstanding debt. What is your outstanding debt? The amount of 
debt you have compared to your credit limits affects your score. If the 
amount you owe is close to your credit limit, the debt will negatively 
affect your score. 
3. Length of credit history. How long is your credit history? The longer 
you have had accounts open, the better it is for you. 
4. Recent requests or inquiries for credit. Have you recently applied 
for new credit? Recent applications for credit, or the inquiries that 
appear on your credit report, can affect your score. If you have 
recently applied for too many new accounts, it will negatively affect 
your score. Practically speaking, if one lender turns you down, the 
next lender from whom you are seeking credit will also probably turn 
you down. Multiple applications within a six-month period will 
undoubtedly hurt your score. Promotional (the prescreened or pre-
approved) credit card and insurance product offers you get in the 
mail do not have an effect on your score since, in these cases, you are 
not actively seeking credit. Rather, a lender is approaching you with a 
credit solicitation. 
5. Type of credit. What types of credit accounts do you have? Your score 
takes into consideration the type of credit accounts you have. 
Generally, loans from finance companies have a greater negative effect 
on your credit score. 
In simple terms, a low score means either that you may be denied credit, or 
that you may be offered credit at a high interest rate. Conversely, a high score 
means that you are likely to be offered credit at a low interest rate. Your credit 
report is also used in this determination. You might think that if you always 
pay on time and you pay your entire balance due at that time, you would have 
an excellent credit score. That certainly seems logical. But you never know 
unless you check. 
87 

Who Accesses Your Credit Report and Score 
Daniel Cohn, a Web detective, demonstrated for a Forbes reporter 
how he could access the reporter's account information and other 
personal information using a credit header. Credit headers which 
are sold to informtion brokers include your name, current and pre-
vious addresses, phone number, date of birth, and social security 
number and are supplied by credit bureaus. Accessing data from a 
reseller, Cohn dug up the reporter's utility bills, two unlisted phone 
numbers, and a summary of his finances. With the social security 
number and a few more details he picked up along the way, Cohn 
then accessed a Federal Reserve database that revealed a $503 se-
curity deposit at Apple Bank for Savings, $7 in a forgotten savings 
account at Chase Manhattan Bank, and $1,000 in another Chase 
account. Calling Merrill Lynch and posing as licensed state investi-
gator, Cohn used the reporter's social security number and other 
details to access the reporter's balance, direct deposits from work, 
withdrawals, ATM visits, check numbers with dates and amounts, 
and the name of his broker. 
Credit bureaus, or credit reporting agencies as they are referred to under 
the Fair Credit and Reporting Act (FCRA), are in the business of gathering 
information about you and how you use credit. Think about credit bureaus as 
data depositories of personal and sensitive information. The bureaus make 
money by reselling the information they collect about you back to lenders, 
merchants, employers, landlords, and other businesses. Fortunately the FCRA 
very carefully regulates who can obtain and access your credit file. 
Now it's time to put the pieces together. To whom do the bureaus sell their 
information? Who besides you and the agency knows that you have a Victo-
ria's Secret Angel credit card? Here's a clue: Does the language "you have been 
pre-approved for this credit card" seem all too familiar? Credit card issuers 
mail approximately 5 billion offers for pre-approved credit cards to American 
households each year. How do they get your name and address? Quite simply 
the FCRA allows the credit bureaus to sell this information to prospective 
88 

4 Your Credit f 
credit card issuers and other entities as well. Here are the four entities that can 
generally access your credit report under the FCRA: 
1. Entities with a legitimate business reason. The first group of people 
is defined under the FCRA as anyone who 
has a "legitimate" business reason to check 
your credit report. This group includes (a) 
any creditor to whom you have submitted 
an application and who is considering 
extending credit to you; (b) an insurer 
from whom you are seeking insurance; (c) 
a landlord from whom you are seeking 
to rent a unit or other property; (d) an 
employer or prospective employer so long 
as in both cases you provide your consent; 
and (e) any other company, provided it has 
a legitimate business reason and is 
involved in a business transaction with you that requires access to 
your credit report. With respect to this last category, an example may 
be a company with whom you have enrolled to monitor your credit 
on a regular basis. 
The bureaus are prevented from selling your credit report informa-
tion to companies that want to sell you products that are not credit-
related, so don't worry that the credit bureaus will use information 
from your credit reports for direct marketing purposes. 
2. The government. The government is the second group that may 
access your credit report, but only under certain circumstances and, in 
some cases, only part of it. A governmental agency may access your 
credit file if you have submitted an application for a government 
license or benefit, but only if the license or benefit is contingent upon 
your financial status or if the governmental or state agency is seeking 
to enforce child support payments. Governmental agencies can access 
your credit file but are limited to obtaining your name, address, former 
addresses, current employer, and previous employers. One exception is 
the new USA Patriot Act, which expands the rights of the government 
Think about credit 
bureaus as data 
depositories of personal 
and sensitive information. 
The bureaus make money 
by reselling the 
information they collect 
about you back to 
lenders, merchants, 
employers, landlords, 
and other businesses. 
89 

* Prying Eyes * 
to access your credit report to assist in its criminal investigations. See 
chapter 11, "Your Everyday Life," for details. 
3. Companies that market pre-approved credit offers. Credit bureaus 
may include your name on lists they sell to companies that market pre-
approved credit and insurance offers to consumers such as yourself. 
The FCRA considers the selling of such information to credit card 
issuers and insurers permissible. This is why you receive so many pre-
approved offers for credit cards in the mail. It works like this: 
If, for example, Capital One is introducing to the marketplace a 
new Gold credit card with special features such as a low APR (annual 
percentage rate), zero annual fee, and double frequent flyer miles for 
every $1 charged on the new card, it would contact one of the credit 
bureaus and request a list of persons who meet certain criteria and 
would, therefore, qualify for this card. Given the high-end nature of this 
particular card, Capital One might request a list of people who have a 
high personal income, live in urban areas, use a certain number of 
credit cards, and have a high credit score. The credit bureau would exe-
cute a search through its records to deliver to Capital One a specific list 
of those who meet Capital One's criteria. Capital One would then mail a 
pre-approved offer for its new credit card to the people on the list. 
If you respond to an offer that arrives in the mail, the credit card 
company issuing the offer has the right to access your entire credit 
report. You should know that pre-approved is very different from 
approved. The fact that you received a pre-approved credit card offer 
does not guarantee that you will actually receive the card. If, for exam-
ple, you respond to the above offer for the pre-approved card, Capital 
One may access your report before it grants you any credit. In the event 
that you do not meet its criteria because of a change in your file since 
the time the offer was mailed to you, Capital One will reject your appli-
cation for the credit card. 
4. Brokers who buy "credit headers." Credit bureaus are allowed to sell 
what are called credit headers from your credit report. A credit header 
includes your name, current and previous addresses, phone number, 
date of birth, and social security number. This information is sold to 
many information brokers, including data aggregators, who in turn sell 
90 

* Your Credit f 
Credit header information, 
which includes social 
security numbers, can 
be used to commit 
identity theft. 
it for a variety of investigative purposes detailed in chapter 1, "What 
Privacy Means to You." Unfortunately, you have little control here. 
Credit header information is sensitive because it includes your 
social security number, which businesses 
and the government use in many ways to 
access information about you. Credit headers 
are used for locating individuals, such as 
missing persons, and for target marketing. 
But because credit headers contain your 
social security number, thieves can use them 
to commit identity theft. 
The sale of credit headers is controversial. Several bills have 
been passed in Congress to prohibit the sale of headers or at the very 
least to restrict the sale of social security numbers, which are con-
tained in credit headers. Even then, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
(GLB) requires users to have a permissible purpose before accessing 
creditor header information. 
How to Reduce Access to Your Credit Report 
There is little you can do to prevent people and businesses with a legitimate 
reason and the government from gaining access to your credit report. If 
you lead a relatively normal life, creditors, insurance companies, landlords, 
and prospective employers will likely see your credit report. And you have 
little choice in the matter unless you want to rent the Unabomber's former 
shack in the hills of Montana and live off the land—avoiding all contact with 
society. 
You do have some control over when other people can access your infor-
mation, to what extent others have the right to share it, and the number of 
marketing-related inquiries you receive. Given the sensitive information in 
your credit report, you must be prepared not only to safeguard the data 
included in the report, but also to manage how the entities that have access to 
the information use it to market products to you. You also have some control 
over how your credit information is used as a basis for marketing. Be proactive 
and take the following steps: 
91 

You do have some 
control over when other 
people can access 
your information, to 
what extent others have 
the right to share it, 
and the number of 
marketing-related 
inquiries you receive. 
• Prying Eyes • 
-fc Always ask why. Whenever you submit an application for credit or a com-
pany requests permission to review your credit report (or asks for your social 
security number), ask why the information or particular information request 
is required and the ways in which the company protects customers' personal 
information. If you are not comfortable with the 
answers you receive with respect to the company's 
information practices, do not submit the application 
or do not permit the company to access your credit 
report. Do not give consent unless it is necessary. In 
some cases, your affirmative written consent is 
required before a credit bureau may release your 
credit report. For example, your consent is required 
before reports that contain medical information 
about you are sent to creditors, insurers, or employ-
ers. In addition, a bureau may not release your report to your employer, or 
prospective employer, without your written consent. 
-fc Opt out. Remove your name from the credit bureau lists that are used for 
pre-approved credit offers or direct marketing. To remove your name from 
these lists, call the following toll-free number: 888/567-8688. By calling 
this number, you can opt out of both the pre-approved and direct market-
ing lists of the three main credit bureaus. The bureaus are required by law 
to maintain this number for that express purpose. You may also opt out of 
these lists by writing to the bureaus. (See "Resources") 
If you call the 800 number, your phone call removes your name and 
address from these lists for a two-year period. If you write a letter request-
ing to opt out, the credit bureaus will send you a form, which when com-
pleted removes your name from these lists permanently. Unfortunately, you 
are not able to opt out of the sale of your credit header information. 
•fc Respond to the annual opt-out notice. You have the right, in most cases, to 
prevent financial institutions from sharing your personal information with 
unaffiliated third parties. Each year, financial institutions must send a notice 
to their customers telling them how they use customers' information and 
what opt-out rights the customer has. This is not a credit issue under the 
92 

* Your Credit * 
FCRA but rather a means of restricting the distribution of your personal 
information under the G LB Act. See chapter 5, "Your Money," for more 
details on how to manage your financial privacy. 
*- Complain to the appropriate government agency or file a lawsuit against 
anyone who inappropriately accesses your credit file. You have this right 
under the FCRA. 
CREDIT SCAMS 
Beware of credit repair companies that claim they can resolve all of your 
credit woes. Many of these offers are scams to cheat you or steal your 
identity. 
The "Credit Repair" Scam 
Look out for the following lines: 
Credit problems? No problem! 
We can erase your bad credit—700% guaranteed. 
We can remove bankruptcies, judgments, liens, and bad loans from 
your credit file forever!!! 
Companies that make these claims are in the business of helping you 
improve, repair, or restructure your credit situation. Some of these busi-
nesses may be legitimate, but many are not. Keep this in mind whenever 
you encounter a credit repair offer: If a credit repair company requests a 
fee and guarantees to clean up your credit report so you can get a job, 
mortgage, or car loan, you should be thinking "This is a scam!" 
As the FTC points out, these companies cannot improve your credit 
report overnight because credit repair usually requires a long-term per-
sonal debt repayment plan. If a company wants to be paid up front, before 
it provides any services, or if it instructs you not to contact any of the credit 
bureaus directly, it is probably not a legitimate business. The same goes for 
companies that offer you a Visa or MasterCard even if you have been 
turned down by banks. The same is true of companies that provide a 900 
93 

number, which could cost you $25 to $50 to call. A credit repair company 
lacks the power to remove accurate information—no matter how bad or 
embarrassing it is—from a credit report. Additionally certain negative 
information, such as bankruptcy, can be removed from a credit report only 
after the requisite period of time passes. As stated above, federal law dic-
tates the type of information that is contained in your report as well as how 
long that information can remain in your report. 
If you decide to use the services of one of these companies, conduct an 
investigation of the company and learn as much as possible beforehand. If 
you need assistance, get the FTC's brochure that explains how to improve 
your credit and lists legitimate resources to help you. 
The "We'll Erase Your Bad Credit and Give You a New Social Security 
Number" Scam 
ERASE BAD CREDIT 
A NEW CLEAN CREDIT FILE IN JUST 30 DAYS! 
ANYONE CAN HAVE A NEW CREDIT FILE INSTANTLY OVERNIGHT 
START ALL OVER AGAIN WITH BRAND NEW CREDIT 
That's right! You see there's a program that the government just put out 
a couple of months ago which is giving consumers, such as yourself, who 
have poor credit, a second chance. With this program you can get a new 
number that acts as your SSN number strictly for credit purposes only. 
Advertised on the Internet, radio, and television, this scam involves pay-
ing a service to apply for an Employer Identification Number (EIN), essen-
tially a business taxpayer number, from the 1RS. Once you receive the 
number, the company instructs you to use this number instead of your 
social security number on credit applications. The company will tell you 
that if you use this new number on your credit report, none of your credi-
tors will see your previous file. In essence, you're buying a false identity. 
The problem? If you sign up for the service, you will not only lose a few 
hundred dollars to the scammer, but you will also have committed fraud. It 
is illegal to make false statements on a loan or credit application or to 
obtain an EIN under false premises. 
94 

4 Your Credit f 
Credit Tips to Protect Your Privacy 
From the summer of 2000 until the fall of 2003, Philip Cummings, a 
thirty-three-year-old help desk worker at a small software com-
pany, stole the confidential passwords and subscriber codes from 
Ford Motor Company, one of his company's clients. Once Cum-
mings had Ford's passwords and codes, he used a third-party 
service provider called Teledata Communications, which has easy-
to-use credit-check terminals at more than 25,000 
companies, 
to download the credit reports of 30,000 unsuspecting 
people. 
Cummings received $30 for each stolen credit report from another 
thief, who in turn sold each credit report for $60 to a ring of iden-
tity thieves, who then stole thousands of dollars from the unsus-
pecting victims. With access to the victims' social security and 
credit card numbers, the thieves stole more than $2.5 million. In 
the words of Manhattan U.S. attorney James Comey, "With a few 
keystrokes, these men [Cummings and his ring of identity thieves] 
essentially picked the pockets of tens of thousands of Americans 
and, in the process, took their identities, stole their money and 
swiped their security. " 
It is bad enough that legitimate lenders and merchants access your credit 
information and send you tons of junk mail. It's much worse, however, when 
an identity thief accesses your information, either through illegal access to 
your credit report or through any of the ways detailed in chapter 3, "Your Iden-
tity." How do you know if you're the victim of identity theft? Your credit report 
is one of the best indicators. 
You are the only one who can look at your credit report and tell if you're a 
victim of identity theft. A credit bureau or bank has no way of knowing if the 
information about you is correct or merely represents updated information. 
For example, if an identity thief applies for a credit card in your name but 
diverts the card to a different address, your credit report will indicate a change 
of address. A bank would have no idea whether an identity thief has diverted 
your mail or you have moved residences. Accordingly, you should adhere to 
the following tips to protect your privacy and your credit: 
95 

4 Prying Eyes f 
# 
Periodically review your credit. You should review your credit report on a 
regular basis and at least once per year. A periodic review will allow you to 
catch fraudulent activity in your report. 
You should pay particular attention to the sections of the report that list 
accounts, inquiries, and addresses to determine if fraudulent activity is tak-
ing place. In particular, you should review: 
• Accounts: Check the "Open Accounts" section to see if any account has 
been opened without your consent. If so, this may indicate fraud and that 
a criminal has been granted a line of credit in your name. 
• Inquiries: Inquiries within the section "Requests Viewed by Others" rep-
resent those creditors who accessed your credit report. If this section 
contains any creditors with whom you are not familiar, fraud may be pres-
ent or a criminal may have made an inquiry about your report. 
• Addresses: If the addresses on your credit report are incorrect, this may 
be an indication that a criminal has applied for credit in your name but at 
a different address. 
•jfr Thoroughly review your credit. For the most thorough review, you should 
check your credit report at all three credit bureaus, because each bureau's 
report may contain slightly different information. 
& Review your report before others do. Consider reviewing your credit 
report several months before you believe your report will be used—if, for 
example, you intend to apply for a mortgage, an apartment rental, an auto 
loan, or a job—to ensure that your report is accurate. 
-fc Pay your bills on time. The overdue bill to the plastic surgeon wouldn't have 
shown up on your credit report if you paid the bill. 
•fc Be on the alert for scams. Phony companies use all sorts of scams to obtain 
your personal information (see page 93). Be careful about divulging sensi-
tive information, such as your driver's license number, mother's maiden 
name, social security number, and credit and bank account numbers, espe-
96 

* Your Credit f 
daily over the phone or online, unless you are familiar with the business that 
is asking for the information. 
# Keep careful records. These records include 
billing statements, mortgage payments, and can-
celed checks. If you think something on your 
report is not accurate, challenge it. 
<$• Correct errors and inaccuracies in your report. If you notice that your report 
contains errors, correct them immediately. Errors may be the result of the 
incorrect information being reported by lenders or merchants to the partic-
ular credit bureau or an indication of identity theft. 
How to Correct Errors on Your Report 
Credit reports contain errors and inaccuracies more often than you think. 
According to one study that appeared in the July 2000 issue of Consumer 
Reports magazine, more than half of all credit reports contain errors. An error 
on your credit report can happen for three reasons: First, you may have inad-
vertently made an error on an application you completed for a lender or mer-
chant, and the lender or merchant submitted your information to the credit 
bureau with the error in place. Second, you may have been confused with or 
mistaken for another person with a similar name, and that person's informa-
tion has been placed in your file. The third reason is the most disturbing cause 
of errors on your credit report: fraud. Someone may have intentionally gained 
access to your personal information and obtained credit in your name. 
The FCRA gives you the right to correct mistakes on your credit report. In 
fact, under the FCRA, both the credit bureau and the company that provided 
the information to the credit bureau (the information provider), such as the 
lender or merchant, must correct any inaccurate or incomplete information in 
your report. It is in your best interest to immediately correct errors and inac-
curate information on your credit report. 
The FCRA outlines the process and procedures for correcting inaccurate 
information. If you believe you are a victim of fraud or identity theft, you 
More than half of all credit 
reports contain errors. 
97 

* Prying Eyes f 
should follow the steps outlined in chapter 3, "Your Identity," to correct the 
problem. To protect yourself fully, you should dispute the error with both the 
credit bureau and the information provider. In brief, here are the three steps 
you should undertake to correct your credit report: 
1. Call the credit bureau and identify the information you believe is 
inaccurate. Follow up on your phone call in writing and include copies 
of documents or information that support your position. (Make sure to 
retain a copy of the letter and documents you send.) Your letter should 
clearly identify each item in your report that you dispute, give the 
facts, explain why you dispute the information, and request the 
specific action you desire such as removal or correction (see 
"Resources" for credit bureau contact details). 
Upon receipt of your letter, the credit bureau generally has thirty 
days to complete an investigation of your request. First, it will forward 
the information about your dispute to the information provider. The 
information provider will then conduct an investigation and report 
the results back to the credit bureau. If the information provider finds 
the disputed information to be inaccurate, or the error cannot be veri-
fied, or if the information is incomplete, it must notify all the credit 
bureaus, which are required to correct this information in your file. 
For example, if you dispute your report's claim that you have been late 
making payments, and the investigation shows that you are not delin-
quent, the credit bureau must then correct the report to indicate you 
are current in your payments. 
Upon completion of the investigation, the credit bureau must give 
you the written results of the investigation. If an item is changed or 
removed, the credit bureau cannot put the disputed information back in 
your file unless the information provider verifies its accuracy and com-
pleteness, and the credit bureau gives you a written notice that includes 
the name, address, and phone number of the information provider. You 
may ask the credit bureau to send a corrected report to anyone who has 
requested your file in the past six months, as well as to anyone who has 
requested it in the past two years in relation to employment. 
2. Write to the creditor, lender, merchant, or other entity that 
reports information to a credit bureau to tell them that you 
98 

-* Your Credit f-
WléÈÊMÊHÊËÊ&SMiÊlÈBWÊuÊÊ < • . • 1 
The most disturbing cause 
of errors on your credit 
report: fraud. Someone 
may have intentionally 
gained access to your 
personal information 
and obtained credit 
in your name. 
dispute an item. Again, include copies of documents that support 
your position. Many information providers specify an address for 
disputes. 
3. If the credit bureau or the information 
provider does not correct the disputed 
information after completing its investiga-
tion, ask the credit bureau or information 
provider to include a one-hundred-word 
statement of the dispute in your file and in 
future reports. In this way, the notice of 
your dispute and explanation of the item in 
question will be included for anyone who 
reviews your report in the future. 
For more detailed information on how to dispute and correct errors in 
your credit report, you can access the Federal Trade Commission's website at 
www.ftc.gov. 
THE BOTTOM LINE 
• How do you score? Landlords, creditors, insurers, and prospective 
employers make decisions based on your credit report and its related score. 
Your credit information is not private and it dramatically affects your life. 
• Do you know what's in your credit report? Your report contains all sorts of 
personal information, including your name, address, social security 
number, employer and past employer, and much, much more. 
• Manage your credit report to protect yourself from identity theft and 
protect your privacy. Order your report from all three credit bureaus at 
least annually, and correct and update any mistakes. Opt out of lists for 
pre-approved credit cards and other marketing material. 
• Watch out for credit scams. No one but you can improve your credit, but 
someone can use your personal information to steal your identity. 
99 

Your Money 
Your stockbroker sold her PalmPilot in an online auction. She didn't 
realize it, but she had not completely deleted sensitive company 
and client information, including the financial and personal details 
about your account. The buyer on eBay deliberately bids on old 
PalmPilots and other PDAs, knowing that these used devices might 
be a treasure trove. 
You withdraw money from an ATM at a local deli. Later you learn 
that you are one of three hundred people to be scammed by 
thieves who had rigged the ATM to collect account and personal 
identification numbers to create fake cards. After the thieves trans-
it 

* Your Money * 
ferred the information onto plastic cards, they withdrew more than 
$200,000 from the accounts of their three hundred victims. 
A computer hacker steals your credit card number, along with thou-
sands of other credit card numbers, from a store you recently vis-
ited. The hacker then publishes all the numbers on the Internet 
after the store's parent company refused to pay a ransom for this 
information. Suddenly, people in Romania, Venezuela, and Oregon 
are using your card. 
Perhaps Mr. McGuire was on to something when, in the 1967 film The 
Graduate, he told young Benjamin Braddock (played by Dustin Hoffman) that 
the future of business would be in plastics. But to what kind of plastics did he 
refer? If he meant the material that creates the credit, debit, and ATM cards 
that fuel our modern monetary system, then Mr. McGuire was truly a man 
ahead of his time. Today, American consumers have about 1 billion credit, 
debit, and ATM cards, and they use their cards in transactions worth nearly $2 
trillion a year. Americans spend more on goods with cards than with cash. 
Welcome to the age of plastic money. According to economist David 
Evans, author of Paying with Plastic, there have been only four changes to the 
world's payment system in the history of humankind: barter to coins; coins to 
paper; paper to checks; and checks to cards. The idea of living without ATM 
cards, debit cards, and credit cards is inconceivable to most Americans. Can 
you imagine going to dinner or to a store and not using a credit card to pay for 
the meal or the stuff you buy? Think about it another way: how would you 
feel if you had to pay cash for everything? 
But credit cards do have a drawback. They create a trail for every credit 
card transaction you make. Think about what your credit card purchases can 
tell someone about your life, from where you shop to how much you spend, to 
how often you pay your bills. Think about how many times a day you hand 
your credit card or debit card to a cashier or use it at an ATM. Think about 
how many opportunities an ambitious thief might have to steal your card 
number or your PIN code. 
Most consumers use credit, ATM, and debit cards and bank at financial 
institutions even if they know they risk the theft of their sensitive financial 
101 

information and the sharing of it without their knowledge. Most of us prefer 
the convenience and are willing to take the risks. Have you ever stopped to 
assess some of these risks as well as the advantages? Consider these: 
• By carrying credit cards instead of cash you lessen your chances of 
pickpocketers or muggers taking your cash. However, identity thieves 
can fraudulently open cards in your name or steal your credit card 
number from credit card receipts to bill items in your name (see 
chapter 3, "Your Identity"). 
• Banking at an ATM allows you to avoid long bank lines, but you risk 
someone stealing your Personal Identification Number (or PIN) and 
accessing your bank account. 
• Paying bills online eliminates the bother of writing checks, addressing 
the envelope, and going to the mailbox, even if a hacker or a user of 
snoopware may record your passwords and access your account 
surreptitiously (see chapter 7, "Your Computer and the Internet"). 
• Banking at the same financial conglomerate that holds your mortgage, 
issued your credit cards, and perhaps serves as your travel agency is 
convenient, at the risk that your sensitive personal information could 
be mishandled or shared with other entities in the regular course of 
business. 
Is it time to return to the old barter system? Don't plan on it, especially 
when the future points to a more digital payment system involving finger 
scanners, remote payment by cellular phones, or wireless chips. In the mean-
time, monitor your sensitive financial information and follow the many prac-
tical tips described in this chapter. 
What Financial Institutions Know About You 
The Minnesota Attorney General's Office sued Fleet Mortgage, 
Inc., a former unit of FleetBoston that was purchased by Washing-
ton Mutual, for sharing customer's home mortgage account num-
bers and other information with telemarketing companies that sold 
102 

•* Your Money * 
club memberships for everything from dental work to home protec-
tion to auto repair. Fleet and its telemarketers led consumers to be-
lieve that they were agreeing to a free trial in the club, when in fact 
charges were tacked to their monthly mortgage bills when con-
sumers failed to cancel the club. Fleet settled the charges in 2001. 
Suppose your bank, insurance company, and stockbroker shared indis-
criminately all the information each institution has collected. Consider what 
would happen: Your bank could tip off stockbrokers every time there is an 
increase in your account balance, so you would receive calls from your broker 
or perhaps an increase in telemarketing calls. Your life insurance company 
could review records of your checking account and then increase your insur-
ance rates based on that information. Your bank could turn you down for a 
loan after learning of a health problem documented on your life insurance 
physical. Fortunately, this does not happen, but the reality is that your finan-
cial insitutions know more about you now than ever before and may share 
this information in ways you don't know. 
The result of the many mergers and acquisitions that have occurred in the 
financial services industry is that theoretically you now enjoy one-stop shop-
ping for your financial services. The bank where you maintain your principal 
checking account and banking services is likely to be affiliated with other com-
panies, such as an insurance company, a mortgage company, an investment 
firm, or even a travel agency. For example, Citibank offers their customers 
checking and saving accounts, credit cards, individual retirement accounts 
(IRAs), insurance products, and mortgages, among other financial products 
and services. In addition to offering many of the same services, American 
Express also offers a full-service, diversified travel agency. 
No doubt, the growth of financial services companies has changed the 
way you handle your money A decade ago, you likely had one financial insti-
tution that maintained your checking and savings accounts; a different finan-
cial institution that issued you your credit card; an insurance company, or 
more likely a personal broker, who handled your insurance needs for your car, 
life, and home; a stockbroker who worked at yet another company (and likely 
was a family friend) who handled your investment account; and, finally, a 
financial adviser who dispensed financial advice. 
103 

If you maintain your credit 
card, insurance policy, 
mortgage, and checking 
and savings accounts with 
one institution, that 
institution knows or can 
discover almost every 
aspect of your life. 
• Prying Eyes • 
These new financial conglomerates do offer certain benefits, such as inte-
grated services, lower costs, and new products. But they also gain great knowl-
edge about you—more than any financial institution that you dealt with a 
decade ago (with the possible exception of the fam-
ily friend who acted as your stockbroker). To 
become a customer of any financial institution, you 
are required to provide certain basic information 
that might include your name, address, phone num-
ber, social security number, and more. As you have 
learned in previous chapters, even such basic infor-
mation is sensitive and private, and potentially 
damaging if misappropriated or misused. Depend-
ing on the nature of the application, however, you 
might also be required to provide your former 
addresses, debt level, mortgage payments, income other than salary such as 
child support payments, and much more. Ultimately, these financial conglom-
erates will be in a position to gather detailed information concerning all 
aspects of your personal and financial life. Such information includes the 
specifics of the financial accounts and information you include on an applica-
tion to obtain a loan, a credit card, or other financial product or services that 
you hold with the institution, as well as the additional information that the 
conglomerate can gather from other companies. 
If you maintain your credit card, insurance policy, mortgage, and checking 
and savings accounts with one institution, that institution knows or can dis-
cover almost every aspect of your life. Your bank maintains a record of your 
account balance information, payment history, and overdraft history; invest-
ments purchased or owned; credit or debit card purchase information; infor-
mation used to analyze your investments; information from a credit report; 
and information gathered through their website (see chapter 7, "Your Com-
puter and the Internet," to learn how websites gather information about you as 
you surf the site or input certain information). Included in this information 
are intimate and sensitive details of your life. For example, your credit card 
statement indicates how you spend your money; your mortgage statement 
provides details about your home; automatic wage deposits to your savings 
account may indicate your income; and checks that you write from your 
104 

• Your Money • 
checking account may disclose aspects of your medical condition, political 
affiliations, and more. 
Your financial institution may also collect information from nonaffiliated 
third parties, consumer reporting agencies, or pub-
lic records. Some financial institutions gather infor-
mation collected from consumer surveys, product 
registration cards, public records, and census 
records, and then use this information to market 
products and services to you that you are more 
likely to buy. 
Federal Protection for Your 
Financial Privacy 
Some financial institutions 
gather information 
collected from consumer 
surveys, product 
registration cards, public 
records, and census 
records, and then use 
this information to market 
products and services 
to you that you are 
more likely to buy. 
NationsBank, which later merged into Bank of 
America, settled with the SEC in 1998 for $7 million after the SEC 
accused the bank of sharing with NationsSecurities, one of its sub-
sidiary affiliates, lists of customers with expiring certificates 
of 
deposit. NationsSecurities 
allegedly used this information to 
sell uninsured, risky products in a misleading manner to the CD 
holders. 
California's Charter Pacific bank sold the credit card numbers of 3.7 
million of its customers to a convicted felon. The felon then ran up 
$45.7 million in fraudulent charges subscribing to X-rated Internet 
porn sites and calling 900-number sex chat lines. 
Recognizing that financial institutions gather sensitive information about 
you, Congress passed the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB) in 1999. On the one 
hand, the act addresses the emergence of large financial conglomerates within 
the financial services industry. On the other hand, and important to you, this 
law outlines certain standards that protect your financial privacy. In general, 
as outlined by GLB, financial institutions must mail to you a privacy notice 
that explains the following: 
105 

• Prying Eyes • 
• the type of information that they gather 
• the ways in which your information might be shared with, sold to, or 
otherwise disclosed to other companies 
• the means by which you can prevent or limit 
your information from being disclosed to other 
companies (known as opting out) 
The GLB Act will not 
prevent your financial 
institution from sharing 
and selling your 
information to other 
companies, although 
there are exceptions to 
this if you exercise your 
right to opt out 
The GLB Act broadly defines financial institu-
tions. For example, your bank, credit union, mort-
gage company, investment firm, or insurance 
company is considered a financial institution under 
GLB, and each of these firms must provide you with 
its privacy policy. In addition, financial institutions 
include collection agencies, credit bureaus, loan 
service companies, agents for leasing real or personal property, real estate 
appraisers, credit counselors, and businesses that sell money orders, savings 
bonds, or travelers' checks. For a full list of financial institutions, see 
www.ftc.g0v/privacy/glbact/glbsub1.htm#6805. 
As protective as the GLB Act is, it does not prevent your financial institu-
tion from collecting and maintaining detailed personal information about you. 
Moreover, the GLB Act will not prevent your financial institution from sharing 
and selling your information to other companies, although there are exceptions 
to this if you exercise your right to opt out (discussed in detail below). Under 
the GLB Act, your financial institution is required only to disclose to you the 
general categories of companies to or with which it is selling or sharing your 
personal information. As a result, you will never know the specific companies 
to or with which your financial institution is selling or sharing your personal 
information. 
Your ability to restrict the selling or sharing of your personal information 
to other companies (or your right to opt out) depends on the relationship 
between that company and your financial institution. To understand how your 
information can be shared, sold, or otherwise accessed, you need to answer the 
following three questions: (1) Is the company in question affiliated with your 
financial institution? (2) Is the company in question a nonaffiliated third 
106 

You will never know 
the specific companies 
to or with which your 
financial institution is 
selling or sharing your 
personal information. 
• Your Money • 
party (or an outside company)? (3) Is the company in question a joint mar-
keter or service provider to your financial institution? 
An Affiliated Company. An affiliated company is a 
company that is owned or controlled by your finan-
cial institution or its parent company. Put another 
way, an affiliate is considered part of the same cor-
porate structure. Your bank's affiliates might 
include, as in the case of Citibank, other financial 
companies (such as a credit card company, a broker-
age firm, or an insurance company, among others), 
or, as with the case of American Express, even non-
financial companies (such as a travel agency). Unfortunately, you cannot pre-
vent your financial institution from sharing your personal information with an 
affiliated company, regardless of whether or not the affiliate is a financial com-
pany. In fact, your financial institution may disclose your account number to an 
affiliate to market its own products and services. This explains why Citibank 
credit card holders, for example, may expect to receive marketing material for 
other CitiGroup products and services such as home equity lines. By sharing 
customer data among affiliates, and then merging the information into one 
database, a financial conglomerate may acquire extensive information about 
you. Bottom line: You cannot prevent information sharing among affiliates. 
A Nonaffiliated Third Party. A nonaffiliated third party is a company that is 
not owned or controlled by your financial institution or its parent company. 
Nonaffiliated third parties may include other financial service providers, such 
as insurance companies, or nonfinancial service providers, such as retailers or 
nonprofit organizations, but none of these companies can be under the com-
mon control of your financial institution or its parent company. Your financial 
institution must give you the right to prevent your personal information from 
being shared with nonaffiliated third parties. As further described below, you 
are given the right to opt out. Bottom line: You can prevent your financial 
institution from sharing your personal information with a nonaffiliated third 
party. 
107 

-• Prying Eyes f-
Joint Marketers or Service Providers. Financial service companies often 
enter into marketing arrangements with other companies such as telemar-
keters or direct-mail marketers. Under such agreements, your financial institu-
tion may freely disclose your personal information 
to a joint marketer or service provider as long as 
the information is used solely for marketing the 
financial products or services of your financial 
institution. You cannot prevent such information 
sharing. The marketer or service provider that 
receives your information may not sell or share 
your personal information and must use such infor-
mation only for the purpose of marketing the finan-
cial product. Bottom line: You cannot prevent your 
financial institution from sharing your personal 
information with a joint marketer or service 
provider. 
Your financial institution 
may freely disclose 
your personal information 
to a joint marketer 
or service provider as 
long as the information 
is used solely for 
marketing the financial 
products or services of 
your financial institution. 
You cannot prevent such 
information sharing. 
How to Use the Law to Protect Your Financial Privacy 
How would you feel if your bank sold your sensitive customer data, 
including your credit card numbers and account balances, to a di-
rect marketer with whom you have had no previous relationship? 
What if the bank had previously assured you that it would never 
share, much less sell, your sensitive financial data to anyone? 
US Bank sold customers' personal data, including credit limits, birth 
dates, marital status, occupation, account balances, and social secu-
rity numbers, to MemberWorks telemarketers. The telemarketers 
then charged customers for memberships in outdoor, sewing, and 
sports clubs that customers had neither purchased nor agreed to 
purchase. In return, MemberWorks paid the bank $4 million plus 
commissions of 22 percent of net revenue on sales of club member-
ships. 
108 

* Your Money * 
As explained above, you can't prevent a financial institution from sharing 
your personal information with an affiliated company, joint marketer, or ser-
vice provider, but you can limit the disclosure of your sensitive financial infor-
mation to nonaffiliated third parties such as telemarketers and direct mail 
marketers. Pay attention to these steps to fully protect your financial privacy. 
^ Look for your privacy notice. Don't be surprised if you receive multiple pri-
vacy notices in the mail. According to the American Bankers' Association, the 
average household receives between fifteen and twenty privacy notices 
annually. Make sure that you actually receive a privacy notice from your finan-
cial institution(s). Your bank is required to send you the notice annually and 
WARNING: YOUR FINANCIAL RECORDS MAY REVEAL 
INFORMATION ABOUT YOUR HEALTH 
Your records and files at your financial institution may include sensitive 
medical information. The GLB itself does not specifically address medical 
information. As a result, any medical information that is contained in your 
bank's files or records (such as a credit card payment to your gynecologist 
or a check to your plastic surgeon) may be disclosed to an affiliated com-
pany. Moreover, unless you exercise your right to opt out, your personal 
medical information can be disclosed to nonaffiliated third parties. In 
some cases, financial institutions may provide an enhanced sense of pri-
vacy for your medical information. If you are particularly concerned about 
sensitive medical information, you should carefully read your bank's pri-
vacy notice or ask a customer representative. In addition, other laws, such 
as the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and 
certain state laws provide additional protection and standards for your 
medical information within the health community but do not generally 
pertain to financial institutions. See chapter 10, "Your Health," for more 
information on your medical privacy. Bottom Line: Assume your medical 
information will be shared with nonaffiliated third parties—yet another 
reason to exercise your right to opt out. 
109 

According to the 
American Bankers' 
Association, the average 
household receives 
between fifteen and 
twenty privacy notices 
annually. 
• Prying Eyes • 
may do so at any time of the year. It is required to send the notice at the same 
time each year. In addition, you will receive a privacy notice when you open a 
new account with a financial institution. If you maintain accounts with a num-
ber of different financial institutions (for example, bank, credit card issuer, and 
so forth) that are not affiliated, you will receive a pri-
vacy notice from each of these institutions. If you have 
different accounts with one financial conglomerate, 
you will receive a single privacy notice that covers all 
your accounts. 
You are likely to receive your privacy notice in 
the mail. In all likelihood, the privacy notice will be 
included with other information you receive from 
your financial institution (such as your account state-
ment or mutual fund prospectus). In addition, every financial institution can 
use its own format for its privacy notice, so you may notice that the privacy 
notices you receive vary in design. Privacy notices are required to be "clear 
and conspicuous" and in writing to you personally. A general posting or 
verbal notice does not meet the requirements. If you conduct business 
online with the institution, you may receive an e-mail if you agree to receive 
the notice in this manner instead of by mail. 
For these reasons, go through the mail you receive from your financial 
institution and review the e-mails or Internet messages you receive from the 
institution and its website. Pay special attention for the following headlines: 
Privacy Notice, Privacy Policy, and Opt-Out Notice. 
& Review your privacy notice. Once you receive your privacy notice, review it 
thoroughly. Look for: 
• Details about the types of information collected by the institution and 
whether the institution might share your information 
• The categories of businesses with which the information might be 
shared. Any information that the institution may share with companies 
outside the corporate family must be described in the privacy notice you 
receive. Look for the broad categories that are outlined in the privacy 
110 

• Your Money • 
policy. Understand that many privacy policies are not written in language 
that is easy to understand, so you may find it is difficult to know whether 
your financial institution is exceeding the requirements of G LB. 
If you don't understand how or with whom 
your information will be shared, call a customer 
service representative. After all, it's your informa-
tion, and you have a right to know how your 
information will be used. 
If you do not opt out, you 
are giving permission to 
your bank to share your 
personal information. 
^ Opt out. Your privacy notice typically includes a form that allows you to opt 
out of information sharing. Check or mark the form as required and return it 
to your financial institution. You must affirmatively opt out to prevent your 
personal financial information from being shared with companies that are 
not affiliated with your financial institution. Opting out is the principal means 
that you have to control how your personal information is used. Although 
your information can still be shared in other ways—for example, with affili-
ates or under joint marketing agreements—opting out limits the extent to 
which your personal information will be shared with other companies, 
including many different marketing companies. You must act affirmatively 
by opting out to ensure that personal financial information is not shared 
with nonaffiliated third parties. 
The good thing is that opting out is easy to do. Not only can you opt 
out by filling out the form that is mailed to you, but some banks also enable 
you to opt out online, via e-mail, or through their websites. If you do not act 
affirmatively by opting out or you fail to respond, you are giving permission 
to your bank to share your personal information. 
-fr Respond to your privacy notice in a timely manner. After you receive the pri-
vacy notice, return the opt-out notice within thirty days to prevent your per-
sonal information from being disclosed. This period is applicable whether 
you receive your privacy notice by mail or e-mail. In some cases, you must 
respond immediately. For example, if you withdraw money from an ATM, the 
ATM screen might post a privacy policy that includes an opt-out notice, and 
you must decide at that moment whether you want to opt out. 
111 

* Prying Eyes * 
If you decide you do not want to opt out, your bank is free to share or 
sell your personal information after that time. Of course, you can later 
decide to opt out; however, doing so at a later date affects only the future 
sharing of information. Information that has been previously disclosed may 
already have been shared with and used by other companies. Conversely, if 
you opt out, you can later reverse your decision. 
# Be proactive about your privacy notice. Be proactive about opting out. 
Opting out is your primary means of preventing the disclosure of your infor-
mation to nonaffiliated third parties. Be on the lookout for your privacy 
notice, return it on time, and opt out. 
If you cannot locate the privacy notice or believe that you never 
received it, call your bank or financial institution and have another notice 
sent to you. Also be sure to follow the specified procedure to opt out as 
stated in its privacy notice. If the notice wants you to respond by mail, mail 
the form back to the issuing organization. If your bank gives you a toll-free 
number, you should use that method to opt out. Of course, nothing pre-
vents you from the "belt and suspenders" method of being even more 
proactive by responding both by mail and by using the toll-free number. 
Remember: opting out is your responsibility; do not expect anyone else to 
do it for you. 
# Compare privacy policies of your financial institutions. Before opening an 
account with a bank, ask to review the financial institution's privacy policy. 
Of course, you will consider other factors, such as financial products avail-
able, interest rate, and so on, before you open your account. In many cases, 
however, the way a bank deals with its privacy policy may reflect its commit-
ment to customer service. Accordingly, if your bank goes beyond what it is 
required to do legally, then this might reflect a heightened sense of cus-
tomer service. Your financial institution is giving you more protection than 
the law requires if it does some of the following: 
• Has a blanket policy of not selling your personal financial information to 
outside companies 
112 

4 Your Money f 
• Provides a simple opting-out process by providing a check-off form and a 
postage-paid envelope 
• Extends your opt-out choices beyond the GLB Act by offering the option 
to prevent your information from being shared among affiliates and joint 
marketers 
• Provides you with the opportunity to review and correct your records 
• Provides additional information about other steps you can take to pro-
tect your privacy 
0 Know your rights. The GLB Act does not provide you with a right to sue 
your financial institution if it violates your privacy rights. If, however, you 
exercise your right to opt out but your financial institution continues to 
share your financial information with nonaffiliated third parties, you may still 
have cause for an action. Even if you cannot directly sue your financial insti-
tution under the GLB Act, you can still pursue three different courses of 
action. 
First, you can complain to one of the eight federal agencies with author-
ity to enforce GLB in the financial services area it regulates. These agencies 
are identified in the "Resources" section at the end of this book. Accord-
ingly, if you complain to one of the eight agencies, that agency has the 
authority to investigate your complaint, and make a determination whether 
to bring an action against the financial institution. 
Second, you may be able to bring a claim that your bank's violation of 
GLB violated other rights you have under state law. Check with your state's 
attorney general's office, because each state has different laws that may 
pertain to your situation. In general, California law is the most protective in 
terms of financial privacy. 
Third, if you remain concerned about your personal information, you 
can simply ask your bank not to share your personal information in any 
manner. Although your bank has no obligation under GLB to comply with 
your request, it may nonetheless do so. You can obtain a form letter to 
send to your bank at either of the following websites: www.consumer-
action.org or www.privacyrights.org (www.privacyrights.org/fs/fs24a-
formletter.htm). 
113 

^ 
Use other means to protect your financial privacy. In addition to exercising 
your rights under GLB, you should consider other methods of protecting 
your privacy. Many of these methods have been described in other chap-
ters. For example, to more fully limit the sharing of your personal informa-
tion, you should consider the following: 
• Opt out of prescreened offers. See chapter 4, "Your Credit" 
• Opt out of telemarketing phone calls. See chapter 8, "Your Home" 
• Opt out of direct-mail lists. See chapter 8, "Your Home" 
• Reduce your chances of identity theft. See chapter 3, "Your Identity" 
• Limit the spam e-mail you receive. See chapter 7, "Your Computer and 
the Internet" 
In addition, as described in chapter 4, "Your Credit," the FCRA allows 
you to limit certain types of information from being shared among corpo-
rate affiliates. In particular, the FCRA gives you the right to prevent a com-
pany from sharing information about your creditworthiness with affiliates. 
However, both the FCRA and GLB do not prevent your transaction and 
experience information (such as information about the checks you write; the 
credit card charges you make; your deposits, withdrawals, and wire trans-
fers; and so on) from being shared with affiliates without your consent. 
When Stolen Information Becomes Stolen Money 
After enjoying a relaxing dinner at a local restaurant, you pay your 
tab with your credit card. A recently hired cashier makes an extra 
imprint of your credit card and uses your card to buy thousands of 
dollars in goods from various catalogs. 
The loss, theft, and fraud of credit cards, debit cards, and ATM cards costs 
cardholders and credit card issuers billions of dollars annually. Theft and loss 
of your card occurs in many different and sometimes unknown ways. For 
example, your account number and personal identification number can be 
stolen without your knowledge and then transferred to a plastic card, which 
114 

• Your Money • 
can be used to withdraw money from an ATM or to charge goods on your 
credit card. Unfortunately, you cannot prevent credit or charge card fraud 
from happening to you, but you can more fully protect your financial privacy 
by following the steps below. You can also limit your financial exposure and 
liability in certain situations. 
Credit Cards 
Before John Jacobus left for an overseas vacation, he bought a 
gift at an airport kiosk operated at the international gate. To pay 
for the gift, John handed the vendor his credit card and watched 
the vendor swipe his credit card through a legitimate machine. 
What John did not notice was that the vendor actually swiped the 
card a second time through an illegal device slightly smaller than a 
pager. John got his card back, completely unaware that his credit 
card number had been recorded. In fact, that same vendor man-
aged to double-swipe more than 600 credit cards over a six-week 
period. When John returned from vacation and received his credit 
card statement, he discovered $1,000 in charges for goods he 
never bought. 
Jill's purse was stolen while she was having lunch with her boyfriend. 
The purse was later dropped off at a local police station, and eventu-
ally returned to her. All the money in her wallet was gone, but Jill 
was relieved to find all her credit cards in place. It was not until she 
began receiving bills for purchases she never made that she realized 
the thief needed only the account number on her credit cards, and 
not the cards themselves, to defraud her. 
Credit cards were a hit in America from the very beginning. When the Din-
ers Club first introduced the credit card in 1950, two hundred people signed up 
for it and fourteen restaurants accepted it. By the end of that same year, twenty 
thousand people were using the Diners Club credit card. Today, if you include 
store and gas credit cards, the total number of credit cards in the United States 
is 1.3 billion. The average cardholder has 2.7 bank credit cards, 3.8 retail credit 
cards, and 1.1 debit cards, for a total of 7.6 cards per cardholder. 
115 

• Prying Eyes • 
Sooner or later, chances are pretty good that you will either lose your 
credit card or discover that purchases have been fraudulently charged to it. 
Much to the chagrin of credit card issuers, credit card fraud is becoming a fact 
of life. The good news for you is that federal law 
limits the maximum exposure you can face for 
unauthorized use of your credit card to $50. Such 
exposure occurs when a thief racks up charges on 
your credit card before you have reported the loss 
or theft. If you report the loss before your credit 
card is used, your card issuer will not hold you 
responsible for any unauthorized charges. If fraud 
involves your credit card number, but not the card itself, as in Jill's case above, 
you have no liability for unauthorized use. 
Federal law limits the 
maximum exposure 
you can face for 
unauthorized use of your 
credit card to $50. 
FRAUD PROTECTION FOR THE LAZY 
A number of companies, including your credit card issuer, provide a ser-
vice commonly referred to as a credit card registration service. For an 
annual fee, these companies will notify all the issuers of your credit card 
and ATM or debit card accounts in the event that your card is lost or stolen. 
This service allows you to make only one phone call to report all card losses 
rather than calling each individual issuer. Most services also will request 
replacement cards on your behalf. 
Your decision to enroll in one of these services should be based on con-
venience or added security. If you manage your cards properly and report 
losses or theft promptly, these services should not be necessary. However, if 
you feel inclined to use such a service, make sure you are working with a 
credible company and one that you trust. Understand the company's policy 
about indemnifying you if it fails to notify card issuers promptly. Once 
you've called in the loss to your service, you should not be liable for unau-
thorized charges or transfers. One final point: You cannot be completely 
lazy—you still need to make that one phone call to report the loss or theft 
of your card. 
116 

-• Your Money f-
ATM or Debit Cards 
gmm^m «»m ; m:m^:m:^im:i 
Your financial exposure 
in the event your 
ATM or debit card is 
used fraudulently 
can be limitless. 
Two men set up an elaborate debit card fraud operation at a gas 
station. They installed a skimming device in 
the station's telephone line to record the in-
formation contained on the black magnetic 
strip of customers' 
ATM cards. A hidden 
video camera mounted in the ceiling recorded 
the customers' personal identification num-
bers. The end result? More than one thou-
sand forged debit cards were created 
to 
access customers' accounts and steal from these unsuspecting 
people. 
A thief used a pair of binoculars to watch people who stopped at an 
ATM in the middle of a high-traffic area. If customers did not ade-
quately cover the ATM monitor as they conducted their business, 
he was able to learn their personal identification numbers and other 
account information. 
One weekend in July 1999, about two hundred residents in Montreal 
reported the mysterious disappearance from their bank accounts of 
amounts averaging $1,000. An eastern European organized crime 
ring had set up rigged debit card machines in grocery stores and gas 
stations. The machines contained two sets of wires: one sending a 
signal to the bank, and the other communicating with the criminals' 
computer to transfer account information to the magnetic stripe of 
counterfeit cards. When unsuspecting ATM users swiped their cards, 
all their card information and passwords were sent to the criminals 
to use at will. 
These stories probably send chills down your spine. They should, and not 
just because of the surreptitious nature of these crimes. The reason is that the 
loss, theft, or fraudulent use of your ATM or debit card can lead to devastating 
consequences. Your financial exposure in the event your ATM or debit card is 
117 

used fraudulently can be limitless. In this case, your financial liability depends 
on how quickly you report the loss or fraudulent use of your ATM or debit 
card. In addition to your reaction time, your liability may depend on whether 
your card has been stolen or lost or fraudulently used. In 2002, according to 
the American Bankers Association (ABA), fraud involving debit cards cost 
banks nearly $51 million. 
In the case of loss or theft of your ATM or debit card, your liability under 
federal law depends on how quickly you report the loss. Here is how your lia-
bility varies: 
Before fraudulent use: If you report an ATM or debit card missing before 
it is used without your permission, your card issuer cannot hold you responsi-
ble for any unauthorized transfers. 
Within two business days: If you report the loss of your card within two 
business days after you realize your card is missing, you can be held be 
responsible for up to $50 in unauthorized charges or withdrawals. 
Within sixty days: If you do not report the loss within two business days 
after you discover the loss, you could lose up to $500 as a result of unautho-
rized or fraudulent use of your card. 
After sixty days: If you fail to report an unauthorized transfer within 
sixty days after your bank mails to you the statement that includes the unau-
thorized transaction, you can face unlimited losses. Think of it this way: You 
can lose all the money in your bank account, plus be responsible for paying off 
any money that has been put aside or is remaining in your line of credit. 
If the fraudulent use of your debit or ATM card involves only your debit 
card number (and not the loss of your actual card), you are liable only for 
money transfers or withdrawals that occur after sixty days from the date the 
bank mails to you the statement that details the unauthorized use of your 
debit or ATM card. Once you report the fraud, you are no longer responsible 
for any ongoing fraudulent charges. 
Follow these practical tips to avoid fraud of your credit card and ATM or 
debit cards and to limit your financial liability in the event of loss or theft of 
your cards: 
+ Be responsible with your cards. The best way to protect yourself against 
card fraud is to know where your cards are at all times and to keep them 
118 

• Your Money • 
secure. Carry only those cards that you think you will need. Sign your cards 
as soon as they arrive. Think twice before you lend your card to anyone, and 
do not leave cards lying around. 
'Wê^iiàM^ii^-M-fm^Mii/^^f^H'i^. 
Cover the screen or 
keypad of an ATM 
or public phone so 
thieves cannot watch 
you enter your PIN. 
^ 
Follow up quickly. Report the loss or theft of 
your credit cards and your ATM or debit cards to 
your card issuers as quickly as possible. Many 
companies maintain toll-free numbers and 
twenty-four-hour services to handle emergen-
cies. After you call, follow up with a letter that 
includes your account number, when you 
noticed your card was missing, and the date you called to report the loss or 
fraudulent use. 
+ Reconcile monthly statements carefully and promptly. Open your monthly 
statements promptly and reconcile your account with your receipts in the 
same way you balance your checking account. If you notice discrepancies or 
mistakes, report them immediately. 
* 
Disclose your personal information carefully. Do not provide personal or 
financial card information over the phone unless you know the person who 
is receiving the information, you are dealing with a reputable company, or 
you initiated the phone call. The same applies when responding to account 
verification requests for financial information sent over the Internet. 
^ Protect your personal identification number. To protect your ATM and debit 
card, guard your PIN. Do not use obvious passwords, such as your address, 
birth date, phone or social security number as your PIN, and consider chang-
ing your password regularly. Memorize your PIN and do not carry it in your 
wallet or purse. Never write your PIN on your ATM or debit card, and avoid 
writing your PIN on the outside of a deposit slip, an envelope, or other 
papers that could be easily lost or seen. Finally, before you input your PIN 
into an ATM machine, carefully check that you are not being monitored. 
Cover the screen or keypad of an ATM or public phone so thieves cannot 
watch you enter your PIN. 
119 

-#• Avoid non-bank ATMs. Although most non-bank ATMs are legitimate, the 
chances of someone tampering with these machines is much greater. Phony 
ATMs may be owned by thieves who will steal your bank card information. 
(Seepage 121.) 
^ 
Be cautious with your credit and debit card receipts. Credit card receipts 
contain important information. For example, write a line through blank 
spaces on charge or debit slips above the total to ensure that the amount 
cannot be changed. Void incorrect receipts. Do not sign a blank charge or 
debit slip. Destroy carbons and save your receipts to check against your 
monthly statements. Do not leave receipts lying around. 
*fr Be alert when you use your credit card. When you use your card, keep an 
eye on it during the transaction. Get it back as quickly as possible. Make 
sure your card does not get swiped twice through a credit card machine. 
-Jfc- Destroy old credit, debit, and ATM cards. Destroy all old cards by cutting 
through the account number before discarding the cards. 
# Be prepared for loss or fraud. Keep a record—in a safe place, such as a fire-
proof cabinet, separate from your cards—of the important information 
related to your credit card. This record should include the following for each 
credit, debit, or ATM card you maintain: the card issuer, your account/card 
number, expiration dates, and the customer service or emergency tele-
phone number of each card issuer so you can report a loss quickly. You may 
even create your own worksheet to keep track of this information. 
^ 
Check your insurance policy. Your homeowner's insurance policy may cover 
your liability for loss or theft of your credit card. If it does not, determine 
whether your insurance company will allow you to change your policy to 
include this protection. 
-#• Be persistent with your financial institution. If you report loss, theft, or 
fraudulent use of your card to your bank, follow up to make sure your bank 
recognizes your situation. Check your monthly statement to ensure that 
your account has been reimbursed for any fraudulent charges. If your bank 
120 

* Your Money * 
is not responding, be persistent and continue to follow up until your situa-
tion is resolved. 
*• Remember the basics of identity theft protection. These tips should not 
replace the actions you should undertake to protect yourself against identity 
theft. For example, continue to monitor your credit report regularly and be 
cautious about the personal information you disclose. 
ATM AND CREDIT CARD SCAMS 
Stealing your ATM and credit card PINs is one of the ways that identity 
thieves can easily steal your money. In many cases, they don't even need to 
have your card; the PIN alone will suffice because identity thieves can cre-
ate their own cards with magnetic strips. Here are some common scams: 
The Phony Bank Machine Scam 
Some delis or gas stations are equipped with a gray box that looks like 
your average non-bank ATM. But these machines are not legitimate ATMs. 
Some rigged ATM boxes steal information via a thin, transparent-plastic 
overlay on the keypad that captures a user's identification code as it is 
entered. If you notice the overlay, you might think it is a cover to protect 
the keys. In fact, microchips in the device record every keystroke. Another 
transparent device is designed to fit inside the card slot to capture card 
data. As the cardholder completes the transaction, a computer attached to 
the overlay records all the data necessary to clone the card. 
Yet another phony ATM scam involves two wires, one of which sends sig-
nals to the legitimate bank and allows you to take out cash. The other wire 
sends signals to a computer where the thieves collect your bank information 
and PIN and later use the information in conjunction with a phony card. 
The "ATM Is Out of Order" Scam 
ATM Out of Order. Working Machine Around the Corner. 
Some scammers do their dirty work right out in the open. This successful 
scam involves posting a hand-lettered sign that directs ATM customers 
121 

away from a bank machine. The sign might explain that the legitimate 
machine is out of order, so customers should use another terminal. The 
new terminal turns out to be a card reader (as in the previous case) set up 
by the scammers to obtain your card data. With the card data, the scam-
mers create bogus cards to spend your money. 
The "Law Has Changed" Telemarketing Scam 
Hi. This is Linda from the Credit Card Loss Protection Service. I'm call-
ing to inform you that the law has changed, so your liability for unau-
thorized credit card use is now unlimited. Give me your credit card 
information and we will protect it. 
This telemarketing scam comes in the form of an offer for credit card 
loss protection insurance. Once the scammers obtain your credit card 
information, the scammers either charge you for worthless credit card loss 
protection insurance, or they do exactly what they warned you about: they 
run up fraudulent charges on your credit card. (The good news? You are 
liable for only $50 if you call your credit card company.) 
The "Free Peek or Free Product for Your Credit Card Number" Scam 
To access fifty unforgettable love slave websites, all you need to 
do is give us your credit card number. We won't charge you, but 
we need your credit card information to prove you are eighteen 
or over. 
In this credit card scam, you are offered a free product if you provide 
your credit card number. You are told that your credit card will not be 
charged but is needed to permit you to register for the free product. For 
example, many adult sites permit users to view adult images online for free 
if they share their credit card information to prove they are over eighteen. 
Another method is to offer a free custom-designed website for a thirty-day 
trial period, with no obligation to continue. Don't believe it. Scammers will 
use your credit card number to run up charges on your card. 
122 

* Your Money f 
Checks 
Before leaving for a business trip, BUI Reilly completed a number of 
personal matters. He was particularly relieved to have finished 
writing out the checks for all his bills, which he placed in his mail-
box on his way out. Unfortunately, a thief got to his mailbox before 
the postman. The thief opened the stolen mail, erased the ink on 
the checks with an over-the-counter 
solvent, and rewrote the 
checks to be payable to himself, increasing the amounts by thou-
sands of dollars. 
Identity thieves find crafty ways to access your checking account. As in 
the example above, thieves can break into your mailbox, use a solvent to 
remove written information on a check, and then rewrite the check, making 
it payable to themselves. If they get hold of your checking account number, 
thieves can make counterfeit checks in your name on their computer. 
Finally, if an identity thief is able to obtain your sensitive personal informa-
tion, including your social security number, he or she may even be so bold 
as to open a checking account in your name and write checks from that 
account. Every year, financial institutions lose more than $10 billion in 
check fraud, and merchants lose more than $13 billion to bad checks. 
Whether you're the victim of identity theft or money mismanagement, 
bouncing a check may have longstanding consequences. First, you will 
endure a certain degree of hassle, inconvenience, and embarrassment, and 
you will have to pay your bank predetermined charges. Moreover, your bank 
may start to monitor your account more closely and, in case you have too 
many overdrafts, your bank may close your account, viewing your relation-
ship as a liability. 
If you bounce a check or activate an overdraft, your name may end up in 
the ChexSystems network, a national database that alerts banks and lenders. 
Approximately 80 percent of the country's financial institutions subscribe to 
ChexSystems. If your bank closes your account, a record of that account clo-
sure is entered into the ChexSystems database. A record of your bounced 
check remains in the database for five years, alerting banks, lenders, and even 
potential employers that you could be a credit risk. When you try to open a 
123 

* Prying Eyes f 
new checking account elsewhere, you may be turned down because of that 
record. 
What can you do? First, remember that every financial institution estab-
lishes its own policy. If your bank closed your 
account because of its policies and procedures, 
another bank may be willing to give you a second 
chance. Second, you can send a letter to your bank 
and to ChexSystems to explain why the check 
bounced, but ChexSystems will not delete or alter a 
factual record unless the bank that closed the 
account instructs it to do so. Third, ChexSystems 
has recently started a new service called About 
Checking, which requires individuals with records 
in its database to attend a class about the basics of 
managing a checkbook and then earn their way 
back to having a checking account by paying off all 
outstanding debts to the financial institution where 
their account was closed. This program, however, is not available in every state. 
If your name ends up in the ChexSystems database because of an error, 
ChexSystems will resolve matters with your bank and remove you from the 
database. The ChexSystems database includes 19 million old accounts listed 
as Closed for Cause. Some people who are included in the database do not 
even know that they have been listed until they attempt to open a new 
account and are rejected. To get in touch with ChexSystems, use the contact 
information on page 126. 
Use these tips to better protect your checking account: 
^ Protect your checking account information. As with other sensitive personal 
information, safeguard your checking account information. Don't carry your 
checkbook with you if you don't need to write checks. Be careful about dis-
closing your checking account information over the telephone. 
-£ Protect your checks. Protect your checks by storing both new and cancelled 
checks in a secure place. If you want to discard your old checks, shred them 
before disposing of them. Checks needed for tax purposes, however, 
should be kept for seven years. Order checks that are tamper-resistant. If 
124 
A record of your bounced 
check remains in the 
database for five years, 
alerting banks, lenders, 
and even potential 
employers that you 
could be a credit risk. 
When you try to open 
a new checking account 
elsewhere, you may 
be turned down because 
of that record. 

* Your Money f 
your mailbox is not fully secure, mail your checks directly from the post 
office or leave them in a drop box. 
-fr Manage your checks. Balance your checkbook each month and immediately 
report any lost or stolen checks or any fraudulent activity. If you order new 
checks, make sure none were stolen in transit. 
+ Consider paying bills online. You might consider paying bills online instead 
of by check. You reduce the chances of people stealing your checks by pay-
ing your bills this way, and fewer people will see your checking account 
information. Of course, online activities may raise other privacy concerns. 
DEALING WITH COLLECTION AGENCIES 
If you fail to pay your bills or if a creditor thinks you haven't as a result of 
an error on your account, you may hear from a debt collector or collection 
agency. Debt collectors and collection agents have a reputation for being 
heavy-handed and deceptive in their efforts to try to collect debts. 
Under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (or FDCPA), collectors are 
required to treat you fairly and avoid unfair and deceptive actions against 
you when you owe a debt. The FDCPA outlines certain actions that debt 
collectors may and may not undertake. For example, debt collectors must 
identify themselves to you if they call you on the telephone, and they 
must stop calling you if you so instruct them in writing. Furthermore, 
debt collectors may not contact you before 8 a.m. or after 9 p.m., and they 
may not contact you at work if they are aware that your boss would not 
approve. Above all, they may not lie to you (for example, telling you that 
you will be arrested unless you pay promptly), harass you (such as swear-
ing at you or calling you repeatedly), or abuse you (such as telling your 
friends and relatives that you owe money). Bottom line: Pay your bills on 
time. By doing so, you not only avoid unpleasant intrusions from debt col-
lectors, but you also ensure that you don't jeopardize your credit report 
and credit score. 
125 

*fr Order your ChexSystems report. ChexSystems is a consumer-reporting 
agency, similar in many ways to the three credit bureaus. You can contact 
ChexSystems through its Web site (www.chexsystems.com) or order your 
report from ChexSystems as follows: 
By fax: 
Get form from website and fax to 602/659-2197 
By mail: 
ChexSystems 
12005 Ford Road, Suite 600 
Dallas, TX 75234 
Attn: Consumer Relations 
Online Banking and Online Payment 
In 1998, three operators from an unchartered bank known as Net-
ware International Bank, which was operating only on the Internet, 
were indicted by a federal grand jury on wire fraud, mail fraud, and 
money laundering charges. The business lured in up to $650,000 
with an offer of a 20 percent return on savings and 10 percent re-
turn on checking accounts on its website. 
The old jokes about limited bankers' hours no longer apply now that 
traditional and online-only banks and a bunch of online payment services 
are open 24/7 on the Web. Most of these banks are legitimate, and Web-
based financial services have given thousands of customers access to 
expanded services and the convenience of managing a bank account and/or 
paying bills online. An added bonus is that using the Internet for bill paying 
and banking reduces the risk of identity theft significantly—up to 18 per-
cent according to one account. Banks (and businesses that accept direct 
online payments) benefit when you pay your bills or manage your accounts 
online because they reduce their costs by approximately 80 percent. They 
also find that customers who manage their accounts and pay bills online 
126 

An added bonus is that 
using the Internet for bill 
paying and banking 
reduces the risk of identity 
theft significantly—up 
to 18 percent according 
to one account. 
• Your Money • 
tend to remain with the institution offering these services for a longer 
period of time. 
Approximately 30 million households currently pay their bills online. 
Banks expect nearly 100 million households to con-
vert to online bill payment by the end of 2006. 
Many customers pay all their bills directly through 
their banks. Banks often offer the service for free or 
offer incentives to sign up for the service. Other 
customers pay their bills through a business web-
site. Others use services that consolidate all their 
bills and pay them automatically or one-by-one at 
the customer's request. These services typically 
charge $5 to $15 a month. 
Online payment options include PayPal (www.paypal.com) and other sim-
ilar online payment services. PayPal has approximately 40 million users world-
wide. Owned by eBay, the e-auction leader, PayPal allows any individual or 
business with an e-mail address to send and receive payments online in a 
secure environment, although PayPal itself has been the subject of numerous 
scams. It is not a substitute for your bank—the service depends upon bank 
accounts and credit cards to ensure security—but PayPal is generally safe and 
easy to use to pay almost any bill. Moreover, your PayPal balance is FDIC-
insured for up to $100,000. 
If you pay bills online, you will reduce the usual risks of thieves stealing 
your information from the mailbox or the Dumpster. On the other hand, you 
do take on other risks by paying your bills in this way. Follow the steps below 
to reduce your risks when you bank and pay bills online: 
-*- Make sure your online bank is legitimate. For online-only banks, make 
sure your deposits are federally insured. Read the description of the 
institution and look for language that indicates the bank is Member 
FDIC or FDIC-insured, which means that the bank will guarantee the 
security of up to $100,000 of your assets. To be double sure, go to the 
FDIC website (www.fdic.gov) and click "Find My Institution" to look up 
your bank. The FDIC site should give you further information about your 
127 

* Prying Eyes * 
bank, including its official name (an online bank may have a different 
name from its parent company), headquarters, insurance certificate 
number, and more. Contact the FDIC immediately if your bank is not on 
their list. If your bank is not listed, it may be chartered overseas, and the 
FDIC may not insure your deposits. If the bank is not insured and it fails, 
you will lose your money. 
^ 
Look up your financial institution's privacy policy. All financial institutions— 
even online-only ones—are required to send you copies of their privacy 
policies with the option to opt out of information sharing with non-affiliates. 
In particular for online banking, look up your institution's policies on cookies 
(See chapter 7, "Your Computer and the Internet") to determine how it 
might track you while you're on their site. For example, if your bank also 
offers travel services and you click on the promotion for discount tickets to 
Florida, you might end up getting calls or mail about holiday travel promo-
tions. If you're concerned about your browsing habits being tracked or the 
possibility of a flooded mailbox, e-mail inbox, or an interrupted dinner, then 
contact your financial institution, disable cookies (see chapter 7), or do not 
bank or pay bills online. 
-£ Make sure the site is secure. If you're banking online and entering sensitive 
information, such as account numbers and passwords, make sure your trans-
mission is encrypted to prevent unauthorized access. Most browsers display 
an icon of a lock or key in the corner of your screen whenever you're on a 
secure site. Another indication of a secure site is a Web URL beginning with 
https:// instead of http://. 
& Be careful with your passwords. Follow the steps detailed earlier in this 
chapter to protect your password. 
4fr Beware spoof sites. PayPal, in particular, has been the target of many 
spoof sites which look official but are actually set up by identity thieves 
(see page 61). Also known as phishing, this scam sends e-mails to users of 
a service indicating a link to a fraudulent website. The fraudulent site may 
128 

* Your Money f 
be an exact copy of the real site, even featuring logos that look the same 
as those on the legitimate site. You may be lured to the site by an urgent 
notice asking you to update your inactive account or the like. If you go to 
the spoof site, you will be asked to provide your user name and pass-
word. Again, follow the tip above to make sure the site is secure before 
you enter any information. 
^ Practice good general computer security. Make sure you protect your com-
puter with antivirus software and antispyware software (spyware and trojan 
horses can pick up your passwords and other sensitive information and send 
it to their source). Invest in a firewall that will protect your system from hack-
ers. See chapter 7, "Your Computer and the Internet," for additional details 
on protecting yourself when you are online. 
-fc Keep records of your online transactions. Compare your PayPal or other 
online bill payment service transactions with your bank account and credit 
card bills on a regular basis. 
* 
Report problems immediately to your financial institution. The Fair 
Credit Billing Act (FCBA) and Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA) help 
you to resolve errors on credit and bank account statements, including 
incorrect fund transfers and computational errors. The EFTA requires 
your financial institution to tell you the results of its investigation within 
thirteen business days of your report. The act also requires the bank to 
correct the error within one business day of the bank's determining that 
an error has occurred. If the institution needs more time, it may take up 
to ninety days, but the bank must return money to your account within 
ten business days of receiving notice of the error. You must report the 
error within sixty days of its occurrence. 
129 

pMM^m^ÈÉâM^MfÈilÊMè^lÊS^W-^ 
How would you know 
if your privacy has 
been invaded or your 
identity stolen if you do 
not keep a record of your 
financial information? 
• Prying Eyes • 
Take Control of Your Financial Documents 
A Pennsylvania teenager was arrested for hacking into someone 
else's computer and using the individual's bro-
kerage account to sell underpriced stock op-
tions. 
The teenager 
had distributed 
an 
e-mail to people in an online chat room for in-
vestors. The letter requested individuals to 
download a new stock-charting tool. Little did 
they know that the tool was really a computer 
keystroke-logging program that enabled the 
teenager to monitor their computers 
re-
motely and learn their user names, passwords, and brokerage ac-
count numbers. 
An important step in protecting your financial privacy is to take control 
of your financial documents. How would you know if your privacy has 
been invaded or your identity stolen if you do not keep a record of your 
financial information? Taking control means getting organized and making 
sure that your financial information is complete, accurate, and available for 
you to review. 
Think about what you would do if you lost your wallet tomorrow. Would 
you know where to locate your bank statement to assess whether you had 
been the victim of ATM fraud? After facing a deadline, an expiration date, or 
an emergency that required you to check a document quickly, have you ever 
felt that you needed to be better organized? If you have ever lost your wallet, 
you understand the hassle of retrieving your personal records, canceling and 
replacing credit cards and other items, and then feeling anxious about the 
entire situation. Further, as discussed above, if you lose your credit card or 
ATM or debit card, you must report the loss or theft quickly to avoid greater 
financial liability. 
As a first step, you must create an inventory or worksheet of your impor-
tant accounts and documents. In addition, you should adopt a system so this 
inventory of accounts and documents remains up-to-date. 
130 

4 Your Money * 
Follow these tips to protect your financial documents: 
0 Store your inventory of records in a secure place. Placing your documents in 
an unsecured drawer in your house is not adequate. Instead, use a locked fil-
ing cabinet, or even better, a fireproof safe. You should use the same rule for 
passwords and personal identification numbers, which you should write on a 
piece of paper to ensure that you do not forget them. Make copies of your 
records, and keep the copy in a secure place. 
-fc Keep a record. Your list of important accounts should include: 
• the accounts that you maintain at various financial institutions 
• account numbers 
• the contact persons at these institutions 
Either make a worksheet that compiles this information about every 
account, or make copies of each account's monthly statement and keep 
those copies in the secure place you have selected. For example, with 
respect to your credit cards, you might make a copy of both sides of your 
current credit cards, including the customer service 800 numbers to call in 
case of loss or theft. If something happens, you have the information avail-
able to cancel the cards. 
^ Tell a trusted person about your system. You must ensure that a trusted 
person, such as your spouse, your lawyer, or your accountant, knows 
where the originals of your documents are stored in case of your death or 
incapacitation. 
-fc Do not keep documents permanently. Learn how long to keep documents. 
In many cases, you need not keep documentation of sensitive financial infor-
mation permanently. For example, ATM slips are only needed for a month 
or until you balance your account; payroll stubs can be discarded annually 
after you receive your W-2 and annual social security statement. On the 
other hand, you must keep other documents for a longer period of time, 
131 

such as in the case of tax records, which must be kept for the current year 
and previous six years. You may want to create a worksheet for your impor-
tant documents (including credit card statements and receipts, insurance 
policies, tax records, investments, bank statements, and so on) to serve as a 
checklist for managing each of these documents. 
•fr Be careful when discarding documents. Your financial documents—even 
old ones—contain sensitive personal information. When you discard docu-
ments, be cautious. Do not place your documents in a garbage bag. For 
optimum protection, use a shredder to destroy the documents. If you do 
not own a shredder, you should buy one. At the very least, you should 
destroy documents and cards to an extent that none of the sensitive infor-
mation, including account information, credit card numbers, or social secu-
rity number, can be identified in any manner. 
THE BOTTOM LINE 
• Cash was king! Long live credit! Today, American consumers purchase 
more items with credit cards than with cash. Welcome to the new age of 
money. A paper trail may now exist for every purchase you make. 
• Your financial institution knows a great deal about you. It gathers detailed 
information concerning all aspects of your personal and financial life from 
the information you include on an application to obtain a loan, credit card, 
or other financial product or services. It gathers additional information 
from other companies as well. 
• Money doesn't talk? Under the federal financial privacy laws, your bank 
or financial institution must send you a privacy notice annually. The 
notice must disclose how the bank will use your personal financial 
information. To prevent your information from being shared with 
nonaffiliated third parties of your financial institution, make sure to opt 
out by checking the box provided in the form. Respond within thirty days 
of receiving the notice. 
• A run for your money. Theft, loss, and fraud of financial information are 
on the rise. If your credit, debit, or ATM card is lost, stolen, or shows 
unauthorized or fraudulent use, report this information as quickly as 
132 

* Your Money f 
possible to your financial institution. Otherwise, you may be liable for 
charges, and the more time passes, the more liability you may incur. 
• Take control of your financial information. Keep a record of your sensitive 
personal and financial information and store it in a secure place. Be 
prepared for loss or fraud. It can happen to you! 
133 

Your Shopping 
You have your prescriptions filled at a big, respected supermarket 
at which you are a regular customer. One day, you receive market-
ing literature in the mail targeted to you and your specific ailment 
from a company with whom you have never done any business. It 
turns out that your supermarket shared your sensitive prescription 
information without your permission. 
You shop for shampoo at a chain drugstore in your town. You see a 
small sign that vaguely indicates the store is in some sort of experi-
mental mode. What you don't know is that every expression that 
passes over your face as you examine the bottle of shampoo, be-
134 

4 Your Shopping t 
lieving yourself to be alone, is being scrutinized by a group of peo-
ple crowded around a monitor in another state. 
You receive sexually explicit letters in the mail, and somehow the 
letter-writer knows everything about you, from your most basic in-
formation such as your name, address, age, and birthday, to more 
obscure and sensitive data such as the soap you use, the kind of un-
derwear you buy, how often you drink alcohol, and your favorite 
kind of candy. An investigation reveals that the letter's author is a 
prison inmate who processed data collected by a company that 
compiles consumer profiles from sources such as product warranty 
cards, loyalty cards, and surveys. 
You buy plastic bags at a drugstore. You plan to use the bags to 
wrap children's sandwiches for school. Shortly after your purchase 
the government gains access to the purchase profiles of all the loy-
alty card users at your store. Because you bought a large number of 
bags, and these are the same bags that often are used by drug deal-
ers, law enforcement authorities make you a target of investigation. 
Do you remember the days when you walked into the local store, bought 
your candy or comic book with a dollar bill or a few coins, and had the shop 
owner ring up your purchase on a metal cash register? Unless you shopped 
there often, the shop owner knew nothing about you. If you were a regular 
customer, the store owner might know your name or your parents' names. 
Well, those days of shopping anonymously or enjoying a trusted and personal 
relationship are over. 
Today, the Internet and other computer technologies have changed the 
entire shopping experience. Without even leaving your own home, you can 
now buy almost anything from anywhere, whether it is oysters shipped 
overnight from Seattle to New York, a Jaguar XKE, or a toy for your child's 
birthday. At various super-stocked auction sites, you can find practically any 
rare item you seek, from art deco vacuum cleaners to corkscrew dogs. At any 
hour, you can research products, compare prices, assess different companies, 
and learn about upcoming sales and specially discounted programs. 
135 

Technology transforms customers into more sophisticated buyers. It also 
transforms businesses into more sophisticated sellers. Many stores now offer 
discounts if you pledge loyalty to them by providing them with information 
about your personal life. They can collect, buy and sell information about your 
buying history including where you shop, what you buy and the names of 
your favorite brands. The convenience may become slightly unsettling only 
when you receive unsolicited coupons for the cold sore cream you always buy 
or when the maternity store across town knows you're pregnant before your 
uncle does. 
To retailers, almost no fact about your life is irrelevant. From your 
favorite brand of chocolate and how often you buy it, to your pant size, your 
acne cream, or your subscription to Shape magazine, stores are fascinated by 
the intimate details of your shopping habits. Here is a sampling of some of 
the sensitive data that certain companies and retailers may be collecting 
about you: 
• name, address, and telephone number 
• date of birth 
• degree of education 
• clothing sizes 
• religious background 
• travel destinations 
• credit history 
• philanthropic donations 
• income 
• race 
• ailments, from psoriasis to cancer 
• marital status 
• hobbies 
• favorite items or brands, including magazines, music, whiskey, 
cigarettes, ice cream, toilet paper, and so forth 
When you provide lifestyle information to retailers, they may sell your 
profile to an affiliate or to profiling companies for the purposes of additional 
marketing. Further, even if you review a company's privacy policy, and deter-
136 

* Your Shopping f 
mine you are comfortable with the way a company treats your privacy, you 
may still face certain situations that are less controllable. Consider these com-
mon privacy risks: 
• Discount or loyalty cards track what you buy, and over time 
accumulate a record of your life that you may find objectionable; 
• Personal and financial information entered on a shopping site could 
become vulnerable to hackers; 
• Company employees could release or sell the information they have in 
their database; 
• Criminals could operate a fraudulent website and make you a victim of 
identity theft; 
• Your information, even if protected by a company's privacy and 
security policies, could be subpoenaed; 
• Your personal and financial information could be processed overseas 
where its handling will not be regulated by U.S. federal and state 
laws; and 
• The company from which you purchased a certain item could go 
bankrupt or get acquired by another company with a different privacy 
policy, and your information would no longer be protected in the same 
manner. 
If you provide personal information to stores, not only do you risk reveal-
ing a lot about your personal life when you shop, you also risk having your 
Crest toothpaste-buying, car-owning, $50,ooo-earning identity stolen. Whether 
you shop online, by phone, or in stores, the sophisticated technologies and 
scams that criminals now employ increase the likelihood of your becoming a 
victim of identity theft. See chapter 3, "Your Identity," to reduce your chances 
of becoming a victim of identity theft. 
There are ways to outsmart marketers and thieves by buying your food 
and clothes with cash, shopping exclusively in out-of-the-way stores, refusing 
to divulge any information about yourself under any circumstances, and oth-
erwise leading a hermit's existence. But chances are that you don't want to 
take these steps. There are better ways to safeguard yourself and your family 
from unsolicited marketing, Big Brother-like surveillance, and identity theft. 
137 

By knowing which information a merchant is and is not permitted to demand, 
understanding the mechanisms of a secure transaction, recognizing the wide-
spread use of profiling lists, and staying alert to common scams, you can pre-
vent the worst of the risks you take. 
A Trade in Personal Information 
In the mid-1990s, 
a news reporter contacted one of the larger 
companies that compile and sell consumer profiles. He purchased 
a few thousand dossiers on children from them. To make a point 
about how vulnerable this information is, the reporter bought 
the files using the highly publicized name of a man who had just 
confessed to murdering a child and was on trial at that time for 
the crime. 
Personicx, a subsidiary of Acxiom Corp., relies on a number of out-
side sources to compile market data, including public records, third-
party research, and product-warranty cards. It updates its records 
monthly so the information reflects the birth of your child or your 
latest job promotion. The goal? To identify your "velocity compo-
nent, " or your ups and downs on the socioeconomic ladder. Person-
icx also provides a household segmentation system that places 
each U.S. household into one of seventy segments based on that 
household's specific consumer and demographic characteristics. 
Whenever you buy something online or from a catalog, the company that 
sells you the product compiles a profile on you, beginning with your name 
and address and the size, make, or model of the item you ordered. If you dis-
close information on a survey, or answer any extraneous questions attached 
to an order form, you are adding information to your growing dossier. The 
more comprehensive the profile about you, the better it is for companies to 
either sell or to use in the marketing of products. For example, some compa-
nies build profiles on you that can be up to thirty pages in length, and that 
cover every shred of information they can find about you, from your social 
138 

• Your Shopping • 
security number, to the kind of pet you own, to your different hobbies, to 
your favorite brand of coffee. You may never know that they are creating this 
profile about you. 
Retailers and companies maintain different 
policies about whether and how they collect data 
on customers, with whom they share the informa-
tion, and to what end they use the information. 
Some companies maintain a file on you only for 
their own marketing purposes, but many sell 
their lists, including your personal information, to 
other companies to generate revenue. In the 
aggregate, the files or personal dossiers that retail-
ers and companies may compile about you include information from many 
sources, including: 
Some companies build 
profiles on you that 
can be up to thirty pages 
in length, and that cover 
every shred of information 
they can find about you. 
consumer surveys, often mailed to your home as sweepstakes invites 
catalog sales 
product warranty cards 
charitable, lifestyle, or political organizations 
• book or music clubs 
• online and off-line purchase information 
• discount or loyalty cards 
These profiles are supplemented with data from other sources, such as 
census findings, Department of Motor Vehicle information, and other public 
records, as detailed in chapter 2, "Your Personal Information and the Public 
Record." 
Individual stores track your buying history and so do massive data aggre-
gators such as Acxiom and ChoicePoint. The aggregators build profiles on you 
from surveys, book clubs and magazine subscriptions, charitable donations, 
and other sources. They sell dossiers as lists to marketers who often use the 
information to supplement their own data. One aggregator, Acxiom, based in 
Arkansas, maintains a database on 96 percent of American households, which 
can include real-time information on you. Each consumer is placed in a 
defined category, such as Timeless Elders, Wealthy Urban, Retired Middle-
139 

im^mt^m&^^-M&m&.mti^^Màm,;. 
Acxiom, based in 
Arkansas, maintains a 
database on 96 percent of 
American households, 
which can include 
real-time information 
on you. 
• Prying Eyes • 
Class Suburban, or Rustic Living, and then each category is sold as a list. Mag-
azine companies, which theoretically sell only name and address information, 
also sell data on lifestyle or interests based on the magazines to which the con-
sumer is subscribing. For companies that sell or 
buy personal information, these lists of profiles 
become more valuable as more information is 
added. 
Who gets to see your personal information? 
For data aggregators and some companies, the sale 
or sharing of your personal information is an 
important means of generating revenue, so they 
are quite willing to sell your information to other 
companies that want to buy marketing profiles. 
Basic lists vary in terms of cost, but most are priced in the range of $20 to 
$100 per thousand names, depending on the detail or specificity provided in 
the list. Your individual profile cannot be bought alone, because the lists are 
sold not by name but by category. This, however, might not prevent a health 
insurance company from buying names from a medical profiler and then 
screening out applicants with certain ailments. Nonprofit organizations can 
use these lists to seek donation requests from you based on the amount of 
money you make and the type of charities to which you've donated in the 
past. Government authorities and law enforcement can use your profile to 
conduct investigations of you. (See information on profiling and Uncle Sam 
in chapter 2, "Your Personal Information and the Public Record," and CAPPS 
II profiling in chapter 12, "Your Everyday Life.") 
Want to guess who is not able to see the profile that Acxiom or Wal-Mart 
might have compiled about you? You. You may never know what is contained 
in your profile or if the information is accurate. Most companies do not allow 
you to review your profile (one exception is ChoicePoint, which allows you to 
see certain information if you purchase it through its KnowX subsidiary). 
Because these profiles are sold to or subpoenaed by different government 
agencies for law enforcement purposes, you may be identified as a possible 
threat or target of an investigation based on your profile. For example, in 1997, 
the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) subpoenaed customer informa-
tion from Smith's Foods to determine whether certain individuals were pur-
140 

• Your Shopping • 
chasing an inordinate number of plastic bags. In this situation you would 
never see the full profile on which such an assessment was based or have the 
chance to correct any errors. 
You may never know 
what is contained in 
your profile or if the 
information is accurate. 
How Companies Track You 
To make their marketing efforts more efficient, 
companies want as much information about you as 
possible. The more they know about you, the better 
they can predict what you'll buy and how much 
you'll spend. The best way to protect your privacy in an age of information 
gathering is to understand exactly how information about you is collected. 
Point of Sale 
Sam went to his local Performance store to buy an item he'd been 
coveting. At the cash register, the sales clerk demanded his full 
name to complete the transaction. Sam was planning to pay with 
cash, so he didn't see why he should have to share his name. It was 
only after he threatened to walk out of the store that the sales 
clerk relented. What did the store offer as a reason for needing 
this information? If Sam lost the receipt and wanted to return the 
merchandise, they could look up the transaction. "Well, okay, that's 
the story being offered to the customers," he says. "[But] that 
doesn't preclude some marketing dweeb within Performance in 
the future [from] deciding that there is all this nice customer data 
just sitting around, and it's time to mine it for marketing pur-
poses. " 
Remember the days when stores offered you the option of putting your 
name and address on a mailing list? By doing so, you would sign yourself up 
to receive notices of sales and promotions for that store, and only that store. 
Today, that seems so straightforward as to be quaint. 
Now, when you buy something at a store, the salesperson who rings up 
your purchase will often ask for information, including your phone number, 
141 

address, e-mail address, photo identification, whether or not you wish to 
receive notices of sales and promotions, or whether you wish to join a dis-
count or loyalty club. They may even take the opportunity to ask you 
lifestyle questions, or give you a form with those questions to fill out and 
return. 
In some cases, this information is requested either to confirm the credit 
card belongs to you, or so the store has recourse against you if your check 
bounces, for example. Most often, the retailer is taking advantage of this 
moment to collect data on one of its customers, namely you. The information 
can be used as research for its own marketing strategies, or for a phone or 
mailing list for marketing, or as a commodity to be used or sold to affiliates as 
well as profiling companies. 
The request for your e-mail address or zip code, for example, is often made 
while you are completing a transaction at the register. It is usually made in 
such a nonchalant manner that you may not realize the information is not 
required as part of this transaction. In some cases, the software on a cashier's 
register is set up so that unless the cashier secures certain information from 
you, the transaction cannot be completed. However, if the information request 
seems excessive, do not be afraid either to ask why the information is being 
collected, or to decline answering. You have the right to decline a request for 
your e-mail address or zip code. 
Product Warranty Cards 
Edgar Rosen bought a Sunbeam Grillmaster. He was appalled at the 
level of questioning on the enclosed warranty card. Among the in-
formation demanded was his income; his marital status; the num-
ber, ages, and occupations of others in his household; the credit 
cards people in his household used; and whether anyone there 
smoked cigars or wore contact lenses. The form also instructed him 
to check off a long list of products he owned. But the foot-long war-
ranty card didn't stop there: it also asked specific questions about 
the Rosen family's health conditions and prescriptions. At the bot-
tom of the card was the following warning in boldfaced letters: "To 
NOT 
RETURN THIS CARD MAY AFFECT YOUR WARRANTY. " 
142 

If you think that you must 
mail in the warranty card 
to secure the warranty 
for the product you 
purchased, you are wrong. 
• Your Shopping • 
Warranty cards enclosed in the packaging of products are one of the most 
effective means for retailers to gather information about you. These cards 
often ask you about income, marital status, interests, and other profile infor-
mation. If you think that you must mail in the war-
ranty card to secure the warranty for the product 
you purchased, you are wrong. Companies enter 
this information into a data bank to use the infor-
mation for future marketing purposes, or to sell 
profiles and marketing lists to data aggregators. 
Before you fill out a warranty card, you should 
first understand that the warranty for the product 
you purchased is almost always secure if you keep the receipt and the war-
ranty card. The information you supply in warranty cards will almost always 
be used to market products to you. The only downside of not completing the 
warranty cards is that companies may have trouble contacting you if your 
product is unsafe and they must recall it. If you're concerned about this, you 
may consider going halfway and filling out only your name and address. 
Weigh the benefits and disadvantages of completing the information required 
in warranty cards and decide what's best for you. 
Loyalty and Supermarket Cards 
You bring a lawsuit against a supermarket for damages after you fall 
on their wet floor. Right before you go to court, though, the store's 
attorney informs you that your purchase of numerous bottles of 
wine per week will be offered as evidence against you to prove 
likely intoxication. This actually happened to Bob Rivera, a Los An-
geles resident, whose buying habits were used against him when he 
sued Von's supermarket after he slipped on a yogurt spill and shat-
tered his kneecap. Von's attorneys implied that he was a drunk be-
cause of the quantities of alcohol he purchased, all recorded on his 
Von's Frequent Shopper card. 
You strike up a conversation with the woman standing in the check-
out line behind you and discover she's been offered a better dis-
143 

count on the same can of peas you're purchasing. Why? Her loyalty 
card records show she only buys peas when they're on sale, and 
that you buy them regardless. 
Whatever their names—loyalty cards, club cards, value cards, smart cards, 
member cards, discount cards, preferred cards, or advantage cards—programs 
offered by supermarkets, drugstores, and other stores gather a great deal of 
information about you. In particular, they build a profile of you by tracking 
every purchase you make at their store or chain. 
A cottage industry has emerged around these card programs. Consul-
tant companies offer businesses penetration profiles, which are supplemen-
tal reports on a store's customers. These profiles are built from facts 
retrieved from other databases, such as public records. Once these records 
are compiled, the store has a bigger, more detailed sense of your life as a 
consumer, and it can work its marketing accordingly. Not only will it know 
your name, address, telephone number, and (in some programs) your social 
security number, but through outside sources it will also know your age, 
whether or not you're married, if you own a home, if you have kids, and 
much more. 
What exactly do loyalty cards do for you? That depends. Retailers say that 
they provide valued customers with virtual coupons that are customized to 
customers' preferred products and brands. If you show a history of buying 
orange juice all the time, and a certain brand of orange juice, you may win sav-
ings on that item in the future. Some stores have divided card users into brack-
ets, and award the biggest savings to the consumers whom they call the most 
valued. Other stores claim they can customize their stock better if they know 
you buy certain merchandise regularly. 
Critics claim that retailers use these programs to blackmail you. If you 
want savings, you must sacrifice privacy and disclose all your sensitive per-
sonal information. Even more vehement critics claim that the savings you get 
are minimal, or, in some cases, nonexistent. They claim the stores manipulate 
prices to make it look like you are getting savings when, over a period of time, 
if the prices are gauged comprehensively, the savings you garner are fictitious. 
Privacy activists also denounce the practice of dividing card users into groups, 
which they claim is discriminatory: the most valued customers are deter-
144 

Few loyalty cardholders 
realize that federal 
authorities may also access 
their store's records. 
• Your Shopping • 
mined by data from the cards to be the most profitable to the store and really 
represent a fraction of the consumer base. 
Critics have also accused some stores of taking advantage of their loyalty 
programs. For example, at some stores, consumers 
who demonstrate that they will buy yogurt all the 
time regardless of price will not receive savings, but 
customers who will only buy yogurt when it is on 
sale will get savings as a further incentive. In this 
case, if you enrolled in a card program, you may 
ultimately decide that sacrificing your privacy leads 
to other customers' gains, and not your own. 
Besides the basic threats to privacy, a store's record of you and your pur-
chases may be susceptible to invasions that you could never imagine. Your 
company may have a privacy policy, but that pledge may not always be possi-
ble or practicable. All a company has to do to share your information with 
another company is to partner with it. For example, the Stop & Shop super-
market chain once partnered with an Internet company called SmartMouth. 
com. Customers could enter their loyalty card information into the Smart-
Mouth system to see a list of their most recent purchases and the nutritional 
value of their entire list. Customer complaints eventually forced the compa-
nies to shut down the program. 
In the recent past, databases of customer profiles have been the target of 
government officials, academics, and prestigious research centers. To what 
end? For one, as a tool to discover the links between advertising, eating 
habits, health, and obesity, among other things. It is true that public health 
issues are important and should be addressed, but signing up for discounts at 
your local supermarket does not mean you agreed to be a subject in such a 
study Few loyalty cardholders realize that federal authorities may also access 
their store's records. Although there haven't been many reported cases of 
seized records, cases such as the one about plastic bags and drug dealers have 
occurred, and the potential for further intrusion is possible. After the terrorist 
attacks of September 11, federal agents used the shopper card transactions of 
Mohammad Atta and the other hijackers to create a profile of "ethnic tastes 
and terrorist supermarket-shopping preferences" in order to track citizens' 
possible terrorist proclivities. 
145 

Card users who resent the system have devised ways to beat it. Some con-
sumers make stickers of their own bar codes and apply those stickers to other 
customers' cards so the data of four hundred customers is being erroneously 
treated as a profile of one consumer. Cashiers at certain stores accept a phone 
number if you don't have your card with you, so shoppers sometimes use ran-
dom phone numbers to avoid being tracked. Others swap cards so the store is 
unable to create an accurate chronicle. Still others use fake names and 
addresses at stores that don't ask for additional identification. 
The bottom line is that if you do not want your purchasing habits tracked, 
do not enroll in loyalty programs. 
In-Store Cameras 
In 2003, Tamara Perez, a shopper in a Toys "R" Us store in Atlanta, 
sued for invasion of privacy when she noticed a hole in the ceiling 
above the toilet she was using. She moved a ceiling tile and discov-
ered a camera pointed down at her. Perez's lawyer says that Perez 
was appalled that a camera had been installed in a bathroom, espe-
cially a bathroom that children might use. Toys "R" Us managers 
claimed they had no knowledge that a camera was there, the device 
wasn't supposed to be there, and they did not know who put it there. 
The Virginia-based company Brickstream uses advanced image-
recognition software to track customers' movements throughout 
stores. The software, which is in use in one hundred stores, records 
how long customers spend in each section, how long they wait in 
line, and what they buy. Brickstream's software revealed that peo-
ple often buy cold medicine and orange juice in the same trip, so 
the company was able to recommend to its client that the OJ be 
positioned near the medicine. 
Today, it is fairly commonplace to see cameras in stores. For the store, the 
camera is a security mechanism to discourage theft, and this use of technology 
is widely accepted. But many people are so accustomed to video surveillance 
in stores that they forget that various privacy issues can emerge. First, if you 
146 

* Your Shopping f 
commit a crime, or allegedly commit a crime, your picture may be broadcast to 
a much larger audience than the security personnel overseeing the store. For 
example, you probably saw the film of Winona Ryder when she was accused 
of stealing from a store. Second, retailers are generally not permitted to place 
cameras in areas that are more sensitive to your privacy, such as bathrooms or 
changing rooms. 
Still other surveillance technologies enable retailers to follow you in stores 
in the same way they can track you online when you surf their websites. Brick-
stream is one company that creates software to track customers throughout 
stores to determine how long they linger over certain products, where they 
gravitate, and how long they stand in line. Although Brickstream claims the 
software isn't designed to distinguish one person from the next (the cameras 
track only customers' heads and shoulders), privacy advocates worry about the 
possibility that it could one day be used in conjunction with facial-recognition 
software. 
Signature Capture Devices 
Signature capture devices are relatively new technologies that convert a hand-
written signature into a digital image and store the image in computer files. 
These electronic tablets are often linked to the credit or debit card system and 
are typically located at the counter when you pay. Retailers use these new 
devices to make your transaction more efficient, reduce paperwork, and 
reduce the potential for fraud. Be aware, however, that because your signature 
is stored in a digital record, a hacker may be able to obtain it and use it in con-
junction with other personal information to commit a crime against you, such 
as forging your signature on fake checks or credit card purchases. Privacy 
advocates say it is too soon to tell if signature capture devices reduce or 
increase fraud. Many stores allow their customers to sign their signatures on 
paper if they refuse to sign into the store's database. Talk to the store's man-
ager if you feel uncomfortable. 
Automatic Number Identification 
It's 5 p.m. on your anniversary. You call the 800 number of a florist to 
see if you can send an overnight delivery of flowers to your wife, who 
147 

• Prying Eyes • 
is out of town on a business trip. The representative informs you that 
you should have called an hour earlier and that she won't be able to 
process your order. You hang up the phone; you're not surprised. But 
this time next year you will be surprised when the florist sends you 
reminders to order flowers early for your an-
niversary. 
Automatic Number Identification (ANI) is a 
method of data capture used by companies that 
have 800 or 900 numbers. When ANI was first 
introduced, subscriber information was transmit-
ted only in the case of calls to 911 and law enforce-
ment emergencies. Today, any owner of a toll-free 
or charge number can collect personal data 
through ANI. 
Here's how it works: whenever you call a com-
pany's 800 or 900 number to order or inquire about 
products, your phone number may be entered into the company's database. 
Using an ANI reverse-directory service, the company is able to get your name, 
address, and even lifestyle information. An innocuous phone call can now lead 
to your profile being included in a corporate database, including the time you 
called and the reason for your call. The company then has all it needs to solicit 
and market directly to you. The best way to get around this one? Use the 
phone number blocking code that your local phone company provides or do 
not call 800 or 900 numbers from your home telephone. See chapter 8, "Your 
Home," for additional details on blocking your home phone number when you 
make outgoing calls. 
Radio Frequency Identification Chips (RFIDs) 
You are shopping for razors. Apparently razors are shoplifted fre-
quently, but you have never shoplifted and never will. However, by 
virtue of the product's notoriety, and by the mechanism of a radio 
frequency ID chip that triggers a camera nearby, you are the un-
148 
Whenever you call 
a company's 800 or 
900 number to order 
or inquire about 
products, your phone 
number may be entered 
into the company's 
database. Using an 
ANI reverse-directory 
service, the company 
is able to get your 
name, address, and even 
lifestyle information. 

* Your Shopping f 
knowing and perhaps unwilling subject of a photograph. The cam-
era snaps a picture each time the razor is moved from the shelf, 
chronicling any would-be thieves. 
In 2003, Wal-Mart and Procter & Gamble admitted to secret RFID 
testing in the Broken Arrow, Oklahoma, Wal-Mart store between 
March and July of that year. The store had installed chips in the 
packaging of Lipfinity lipstick. Customers who touched the package 
were videotaped and monitored by marketers, some of whom were 
hundreds of miles away. Wal-Mart had previously announced that it 
was not testing RFID chips. 
Radio frequency ID chips, otherwise known as RFIDs, are a technology 
innovation that may replace bar codes. These tiny microchips can be 
implanted in products. Information on the chips can be picked up by readers 
that are strategically placed throughout the store. 
As with any new technology, there are pros and cons to these devices. For 
the store, RFIDs expedite the checkout process because a device-implanted 
product can be sensed from five feet away, allowing cashiers to ring up sales at 
a faster rate. The devices also make inventory easier, because a box of items 
can be inventoried simply by putting the box to the receiver. Further, shoplift-
ing can be controlled, because these chips cannot be removed and cameras can 
be triggered each time a shopper picks up an item with a history of being 
attractive to thieves, such as a pack of shaving razors. These chips also give 
companies unprecedented capabilities, because the chips provide a lifetime of 
data on the items that are purchased. 
For you, this technology means that stores may use RFID chips to accumu-
late a detailed profile on you, including your history of purchases and much 
more. Any store that has a receiver can read all the tiny chips that you carry 
around with you—including the one in the chip-embedded coat that you 
bought at another store last year. If that coat were made by an expensive 
designer, say, Versace, you could theoretically be charged more for items. You 
could also be photographed, without being aware of it, for picking up an item 
that has an RFID chip in it. Moreover, any personal information you give dur-
149 

* Prying Eyes * 
ing the transaction—whether it is your credit card number, your e-mail 
address, your phone number, or your photograph—can be recorded and 
linked to that chip. As is true of other customer information databases, if this 
network of chips and receivers becomes prevalent, your detailed profile may 
be vulnerable to use by the government, the police, 
or criminals. All three groups might be interested in 
knowing, albeit for different purposes, that you fre-
quently wear Versace. 
If the technology catches on, there may be 
RFID receivers everywhere you go (not only in 
stores) recording what you're wearing, what you're 
touching, and where you're going, and crosslinking 
that information with data from other sources. 
The RFID technology is still too expensive to be 
used on a large scale, but experts predict,that the 
costs of these chips will drop dramatically within 
the next few years. Stores such as Wal-Mart are 
already testing the chips on a small scale and for individual products like 
Gillette razors. Other uses of RFID technology beyond the store include every-
thing from its use in automobile paint and tires to the European Union's plan 
to embed the chips into EU bank notes to catch counterfeiters. One Singapore 
hospital has already issued RFID cards to everyone entering the emergency 
department of the hospital as a public health incentive. If a patient is diag-
nosed with SARS at or after his or her hospital visit, the hospital will know 
with whom he or she had contact. 
Privacy advocates have discussed ways to retaliate if the use of RFID tags 
becomes widespread. Ideas include crushing, puncturing, or microwaving the 
chips, boycotting products that include them, and devising blocker tags to jam 
the chips' radio signal. 
Advocates of the chips say that the chips and receivers are too weak for 
anything but in-store convenience, but privacy advocates aver that the technol-
ogy could easily be made to be more sensitive. The best advice for now is to 
inquire whether the stores in which you shop use RFID technology, and then 
decide before you purchase whether you object to a microchip existing in an 
item you bring into your home. 
Any store that has a 
receiver can read all 
the tiny chips that you 
carry around with you— 
including the chip-
embedded coat that you 
bought at another store 
last year. If that coat were 
made by an expensive 
designer, say, Versace, you 
could theoretically be 
charged more for items. 
150 

4 Your Shopping * 
SHOPPING SCAMS 
From the infamous snake oil scammers of the distant past to the techno-
sawy scammers of today, people have always tried to get fools to part with 
their money. Here are a few of the popular scams to watch out for today. 
The "Better Deal" Scam 
Get your Epson cartridge cheaper and faster!!! We sell your printer's 
ink for only $4.99 by going to www.499epsoncartidges.com. 
Buy in 
bulk for your company! Escrow services offered. 
One of the most popular Internet auction scams involves a scam artist 
luring a bidder off the official auction site by promising a better deal. The 
offer seems credible because it offers an escrow service. But it is possible, 
as it is possible with any kind of site, to create a false escrow service web-
site. In this case, the con artist leads the buyer to a fabricated escrow serv-
ice, where your bank account or credit card information is collected. After 
the money is transferred to some account to which the scammer has 
access, the particular escrow service disappears and so does your money. 
The merchandise, of course, never arrives. 
The "Try Out Our Product" Scam 
We know that you love golf. You were recommended to us as some-
one who might be willing to "play test" a new line of high-quality golf 
clubs. Are you interested? All you have to do is test the clubs for sixty 
days and fill out a questionnaire. 
There's just one catch: The company asks for your credit card number 
for a security deposit to ensure that you return the clubs. It explains that 
your account will be charged $1,500 for the clubs, but that the charge will 
be removed as soon as they are returned. Sure. Send the clubs back and 
you'll see that your money's in the hole. 
The "Membership Fee" Scam 
Super CD/DVD combo for free to members of our exclusive electron-
ics club! All you need to do is pay a token membership fee and find 
151 

five more members to join. Then you'll receive a new high-tech gadget 
every month. 
In this scam, you are promised high-end goods—like electronic items or 
long-distance phone cards—for free. All you have to do is pay a small club 
membership fee. To receive the offered goods, you must recruit a certain 
number of participants. This is commonly known as a pyramid scheme. 
Almost the entire payoff goes to the promoters, and little to none is paid to 
the consumers who pay to participate. 
Shopping Online 
If you've signed up for My Yahoo service, you may have been asked 
for your birth date and your e-mail address. The service claims it 
needs this information so it can offer you a prompt in case you for-
get your user name. But just wait until your birthday 
comes 
around—you may be swimming in promotions. 
The advent of the Internet has resulted in new, exciting and highly con-
venient ways to shop. For some, such as disabled and handicapped people, 
the Internet has become a necessity. However, the rules governing online 
merchants are different than the rules for brick-and-mortar retailers because 
the nature of the transaction is different. Online transactions provide no 
opportunity to check a photo ID against a credit card, so from the online 
merchant's standpoint, security is challenging. As a result, many online 
retailers request that you provide your name, credit card number, the credit 
card's billing address, and often your phone number as evidence of a legiti-
mate transaction. Further, you will need to provide the mailing address of 
the place where you intend to receive your purchase. 
In addition to personal information that you must input to shop online, a 
website collects other information that you unknowingly provide through 
what are known as cookies. The site may track your online activities, such as: 
152 

* Your Shopping f 
• the areas within the website you visited 
• the last website you visited 
• files that you may have downloaded 
• your other online activities within the site, such as using Internet 
searches or participating in chat rooms or on bulletin boards 
In these situations, you may not be aware that the website has obtained 
other, and perhaps intimate, personal information about you. Read more about 
how you're tracked online in Chapter 7, "Your Computer and the Internet." 
Be wary if an online shopping site asks you to provide additional informa-
tion. Some sites pose questions about your lifestyle, preferences, and income, 
and they require an answer to these questions to complete your transaction. 
None of these questions is essential to the transaction, and most e-merchants 
mark fields and questions that are required with an asterisk. Avoid responding 
to any questions that are not required, and if information is required that you 
do not feel is vital to the transaction, consider shopping at other sites. Further, 
be cautious if a site asks for the smaller identifying numbers that appear on 
your credit card. The one exception may be sites that involve a financial trans-
action, such as sites where you can purchase your credit report or a mortgage. 
These transactions may require you to supply sensitive information such as 
your social security number and previous addresses. 
How to Tell if a Site Is Legitimate 
Becky Roberts, an account executive and regular California-based 
eBay auctioneer, received an e-mail that appeared to be a legiti-
mate eBay request for updated personal information. The e-mail in-
cluded what seemed to be official eBay logos. Becky complied with 
the request and entered her credit card number, checking account 
number, address, and other personal information. One week later 
she received a notice from eBay telling her that the request was not 
legitimate. 
One issue associated with online shopping that rarely needs to be 
addressed in the brick-and-mortar marketplace is determining whether or not 
153 

a site represents a true business. Anyone in the world can create a website, and 
cyberspace con artists profit by launching websites just to obtain credit card 
information or other sensitive information, which they then use elsewhere to 
make purchases or open accounts. The safest means of shopping online, if pos-
sible, is to restrict yourself to doing business online with companies you 
already know. 
Some hard-to-find objects may, however, only be available on websites 
that you have never previously visited or seen. If you dare to try a new com-
pany online, investigate it beforehand by following the tips below. 
*- Check with the Better Business Bureau (www.bbb.org) to see if the com-
pany exists. 
* 
Check whether the company has a listing in the phone directory. 
*- Search to see whether any press articles have been written about the com-
pany. 
# 
Check whether the website provides information about the sponsoring 
company, such as a telephone number or physical address. If so, call the 
phone number. A site is suspicious if it includes only a post office box. If you 
call the company but no live voice ever answers the phone, then this may 
also be cause for suspicion. 
& Look at the site's overall design. Is it garish or amateurish? Does the site 
contain spelling mistakes or bad grammar? Fraudulent sites may be riddled 
with errors. 
^ Ask yourself if the pricing of the products is "almost too good to be true." 
The site may be suspect if it urges you to buy a product quickly so you get 
the best deal, or if it requires you to send cash via overnight mail or courier. 
*- Look for any request for irrelevant information, such as your social security 
number. 
154 

• Your Shopping • 
* 
Consider restricting yourself to conducting online business only with U.S. 
merchants. Though an online merchant based in another country is not nec-
essarily suspect, if a problem does arise, it will be easier for you to resolve if 
the merchant is located within the United States. Foreign businesses are not 
regulated by U.S. state and federal laws, so if you do business with foreign 
businesses, you may not be protected in the manner you might like to be. 
How to Tell if a Website Is Secure 
You shop online at a store you trust. The store maintains a privacy 
policy that guarantees the security of your financial and personal 
data. At some later date you find out that it took less than a minute 
for a twenty-year-old independent computer programmer to locate 
a flaw in the site's online security. This programmer was able to re-
trieve the names, addresses, and credit card numbers of a half mil-
lion customers. 
By hacking into the New York Times computer system, 
Adrian 
Lamo, a twenty-two-year-old California-based hacker, accessed a 
database containing the home telephone numbers and social secu-
rity numbers of more than three thousand contributors to the Times 
Op-Ed page. Lamo then established five fictitious user names to 
conduct extensive computer searches using the LexisNexis informa-
tion service, including searches to see whether his exploits as a 
hacker were mentioned. 
Before you shop online, you must ensure that the site with which you 
are dealing is secure. After all, to buy something online you must provide 
some sensitive personal data to complete a transaction. The most secure 
sites use encryption technologies that effectively scramble your personal 
information during the transaction as your data moves from your computer 
to those of the online vendor. Further, secure sites will maintain your data in 
a scrambled and encrypted format to further protect against any hacker who 
seeks to ransack a company's database for hundreds of names and credit 
card numbers. 
155 

* Prying Eyes f 
A site can never be fully secure against online hacking, and the situations 
above could happen to you even if you are careful about entering your data 
only on secure sites. It is best to use your judgment as to whether you trust the 
site in the first place. To ensure that the transmission of your information is as 
safe as possible, follow these steps: 
+ 
Check if the website has a seal from Verisign indicating that the site is 
secure. The site should also provide additional information about its security 
so you are confident your data will be properly handled before you submit 
any confidential or secure information. See chapter 7, "Your Computer and 
the Internet," for more information on Verisign and other seals of approval. 
-fc Look out for a security alert window that pops up and indicates "you are 
about to view pages over a secure connection." 
-* Make sure the site's address begins with "https://" instead of "http://". 
The s stands for secure but, occasionally, this s appears in the address only 
when you reach the page in which you place your order. 
* 
Look for a lock icon on the bottom of your screen, or a closed lock icon to 
reflect a secure session. Most websites display their privacy policies, and 
this information should include details about the site's security levels. For 
example, the site might indicate precisely what kind of secure layers of tech-
nology or authentication systems it uses to protect the confidentiality of 
your information. 
Your Password 
A group of hackers between the ages of sixteen and twenty-one 
stole the passwords and personal information of more than two 
hundred legitimate Internet account holders and sold them through 
a middleman to users on the lookout for cheap, unlimited Internet 
access. 
A New York City teenager stole more than five hundred AOL user 
passwords by using Trojan horse computer programs. He sent the 
156 

* Your Shopping f 
programs to AOL users via e-mails that carried the programs as at-
tachments. When a recipient opened the attachments, the Trojan 
horse programs would install themselves onto the user's hard drive 
and record every single one of the AOL user's keystrokes, including 
passwords. 
Many websites create an account for you to process your transaction and 
to facilitate future transactions. To create such an account, you need to choose 
both a user name and a password for the account. You should adopt these 
guidelines for establishing your password: 
Mft Be careful with your password. Never give it to anyone, either directly or 
indirectly. You do not need to provide it even if a representative of the web-
site requests your password. If you forget your password, the company will 
usually reset the password. 
+ Use a password you can remember, but not one composed of or incorpo-
rating your birthday, maiden name, telephone number, license number, or 
social security number, birth date, or nickname. 
* Use letters, numbers, and symbols, if possible, in the password. Make it as 
long as the site permits and as many characters as you can reasonably 
remember. 
-*- Use different passwords for different accounts. 
-*- Store your passwords in a safe place that only you can access. 
* 
Consider changing your password on a regular basis, perhaps every few 
months. 
* 
Install anti-spyware on your computer to avoid Trojan horses and other 
means of password detection (see chapter 7, "Your Computer and the 
Internet," for details). 
157 

• Prying Eyes • 
These same tips apply to any password, regardless of whether it is a pass-
word for your online account or for your bank account. See chapter 5, "Your 
Money," for creating passwords for your ATM or other accounts. 
Only 33 percent of 
shoppers read privacy 
policies, and only 
7 percent complain about a 
policy with which they 
disagree. 
Privacy Policies 
You place your trust in the online hands of a 
company whose brick-and-mortar stores have 
always been some of your favorite reputable 
retailers. The site guarantees that it protects 
your information with every available level of 
security. You find out, though, after having given them your per-
sonal data to store for further transactions, that they have gone 
bankrupt and were forced to sell all of their assets. You never 
dreamed that your name, address, and credit card number would 
be counted among those assets, but they were. 
Section 4 of eBay's privacy policy reads: "In response to a verified 
request by law enforcement or other government officials relating 
to a criminal investigation or alleged illegal activity, we can (and you 
authorize us to) disclose your name, city, state, telephone number, 
e-mail address, user ID history, fraud complaints, and bidding and 
listing history without a subpoena. " 
According to a 2003 survey by PC World, 88 percent of respondents worry 
about sites sharing or selling e-mail addresses, but only 33 percent of shoppers 
read privacy policies, and only 7 percent complain about a policy with which 
they disagree. Privacy policies outline how a website collects and uses your 
personal information. The policies address the following areas of concern for 
you as a potential consumer: 
• Data collection, referring to the data the website seeks to collect from 
you while you do business on the site. 
• Use of data, which details whether your data will be used solely by the 
website itself in further marketing to you by e-mail, mail, or telephone, 
158 

• Your Shopping • 
or whether your information will be shared with third parties to do 
the same. 
• Information sharing, which describes the types of companies with 
which your information will be shared, and the specifics of what 
information is shared, such as if the data is connected to your name or 
to any other personally identifying facts, or is shared in the aggregate 
(see paragraphs below for data aggregation vs. individual profiling). 
• Security of information, referring to the security measures that 
protect and encrypt your information while it is stored so hackers 
cannot access sensitive details. This section may also detail the length 
of time your information is stored after the transaction is completed. 
• Access to your information, which describes whether you can view 
the data collected about you and check its accuracy or completeness. 
• Choice, referring to whether you have the option of opting in or 
opting out of whether and how your personal information is collected 
and used for other purposes (see paragraphs below explaining opting 
in vs. opting out). 
• Notice, which details information practices that are available to you 
before the site uses or shares your information. This section also 
covers how the site informs its users of changes in its privacy or 
information collection practices. 
• Privacy violation, referring to the method you must follow or person 
to contact in the event you have a complaint. 
A company's privacy policy should provide you with comfort in two ways. 
First, the policy should give you a sense of the company's commitment to its 
customers, in general, and to the privacy of its customers, in particular. If a com-
pany goes beyond the basics of privacy protection—for example, by providing 
you greater access to correct your personal information or stating that it will 
not share your information with any third parties—then you should feel more 
comfortable with the site. In addition, the policy should outline the company's 
liability if your privacy or personal information is compromised as a result of 
bad information practices, insecure transactions, or faulty storage of your data. 
It is wise to use sites that have received approval from certain third parties 
that have developed oversight for privacy policies. Sites that have such 
159 

approval display a seal indicating their participation in a merchant group 
interested in self-regulating privacy standards. Two of the most recognized 
seals are from TRUSTe (www.truste.org) and BBBonline (www.bbbonline.org). 
Seals from these organizations certify that the site in question has met basic 
privacy standards and fair information practices, and subjects itself to ongoing 
monitoring to ensure compliance with such standards. These seals indicate 
that the website from which you may purchase goods maintains these basic 
privacy standards. For more information on these seals, refer to chapter 7, 
"Your Computer and the Internet." 
A website's link to its privacy policy and the privacy seals are usually 
located at the bottom of the site's home page. The policy is often listed in a sec-
tion called Privacy Policy, or sometimes in the sections entitled About Us or in 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs). The privacy seals may also be posted near 
the privacy policy. 
Unfortunately, neither the privacy policies nor these privacy seals-of-
approval are ironclad. Your privacy or personal information may still be com-
promised in a number of ways. For example: 
• Even the most secure databases can be hacked. 
• Some companies post privacy policies but use arcane and vague 
language, often obscuring their true intentions regarding the use of 
your personal information. 
• A company's policy may have changed, and if the company does not 
appropriately notify its customers, you may continue buying from the 
company without realizing that your personal data is no longer 
protected in the same way or to your satisfaction. 
• An employee of the company with access to the company's database 
may, by design or mistake, sell your consumer profile in a manner 
that violates that company's privacy policy. 
• Large, reputable companies can sell customers' personal information 
in contravention of their own policies by mistake, by corruption, or by 
using a legal loophole. 
• A company's privacy policy though well-intentioned, may not be well-
managed, thereby proving to be ineffective; and 
160 

Debit cards expose you 
to liability up to the 
amount of money in your 
account if someone 
obtains and fraudulently 
uses your card number. 
• Your Shopping • 
• Files theoretically protected by the company's policy can be 
subpoenaed in court cases. 
Opt-in vs. Opt-Out 
Websites make available to you the option of opt-
ing in or opting out to allow or to prevent the site 
from sharing your information. In either case, the 
website is likely to indicate the different ways that 
your information might be used, such as to market 
to you additional offers from the site you are cur-
rently visiting or to market to you offers from unaf-
filiated third parties. Look for these options whenever you type your personal 
information into a site: 
Opt-in. To give a site permission to use or share your information beyond the 
purpose for which your information was initially collected, you must explicitly 
give your consent. In this situation, websites offer a box for you to check to 
allow the site to use or share your personal information. 
Opt-out. To prevent your information from being used beyond the original 
reason for which it was collected, you must opt out. To do so, you must 
uncheck a box that is checked as a default setting. 
Data Aggregation vs. Individual Profiling 
As mentioned above, a website may share or sell your data in different ways. 
A site's privacy policy explains how your data may or may not be used. For 
example, if a website only collects, shares, or sells aggregate data, then any 
data that is compiled does not identify you as an individual. For example, if 
you purchase product A, then your purchase or data may be included in an 
aggregate statement, such as "25 percent of users purchased product A." Indi-
vidual profiling is the opposite. In this case, the website develops records that 
are as detailed as possible to market other products to you in the future. 
Before shopping at a site, check the privacy policy to see how your data will 
be used. 
161 

Paying for an Online Purchase 
Once you have checked to see if a site is legitimate and secure, and you have 
read its privacy policy, you might be ready to make your online purchase. 
Paying in person with cash is the best way to avoid any kind of fraud, but 
different rules apply online. The security problems associated with online 
commerce depend on how much information you provide, the security of 
the website, and the fact that transactions are always remote. As a result, if 
you make an online transaction, it is best to use a credit card. Do not use 
cash or a cashier's check, which are the worst alternatives. You may not want 
to use a debit card to pay for items you buy online because, as outlined in 
chapter 5, "Your Money," debit cards can expose you to greater liability. 
If you use a credit card to pay for an online purchase, you can rely on the 
credit card company's policy for protecting you in the event of fraud. As dis-
cussed in chapter 5, "Your Money," a credit card user can challenge unauthorized 
use of his or her card and withhold payment while the charge is investigated 
and disputed, and if the charge was indeed unauthorized, the card user's total lia-
bility will not exceed $50. In fact, many credit card companies do not even 
enforce that $50 liability. 
Use these privacy tips to further protect yourself when buying items 
online: 
*- Make sure the site is legitimate and secure, and that you are comfortable 
with its privacy policy. 
-fc Use a credit card to buy items online. A credit card offers more protection 
than debit cards against fraud. 
%• Print a record of all purchases you make online. Make sure that the record 
includes date of purchase, item ordered, total payment, and method of 
payment. 
* 
Examine your credit card bills to confirm the purchase you made, and to 
make certain that no unauthorized charges have been applied to your 
account. To facilitate matters, use one credit card for all online payments, 
and restrict all online activity to that account for easier surveillance. 
162 

* Your Shopping f 
WHAT THE LAW SAYS 
In the United States, no one law governs privacy across all retail industries. 
Instead, a number of state and federal laws address certain situations in 
various industries. Most of these laws focus on general principles with 
respect to data, including openness, disclosure, secondary use, correction, 
and security. Many of the laws that relate to data collection or privacy— 
such as the Fair Credit Reporting Act, the Video Privacy Act, and the Right 
to Financial Privacy Act—have been discussed in other chapters. At the 
same time, some organizations that regulate specific industries, such as the 
Direct Marketing Association, have developed industry standards in the 
name of self-regulation. 
Each state has implemented laws that deal with the information that 
merchants are allowed to require in addition to the check or credit card 
you use in a transaction. These laws address whether the merchant can 
ask for your credit card information when you pay by check, require that 
you supply a photo ID in conjunction with a check or credit card, and so 
on. Given that the law in this area varies by state, you must consult your 
state's official website or your state's consumer division for additional 
information. 
Although state laws differ, you should be cautious when a merchant 
requests the following: 
(1) when paying by credit card, information beyond what is on the front 
of the credit card; 
(2) when paying by check, a request for you to write your credit card 
number on the check; and 
(3) when paying by check, a request to write your social security num-
ber on the check (although your driver's license can be legally requested). 
In the event that a merchant breaks a law in requiring certain informa-
tion from you, you should report the action to your state attorney general. 
Your complaint may result in the merchant being sued or fined. Given the 
rise of identity theft, you should not take such infractions lightly, as inap-
propriate requests for information made during a retail transaction can 
increase the odds that a con artist will gain the information necessary to 
commit fraud or identity theft against you. 
163 

^ 
Protect yourself against identity theft. Follow the steps outlined in chap-
ter 3, "Your Identity," including ordering your credit report at least annually 
and protecting your confidential personal information. 
ft- Make sure your computer system is secure and free of viruses and spyware 
(see chapter 7, "Your Computer and the Internet"). 
Auctions 
James Thompson and Susan Germek of Illinois used stolen identi-
ties in an elaborate online auction scheme to sell computer soft-
ware and electronics. 
The pair offered various items for sale 
through Internet auctions, then failed to deliver the products after 
receiving payment from the buyers. To avoid leaving a trail, they 
continually changed their auction user names. Eventually, the two 
set up bank accounts and post office boxes in other people's 
names. The identity theft victims included people with whom 
Thompson had personal relationships, people whose information 
Germek took from the records of a hotel where she worked, and 
even a person who had died. 
One of the Internet's most popular forums is the online auction. These 
cyber-bazaars facilitate commerce between and among businesses and individ-
uals around the globe. Both business-to-person auction sites and person-to-
person auction sites demand extreme vigilance from all participants. 
In most auction sites, both buyers and sellers are required to establish site 
identities, with screen names and passwords, and, over time, develop a profile 
of feedback. Before you buy something from an auction site, do the following: 
-fc Check the vendor's feedback profile. That feedback will give you an initial 
sense of how reliable that vendor is likely to be, though feedback profiles 
are not 100 percent reliable because scammers often establish different 
identities to avoid being traced. 
164 

* Your Shopping f 
* Look at the seller's payment options. Some sellers require a cashier's check or 
money order before they will ship an item, although most business-to-person 
sellers process credit card payments, especially through PayPal. A credit card 
used in this kind of transaction is your safest bet, since a charge can be con-
tested if the merchandise is never received or is not what was advertised. 
^ Consider an escrow service. Because you are unlikely to know with whom 
you are doing business, especially in a person-to-person transaction, the 
best options for sending payment may be an online payment and escrow 
service. Many sites offer access to such an online payment service because it 
eliminates most fraud possibilities. The buyer provides the service with 
credit card or bank account information, and the seller provides information 
on where the payment should be deposited. Neither party, however, has 
access to the other's financial information. Escrow services operate differ-
ently. Money from the buyer is put into an escrow account, where it is held 
until the buyer receives and approves the merchandise. Escrow services are 
especially useful when very valuable items are being transferred, and the 
threat of fraud is greater than usual. 
* Beware of false online payment or escrow services. As always, use common 
sense. Beware of new services or ones you have never heard of before, and 
check sites for red flags (see page 153 to assess whether a site is legitimate). 
* Call the customer service number to confirm that the auction and payment 
and escrow services are legitimate. 
^ Read the privacy and security policies of the service. Do not use a service 
that cannot process your payment. 
Protect Your Privacy When Shopping 
Even with all these potential hazards, you are not going to stop shopping, be 
it online or off-line. After all, these risks did not seem to stop Carrie Bradshaw 
on the popular Sex In The City show from fulfilling her Manolo Blahnik 
165 

* Prying Eyes * 
fetish. Here's a summary of the tips to follow whether you're at the register or 
in front of your computer: 
-fc Never disclose your personal information unless necessary. Even then, 
make certain you know who is getting your information, what they will do 
with it, and how dedicated to and capable they are of protecting your 
information. 
^ Be on the alert for information requests that seem excessive. Be con-
cerned about any retailer who demands too much information or 
details that are too sensitive. Above all, protect your social security 
number. 
4jt Familiarize yourself with retailers' privacy and security policies for informa-
tion collection, both in terms of your off-line and online shopping. A com-
pany's privacy policy will give you a sense of how the company respects its 
customers and handles your information. 
-*- Understand how companies collect information about you—by using loy-
alty cards, product warranty cards, surveys, browsing habits, and so on. 
Make a conscious decision about whether the benefits outweigh the dis-
closure of your personal information. Remember that there are important 
exceptions to privacy policies, and other entities such as law enforcement 
may subpoena your data or the store might share it with its "partners." 
•fc Prevent your information from being sold, shared, or rented to other com-
panies to the extent possible. Check the appropriate box on websites to 
opt in or opt out. 
& If you call a company's 800 or 900 number, block your telephone number 
or don't call from home. 
* 
Know your retailers by shopping with reputable merchants or researching 
unfamiliar e-retailers before you shop with them so you are sure they are 
legitimate. 
166 

* Your Shopping f 
-*• Use a credit card, as opposed to a debit card, when shopping online. 
-fr Examine your credit or retail card statements for potential errors or fraud-
ulent charges as soon as you receive them. 
* Create a safe password for your various online accounts, and do not tell it 
to anyone. Do not use your name, address, birthday, and so on. If you use 
multiple accounts, create different passwords. Keep a record of your pass-
words and store the record in a secure place. 
-fc Ensure that your computer system is secure and free of viruses and spy-
ware. 
* 
Remember the basic tips to prevent identity theft. This includes reviewing 
your credit report for accounts opened without your authorization. 
& Consider shopping online only with U.S. retailers. Foreign retailers are not 
subject to the same laws or standards that govern the activities of U.S. 
retailers. 
* Print, save, and keep copies of all correspondence with retailers, as well as 
all order information. In the event of fraud, a paper trail is invaluable. 
-fr Be on the alert for the red flags of online fraud. Clues include a site that is 
poorly designed and executed, with no physical address or live customer 
service. 
0 Be especially careful when you use online auction sites. Check the seller's 
or buyer's feedback. Consider online payment or escrow services before 
making the transaction. 
THE Bono M LINE 
• It's all in the details. Retailers and merchants seek to gain as much 
information about you as possible to make their marketing efforts more 
167 

effective. No detail is unimportant. Every detail of information they collect 
about you is added to the personal dossier that retailers and merchants 
build about you. 
• All eyes are on you. Retailers and merchants track you in many different 
ways, including collecting data at the point of sale and through product 
warranty cards, offering loyalty cards, using in-store cameras, and 
installing new technologies such as signature capture devices and radio 
frequency identification chips. 
• Lock and loaded. When you shop online, you must ensure that the site 
from which you are buying is legitimate and secure. Today, anyone can 
create a fake site to collect information about you. Once you are confident 
a site is legitimate, make sure that the site is maintaining your data in a 
secure way. 
• It's in the fine print. A company's privacy policy tells you how the 
company collects information, how it stores data, whether you have access 
to your information, and the extent to which your information will be 
shared with others. Take the time to read and understand a company's 
privacy policy before you buy from the company. 
168 

Your Computer and 
the Internet 
You buy a Palm Pilot and register the device on the manufacturer's 
website using an e-mail address you've never used for any other 
purpose. Soon after, you start to receive offers for other Palm prod-
ucts, which was to be expected. But you also start to receive adver-
tising for banking services, credit cards, and telephone 
service. 
Later, you start to receive dozens of e-mails each month with offers 
ranging from travel clubs to acne remedies. All of these offers origi-
nated from that one e-mail. 
You replace your four-year-old computer with a newer model. You 
put the old CPU out on the curb on garbage collection day. You 
don't worry if someone else picks it up because you deleted your 
169 

* Prying Eyes * 
old files from the hard drive. What the Dumpster diver knows that 
you don't know is that if you don't wipe or squeeze those files clean 
with specially designed software, your supposedly erased files can 
be easily retrieved. 
You're shocked when you get an e-mail from your professor request-
ing sexual favors in exchange for a grade change. To your relief, it 
turns out that a graduate student hacked into your university's com-
puter system and used information from more than sixty students 
and professors to forge e-mails and get copies of final exams. The 
hacker sent the fake e-mail from your professor's account. 
You wake up early on a Saturday to begin your first day of the weekend. 
First, you scan the newspapers, reading your favorite sections, from the hard 
news, to the gossip pages, to the entertainment section. Then you do a little 
grocery shopping and head out to buy a baby present for your dear friend who 
recently had a baby girl. Next, you call your friend to confirm lunch and sug-
gest a new restaurant you recently read about. You also verify that the two of 
you are going to see the new Nicole Kidman movie in the afternoon. The 
movie has just opened, and it has received rave reviews, so you decide to buy 
tickets before you meet for lunch. Lastly, to spice things up, you go to your 
favorite cosmetics counter to compare shades of red lipstick. 
Guess what? All these activities—except, of course, actually eating lunch 
and going to the movie theater—can be done online. If you live in New York, 
for example, you can read the New York Times online, buy your groceries at the 
FreshDirect site at www.freshdirect.com, choose and send a baby present at 
the Gap online, send an e-mail to your friend to confirm lunch, buy your 
movie tickets online at www.fandango.com, and even compare shades of 
makeup on the Estée Lauder site. And you can accomplish all these tasks while 
still wearing your pajamas and in the comfort of your home—and by 9 A.M. 
But the convenience of life online has decided drawbacks. You are being 
tracked at every click of your mouse. When you send an e-mail, shop online, or 
surf the Internet, information travels through dozens of computer systems 
and ISPs (Internet Service Providers) that capture and store information about 
you and your activities. Your information is compiled and compared with 
170 

• Your Computer and the Internet • 
standard patterns to develop a profile of you that predicts what kind of person 
you are, your spending habits, and the advertising you might like to see. In the 
scenario above, you could be tagged as a sophisticated college-educated female 
who has disposable income. 
As you undertake these activities, you expose yourself to certain other 
dangers and annoyances that are the result of being connected to the Web. 
You may enjoy the many conveniences of the Internet, but you must under-
stand that the Internet poses very real threats to your privacy. These include 
the nuisances of junk e-mail and pop-up ads and the very real chance that your 
computer and all the information stored inside it could be invaded by viruses, 
hackers, and snoops. 
How Sites Track You 
You go online to look at a website for classic cars. The next day 
there are three e-mails in your inbox advertising auto financing 
deals. How did the dealers know? 
DoubleClick is a technology company that had an online advertising 
firm. The firm operated a network of online advertising sites and 
used cookies to collect information from unsuspecting Internet 
users who accessed the more than one thousand websites within its 
network. It then acquired a direct-marketing 
database company 
called Abacus that could cross-reference the information in its data-
base with an individual's online activities. What does that mean? 
Following the purchase, DoubleClick had the ability not only to 
track where you went online and what you did there but also to 
connect those activities directly to your name, your address, and 
your phone number. Ultimately, New York State used its powers to 
halt the program. If the state hadn't taken that step, your name and 
phone number would be connected to the website you visited last 
night. The same site would have the data it needed to be able to 
send you a direct mail solicitation at your home, based on visits to 
various websites. 
171 

|:pi*f;^ï^:;SÉ*ï§^ 
Virtually every website 
uses some sort of 
tracking software. 
• Prying Eyes • 
Have you bought a book from Amazon.com? In addition to the personal 
information that Amazon.com maintains on you, such as your e-mail address, 
home address, and shipping address, Amazon.com also keeps an individual 
profile of which books you have looked at and which books you have pur-
chased. They use this information to suggest other 
books for you to buy. 
Who else tracks you online? The simple 
answer: just about everyone who may want to sell 
something to you or sell your address to someone. 
Virtually every website uses some sort of tracking software. Everyone from 
Fortune 500 companies to small nonprofits recognizes that retaining and ana-
lyzing information about your visits are powerful tools for marketing and 
other purposes. The websites may collect and share the information in a num-
ber of different ways. 
On many sites you leave a very clear and detailed trail of where you have 
been, what you have clicked on, what you have been downloading, and, in 
some cases, how long you've spent there. To understand how your online 
activity is tracked and recorded, you must have a basic understanding of how 
the Internet works. 
The Internet is a decentralized global network that connects millions of 
computers. To access it, you typically need to subscribe to an Internet Service 
Provider (ISP), which connects you to the Internet and usually charges you a 
monthly fee for the service. Some ISPs merely connect you to the Internet, 
while others not only link you to the Internet but also offer additional services, 
such as specialized content and e-mail, that are available to you as a subscriber 
to their service. America Online (AOL), for example, not only connects you 
to the Internet, it also directs you to their proprietary areas of content and 
e-mail. The ISP may download a piece of software onto your computer in the 
course of establishing your account or maintaining it. By and large, this down-
load is not terribly intrusive, although your ISP may collect certain informa-
tion from you during the downloading process, such as information about 
your computer hardware, and thereafter monitor your level of usage with the 
ISP service. 
The World Wide Web is a service riding on the Internet. To find and view 
content on the Web, you need to use a browser. The most commonly used 
172 

• Your Computer and the Internet • 
browsers are Netscape Navigator and Microsoft Internet Explorer. When you 
visit a particular website, your browser transmits certain information about 
you to the site that you are visiting. In particular, your browser provides that 
site with your Internet Protocol (IP) address, which 
is a unique set of numbers that your browser 
assigns to your computer. Your IP address is not 
unlike your phone number. It distinguishes your 
activity from other computers and allows the 
server, or computer, that hosts the site you are visit-
ing to track your activity on the site. The browser is 
your passport to the Web and holds your personal 
information in its cache and cookies. 
The existence of a cache 
means that a record 
of your Internet surfing 
is present on your 
computer, and this record 
can be seen by you or 
anyone else who uses 
your computer. 
Cache. When you visit a website your browser stores 
a copy of each Web page you open in an area of your hard drive called a cache. 
By storing information (text, graphics, and so on) from the sites you visit, the 
cache enables you to view these pages when you are not connected to the Inter-
net and allows you to reopen these pages faster when you reconnect to the Inter-
net. Accordingly, the existence of a cache means that a record of your Internet 
surfing is present on your computer, and this record can be seen by you or any-
one else who uses your computer. 
Cookies. Another program that tracks your online activities is called a cookie. 
The cookie is akin to automatic recall because it remembers the e-mail 
address, login name, and password you create when you visit certain Web 
pages. That information is sent to your browser by a particular site when you 
access information on that site. Your browser stores the cookie on your hard 
drive. If you are a frequent online shopper, you know how tedious it can be to 
repeatedly input your personal data, including user names and passwords, and 
often payment, shipping, and other information. Cookies eliminate the need 
to reenter all your information and preferences because they contain your reg-
istration information, online shopping cart information, and user preferences, 
among other things. 
Cookies also play a part in the online advertising you see when you surf the 
Internet. In fact, cookies are responsible for rotating the banner ads you see on 
173 

Your cookies may send 
certain information to the 
third party that manages 
the rotation of ads and 
ad banners that pop up 
when you're online. 
• Prying Eyes • 
Web pages so you do not see the same banner ads every time you connect. 
When you log on to a site, a cookie sends data to an ad clearinghouse (or third-
party site) that identifies the ads you have previously viewed. This process of 
banner or pop-up tracking is a common method of 
profiling or tracking your online activities. Although 
these third-party clearinghouses may not be collect-
ing your name and telephone number, they still 
identify you, collect data about your Internet surfing 
habits, and then tailor certain advertising that you 
might see in the future. 
Sites collect information about you in two 
ways. (Actually, there are many ways, including 
Web bugs and spyware, and these will be revealed in more detail later in the 
chapter, but there are two primary ways.) First, your browser discloses certain 
information about you via cookies, so a site can gain clues about you by track-
ing your activities within the specific areas of a website that you visit. This 
tracking can reveal information about your interests or hobbies. Second, the 
owners of sites collect additional information that you yourself provide during 
a financial transaction, a registration for a membership, or an application for a 
specific service. 
Let's say you use the Internet to research inexpensive plane tickets to 
Hawaii at travel sites such as priceline.com, cheaptickets.com, or 
expedia.com. The first time you visit these sites, your cookies will likely 
reveal the following tidbits of information about you: 
• The type of computer you are using 
• The height and width of your monitor 
• What browser you are using 
• Your IP address 
• Your ISP's name 
• Where you linked from 
• How many pages you have visited in this session 
• Whether or not your browser is enabled to use JavaScript (a computer 
programming language invented by Sun Microsystems to allow Web 
pages to incorporate animation, sound effects, and games) 
174 

* Your Computer and the Internet f 
If you have ever registered or bought anything from the site, your cookie 
will prompt the site to recall the following information about you that the site 
already has on file: 
• Your e-mail address 
• Your user name and password 
• Your mailing address 
• Your telephone number 
• The name and e-mail address of your preferred travel partner 
• An itinerary from your most recent trip 
In addition, your cookies may send certain information to the third party 
that manages the rotation of ads and ad banners that pop up when you're on-
line. If you are surfing the Web for a getaway to a Hawaiian beach, the sites 
you visit may alert their affiliated ad clearinghouses. Don't be surprised if you 
receive advertising for travel-related services or products, such as car rental 
companies, hotels, or even bathing suits and suntan lotion. 
Sites may compile information about you either in an aggregate with 
other users' information or in an individual profile of you. Aggregate 
information is data that is compiled without revealing your identity, and 
it may be used and shared in a variety of ways. For example, a website 
may use aggregate information to tell an advertiser that 40 percent of all 
its visitors live in California. Or, a website may provide aggregate infor-
mation to investors to reflect an increasing number of total visits to the 
website. 
In other cases, a website may use the information it has collected about 
you to adapt content to appeal to your particular interests. This type of track-
ing is called individual profiling because it is personally identifiable to you as 
an online user. Sites that use individual profiling may collect information on 
your online actions and habits so the site can target specialized content, adver-
tisements, or products to you. An online store may recommend specific prod-
ucts like weight loss pills or self-help books based on the fact that you've 
bought diet cookbooks and barbells in past online shopping sprees. Your indi-
vidual profile is updated and compared against standard shopping patterns to 
try to determine the type of person you are as well as to predict your spending 
175 

habits. This is how Amazon.com and other sites are able to make personal rec-
ommendations. 
By managing your browser, cache, and cookies, you can decide what infor-
mation you want to leave at websites or on your personal computer. Here are 
some basic tips as a first defense: 
0 Turn off cookies or enable cookie alerts. Blocking your computer's ability to 
store cookies is the most effective way to protect your information from 
sites that want to sell to you. The drawback of the decision to turn off your 
cookies is that your surfing experience may be less convenient. For instance, 
your computer will no longer be able to recall your user name, recently 
viewed items, or even inputted or stored information. Be aware that some 
sites will not load if their cookies are refused. Instead of turning off cookies, 
you may want to turn on cookie alerts. These alerts prompt you every time a 
website is trying to place a cookie on your hard drive. It gives you the option 
of accepting or declining the cookie. 
Both Internet explorer and Netscape Navigator give you the option of 
disabling or fine-tuning your computer's ability to accept cookies. For AOL 
users, the process for disabling cookies depends on which Web browser— 
Netscape or Internet Explorer—you use along with your AOL browser. Con-
sult your browser's help menu to turn off cookies or enable cookie alerts. 
0 Delete your cookies. You can also manually delete cookies from your hard 
drive. A number of programs are available to delete unwanted cookies and 
prevent certain servers from accessing them. You can find cookie control 
software packages with a quick Internet search, and the software typically 
costs less than $50. Check your browser first, however; it may already con-
tain this capability. If you want to clear your cookies yourself, consult your 
browser's help menu. 
0 Clear your cache. You can also clear your cache and thereby clear the pages 
that you have previously viewed and that are stored in a special folder on 
your computer. If you clear your cache, your browser won't be able to auto-
matically fill in URLs you begin to type. Consult your browser's help menu to 
learn how to clear your cache. 
176 

* Your Computer and the Internet * 
-fc Clear your history. Your cache maintains a local version of the websites you 
have downloaded and viewed, but your history contains a list of every site 
(or URL) you have ever visited. You can also set a limit on your browser of 
how long you want to retain a history of your website store pages. Again, 
follow your browser's instructions to clear your history. 
# Update your browser. Internet Explorer and Netscape Navigator/Commu-
nicator browsers are all susceptible to potentially hazardous security bugs 
and viruses. When you visit a website, your browser reveals certain informa-
tion about you and your computer, including your IP address. If you do not 
update your Web browser with the latest security fixes, someone may be 
able to hack into your computer (more information later in the chapter) to 
manipulate your browser into giving up your e-mail address and other 
important information. Whenever an upgrade is released, you should down-
SURFING WITH SHADES 
Do you want to make sure no one knows you have visited a site for mari-
juana users or herpes sufferers? To hide your identity when surfing the 
Web and to reduce spam (more on this later), consider various software 
tools known as anonymyzers. Most anonymizers are essentially intermedi-
ary servers that act as protective walls. As a result, you are able to conceal 
your identifying information—such as your IP address, the browser soft-
ware you use, your surfing patterns, and so forth—from any website you 
visit. Anonymizers prevent sites from adding cookies or other files to your 
computer, thereby protecting you from being profiled by marketers and 
retailers. 
Various companies, such as www.anonymizer.com or www.freedom. 
net, redirect you through their anonymous servers to view any Web page 
identity-free. They can also create a number of aliases for you that are 
assigned to cookies that cannot be linked to your real identity. Another site, 
IDzap's Idsecure (www.idzap.com/anonsurf.php) encrypts data going to 
and from your browser and replaces website names and addresses in the 
browser with nonsensical character strings. 
177 

load it from your browser's site. Browser upgrades are free and easily 
accessed. As a rule of thumb, you should check for upgrades every few 
months. 
^ Use an anonymizer. Consider using an anonymizer if private surfing is your 
priority. 
Unfortunately, even these tips have their limitations. For example, clear-
ing your cache means that you are removing from your own computer your 
search history, and that only prevents another user on your computer from 
easily looking up where you've been. Disabling your cookies will prohibit you 
from using certain sites that require them. Don't forget that your ISP will still 
keep records of your online activities. 
Hackers and Virus Writers and 
the Programs They Create 
Ehud Tenebaum was put under house arrest after the U.S. Justice 
Department notified Israeli police that the eighteen-year-old had 
broken into computers at the Pentagon and commercial and educa-
tional institutions. 
In 1998, a fourteen-year-old Massachusetts boy hacked into remote 
computer systems that move voice and data transmissions, effec-
tively causing the Worcester Regional Airport to shut down because 
of the loss of phone service for six hours. His activities also knocked 
out the city's fire department and security system. 
In 1989, a West German hacker named Marcus Hess infiltrated sev-
eral computers in the United States, including those at universities 
and at approximately four hundred military and government com-
puter contractors. His aim was to locate and steal national security 
information and sell it to the Russian government. He was found 
178 

-• Your Computer and the Internet *-
guilty of espionage and received a short prison sentence. He now 
writes networking software for a computer company in Germany. 
If you think only 
computers at big banks or 
the Pentagon are hacked, 
you're wrong. Anyone can 
download a hacking 
program on the Internet 
and these programs scan 
the average home 
computer more than ten 
times a day. 
The term hacker originally described a person 
with a high level of computer expertise who, for 
fun, attacked computer problems and navigated 
through systems. Hackers were not malicious, and 
they broke into a system to look at data and then 
depart without leaving a trace. More recently, the 
name hacker has been applied to any person who 
gains unauthorized access to computer systems 
with the intent to steal information or wreak havoc. 
The term has come to describe anyone who poses 
security threats online, including virus writers. 
The FBI profiles hackers as between the ages of 
eighteen and thirty-five and characterizes them as bright, highly motivated, 
creative, and adventuresome people who love a challenge. According to an 
IBM study, amateur hackers, also known as script kiddies, are responsible for 
90 percent of all hacking activity; potential professional hackers for hire (cor-
porate spies), for 9.9 percent, and world-class cyber criminals for 0.1 percent. 
If you think only computers at big banks or the Pentagon are hacked, 
you're wrong. Anyone can download a hacking program on the Internet and 
these programs scan the average home computer more than ten times a day, 
and a hacker breaks into a computer somewhere every five seconds. You are 
most vulnerable to hacking if your computer is always online via Wi-Fi, DSL, 
cable, or T-i connections. 
Different hacking programs have the potential to incur varying amounts 
of damage. The following list details some examples of what hackers can do: 
• see everything you're doing 
• access any file on your disk 
• write new files, delete files, edit files 
• install programs onto your system without your knowledge 
• steal personal information such as passwords and credit card numbers 
179 

• listen in on your conversations if you are using your computer's 
microphone 
Packet Sniffing 
A hacker used packet-sniffing 
software to pick up one hundred 
thousand credit card numbers from the online credit card transac-
tions of a dozen Web retailers. Given that the cards had limits be-
tween $2,000 and $25,000, the potential cost of the crime was 
approximately $1 billion. Fortunately, the identity thief made the 
mistake of trying to sell the card numbers to a decoy crime ring set 
up by the FBI. 
A packet sniffer is a tool that captures packets of data as they pass through 
a network. Packet sniffers are legitimately used to monitor network traffic and 
pinpoint errors and bottlenecks, but they can also be used by hackers to inter-
cept messages. Hackers use packet sniffers to capture user names and pass-
words as well as a great deal of other information from e-mail traffic, 
including credit card numbers and other private information. 
Viruses 
May 4, 2000, wasn't Valentine's Day, but 1.2 million people world-
wide received an e-mail that read ILOVEYOU. The virus known as 
LoveBug affected almost 3 million computer files, shut down corpo-
rate e-mail servers, and cost businesses worldwide approximately 
$2.61 billion in damages. The virus, created by a thirty-three-year-
old man in Manila, corrupted files on victims' machines and sent 
copies of itself to everyone in the victims' address books. 
In early 2004, the Mydoom virus swept the world turning unsus-
pecting computers into unknowing spammers. It was considered 
the fastest-spreading 
computer virus ever, generating tons of 
e-mails to the point that it clogged corporate computer 
systems 
and slowed all traffic on the World Wide Web. 
180 

* Your Computer and the Internet f 
A virus is a piece of software that disguises itself as a legitimate program 
and passes from computer to computer just as a cold passes from person to 
person. A computer virus piggybacks on other programs and is activated 
when a user inadvertently opens the program. Your computer might be 
infected with a virus through an e-mail attachment, a bulletin board, a floppy 
disk, or through other channels. Once executed, a virus can spread throughout 
your computer system and infect your operating system, your applications, 
and your documents. Just as viruses that affect human systems come in 
degrees of lethalness, so do computer viruses. E-mail viruses such as the 
famous Melissa virus and the ILOVEYOU virus are perhaps the most insidi-
ous. They are activated when people receive an attachment and double-click 
on it. 
Worms 
When the MSBIast worm appeared, it quickly spread via the Web 
and affected home users the most. In one day, the malicious pro-
gram infected more than 188,000 machines and swamped Internet 
connections with traffic as it searched for fresh computers to infect. 
A worm is a self-replicating virus that resides in a computer's active mem-
ory and duplicates itself. Worms move through a network on their own, unlike 
viruses, which attach themselves to other programs. Whereas a virus received 
by e-mail may require you to open a file before it infects your computer, a 
worm can activate itself. It takes residence in the network storage of your com-
puter and copies itself on remote drives. Worms are particularly dangerous to 
networked computers because they can spread so rapidly, and servers may 
crash because of the huge increase in activity. 
As with other viruses, it is not always obvious if a worm has burrowed its 
way into your computer. The first sign that a worm is present within your 
computer may be that your computer's processing time slows dramatically. 
But the surest way to tell is to install an antivirus program on your computer 
and to periodically scan your files. 
181 

YOUR W I - F I CONNECTION 
You stop at your local Starbucks first thing in the morning for a jolt of 
caffeine. While you are sipping your latte grande and skimming the 
scores from last night's baseball game, the guy next to you has already 
started his day. He's on his laptop, pounding out e-mails and surfing the 
Web. How is he able to connect to the Internet? He's using Wi-Fi (short 
for Wireless Fidelity), or wireless Internet access, which has become an 
increasingly popular tool to connect to the Internet in public places, 
including corporations, university campuses, airport terminals, public 
parks, and at cafés such as Starbucks. Wi-Fi systems in your house enable 
you to roam throughout your home with your computer continually con-
nected to the Internet and to use multiple computers with the same 
Internet connection. 
Unfortunately, the convenience of Wi-Fi is offset by the ease with which 
a snoop can access your computer when you use it. Sure, you and your wife 
and kids can all tap into the same connection, but so can anyone else 
within a radius of several hundred feet. When you are using a Wi-Fi con-
nection in a public place, you are particularly vulnerable to having your 
password and other information stolen. According to a February 2004 
Secure Computing report, business travelers face significant risks of pass-
word theft when using the Internet in hotels, cafés, airports, and trade 
show kiosks. This report exposed the many methods cyber-criminals use to 
steal passwords and corporate information. In particular, the report high-
lighted the vulnerability of wireless access points to sniffer software. This 
kind of software detects unencrypted data and makes it accessible to 
snoops and thieves who prey on unsuspecting users of Wi-Fi hotspots. 
What can you do to protect your privacy when you are using Wi-Fi? 
First, if you use a Wi-Fi network at home, you should encrypt any data you 
transmit from or on your Wi-Fi network. As discussed in more detail on 
page 185, encryption scrambles data and information as it leaves your 
computer, making it extremely difficult for a hacker to access or read your 
data. Wi-Fi equipment typically provides a basic type of encryption called 
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), but in most cases the system arrives 
with its encryption measures disabled as a default setting. A newer 
182 

4 Your Computer and the Internet t 
encryption system called Wi-Fi Protected Access, or WPA, is more secure. 
You must activate the WEP or WPA security that is packaged with your 
home Wi-Fi system. 
If you use a Wi-Fi network in a public place, chances are good that 
information leaving the network is not encrypted. A test by a company 
called AirMagnet revealed that of eighty-three access points in the Mis-
sion District of San Francisco, only thirty-nine of the points were using 
encryption technology. Moreover, if you are in a hotspot in your local 
café, even WEP may provide little protection for your data. To combat 
this problem, some places, such as Starbucks, are considering offering 
users a type of encryption key to reduce the likelihood of sniffers and 
spies accessing computers in such locations. The key would only protect 
registered customers once they log on to the network. 
In the meantime, especially at home or in your office, you can use 
other security features that are currently available. For example, you can 
use your virtual private network, or VPN, which works on both wired and 
wireless networks and which companies typically provide to employees 
who wish to access the company network from remote locations. You 
should still use standard security features such as firewalls. But the bot-
tom line is that you should know that the use of Wi-Fi in public places is 
less secure than the use of Wi-Fi on your home network, and certainly less 
secure than using a wired network. 
Trojan Horses 
In 2001, The American National Red Cross warned supporters of a 
credit card-stealing Trojan horse program sent via e-mail that ap-
peared to come from the disaster-relief organization. According to 
the Red Cross, the code came in the form of an executable file at-
tached to an e-mail message, which by clicking on the file, showed a 
donation request form to fill out for the Red Cross, United Way of 
America, and the September 11th Fund. Upon completion of the 
form, the user's personal information was saved and uploaded to a 
website not connected to the organization. 
183 

A Trojan horse is an insidious program that is disguised as a benign one. 
The term comes from Homer's Iliad, which describes the wooden horse the 
Greeks offered to the Trojans as an alleged peace offering. After the Trojans 
accepted the horse and brought it inside the walls of their fortified city, Greek 
soldiers emerged from the horse's hollow belly and conquered the bewil-
dered Trojans. In the context of privacy, the Trojan horse is one the scariest 
programs in existence. Instead of destroying data on your computer in the 
way that a virus or a worm might, a Trojan horse may, for example, allow its 
sender to access your computer and even control the machine remotely (see 
"Spyware" on page 191). Trojan horses are often found in executable content 
software that has been developed to enable Web browsing, file sharing, and 
graphic design. Examples include ActiveX, Java, and JavaScript. Unlike 
viruses, Trojan horses do not replicate themselves. A Trojan horse can create a 
back end for a hacker to continue to access your system. 
Unfortunately, it is nearly impossible to avoid every incidence of packet-
sniffing activity or viruses, worms, and other applications that may infect your 
computer when it is connected to the Internet. Nonetheless, use these tech-
niques to reduce your chances of harm: 
*- Use a firewall and antivirus software. Firewalls can be either hardware or 
software and they keep your computer files secure by blocking unauthorized 
access to your computer. Think about firewalls as barriers that prevent any-
thing intrusive or destructive on the Internet from damaging your files. A fire-
wall functions much like a physical firewall that stops a fire from spreading 
from one area to another. If a firewall's filters sense that certain information is 
potentially hazardous, the firewall will not let that information access your 
computer. Firewalls are becoming more common for personal use as well as 
business use. If you want to install a firewall, you can buy a decent one for 
your computer for less than $50. Be aware, however, that you will have to 
constantly update the software; software companies continually find security 
holes in their software and release patches and updates to correct them. 
Another sensible step is to install antivirus software on your PC. Update your 
antivirus software and perform systems scans as often as you can. Antivirus 
updates are released frequently (even daily if there is a virus outbreak), so 
consider setting your program to update itself automatically. Two established 
184 

4 Your Computer and the Internet t 
companies that provide firewalls and antivirus software updates include 
Symantec (www.symantec.com) and McAfee (www.mcafee.com). 
-fc Use encryption software. The use of encryption has become a staple in the 
world of online communications. If you encode your e-mail and personal 
data files, you can be more confident of their security from packet sniffers. 
There are two kinds of computer encryption: symmetric key and public key. 
Symmetric key is based on the simple concept that you create a code, for 
example, where a=1, b=2, c=3 and so on, then you send a message to your 
friend along with the decoding formula. Anyone else who intercepts this 
message will not be able to read the message without the key. The other 
type of encryption is called public key, and it uses a complex combination of 
symmetric keys and public keys (codes given by your computer to any pub-
lic computer that wants to communicate securely) to encode e-mails, files, 
and other components. Whatever encryption you use, you must ensure that 
the person receiving the message has the ability to decode the message. If 
you neglect this step, your message will be protected from everyone, 
including the person to whom you are sending the message. Encryption 
requires additional time and steps. You may decide to encrypt your most 
sensitive e-mails and data but to use unencrypted e-mail and files for every-
day messages, inquiries, and memos. 
A popular public key encryption is called PGP (www.pgp.com), which 
stands for Pretty Good Privacy and can be downloaded and mastered in a 
short period of time. In addition, a common Internet security protocol is the 
Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol, which is used by Web browsers and 
Web servers to transmit sensitive information. You can tell when your 
browser is using a server protocol such as TLS if the "http" in the address 
line is replaced with "https" and a small padlock appears in the status bar at 
the bottom of the browser window. Another software that encrypts mes-
sages for AOL, Yahoo!, and Hotmail is Impasse (www.impasse.com). 
^ Be careful with e-mail attachments. Consider deleting any e-mail you receive 
from strangers. Avoid reading any HTML e-mail that is sent to you by an 
unknown source. Never open e-mail attachments unless you are expecting 
them. 
185 

* Prying Eyes f 
# Turn off the Windows scripting host. Many viruses spread through Visual 
Basic scripting. To avoid infection, consider disabling the Windows scripting 
host by following these steps: 
• Open My Computer 
• Go to the Tools menu and select Folder Options 
• Select File Types 
• Find the VBScript script file and select delete 
• Click OK 
-fc Avoid or take precautions when you use file-sharing programs. When you 
use file-sharing programs, such as Kazaa, BearShare, LimeWire, and 
Grokster, you always run the risk of irresponsible users introducing viruses. If 
you do use one of these programs, adopt the following measures: 
• Use the latest version, which is more likely to have a built-in virus protec-
tion program 
• Download only premium, high-quality content 
• Turn on your virus filter 
* 
Disable ActiveX, Java, and JavaScript. You can disable these programs 
yourself if you use Internet Explorer or Netscape Navigator. The vulnerabil-
ities that affect Java, JavaScript, and ActiveX often apply to e-mail as well 
as Web pages. You should disable these programs before you browse 
through sites that you are either unfamiliar with or do not trust. If you 
notice that a site is not working properly, you may want to go back and 
enable your programs. 
-fc Look for suspicious activity. Sometimes you can notice Trojan horses by 
keeping an eye on the Internet connection icon in the Tray area of your 
Taskbar and on the lights on your CPU. If your hard drive is continually active 
when you are not actually doing anything online, this could be a sign of an 
active Trojan horse (unless, of course, you have automatic updates installed 
on your computer, in which case you'll regularly notice some activity). 
& Scan your computer with an anti-Trojan program to see if you have any 
Trojans in your system. Some anti-Trojan programs are available online. 
186 

• Your Computer and the Internet • 
Some sites will also give you advice on how to manually remove Trojans 
if you have any: PC Flank's Trojan Test (www.pcflank.com/trojans_test1. 
htm), Trojan Scan (www.trojanscan.com), and Trend Micro's Housecall 
(www.trendmicro.com). 
What Else Is Out to Get You: Web 
Bugs, Spiders, Spyware, and More 
When you are using a 
Wi-Fi connection in a 
public place, you are 
particularly vulnerable to 
having your password and 
other information stolen. 
An employee at a major Japanese bank inad-
vertently sent an e-mail virus to some of the 
bank's customers from his personal computer. The virus installed on 
the recipients' computers a program that made their monitors read 
"You're a big stupid jerk" on the fourteenthth of every month. 
Surfing the Web is one metaphor for browsing sites online. Going on 
safari might be another. Whenever you use the Internet you chance an 
encounter with Web bugs, spiders, Trojan horses, and more—a virtual zoo of 
applications that threaten your privacy. Some of the tools associated with 
virus writers, such as Trojan horses, are available as spyware and are easily 
accessible to any average Joe or ABC Corp. that wants to use them. Marketers, 
snoops, spammers, and others cultivate these pests either to access your per-
sonal information or to cause damage to your system. 
Web bugs 
Internet security company SecuritySpace.com documents the usage 
of Web bugs on the Internet. It posts a table of the top one hun-
dred sites that were found to have a Web bug on them. 
A Web bug is a marketing surveillance tag in the form of an invisible 
clear-colored graphic known as a GIF that is embedded in a Web page or 
HTML-enabled e-mail. A Web bug can be as small as a single pixel on your 
187 

* Prying Eyes f 
screen. Marketing companies use Web bugs to track the sites you visit, how 
long you spend in various sections of a website, and at what time you surf 
their sites. 
Web bugs can also be used by spammers who 
plant them in the HTML e-mails they send you. If 
you open the spam, the Web bug will send a mes-
sage to the spammer that says "valid address." Web 
bugs can be linked to cookies, which can contain 
personal information such as your name and e-mail 
address. But there is a difference between a Web 
bug and a cookie: whereas a cookie is typically 
accessed only by the server that originally places it 
on your computer, and you have the option to set 
your computer to refuse cookies, Web bugs collect 
your information, without your permission, and 
allow additional servers to copy cookies from your 
hard drive. Consequently, websites that share an 
advertising network with the site into which you 
legitimately entered information can also obtain your data. If marketers or 
snoops use cookies and Web bugs together, they can see the Web addresses of 
other sites you've visited or the details of your past search terms. Among the 
companies that use Web bugs are DoubleClick and LinkExchange as well as 
Web giants Yahoo! and America Online. 
Beware: Web bugs are not limited to Internet sites and HTML e-mails. 
Web bugs can also be embedded in Word documents, Excel spreadsheets, 
and PowerPoint slide show files, enabling the author of a document to moni-
tor the document and know who's accessing or reading it. The bug in the 
document will report the IP addresses, date and time of viewing, and other 
information when the document links to a file located on the author's Web 
server. Think of the scenarios here: any document can be bugged, which 
means that if, say, your boss sends you a document to read, he or she could 
theoretically know if you've read it or not and when you read it. Web bugs 
can also multiply and spread. For example, Word allows users to create 
macros, which are programs that automate tasks, and macro viruses, when 
Beware: Web bugs are 
not limited to Internet 
sites and HTML e-mails. 
Web bugs can also be 
embedded in 
Word documents, 
Excel spreadsheets, 
and PowerPoint slide 
show files, enabling the 
author of a document 
to monitor the document 
and know who's accessing 
or reading it. 
188 

* Your Computer and the Internet * 
opened unwittingly, duplicate themselves into other documents and spread 
much as any other virus would. 
To reduce your chances of being bitten by a Web bug, keep the following 
in mind: 
-fc Check whether your computer is storing a Web bug. A number of Web bug 
detectors exist such as Privacy Foundation's Web bug detector, Bugnosis 
(www.bugnosis.org). Bugnosis is free and easy to download, though it only 
works with Internet Explorer running on a Microsoft Windows operating sys-
tem. If you are a savvy computer user, you can manually find a Web bug by 
viewing the HTML source code of a Web page and searching for IMG tags 
that match up with cookies stored on your computer. 
-fc Disable cookies. If you suspect the Word, Excel, or PowerPoint document 
you are viewing might have Web bugs, set your browser to disallow cookies. 
•fc Beware HTML e-mails. HTML e-mails may contain a Web bug. Opt for plain 
text when you have a choice. 
^ Protect yourself. For ongoing protection, block Web bugs by installing one 
of a number of different programs, such as Guidescope (www. 
guidescope.com), WebWasher (www.webwasher.com), or AdSubtract 
(http://www.intermute.com/adsubtract/). These programs are essentially ad 
blockers, but since Web bugs are third-party content, most ad blockers will 
block Web bugs, too. 
Spiders 
According to the Center for Democracy and Technology (CDT), 
spammers use software harvesting programs such as robots or spi-
ders to collect e-mail addresses listed on websites, including both 
personal Web pages and institutional (corporate or nonprofit) Web 
pages). A March 2003 CDT study, reported in a PC World article, 
189 

found that 97 percent of the spam it received was sent to addresses 
harvested from the Web. 
Spiders may also be referred to as search engine bots, wanderers, D2s, 
lookers, searchers, or crawlers. They are automated software programs that 
run at several search engines, read the content of websites, analyze the mate-
rial, and insert that content into an index. Spiders are not designed to cause 
harm, but they can be used for illicit purposes. 
There are two kinds of spiders. One looks at the meta tags that are 
located in a website's code, and contain a list of keywords that search 
engines use to classify that particular page. (These tags are not visible to the 
average user, though if you are HTML savvy, you can access a website's 
meta tags.) Web search engines such as Google use hundreds of spiders, as 
does Yahoo!, Hotbot, Internet Archive, and others. The other type of spider 
is known as full index and is more thorough, cataloging every word of 
every page in a site. Spiders are often hidden inside software packages to 
enable the manufacturer to access your computer and virtually all of your 
files. As such, spiders are most common in the following types of diagnostic 
software: 
• Updates for your hardware and software 
• Fix-it and repair programs that identify problems on your hard drive 
and/or eradicate viruses. Examples include Norton AntiVirus, 
LiveUpdate Pro, and McAffee Clinic 
• Tech support accessibility software that enables server and workstation 
problems to be resolved by remote access. Examples include Syman-
tec's pcAnywhere and Wind Design's SupportAbility 
If you've ever posted anything online, a spider will index your identity 
and the content of your posting. A spider's findings end up in massive data-
bases in computer systems around the world. Test the power of spiders by 
going to Google and typing in "I have cancer" to see how many pages contain-
ing peoples' names pop up as a result. 
Many companies and individuals run spiders that search the Internet for 
190 

Test the power of spiders 
by going to Google and 
typing in "I have cancer" 
to see how many pages 
containing peoples' names 
pop up as a result. 
• Your Computer and the Internet • 
computers that are sharing files. The spiders then download all of the infor-
mation they can find and index it for quick retrieval. At the same time, there 
are a growing number of computer viruses that spread by searching for com-
puters with shared disks. 
To protect yourself against spiders, remember 
that spammers use harvesting programs such as 
spiders to gather information on you, including the 
e-mail address you provide on websites or informa-
tion you post online in discussion groups. Accord-
ingly, pay particular attention to tips on page 200 
on the ways you can protect yourself against spam 
e-mail. 
Spyware 
Ever received an e-greeting from an ex-lover? One spyware pack-
age lets your ex "spy on anyone" by simply sending an e-greeting. 
The message from your ex-lover installs a software program on 
your computer and then captures and records every word you 
type. 
For more than a year, unbeknownst to people who used Internet 
terminals at Kinko's stores in New York, Juju Jiang was recording 
what they typed, paying particular attention to their passwords. 
Jiang had secretly installed software that logs individual keystrokes 
in at least fourteen Kinko's copy shops. He captured more than 450 
user names and passwords, and then he used them to access and 
open bank accounts online. 
After Michael Stone's three daughters finished playing spelling 
games on Reader Rabbit, an educational software program, he put 
them to bed and went online himself. Minutes into his session, the 
California attorney's desktop security program alerted him that 
Reader Rabbit was attempting to secretly send data from his com-
191 

* Prying Eyes * 
puter. Apparently, his children's software contained heavily encrypted 
spyware. 
Spyware is a catch-all term that refers to soft-
ware installed on your computer to monitor your 
computer or online activities. The spyware is 
installed without your knowledge and uses your 
Internet connection to gather and transmit infor-
mation about you or your activity. 
Spyware varies in form and type, from simply 
annoying to potentially devastating. Some spy-
ware programs are Trojan horse programs, as 
detailed above. Spyware may store all the key-
strokes you make, access the user names and pass-
words you use, log all the URLs you type, retrieve 
your credit card numbers, log all the windows you 
open, take screenshots of your system at specified 
intervals, scan files on your hard drive, and send 
all this data to the spyware's author or originator automatically, using your 
Internet connection. 
Apart from the privacy concerns, spyware can also consume your system's 
resources, thereby slowing down your system, clash with other installed soft-
ware, and crash your browser or even Windows itself. 
Spyware is widely accessible and virtually anyone can get hold of it. 
According to SpyCops.com, more than 350 computer monitoring spyware pro-
grams are available commercially, in addition to the thousands of other hacker 
or spy software programs that are available on the Web. Spyware is used not 
only by hackers, marketing companies and employers, but also by a fast-
growing market of suspicious lovers, friends, parents, and spouses (see chapter 
12, "I Spy, You Spy"). According to the 2003 National Cyber Security Alliance 
study, 91 percent of broadband users have spyware programs on their com-
puters, and most of these programs found their way into users' computers 
through P2P (music and file-sharing) programs. What does this mean? Well, it 
depends. Not all spyware is created equal, and the programs are available in 
Spyware may store all the 
keystrokes you make, 
access the user names 
and passwords you use, 
log all the URLs you type, 
retrieve your credit card 
numbers, log all the 
windows you open, 
take screenshots of your 
system at specified 
intervals, scan files on your 
hard drive, and send all 
this data to the spyware's 
author or originator. 
192 

-• Your Computer and the Internet f-
many varieties, as detailed below. Spyware may do any or all of the following 
to your computer: 
• Install other programs onto your computer 
without your knowledge 
• Transmit cookies to and from other spyware 
programs (even if you have disabled cookies 
in your browser) 
• Send Trojan horses to your system (see 
below) 
• Reset your auto signature 
• Disable or bypass your uninstall features 
• Scan files on your drive 
• Monitor your keystrokes 
• Change your home page 
• Read, write, and delete files 
• Reformat your hard drive 
• Reroute your personal information to marketing and advertising 
companies 
91 percent of broadband 
users have spyware 
programs on their 
computers, and most 
of these programs 
found their way into 
users' computers through 
P2P (music and file-
sharing) programs. 
Here are the basic types of spyware: 
Browser Helper Objects (BHOs). Commonly installed as part of Internet 
Explorer, a BHO is a small program that runs every time you use your browser. 
Some BHOs perform useful functions, such as killing pop-up windows, as with 
Yahoo! Companion. In this way, BHOs extend the capabilities of the browser to 
enhance a user's experience on the Web. However, a BHO can also be installed 
on your system by another software program, and used as a type of spyware to 
monitor your messages and actions and report that information back to its cre-
ators. You may have a BHO running on your computer if, for example, you get 
pornographic pop-ups while surfing the Web. It is difficult to know how exten-
sively BHOs are being used. But BHOs can conflict with other running pro-
grams, cause a variety of page faults and run-time errors, and generally impede 
browsing performance. One sign that you may have a BHO running on your 
193 

• Prying Eyes • 
computer is if your browser continually crashes. BHOs are not disabled by per-
sonal firewalls, because the firewall perceives the program to be part of your 
browser itself. Microsoft does rely on BHOs to monitor browser functions. But 
the very existence of BHOs creates the possibility 
that the BHOs can be easily hijacked and used to 
replace banner advertisements with other ads, 
report your online actions to a third party, and even 
change your home page. 
Follow this tip to protect your privacy from 
BHOs: 
You may have a BHO 
running on your computer 
if you get pornographic 
pop-ups while surfing 
the Web. 
^ Manually locate and/or remove BHOs. Follow these steps (as outlined on 
www.pcflank.com/art36.htm) if you're running Windows: 
1. Click on the Start button and go to the Run menu. 
2. In the Run dialog box type: regedit. But make sure you make a copy of 
the registry before you edit. If you make a mistake and don't have a 
copy, you may not be able to restart your machine. 
3. Click on the OK button or hit the Enter key. The Windows registry 
editor will be displayed. 
4. Drill down to the Browser Helper Objects registry key using 
the following path: HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Microsoft\ 
Windows\CurrentVersion\explorer\Browser Helper Objects. 
Once you have reached the BHO registry keys, you can remove any one of 
them by positioning your cursor over the key in question, right clicking on it, 
and then selecting Delete from the drop-down menu. It is wise to familiarize 
yourself with what these various keys do before you delete anything from the 
registry. 
Hijackers. A hijacker is software that resets your browser's settings to redirect 
you to other sites, usually porn sites full of advertising. Some hijackers may 
capture information about you, including any URLs you type, as you are en 
route to your unexpected destination and then forward this information to an 
unseen site that captures it. If this occurs, you won't notice it but your browser 
194 

Hijackers may capture 
information about you, 
including any URLs 
you type, as you are 
en route to your 
unexpected destination 
and then forward this 
information to an unseen 
site that captures it. 
• Your Computer and the Internet • 
may perform at a slower pace. You will certainly notice that you have arrived 
at a website that you were not expecting. 
One hijacker program is the home page hijacker, which captures your 
home page request and in its place advertises some 
unknown search engine's site like Cool Web 
Search. The hijacker also replaces your search 
results at www.google.com with its own results. 
Another hijacker is the error hijacker, which occurs 
when you load an expired Web page or your 
browser generates an error. Instead of receiving a 
message from Internet Explorer or Netscape, you 
will receive a special error page from the hijacker 
program that either redirects you to the Cool Web 
Search site or displays similar information. 
Regardless of the tactic, the hijacker's goal is to control your actions and col-
lect information about you and your activities. 
Hijacking is increasingly common, and pornography sites are the most 
notorious users of hijacking programs to capture traffic. To protect yourself 
from hijackers: 
-fc Install an antihijacking program. A number of different programs will prevent 
hijacking. One is StartPage Guard (www.pjwalczak.com/spguard/index.php), 
which claims to block hijacking while letting harmless scripts through. You can 
download the software for free. 
Keystroke loggers. Keystroke loggers are spyware programs that run in the 
background of your computer and record everything you type and every 
key you hit. Keystrokes are logged and stored on your computer for future 
retrieval. Sometimes keystrokes are recorded in real time and transmitted 
back to the perpetrator. A sophisticated type of keylog program is a Remote 
Administration Tool (also known as a RAT). A RAT is a Trojan horse that 
allows a perpetrator to essentially control your computer and server from a 
remote location. The perpetrators of keystroke logging range from nosy 
bosses to suspicious spouses to knowledgeable hackers. You should pay 
195 

attention to and immediately remove any suspect hardware from your 
computer. 
To protect your privacy from keystroke loggers: 
•fc Look for hardware keystroke loggers. Hardware keystroke loggers look like 
small cylinders. They plug into the end of your keyboard's cable and con-
nect to your PC. 
-*- Download software to search and remove software keystroke loggers. 
Keystroke logging software is difficult to spot, because the applications use 
cryptic names and can send periodic logs of your keystrokes to anyone, any-
where. You can download a variety of programs, such as Spycop or Spy-
detect, to search and remove such software from your computer. 
Screenshot loggers. Screenshot loggers such as Spector periodically cap-
ture screenshots of your desktop. These programs also monitor e-mail, 
record chat and instant messages, and log keystrokes. Another commer-
cially available software package, eBlaster, captures both sides of chat con-
versations, instant messages, keystrokes typed, applications launched, and 
websites visited, and sends a detailed activity report to the spying party on 
the hour. Some spyware packages can turn on video and audio components 
without your knowledge and digitally record you and whatever else is in 
front of the computer screen. One such package, NETObserve, advertises: 
"With NETObserve on your side, you will have remote, realtime access to 
your PC, allowing you to remotely control and monitor a PC while you are 
away!" 
Adware 
If you download freeware or shareware from the Internet, you are usually 
downloading adware. The difference between adware and spyware is that the 
adware discloses that it tracks your personal information when you download 
it. The software is often bundled with banner ads and pop-ups and is, on the 
whole, more annoying than harmful. If you do not want banner ads and pop-
ups, be sure to read the contents of the software's privacy policy before you 
agree to download it. Some adware companies have gone so far as to create 
196 

Some spyware packages 
can turn on video and 
audio components 
without your knowledge 
and digitally record you 
and whatever else is in 
front of the computer 
screen. 
• Your Computer and the Internet • 
virus-like software programs known as advertising Trojan horses, which 
install themselves on your computer and inundate you with unwanted adver-
tising whether or not you've installed the advertising-supporting software. The 
latest of these require advanced computer knowl-
edge to detect and include the TimeSink/Conducent 
. 
TSADBOT and the Aureate. One spyware module 
has even been known to spoof a Windows system 
process so it cannot be terminated and is not 
included in the Windows End Task (Ctrl-Alt-Del) 
dialog box. 
In addition to the specific tips above, use these 
tips to reduce the chances of your computer being 
invaded by Web bugs, spiders, and spyware: 
*- Be cautious when you download shareware or freeware. Many shareware 
programs and P2P programs, such as Grokster, Kazaa, and others, come 
with an enormous amount of bundled spyware. 
-fr Install antivirus software. Before you install antivirus software, check that 
the program is able to detect spyware. New versions of such software, such 
as Norton AntiVirus, are capable of detecting spyware. Also remember to 
keep your antivirus software current with regular updates. 
& Scan your computer. There are various programs that will scan your com-
puter for spyware and adware. Some will scan your computer for free. The 
scan takes about fifteen minutes, depending on the number of files saved 
on your computer. A scan should detect the presence of spyware and 
adware programs and their authors or owners, and it should define the 
degree of harm these programs can cause. Software packages that eradi-
cate spyware and adware programs are available for less than $50. One pro-
gram, Pest Patrol, protects against the full range of non-viral malware, 
including Trojan horses, hacker tools, spyware, and adware. Aluria's Spyware 
Eliminator detects and removes spyware, adware, and keyloggers from your 
computer, and blocks these programs if your computer comes under 
assault. Both are commonly recommended by sites dispensing security tips. 
197 

-fc Check your ISP's service features. Your ISP may have built-in software to 
detect and remove spyware. For example, AOL, Earthlink, and MSN offer 
their subscribers some type of spyware detection and removal. 
-*- Turn off your high-speed or broadband connection if you are not using it. 
Disconnect the ethernet card or remove the network interface card. 
-$• Understand the risks of using a Windows system. Most invasive software is 
written to target Windows systems and Microsoft applications. Macintosh 
computers and other operating systems, such as Unix or Linux, are not 
widely targeted. 
Spam or Junk E-mail 
In 2003, a Miami-based company used fraudulent e-mail addresses 
that appeared to come from Amazon.com to distribute ads for pe-
nile enlargement pills, while another company used a fake e-mail 
from Amazon.com to promote tools for creating and sending spam. 
As a result, and after much public outcry, Amazon.com had to set 
up a special e-mail address, stop-spoofing@amazon.com, for users 
to report suspected spoofing. 
This pitch is probably familiar to you: A "friend" asks if you're fed 
up with working long hours for little pay, and wonders if you'd pre-
fer to be your own boss and make $10,000 a month. To discover 
how, the e-mail tells you that you merely need to call a toll-free 
number and leave a message that includes your credit card number. 
Of course, the e-mail ends with a legal disclaimer, adding to its le-
gitimacy. Of course, the e-mail is spam—and it is just another trick 
to get you to open the e-mail. 
Not only do you have to worry about protecting your privacy online, but 
you also need to protect your sanity. If junk mail and telemarketers drive you 
crazy, spam will have the same result electronically. The volume of spam has 
198 

jjjjg^=*pjj^ ^^ÎÏ!";|: '^WlB^ ^W*^- Ê.'^""^."s*!
1*!!^-" L^tBfegHjJW^: J^*fe^W>fr
: " -•
j*»"^-1 
If your e-mail address is 
listed on any public Web 
page, including a 
company or association 
site, you can be sure that 
spammers will find it. 
• Your Computer and the Internet • 
grown so much that it makes up almost 50 percent of e-mails sent today, as 
compared to only 7 percent in 2001. AOL customers have received as many as 
2.5 billion spam e-mails, in the aggregate, in a single day. Why is there so much 
spam? There is one universal explanation for the 
surge in recent years: spam is incredibly cheap. 
Gone are the days when marketers needed hefty 
budgets to pay for print production and postage to 
advertise their products. Now they can send bulk 
e-mails for practically nothing. It costs as little as 
$500 to send 1 million e-mails. Even if the spam 
marketer only sells a handful of items, it's worth it. 
And spammers and direct marketers both harvest 
and sell e-mail addresses. Perhaps this puts into context Bill Gates's suggestion 
to require e-mailers to apply "postage" or "stamps" as one means to stem spam 
e-mail. 
Even more lucrative than the occasional sale of cosmetic surgery in a bot-
tle or Viagra at an 80 percent discount is the business of selling e-mail 
addresses to direct marketing companies. Spammers send out Web bugs, spy-
ware, and adware to collect information about you. Companies will pay any-
where from a few cents to $1 per e-mail address for these databases. 
Spammers and direct marketers sell your e-mail address to other spammers 
and direct marketers, and information travels from one database in one part of 
the world to another with little oversight. 
If your e-mail address is listed on any public Web page, including a com-
pany or association site, you can be sure that spammers will find it. Even 
unsophisticated spammers can put specialized products to work for them. 
They use spiders and Web bugs to cull thousands of e-mail addresses hourly 
from various public pages. If you participate in chat rooms, newsgroups, or 
other public forums, your e-mail address becomes a public posting and is eas-
ily accessed by spammers. Public postings are almost always archived, so 
your activity is recorded even if you participated in a forum only one time. 
Spammers also access other publicly available sources such as subscriber and 
member directories, White Pages, alumni bulletins, and domain registries. 
For example, your ISP maintains information about you, and the service may 
list your e-mail address as part of its subscriber or member directory. Or, 
199 

* Prying Eyes * 
depending on its privacy policy, the service may sell your e-mail address to 
direct marketers. 
Spammers use many methods to enlarge their mailing lists. They may 
randomly generate e-mail addresses themselves. One such method is called a 
Dictionary attack, in which spammers use programs that create combinations 
of names and numbers—such as Janeooi@aol.com, Jane002@a0l.com, and so 
on—to find you. If you reply to one of their e-mails, or sometimes if you 
merely open the e-mail, you confirm to the spammers that your e-mail address 
is live, and the spammers will add your e-mail address to their database. Fur-
ther, spammers may buy your e-mail address from some websites. When you 
shop online or register with websites, particularly those that do not post pri-
vacy policies or have policies that do not prevent disclosure or sharing of your 
e-mail address and other personal information, you may be more susceptible 
to spammers. 
To fight spam, follow these steps: 
•Jfr Use features offered by your ISP or e-mail account. Almost every ISP and 
e-mail provider, including AOL, MSN, Earthlink, and Yahoo!, offers a spam fil-
ter that either lets you sort and inspect incoming mail before you open it, or 
automatically places spam in a separate folder. Spammers work to bypass 
these filters by using generic or personal subject lines, misspelling keywords 
like Viagra (for Viagra), and assuming false identities like "Bob Johnson" or 
another familiar name. If you see such e-mail, don't even look at it or open it 
up. Delete it immediately. 
Some ISPs block spam by requiring new or unknown senders to 
respond to a system message before their e-mails can be delivered. For 
example, if your long-lost friend from high school sends you an e-mail in 
an attempt to reconnect, your ISP might respond with a pop-up message 
and an image of an apple. The message prompts your friend to type the 
word apple before your ISP will deliver the e-mail to you. This strategy 
prevents mass e-mails by verifying that a live person is sending the mes-
sage to you. 
-#- Use separate e-mail accounts. You might consider using three separate 
e-mail addresses: one for friends and family; one for business purposes; and 
200 

* Your Computer and the Internet f 
one for everything else. If the latter attracts too much spam, abandon it for 
another e-mail address. 
+ Minimize use of your regular e-mail account. Don't use your regular e-mail 
address in chat rooms or other public areas. Use a different screen name or 
a third e-mail address, as described above. 
•Jfr Protect your regular e-mail account. Consider using an e-mail address that is 
more than six characters long and hard to guess. Avoid using your regular 
e-mail address in public areas or forums or chat rooms, or on very public sites 
such as eBay. If you must use your regular e-mail address in a public area, 
spell it out. For example, type "John smith at yahoo dot com" as opposed to 
"johnsmith@yahoo.com." 
# Avoid contests and giveaways. Many online sweepstakes and free promo-
tions are designed to obtain your personal information for marketing pur-
poses. For example, some stores request e-mail addresses to send coupons 
and notices about store activities. Consider refusing these requests, or 
treating them with suspicion. You are responding at your own peril. 
# Opt out. Most legitimate sites give you the choice of opting out to prevent 
your personal information, including your e-mail address, from being dis-
closed. If you have the choice, you should take advantage of any opportuni-
ties to opt out. 
#• Ignore spam. Do not open spam or buy anything promoted in spam. Do not 
forward chain letters, petitions, virus warnings, or cartoons. (These are often 
sneaky ways for spammers to collect addresses.) Lastly, do not reply to a 
spammer's unsubscribe link, because your response confirms your e-mail 
address. 
# Use additional technology. Consider purchasing additional spam-blocking 
software. Install a firewall, especially if you have a high-speed or "always-
on" connection. 
201 

& Read privacy policies. Make sure you read the privacy policies of websites 
you visit and of your ISP. Inform your ISP that you do not want your e-mail 
address shared or disclosed. 
# Protect the e-mails you send from spam filters. You must prevent your own 
e-mails from being mistaken for spam and deleted by filters. To do so, use 
your knowledge of how spam works to format your e-mails so they are not 
mistaken for spam. For instance, avoid general subject lines like "Hi, How 
Are You," or "About Last Night." Also avoid industry-related words, such as 
credit, mortgage, discount, vacation, prescription, and so on, in the subject 
line. Some filters reject subject lines in capital letters and certain types of 
punctuation, like exclamation points. 
•£ Follow the tips in the sections above. Protect yourself against Web bugs, 
spyware, adware, and other devices that spammers use to collect personal 
information about you. 
Public Areas on the Internet 
A thirteen-year-old girl from Texas made a "friend" in a chat room 
who claimed to be about her age and to live in Washington State. 
Unbeknownst to her, he was actually a forty-year-old sexual preda-
tor. He arranged for the girl to visit him in Washington, and he in-
structed her to remove the hard drive from her computer and 
bring it with her in an effort to remove evidence of their exchange. 
When they met, he held her captive and sexually assaulted her. She 
managed to escape, and she took the hard drive with her to the 
police. 
Certain areas of the Internet are considered public and therefore offer lit-
tle to no privacy These public areas include chat rooms, bulletin boards (also 
known as discussion groups or newsgroups), listservs, and Web logs, which 
are also called blogs. Any and all of the information you provide or type is pub-
lic information and therefore accessible to anyone who is either participating 
202 

-• Your Computer and the Internet •-
ANTISPAM LEGISLATION 
On January 1, 2004, the Can-Spam Act went into effect. The act restricts 
commercial e-mail companies or spammers from using false identities and 
misleading subject lines. It also requires commercial senders to include 
valid postal addresses in their e-mail messages. The law gives recipients the 
opportunity to opt out of receiving more messages. Under the Can-Spam 
Act, the Federal Trade Commission, state attorneys general, and ISP compa-
nies can sue spammers, but an individual cannot sue a spammer. Any spam-
mer who violates the law may be subject to fines up to $250 per e-mail with 
a cap of $2 million. 
The effectiveness of this new law will, of course, largely depend on 
enforcement. In March 2004, America Online, Earthlink, Microsoft, and 
Yahoo! brought the first major lawsuit under the new Can-Spam Act 
against hundreds of spammers, including some of the country's biggest 
offenders. In addition, in December 2003, the State of Virginia indicted 
two individuals on spam felony charges—the first indictments of their 
kind since the state's new anti-spam law went into effect July 1, 2003. Irre-
spective of these cases, it is unclear whether or when the volume of spam 
will decrease. For example, Earthlink has taken legal action against more 
than one hundred spammers since 1997. For this reason, ideas that 
emanate from the private sector, such as Bill Gates's idea to require a fee or 
postage for all e-mail, and Stanford law professor Lawrence Lessig's idea to 
offer bounties for the reporting of spammers, continue to be put forth. 
in any of these areas, or merely monitoring a specific area. Anything you sub-
mit may be permanently searchable and reproduced on other sites. Internet 
marketers often use Web bugs and spiders to troll in and among the various 
public forums, discreetly learning information about you and subtly market-
ing their products with banners, for example. Even sites that you frequent 
often gather personal information about you when you participate in chat 
rooms or discussion groups or conduct a search on their site. Following is a 
breakdown of each of the public areas where marketers and snoops are likely 
to find information about you: 
203 

• Prying Eyes • 
Chat rooms. A chat room is a place on the Internet or page within a website or 
online service where you can chat, or "talk," to others by typing messages to 
them. In chat rooms, your communication tends to be real-time communica-
tion (as opposed to e-mail, which is delayed). When 
you participate in a chat room or online forum, 
your posting, which includes any messages you 
type and your e-mail address, is essentially public 
record. In some cases, websites archive the discus-
sion that takes place in chat rooms and online 
forums, and this information can be accessed by 
anyone for years. 
l^^j/^^^igi^^^êltir^j^^^^^^ 
Internet marketers often 
use Web bugs and spiders 
to troll in and among the 
various public forums, 
discreetly learning 
information about you 
and subtly marketing 
their products with 
banners, for example. 
Bulletin boards. Bulletin boards are similar to chat 
rooms except that real-time communication typi-
cally does not occur. Instead, you can post a message for everyone to read for 
as long as the message stays on the bulletin board. If you post a message to a 
bulletin board, that message is available for anyone to view, along with your 
name, e-mail address, and ISP. As with chat rooms, some bulletin boards are 
archived. 
Listservs. A listserv is a form of online newsletter that is e-mailed to a dedi-
cated list of subscribers. Typically, a listserv is focused on a particular interest, 
such as gourmet cheese, teaching abroad, or local politics, and one company or 
individual is responsible for routing messages to you. The listserv is not 
always privately managed, so access to the mailing list may vary. If you partic-
ipate in a listserv, be aware that even if you intend to reply solely to a particu-
lar individual on the list, you may actually be sending a message to everyone 
on the list. 
Personal Web pages and blogs. Personal Web pages and blogs have become 
increasingly popular, especially among teenagers. A personal Web page typi-
cally contains information about the person who creates it or commissions it. 
Making personal information available is the reason why people choose to 
post these sites. But a personal Web page and any sensitive information 
included on it can be accessed by anyone. A blog is a Web journal of usually 
204 

:^P|I|W^^ ] • -||^jiip^::-:. ^^P^Sf: : ^r^W?^'-.: ^ffP^^' j ' ? ! ^ : i-mf^T^: ' ^ P ^ /''W^ ^ ^ W j ^ ^ P ^ ' I^WT^-I 
Almost 90 percent of 
children's sites collect 
personally identifiable 
information directly 
from children. 
• Your Computer and the Internet • 
short, frequently updated posts that are arranged chronologically. The content 
and purposes of blogs vary, and they run the gamut from links and commen-
tary about other websites, to news about a company/person/idea, to diaries, 
photographs, poetry, mini-essays, project updates, 
and even fiction. Blogs act like instant messages to 
the Web. If you participate in a blog, you may 
reveal sensitive personal information or intimate 
thoughts to strangers. Finally, if you have registered 
a domain name for a website—even if the site has 
yet to be built—your registration information is 
public information. Ownership of a website is akin 
to owning a home, and a public record is created in both cases. To discover the 
owner of any website or domain name, you can visit various sites, including 
www.register.com or www.checkdomain.com. 
E-mail and Instant Messaging 
The co-founder of a company used the same corporate e-mail ad-
dress for both his work-related and personal communications for a 
number of years. When he was fired after a power struggle, the 
new president read the e-mails that continued to be sent to the 
man's account. Under company policy, this was perfectly legal. 
When you send an e-mail or an instant message, your message carries about 
as much privacy as a postcard. In fact, you may have enjoyed more privacy in 
the game of telephone you played as a child, because most of the kids were not 
paying attention to your message. Now not only do may people pay attention to 
your e-mails and instant messages, but a record of your communication is likely 
to reside permanently in various places without your knowledge. 
E-mail 
As a result of a dispute with her Internet Service Provider, a woman 
lost her Internet account. Instead of canceling her user name, how-
205 

• Prying Eyes • 
ever, the ISP simply changed her password. Personal mail continued 
to flow into her old address, but she was incapable of accessing it. 
The ISP, on the other hand, had full access. 
Angel Lee of El Mirage, Arizona, was sen-
tenced to sixty days of home detention for in-
tercepting her husband's ex-wife's e-mail. To 
do so, she fraudulently 
obtained the user 
name and password to the woman's e-mail ac-
count. Comparing Lee's actions to someone 
breaking into the woman's home and reading 
her diary, the sentencing Judge said that Lee's 
penalty of home detention was a warning to 
others. 
E-mail affords you little privacy for a variety of reasons. As you know 
from earlier in this chapter, hackers using packet sniffers can easily inter-
cept your e-mails and read them when they are in transit. Anyone with 
access to your computer can break into it to read any e-mails that are stored 
on the machine. Hackers are also capable of obtaining your e-mails from 
the servers that may indefinitely store your e-mail communications. 
Also, as mentioned in chapter 9, "Your Workplace," do not expect privacy 
in your e-mail communications when you send e-mail from work. Your 
employer can legally monitor and read your e-mails any time it wants and 
without your explicit knowledge or permission. In some cases, even if your 
employer promises not to read or monitor your e-mail activity, you still may 
not have a reasonable expectation of privacy. Accordingly, in the workplace, 
assume you have little to no e-mail privacy. 
Further, even if you are cautious and only send personal e-mails from 
home, your user agreement with your ISP may reduce your expectation of pri-
vacy. Although user agreements with the various ISPs vary the agreements are 
written to insulate the ISP's potential liability. Accordingly, your user agree-
ment with your ISP likely states that it may monitor your e-mail communica-
tions and disclose any information for any reason that it views as reasonable, 
including government or legal purposes. Moreover, if you have an e-mail 
206 
If you have an e-mail 
account with Yahoo! or 
Hotmail, or other 
commercial account 
providers, your personal 
information may be sold 
to third parties for 
marketing puposes. 

• Your Computer and the Internet • 
account with Yahoo! or Hotmail, or other commercial e-mail account providers, 
your personal information may be sold to third parties for marketing purposes. 
This information may include the details you submitted when you opened the 
PROTECTING YOUR KIDS ONLINE 
Chat rooms, bulletin boards, personal Web pages, and blogs offer great 
opportunities for people to meet. Unlike traditional meeting places, like 
libraries, schools, or town halls, however, you don't get to see the strangers 
you encounter, but you do let those strangers into your house. In the 
anonymous virtual world where anyone can be anybody, it's not a surprise 
when a fifty-year-old man poses as a fourteen-year-old kid. Your daughter's 
new twelve-year-old friend from Moscow could be who he says he is, or he 
could be a pedophile, criminal, or someone else with less than honorable 
intentions. According to a study by the Crimes Against Children Research 
Center at the University of New Hampshire, at least 20 percent of teens 
have received sexual advances from a stranger online. 
The steps you must take to protect your privacy in cyberspace are simi-
lar to the steps you take to keep yourself and your family safe in the real 
world. In terms of your children's protection, privacy means keeping your 
kids' names, addresses, and phone numbers out of the hands of strangers, 
and protecting your children from anyone, including companies that want 
to sell or send them something. 
Whether you like it or not, you must accept that Internet sites gather 
information from and about children. According to one FTC study, almost 
90 percent of children's sites collect personally identifiable information 
directly from children. Moreover, only about half the sites directed to chil-
dren disclose their policy governing information collection. Finally, less 
than 10 percent of children's Internet sites provide for some form of 
parental control over the information collected from kids. 
To make it easier for you to protect the privacy of your children's per-
sonal information on the Internet, the FTC and Congress established the 
Children's Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA). COPPA seeks to enable 
parents to control the type and extent of information that websites may 
207 

collect or use with respect to children. In particular, COPPA requires that 
commercial and general-audience websites with content directed at chil-
dren under the age of thirteen operate their websites in accordance with 
certain requirements, such as providing parents with notice about their 
information collection practices and obtaining parental consent before col-
lecting personally identifiable information from children and more. 
A word of caution, however: Do not rely solely on COPPA. Although 
many sites comply with COPPA, other less scrupulous sites do not. There-
fore, you must adhere to the tips listed below: 
-#- Start together. When your child is old enough to learn about the Internet, 
you should learn together. At the beginning, do not allow your child to surf 
alone. Explain to your children that although they may be alone when using a 
computer, once they are logged on to the Internet, they are no longer alone. 
^ 
Set the ground rules for personal information. Explain to your children 
that, just like in real life, revealing their names, addresses, e-mail addresses, 
telephone numbers, passwords, or any other personal information about 
themselves, their family, or their friends could jeopardize their safety and 
that of others. This rule also applies to photographs: Tell your child never to 
send a photograph of himself or herself via e-mail to a stranger. 
•Jfr Monitor your child's activities online. Monitor what your child is doing 
when he or she is online and the amount of time he or she is spending on-
line. You may even want to check the cache or cookies from the sites 
they've visited (see instructions in the section above on cache and cookies). 
0 
Limit your child's interactions online. Instruct your child never to arrange 
to meet in person someone he or she has met online. (If the correspondent 
is insistent, a parent should be present and the meeting should take place 
in a public place.) Instruct your child never to open e-mail from someone 
whose address they don't recognize because the e-mail might be an inap-
propriate overture from a stranger or it might be a virus. The same rules 
should govern instant messaging (IM), which is like chat, except that it is 
usually a one-on-one experience. Instant messaging between friends is 
safer than any exchange in a chat room. Instant messaging with a stranger, 
however, may be less safe, because there is no monitor involved in IM con-
versations. 
208 

4 Your Computer and the Internet f 
^ 
Check your Internet Service Provider (ISP). Consider using an ISP that 
offers parental controls to block access to sites that are not explicitly 
marked as appropriate for children, as well as chat rooms, bulletin boards, 
and other highly interactive areas. 
•Jfc- Use filtering software. Consider using filtering software, like Net Nanny or 
CYBERsitter. These software packages block access to certain sites and 
prevent children from giving out personal information online. 
•Jfc Pay special attention to highly interactive or revealing sites. Chat rooms 
and blogs can be highly invasive areas for children. In these rooms, your 
child may meet someone who befriends him or her, develops an online 
relationship, and tricks your child into revealing personal information or, 
worse, agreeing to meet in person. Similarly, monitor your child's contribu-
tions to blogs. The continuity of blogging allows small revelations to be 
connected, so a large amount of very precise personal information can be 
extrapolated in a very dangerous way. 
account, including your zip code, gender, birth date, occupation, and more. 
Check your e-mail provider's privacy policy to see if this information might be 
used by marketers. 
The Electronic Communications Protection Act (ECPA) of 1986 oversees 
the legal protection of your e-mails. Under the ECPA, the interception of e-mail 
while it is in transit between two destinations is a federal crime. However, the 
ECPA protects only the transmission of e-mail and does not provide any pri-
vacy or protection for e-mails in either your computer or in the receiver's 
machine. Moreover, the ECPA specifically permits your ISP to review any 
e-mails it stores as well as incoming or outgoing e-mails if your ISP believes you 
are attempting to harm the e-mail system or another user. Some ISPs temporar-
ily store all messages that pass through the system. The ECPA also enables law 
enforcement agents to access your e-mails and other information that is in pos-
session of your ISP. 
Finally, law enforcement agents can seize your e-mail history if they have 
a warrant. The USA Patriot Act, which is discussed more fully in chapter 11, 
209 

* Prying Eyes f 
"Your Everyday Life," makes it easier for law enforcement officials to access 
your e-mail without a court order or subpoena. 
Instant Messaging (IM) 
When Nick Groleau, a technical manager in Silicon Valley, re-
ceived a friend's message on his AOL Instant Messenger buddy 
list telling him that Osama Bin Laden had been captured, he im-
mediately 
clicked on the news link to learn more about this 
breaking story. Instead, he was directed to a site that offered a 
game to download. It is a good thing he decided not to down-
load the game. One of Nick's friends did download the game and 
it triggered a virus that sent the same invitation to contacts on 
her buddy list and simultaneously installed adware to track user 
activity. 
Equipped with special software from AOL and several other companies, 
instant messaging users can connect to one another on the Internet and have a 
seemingly private chat in real time. For most users, instant messaging feels 
like talking on the phone except with text. For the most part, if you want to 
have a live chat with your friend, the two of you must be operating the same 
software. Using these applications, you create a list of others or friends with 
whom you want to chat. When you log on to the Internet, the software tells 
you which of your friends are online. 
Instant messaging is about as private as typing your personal information 
into an unsecure website. Your messages are accessible and can be easily inter-
cepted. Instant messages are also subject to password hacking, virus attacks, 
and harvesting of personal data through spiders, Web bugs, and spyware. 
The most important steps you can take to protect your e-mail and instant 
messaging communications are: 
^ 
Encrypt your e-mail. To fully protect your e-mail communications, you must 
encrypt your messages. See page 185 for instruction on how to encrypt 
your e-mail. 
210 

• Your Computer and the Internet • 
-fc Have more than one e-mail address. If you are a frequent user of chat rooms 
and bulletin boards, use an e-mail address and/or user name that is specific 
to these activities and different from the one that your use for personal or 
professional communications. Be aware that other people may be doing the 
same thing to disguise their identities. 
INTERNET SCAMS 
Many viruses come from spam or inadvertent e-mails from acquaintances. 
Watch out for scams that sound like these: 
The "Virus Warning" Virus Scam 
My mother sent this to warn me about the finaldoom virus, 
and 
I downloaded it because she works for IBM and she gets this informa-
tion before the rest of the world. I know there are a lot of hoaxes 
about, but this virus sounds pretty scary because it will send all your 
Word documents to everyone in your address book. Download this 
patch—believe me, it's better to be safe than sorry. 
This scam warns you about viruses to avoid. Typically, the sender makes 
it clear that there is no reason to doubt the warning. If you fall for the trick 
and download the patch, you will infect your computer and operating sys-
tem. If you forward the e-mail, the recipients of your e-mail will get the 
virus, and—bam—mail servers will be bogged down. The virus could also 
be a Trojan horse that would allow the sender to snoop on you. 
The "Fill in This Form Related to Your Account" Trojan Horse Scam 
PAYPAL.COM NEW YEAR OFFER: For a limited time only PayPal is of-
fering to add 10 percent of the total balance in your PayPal account to 
your account. All you have to do is register within the next five busi-
ness days by filling in this form (attached). 
In this scam, which is also known as phishing, spammers send legiti-
mate-looking e-mails to users of PayPal and other popular services offering 
211 

them the chance to download a form, fill it in, and get a free offer. Unlike 
other scams that seek personal information directly from users, the pur-
pose of this scam is to get the user to download a file containing a Trojan 
horse. Users who open the compressed Zip file attached to the spam e-mail 
inadvertently execute a Trojan horse program that connects to a website, 
which sends a worm to the user's computer. The worm reproduces itself 
and spreads throughout the Internet. 
The "Enticing Celebrity Photo" Scam 
Want to see revealing photos of Catherine Zeta-Jones? Not your type? 
How about other female celebrities such as Britney Spears or Shakira? 
In this scam, a Trojan horse purports to contain revealing photos of 
Catherine Zeta-Jones and other female celebrities including Britney Spears 
and Shakira. Once the file is opened, a backdoor Trojan horse is down-
loaded onto the victim's computer and installs a backdoor program that 
allows someone to take over the computer. 
-#- Use a password. A password makes it more difficult for other people to access 
your e-mail account. A password is particularly important if you share a com-
puter with others, or if you often use public computers. To create an effective 
password, use the tips you have learned in other chapters of this book. 
& Log off. If you are using a public computer, such as one in the library, at a 
computer center, at work, at a friend's home, and even in your own home, 
remember to log off. A computer that is perpetually connected to the Inter-
net is more vulnerable to hackers. 
*t Use Web-based e-mail. If you share your computer or other people have 
access to your computer, use a Web-based e-mail application such as 
Yahoo! or Hotmail, both of which do not store your e-mails on your local 
drive. 
212 

4 Your Computer and the Internet f 
-fc Delete your e-mail. In many cases, e-mail can be retrieved from servers and 
back-up systems. Nevertheless, if your e-mails are stored locally, you can 
protect yourself by deleting the local copy of the e-mail you sent or 
received. 
# Update your software. Whether you are e-mailing or using instant messag-
ing, be sure that your software is updated with the latest security patches 
and set to the highest security levels. 
-*- Watch what you write! Know that your e-mail cannot be completely pro-
tected and keep sensitive information out of cyberspace. 
Protect Your Privacy Online 
Protecting both your privacy online and the valuable information in your com-
puter requires an ongoing and active commitment. Here's a summary of the 
most important tips to protect your privacy online: 
-fr Install a firewall. A firewall will protect your system from viruses, hackers, 
and snoops. 
* 
Run antivirus programs. 
^ Delete or disable cookies. Use your browser's help menu to change the set-
tings for your cookies. 
-fc Encrypt your communications. Protect your transactions from packet snif-
fers by using encryption. 
-*• Don't post sensitive content online under your own name or e-mail 
address. 
•fr Clean sweep your computer. When you delete files on your computer, your 
files move to the trash or recycle bin on your computer, but they are still not 
213 

* Prying Eyes f 
gone forever. This is the case even after you empty the trash. Such file dele-
tion merely frees the operating system to reuse the hard drive. If you want 
to dispose of sensitive files on your computer you must do a clean sweep. 
Windows data cannot be deleted beyond recovery without the use of spe-
cial sweeping software. If you are getting rid of an old computer, or if you 
want to erase information on your current one, sweep the files clean. Buy a 
file-wiping program to clean your hard drive. 
^ Log off and turn off your computer. If you have a DSL line, broadband cable 
modem, or other connection to the Internet that is up and running twenty-
four hours per day, be sure to turn your computer off when you are not 
using it to protect yourself from spyware. If you must leave your computer 
running instead of turning it on and off, you should at least password-
protect your PC screen saver. In this way, you will be the only one who can 
deactivate the screen saver and access the computer. 
^ Manage your personal information on your computer. If you maintain sen-
sitive personal information or financial records on your computer, be espe-
cially careful. Be extra cautious if you keep the information on a laptop. 
Place sensitive records in files that require a password before they can be 
accessed, and then use a strong password that contains both letters and 
digits. If you use different names and passwords, do not save them on your 
computer. Make a chart of the user names and passwords you have 
assigned to your files and the names of any sites with which you have regis-
tered. Store the chart in a secure place. In the same way, try not to use 
automatic login features on websites. Finally, delete files you no longer 
access and empty your trash often, in both your e-mail program and on 
your computer. 
*- Be cautious when you use public computers. Be especially careful if you are 
picking up your e-mail on public computers in Internet cafés, airports, 
libraries, and so forth. If you use a public computer terminal, you may inad-
vertently leave private information behind. As such, be sure to take the fol-
lowing precautions: 
214 

* Your Computer and the Internet •-
• Type your password every time. Never elect to save your password 
• Delete any e-mail you retrieve from your inbox and, if applicable, from 
the Trash e-mail folder as well 
• Before logging off, undo any changes you made to the browser or e-mail 
software, clear the browser's cache and history, and close the browser 
• Make sure you've officially logged off (ask for assistance if you are unsure) 
• Make sure that no one is looking over your shoulder as you work in public 
terminals 
• Never check your bank accounts from or input any financial information 
into a public terminal 
•$• Don't use unencrypted Wi-Fi. If you are worried about hackers, do not use 
Wi-Fi for sensitive information unless you encrypt your home system. Be 
aware that even if you encrypt data on a Wi-Fi system, it will not be as 
secure as data that is transmitted via a direct connection. Wi-Fi in public 
hotspots is rarely encrypted. 
-fc Be proactive. You must be proactive to protect your privacy. Update your 
virus software regularly. Be on the alert for security patches and repairs that 
you can download. Constantly delete cookies on your computer and unload 
your cache. Do not open files that are sent to you by strangers. Stay 
informed about new computer viruses. 
The Bottom Line 
• Caught in the cookie jar? Remember that as you surf the Internet you leave 
very clear and detailed crumbs that create a trail of where you have been, 
what you have clicked on, what you have been downloading, and, in some 
cases, how long you've spent there. 
• Don't catch a virus. As you surf the Internet, you can expose yourself to all 
sorts of viruses and spyware that can capture your information and infect 
your computer. 
• Spam is not just a food product. Today, over 50 percent of all Internet 
traffic is spam e-mail. Follow the tips in this chapter to protect yourself 
215 

against spam and you'll avoid spending half your morning deleting all the 
spam that you may be receiving. 
• For kids, the Internet requires an "R" rating and not just "PG." Did you 
know that one in five kids is approached with sexual advances online? 
Make sure that you do all you can to protect your children's privacy online. 
• Your e-mail may not be so private. E-mails have little privacy for a variety 
of reasons. If you want to protect your email fully, use encrypted e-mail, 
select a password difficult for others to access, and remember always to log 
off your e-mail account. 
216 

Your Home 
You host your first cocktail party in your new home. On the way to 
the kitchen you overhear two guests gossiping about you and your 
house. One tells the other precise and private information about your 
house such as the exact price you paid for it, and the terms of your 
mortgage. 
After a long day at work you sit down with your family to eat dinner 
together. During your thirty-minute meal you get up three times to 
answer the phone. The first call is a sales pitch for a Las Vegas time-
share. The second is from a local company offering aluminum sid-
ing. The third advertises super rates with Mel's Long Distance 
Service. By the time you get off the phone, your dinner is cold. 

You move from Chicago, Illinois, to Boise, Idaho. Just a few weeks 
after your move, junk mail mysteriously makes its way to Boise and 
fills your new mailbox. 
You are a divorced woman trying to purchase a Manhattan co-op 
apartment. During your interview with the co-op board, you are 
outraged when a member of the board asks how long you expect 
your former spouse to live. The board member says this estimate 
will allow the board to calculate how long your ex will be able to 
continue providing your alimony payments. 
You are alone in the privacy of your bedroom. From the corner of 
your eye, you notice what appears to be a tiny speck on the picture 
displayed on the wall. You move closer to investigate and discover a 
tiny, hidden camera. It turns out your ex-husband has been spying 
on you for months. 
Most people think of their homes as havens from public life. Home is a 
place to hang your hat, kick back, and let it all hang out. It's a place where you 
want to feel protected from judgment, scrutiny, and unwanted distractions. In 
the safety and privacy of your own home, you should be in control. But are 
you? 
Unfortunately, more and more, your private life is becoming public. It all 
begins when landlords or lenders pry into your personal information when 
you want to rent or buy a home. After you move in, there's a good chance that 
you will be bombarded with telemarketing calls, junk mail, and other intru-
sions, most of them in the form of offers to sell you something. 
Some violations of privacy are less obvious, such as when your caller ID 
tag shows up on every call you make, when high-tech surveillance devices pen-
etrate the walls of your house to tap your wireless phone calls or pick up 
images from video monitors, or when thieves rifle through your trash. Using a 
combination of new technologies and old-fashioned guile, corporations, crimi-
nals, and others can find out more about you than you realize. 
218 

* Your Home f 
Your Property 
The first invasion of your privacy often happens even before you move into 
your home. Whether you are renting or buying, you are required to provide 
detailed information about your life and financial history. That has been a fact 
of life. But now your privacy is threatened more than ever because technology 
makes your personal information public and more easily accessible than ever 
before. It used to be time-consuming and difficult for landlords, lenders, and co-
op boards to conduct a background check on applicants. All the pieces of the 
puzzle were scattered. Checking rental history, for instance, involved tracking 
down old landlords and physically traveling to housing courts to check records 
(and this strategy was effective only for the apartments the applicant dis-
closed). Verifying employment history meant calling the applicant's past 
employers. It was virtually impossible to discover criminal history; criminal 
records are filed in the relevant courthouse. The Internet has changed all that. 
Now anyone with a computer and Internet connection can discover the details 
of your life in just a few minutes. 
When You Rent 
Landlords can find out more about you than you probably want them to know. 
If you plan to rent your home or apartment, your prospective landlord will 
likely perform a screening or background check on you. Understandably, your 
prospective landlord wants to know whether you will pay the rent on time and 
be law-abiding. 
You will probably be asked to complete a rental application that includes 
references from prior landlords and employers as well as your consent for the 
landlord to access your current credit report. Armed with this information, the 
landlord can learn quite a bit about you. As you already know from chapter 4, 
"Your Credit," the credit check alone will reveal your credit history over the 
past seven years, including whether you have been late or delinquent in pay-
ing rent, bills, or student or car loans; been slapped with a money judgment 
(including child support judgments) or tax lien; or been involved in another 
type of lawsuit, such as a personal injury claim. A credit report may also reveal 
whether you have filed for bankruptcy. 
Many landlords also pay to use outside screening services that enable 
them to dredge up all sorts of even more personal information about you. Two 
219 

of the largest tenant-screening services in this crowded field are Fidelity Infor-
mation and ScreenNow Tenant from ChoicePoint. Fidelity Information, which 
is located in California but conducts nationwide background checks, claims to 
screen about fifty thousand prospective tenants each month. These companies 
provide landlords with information about your utility payment history, previ-
ous eviction proceedings, criminal reports, sex offender violations, and 
domestic-violence history from national databases compiled from public 
record information. They also check your references and verify employment 
history. Fidelity Information offers an additional report on your habits as a 
previous tenant: whether you are an abusive tenant, whether you vandalized, 
or whether you made chronic late payments. 
The terrorist events of September 11,2001, created demand for yet another 
kind of background report. Now a growing number of tenant-screening compa-
nies offer terrorist registry searches. The Office of Foreign Assets Control 
(OFAC) in the U.S. Department of the Treasury collects data from the FBI, CIA, 
and other national-security agencies and compiles a list of possible terrorists, 
money launderers, and international drug traffickers. The screening compa-
nies charge you to search the OFAC terrorist database, but you can check it for 
free by going to www.brownandcompany.net/ofac/search.asp. 
Problems with Background Checks 
As useful as background checks are for prospective landlords, they are not 
always helpful to you. Here is a list of some of the problems prospective 
renters have faced when their prospective landlords looked them up: 
Subjective or Inaccurate Information. What if the information about you 
incorrectly indicates that you're a sex offender or a terrorist? This problem can 
occur because of mixed files. A mixed file is a report that combines informa-
tion from one individual's file with information from a second person's file. 
This happens sometimes to individuals with similar names or similar social 
security numbers. It can also be the result of data-entry errors. In 2002, a case 
involving a mixed file resulted in a woman named Judy Thomas receiving 
$5.3 million in punitive damages from an Oregon court. TransUnion mixed up 
Judy Thomas with a woman named Judith Upton because the two women 
220 

• Your Home • 
have similar social security numbers. As a result, Judy Thomas was considered 
a credit pariah for years, through no fault of her own, and despite her persis-
tent efforts to clean up her credit report. 
Incomplete Information. Another serious problem 
, 
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 
In 2002 alone, there 
were about two hundred 
thousand cases involving 
an identity thief renting 
a house or apartment 
under an assumed name. 
is that the databases that landlords access may not 
have complete information. For example, the 
reports that cull information from housing-court 
cases are based on the filings rather than the judg-
ments. This means that regardless of who was at 
fault, or who filed the case against whom, as a 
prospective tenant, you may be flagged. What if 
you sued your prior landlord for failure to make required repairs and the court 
sided with you? Your name would still appear, suggesting that you may be a 
difficult or litigious tenant, and thereby affect your application. 
Identity Theft. Identity theft is a serious problem. Imagine if an imposter 
used your identity to rent an apartment, failed to pay the rent, and the land-
lord filed for eviction? No doubt, you would be rejected for the next apartment 
you sought. In 2002 alone, there were about two hundred thousand cases 
involving an identity thief renting a house or apartment under an assumed 
name, according to the FTC's 2003 Identity Theft Survey. See chapter 3, "Your 
Identity," for tips on preventing identity theft. 
If Your Application Is Denied 
If a landlord denies you tenancy based on either a credit report or a report 
from a tenant-screening service, the landlord must comply with the provisions 
of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) and provide you with what is known 
as an adverse-action notice. This notice informs you that you are entitled to a 
free copy of your credit report or tenant-screening report, and if you feel the 
information is incomplete or inaccurate, you can require the credit-reporting 
agency or screening service to reinvestigate and record the current status of 
the information. If the information is found to be inaccurate or cannot be ver-
ified within thirty days, it must be deleted from your file. In all likelihood you 
221 

will have lost this apartment, but correcting your credit or screening report 
can prevent you from being denied tenancy in the future. 
An adverse-action notice is required even if the information in the credit 
or tenant-screening report was not the main reason for you being denied ten-
ancy. If the information in the report plays only a small part, or indirectly 
results in the landlord's overall decision, you still must be notified. Even if 
your rental application wasn't denied, you are entitled to an adverse-action 
notice if you are required by the landlord to: have a cosigner on the lease; pay 
a deposit not required for other applicants, or an unusually large deposit; or 
pay rent that is higher than for another applicant. 
If you did not receive an adverse-action notice and feel you were entitled 
to one, ask the landlord or management company. You have legal remedies as 
well: you can sue in federal court for compensatory damages, punitive dam-
ages if the violations were deliberate, and attorney's fees. 
When You Buy 
What if your past credit card statements revealed that you have a 
propensity to drink and gamble? If your bank knew about your ac-
tivities, would they jeopardize your chances of getting the best 
mortgage rate? 
If you plan to purchase a home, condominium, or co-op apartment, be pre-
pared to reveal a lot of personal and private information about yourself—in 
many cases, even more than when you're renting. If you plan on taking out a 
mortgage, your credit history is crucial to determine what interest rate you can 
secure and indeed whether you qualify for a mortgage at all. 
If you have a blemished credit report but still are able to qualify for a 
mortgage, your lender's terms will no doubt be less favorable than the terms 
offered to someone with strong credit. Your down payment, interest rate, and 
points might be significantly higher than they would be if your credit history 
was perfect. The reasoning is the higher the perceived risk for the bank, the 
higher the reward. Over the life of a thirty-year mortgage, the difference 
between what you would pay and what someone with good credit would pay 
can be substantial. 
222 

* Your Home f 
'^^g^gg^^^^y^i^J^Z^''^"'!»^] 
Even if you have a 
perfect credit history, 
you can wind up 
overpaying for your 
mortgage for undisclosed 
reasons. 
Factors other than what is contained in your credit report can also affect 
your application for a mortgage or your mortgage rate. As discussed in chap-
ter 5, "Your Money," financial institutions routinely share confidential cus-
tomer information with their affiliates and often 
with nonaffiliated third parties as well (which, how-
ever, you can prevent). What if your lender was part 
of a conglomerate that also owned airline and hotel 
websites, a shopping site, and an online ticket 
provider? Isn't it possible that the lender might be 
privy to personal information having nothing to do 
with your financial situation, such as how many 
Fifty Cent concerts you've attended or how many 
trips to Colombia you've made in the past year? Even if you have a perfect 
credit history, you can wind up overpaying for your mortgage for undisclosed 
reasons. With the growth of large and diversified financial conglomerates, this 
becomes more likely every day. 
Co-ops 
A posh Upper East Side Manhattan co-op rejected a buyer after dis-
covering during his interview that the buyer had a J.C. Penney 
credit card. The co-op board felt that the buyer didn't have the 
right image for its building. 
Prospective purchasers in some upscale co-op buildings (assuming 
these buildings allow dogs in the first place) must have their dogs 
"interviewed" by the co-op board. They must also supply letters of 
reference from the dogs' trainers and breeders. 
In some cities, such as New York, cooperative (the official name for a co-
op) ownership is the most common form of property ownership. When you 
buy a co-op, you are purchasing shares of stock in a corporation that owns the 
entire building. The shares are part of a lease that allows you (the share-
holder) to rent the apartment. 
When you apply to join a co-op, you are typically subject to a detailed and 
223 

THE RIGHT TO ENTER? 
After disputes over money (rent, security deposit, and so forth), the most 
common source of tension between landlord and tenant is the landlord's 
right to enter a rental unit. Put another way, what is your right as a tenant 
to be left alone in the privacy of your home? Your landlord does have the 
right to enter your apartment or house, but with restrictions. It's not per-
missible for your landlord simply to pop in uninvited and crash your 
Super Bowl party; nor is it permissible for your landlord to slip into your 
apartment while you are at work and play dress-up with your clothes or 
leave love notes on your pillow. Here are the general limits to a landlord's 
right to enter your property, subject to state law: 
Reasonable notice. Although landlord and tenant laws vary from state 
to state, a landlord typically cannot enter your rental premises without 
giving you reasonable notice. Check the provision in your rental agree-
ment about reasonable notice, but remember none of the provisions in 
your lease can abridge any rights you have under state law. To see what 
constitutes reasonable notice in your state, visit the "Real Estate" sec-
tion of the Findlaw website at public.findlaw.com. 
The landlord does not have to provide any kind of notice in case of 
emergency, such as fire or a serious water leak. 
Legitimate reason. In addition to providing you with reasonable notice, 
your landlord also needs to have a legitimate reason to enter your prem-
ises. The following are legitimate reasons for entry: 
• making repairs 
• determining if repairs are needed 
• showing the property to prospective new tenants or purchasers 
• maintaining the property during a tenant's extended absence (in 
many states) 
• if you have granted permission 
• if the landlord has a court order 
224 

* Your Home * 
onerous level of personal and financial scrutiny. In addition to a personal 
interview, you will be asked to supply an enormous stack of documents, 
together called the co-op package, which includes tax returns, statement of net 
worth, bank statements, brokerage statements, personal and business letters of 
recommendation, and so forth. In effect, the co-op package contains your 
entire life history, and copies of the package are circulated to everyone sitting 
on the board of directors in the co-op. Eventually, everyone in the entire build-
ing knows everything about you. 
Unfortunately, there is essentially nothing that can be done about this 
enormous invasion of privacy. If you want to live in a co-op building, you must 
supply the documentation that the building requires. Worse, even if you sup-
ply all the material, you are not guaranteed approval. 
Who Can Access Your Real Estate Records? 
You discover a photograph of your home posted on the Internet 
linked to information including its exact street address, your name, 
and your home's value. The problem? Your home isn't for sale! 
You may not like it, but anyone can access your real estate records—and 
it's quite easy to do so. When you purchase a home or other real estate, a 
record of your transaction is filed in your county assessor's or recorder's office 
(or the comparable office in your state). These records become part of the pub-
lic domain, and anyone has a right to access the information contained in 
these files. (See chapter 2, "Your Personal Information and the Public Record.") 
Before the emergence of the Internet, it was much more difficult for 
someone to access your real estate information. For instance, a person would 
have to determine the exact county location of your property and physically 
travel there to look through records, which might or might not have been com-
puterized. That person would also face the usual bureaucratic hassles, like lim-
ited hours of operation, missing files, or missing papers. 
Now, if somebody wants to find out information about your real estate, a 
simple search on the Internet can produce a frighteningly thorough profile. If 
you own a home, an Internet search might reveal your name and address, the 
purchase price of your home, your loan balance, the property's estimated 
225 

• Prying Eyes • 
value, and, in some cases, even the day of the week the trash gets picked up. 
Depending on the county in which you live, you might also see a photograph 
of your home, posted, in all likelihood, without your knowledge or permission. 
A lien search on real property may reveal even 
more information, including whether you (the 
owner) are divorced, owe child support, or are sub-
ject to a court judgment. 
Don't believe it? Try it for yourself. Go to 
www.netronline.com/public records.htm and start 
your own search for information. To get a map and 
driving directions to your home, log on to 
www.mapquest.com and type in your address. 
Despite all the information that can be accessed 
about you in the public record, you still have some 
ability to protect your privacy and your good name. 
Consider the following tips when renting or purchasing a home: 
If you own a home, an 
Internet search might 
reveal your name and 
address, the purchase 
price of your home, your 
loan balance, the 
property's estimated 
value, and, in some cases, 
even the day of the week 
the trash gets picked up. 
^ 
Review your credit report regularly. As mentioned previously, you must 
check your credit report regularly. The time to correct credit report errors is 
not when you plan to buy or refinance property, but well in advance of that 
time. 
-*- Establish a trust or other structures to acquire property. If you are troubled 
by your privacy being sacrificed when you purchase real property, you can 
consult an attorney who will advise you about using trusts, corporations, or 
other vehicles as the purchaser of record in your real estate transaction. By 
doing so, however, you may forfeit certain tax advantages. Given the com-
plexities of establishing trusts and other legal vehicles, you must consult an 
attorney if you are considering this option. 
^ Use extra caution with respect to co-ops. Keep careful count of the number 
of co-op packages that are copied, and demand that all packages circulated 
be returned directly to you. Do not trust the managing agent of the building 
(who runs the co-op approval process) to destroy these packages on your 
behalf. Packages are often never returned to the managing agent. Ensure 
226 

* Your Home * 
that you destroy or shred the packages yourself. Request that no photo-
copies be permitted. 
0 Ask questions about document storage. Ask the landlord or management 
company how your personal information will be safeguarded. Try to limit the 
number of copies that are made. Also make sure that the material is not dis-
carded in trash cans. Documents as sensitive as these should be shredded, 
and you should be the one who makes sure that happens. If you are con-
cerned about jeopardizing your chances of getting the apartment, you 
might consider waiting until after your rental application has been approved 
before asking these questions. 
-*- Follow up if you are turned down. If your application for a rental apartment 
is rejected, ask the landlord why you were rejected. You have certain rights 
under the FCRA. As mentioned, if a landlord turns you down based on a 
credit or tenant-screening report, the landlord must provide you with an 
adverse-action notice. This notice entitles you to a free copy of your tenant 
report, and, if the report is incomplete or inaccurate, you can require the 
credit agency or screening service to investigate and record the current sta-
tus of the information. If the information is inaccurate or cannot be verified, 
it will be deleted from your file. In all likelihood you will have missed out on 
the apartment, but correcting your screening report can prevent you from 
being denied one in the future. Make sure that report has been corrected 
before you resume your housing search. 
^ 
Be realistic and use common sense. You cannot avoid releasing certain 
information. You need to live somewhere. But use common sense to make 
sure that your sensitive information is being returned to you. 
Privacy Issues in Your Home 
Once you move into your home or apartment, you would think that your pri-
vacy would be secure. Unfortunately, this is not always the case. Technology 
that you use every day often has the nasty habit of causing unintended conse-
quences. In the hands of snoops or law enforcement, some technologies such 
227 

4 Prying Eyes * 
as nanny cams, video monitors, and other devices can invade your privacy. 
There are also low-tech ways that snoops can invade your privacy, such as 
good old-fashioned Dumpster diving. 
j^mm^mmmm^mmmma 
Nanny Cams 
Installing a nanny cam 
in your home can allow 
A Privacy 
e*Pert 
demonstrated on national 
high-tech peeping toms 
television how easily camera-generated im-
to spy on you. 
ages 
can 
De intercepted by someone sitting in 
a car outside on the street. The expert tapped 
into a camera's signal and displayed the images on his laptop, using 
only a makeshift antenna constructed from an empty can. 
A nanny cam is a video monitor used by people who want to watch their 
nannies, children, elderly parents, or pets from a remote site. If you watch 
national news shows on television, you have probably seen disturbing nanny 
cam footage of caregivers abusing children. A combination of parental con-
cern and drastically declining prices has caused a boom in the nanny cam 
business. Some nanny cams are so small they can be concealed in almost any-
thing, including alarm clocks, tissue boxes, humidifiers, and even teddy bears. 
Almost a million wireless cameras have been sold by Xio Wireless Technol-
ogy, whose ubiquitous ads pop up when you surf the Internet. Wireless ver-
sions enable you to access your nanny cam via remote computer. Simply log 
on from work or from your business trip to check on your family. Although 
some people believe that nanny cams are an essential protection tool in 
today's dangerous world, others reject the devices on moral grounds as an 
invasion of privacy. 
There is another privacy concern surrounding wireless nanny cams that 
is not well known, but is highly disturbing. In a strangely ironic twist, 
installing a nanny cam in your home can allow high-tech peeping toms to 
spy on you. Strangers could be peering into your private life, spying on your 
home and your kids. The wireless nanny cam operates by sending a signal to 
a nearby receiver that is plugged into your TV, DVD player, or VCR. This sig-
nal is easily intercepted from more than a quarter-mile away by cheap, off-
the-shelf electronic equipment. To add insult to injury, this type of snooping 
228 

* Your Home * 
is generally not illegal because wiretap laws apply to intercepting sound, 
not video. 
Follow this tip if you still feel the need to install a nanny cam despite the 
privacy risks: 
^ Secure your nanny cam as well as possible. Your nanny cam should be either a 
hard-wired device, or a wireless system with a proven encryption technology. 
Is IT A CRIME TO SNOOP USING VIDEO SURVEILLANCE? 
From a legal standpoint, snooping on people with a video camera in your 
own home is generally legal, except perhaps in bathrooms, changing 
rooms, or other places where an individual would have a reasonable 
expectation of privacy. Audio recording, however, is usually illegal under 
wiretap laws. 
What if someone is spying on you? Remember the creepy Sharon Stone 
movie, Sliver, in which the residents of an entire apartment building in 
New York were watched and videotaped in their most intimate moments 
by their landlord? Numerous cases involving landlords spying on their ten-
ants have filled the headlines. In certain instances, the landlords were not 
prosecuted; in others, they were charged only with trespassing. These sto-
ries have exposed gaping holes in current legislation. Many states do not 
have laws that adequately address high-tech snooping because the technol-
ogy of modern peeping has evolved faster than the law. The law, however, 
is beginning to catch up. 
In June 2003, a new law was enacted in New York, making video 
voyeurism a felony (highly unusual in most states). The new law, called 
Stephanie's Law, allows for punishment of up to seven years in jail for 
secretly videotaping a person in a private setting such as a bedroom, chang-
ing room, or bathroom. Stephanie Fuller lobbied for the law after her land-
lord—who secretly taped her through a camera hidden in the smoke 
detector above her bed—was convicted of a minor trespassing charge that 
carried no jail time. 
229 

• Prying Eyes • 
Home Intercom Systems and Baby Monitors 
Most home intercoms and baby monitors operate by emitting radio frequen-
cies and are easily intercepted by scanners, cordless phones, or other baby 
monitors nearby If you are concerned about your 
privacy, turn these devices off when not in use, or, 
as with a nanny cam, use a hard-wired unit instead 
of a wireless one when possible. 
Snoops who intercept 
nanny cam signals are not 
breaking the law because 
wiretap laws apply to 
intercepting sound, 
not video. 
Cordless Telephones 
Cordless phones are not secure devices. They oper-
ate like mini radio stations, sending radio signals 
back and forth from the base unit to the handset, 
and these signals are easily intercepted. As with cell phones (discussed in 
chapter n, "Your Everyday Life"), the older, analog models offer no security 
and can be monitored by anyone with an inexpensive scanner. Newer digital 
cordless phones offer better security, but they are not invulnerable. Under the 
Electronic Comunications Privacy Act, it is generally illegal to intercept cord-
less phone conversations. 
Follow these privacy tips when using a cordless phone: 
# Use a digital cordless phone. A digital cordless phone that operates on a 
higher frequency is more secure. 
# Use a cordless phone that randomly assigns a new digital code every time 
the handset is returned to the base. This design feature won't protect 
against eavesdropping, but it will prevent people nearby with similar hand-
sets from attaching to your phone line and driving up your long distance bill. 
# Never use cordless phones, even a digital cordless phone, when disclosing 
sensitive financial or personal information. Use a landline phone instead. 
Caller ID 
From a privacy standpoint, Caller ID is a double-edged sword. On the one hand, 
it enhances your privacy by enabling you to identify who is calling before you 
answer the phone. You have control because you decide whether or not to 
230 

* Your Home * 
answer. Caller ID is a useful means of minimizing the intrusiveness of the tele-
phone, and using it may result in fewer telemarketing, obscene, or crank calls. 
On the other hand, your own privacy is compromised when you make out-
going telephone calls if the person or business you are calling is also using 
Caller ID. You lose your right to control to whom you give your phone number. 
There are situations where you might prefer to remain anonymous, such as if 
you call AIDS or mental-health hotlines, police tip lines, and so on. Further-
more, if you call a business that is using Caller ID, the business is capturing 
your telephone number, and can add it to their marketing databases, resulting 
in yet more telemarketing calls. 
If you want to prevent your name and number from appearing on some-
one else's Caller ID box: 
* 
Take advantage of any blocking options that exist in your area. In some 
places you can block your telephone number from appearing on someone 
else's phone on either a per-call basis or for all calls. Many of these services 
are free. Check with your local telephone company. 
Biométrie Scans 
You return home to your apartment building, struggling to keep 
hold of your grocery bags, briefcase, and gym bag. Forget fumbling 
in your pockets for your keys; you simply press your finger next to 
the fingerprint-identification door lock to open the door. Is this your 
sci-fi fantasy or a privacy nightmare? 
Biométrie devices turn physical characteristics, such as fingerprints or 
patterns in eye retinas, into data that computers can use to identify people. 
Biometric-enabled security devices have gained popularity in security-sensitive 
locations like airports, hospitals and police stations. It is only recently, how-
ever, that biométrie locks have found their way into apartment and co-op 
buildings. A few upscale buildings in New York City now use biométrie locks 
to admit residents into elevator banks, gyms, and garages. (You still need keys 
to get into your own apartment, but biométrie apartment locks cannot be far 
behind.) Clearly one's desire to emulate the Jetsons is a big selling point in 
231 

Do you really want your 
fingerprint allowing your 
nosy landlord or the 
police to monitor your 
comings and goings? 
• Prying Eyes • 
choosing these security devices. According to the developer of one of the 
buildings, the feature was chosen not so much for security but to "reflect the 
lifestyle" of the target buyer. 
The notion of key-free living may be attractive, 
but it does raise complex privacy issues that are 
only beginning to be studied. A 2003 report by the 
National Research Council advises caution when 
using biométrie security systems. According to the 
report: "These technologies can pose serious pri-
vacy and security concerns if employed in systems 
that make use of servers to compare biométrie sam-
ples against stored templates (as is the case in many large-scale systems)." 
When used on a smaller scale, such as an individual unit used as a lock to your 
home or laptop, they raise fewer privacy issues. 
Do you really want your fingerprint allowing your nosy landlord or the 
police to monitor your comings and goings? Or worse, do you want to risk 
finding your fingerprint for sale one day on the Internet? The answer is 
clearly no, but these are issues that you are likely to grapple with in the future. 
Television Viewing Habits 
You're hopelessly addicted to The Bachelor, celebrity infomercials, 
and the occasional Playboy special, yet you profess to watch noth-
ing but Civil War Journal on the History Channel. Luckily no one 
will ever know... or will they? 
Your television-viewing habits can reveal a frightening amount of per-
sonal information about you. Cable-viewing records are supposed to be con-
fidential under the terms of the federal Cable Communications Policy Act. 
The act states that cable operators can't use the cable system to collect your 
personally identifiable information or disclose it without your prior written 
consent. The cable companies have been doing a good job of safeguarding 
your personal information, but as these companies grow and branch into 
areas that are not covered by the act, there is concern that the law is not strong 
enough to protect your privacy. For instance, Comcast, the largest cable 
232 

With only a company 
promise to keep your 
anonymity and no law 
to enforce it, privacy 
advocates are worried that 
TiVo—or other DVRs—may 
become a peephole into 
your living room. 
• Your Home • 
provider in the United States and the acquirer of AT&T Broadband, has been 
challenged for its vague and possibly illegal privacy policy. The policy allows 
Comcast to share customer information with "potential business transition 
partners," "professional advisers," and "service 
providers" for "legitimate business activities." Bow-
ing to pressure, Comcast agreed to rewrite its pri-
vacy policy, but skeptics have yet to see the revised 
policy. 
The current law does not apply to newer tech-
nology such as satellite TV, interactive TV, cable 
modems, or TiVo, which is the best known of the 
digital video recorders (DVRs). TiVo allows televi-
sion viewers to pause live shows, skip commer-
cials, show instant replays, and record shows. 
TiVo's technology allows it to know that you watch Celebrity Mole at 3 A.M. 
and replayed the Janet Jackson Super Bowl 2004 halftime show a dozen 
times. More importantly, TiVo's technology tracks your viewing habits to 
develop a profile of you that permits TiVo to recommend shows you may 
enjoy based on a review of your previous television habits. This information 
is a treasure chest for advertisers and broadcasters, and they are dying to get 
their hands on it. Recently, TiVo announced that it would sell audience-
viewing data, but only on an anonymous basis. (TiVo came under fire in 
2001 for having the capability to link its viewer information with individual 
customers, though the company promised it would never do so.) With only a 
company promise to keep your anonymity and no law to enforce it, privacy 
advocates are worried that TiVo—or other DVRs—may become a peephole 
into your living room. Indeed, the Electronic Freedom Foundation believes 
that DVRs present "one of the great privacy issues of our time." 
Law Enforcement and High-Tech Snooping 
In Florence, Oregon, narcotics officers stopped in front of the house 
of Danny Kyllo in the dark hours of the early morning. The police 
suspected Kyllo of growing marijuana, but they did not have enough 
evidence to get a warrant. Sitting in their van across the street, the 
233 

police aimed a thermal-imaging 
device at the outside of Kyllo's 
house and detected high levels of heat from the exterior walls. The 
police surmised that Kyllo was using heat lamps to grow marijuana 
inside his house. The thermal images enabled the police to secure a 
warrant and arrest Kyllo. Kyllo claimed that his Fourth Amendment 
rights were violated because the police failed to get a search war-
rant before using the technological device to "search" his house. 
In the case of Danny Kyllo, it was the police—and not some business or 
ordinary snoop—using technology to violate his privacy. Under the Fourth 
Amendment, you are protected from unreasonable searches and seizures in 
your own home. You probably already also know—or have learned from Law & 
Order and other police dramas—that to comply with the law, the police must 
have a warrant to enter and search your house. But what if the police could 
search your house, as they did with Kyllo, without ever entering? 
In 2001, the Supreme Court ruled in Kyllo v. U.S. that when the govern-
ment uses cutting-edge technology that is not ordinarily used by the general 
public to obtain information about the interior of a home, the surveillance is 
unreasonable in the absence of a search warrant. The Court reasoned that tech-
nologies such as the thermal-imaging device could be used to determine very 
intimate details about someone's private life, such as "at what hour each night 
the lady of the house takes her daily sauna and bath." 
The Supreme Court ruling in the Kyllo case is significant for many rea-
sons. First, it affirms your right to privacy within the sanctity of your own 
home. Second, the case extends the original understanding of the Constitution 
into the technological age. Finally, the case has broader implications because it 
limits technology-assisted searches in a variety of places, not just the home. 
How the government's use of its broad and intrusive surveillance powers 
under the Patriot Act (see chapter 11, "Your Everyday Life") meshes with the 
Kyllo ruling remains to be seen. 
Sexual Privacy 
In 1998, the Houston police entered the apartment of John Lawrence 
after receiving a call from Lawrence's neighbor. The neighbor claimed 
234 

* Your Home f 
there was a man in Lawrence's apartment who had a gun and was 
"going crazy. " When the police entered the apartment, they discov-
ered Lawrence engaging in anal sex with Tyron Garner. They were im-
mediately arrested under a Texas law that prohibited "deviate sexual 
behavior" between persons of the same gender. Lawrence and Gar-
ner were jailed, prosecuted, and fined more than $200 each. 
In the same way that the Supreme Court deals with the effects of technol-
ogy on privacy it confronts the effects of changing attitudes and lifestyles 
with respect to your sexual privacy In Lawrence and Garner v. Texas, which 
was decided in 2003, the Supreme Court struck down a Texas statute banning 
sodomy between same-sex couples. The Court found that the state could not 
pass laws that would demean its residents' existence "by making their private 
sexual conduct a crime." 
Beyond just striking down the Texas statute, the ruling established for the 
first time, in the view of many legal analysts, a broad constitutional right to 
sexual privacy The ruling would most likely invalidate the laws of the thirteen 
other states that outlaw sodomy between same-sex or heterosexual couples, as 
well as virtually any other law governing private sexual conduct among con-
senting adults in their homes. 
Garbage 
The police believed that Billy Greenwood was dealing drugs from his 
house. They wanted to obtain a warrant to search the property, but 
they could not gather enough evidence to get one. To solve their 
problem, the police searched the garbage bags that Greenwood left 
at the curb for pickup. When they looked through Greenwood's 
garbage, the police found a number of drug-related clues, which 
gave them enough evidence to get a warrant to search Greenwood's 
house. That search uncovered illegal drugs, and Greenwood was ar-
rested on felony charges. 
Unlike the previous two cases that expand your privacy rights, the 
Supreme Court ruling in the case of Greenwood v. California (1988) demon-
235 

The police don't need a 
warrant before snooping 
through the contents 
of your trash, nor is it 
illegal for anyone to sift 
through your trash. 
• Prying Eyes • 
strates that there are still some areas where you might expect to have a privacy 
right, but in fact do not. In the Greenwood case, the court ruled that you have 
no expectation of privacy in your garbage. Therefore, the police don't need a 
warrant before snooping through the contents of 
your trash, nor is it illegal for anyone to sift through 
your trash. 
The effect of this ruling is that your privacy 
may be greatly compromised. Garbage routinely 
contains items of a deeply personal nature, such as 
empty prescription bottles labeled with an individ-
ual's name and drug name; credit card receipts; 
financial documents; cashed checks; confidential 
correspondence; and birth control packaging. 
You might think that when you place your garbage in an opaque bag or 
place it in a sealed trash container on your property or at the end of your drive-
way, that you could reasonably expect your trash to remain private. But the 
Supreme Court ruling in Greenwood says that if you are concerned about the 
privacy of your personal garbage, you must use a shredder, black out prescrip-
tion labels, and jump through other hoops to keep any sensitive information 
from prying eyes. 
The Greenwood case does not prohibit states from providing their citizens 
with a higher level of privacy. To date, at least six states have ruled that 
garbage is private and that the police must secure a warrant before they per-
form a search. 
When you put out your trash, remember to: 
# Shred sensitive documents, receipts, and junk mail. If this information gets 
in the hands of an identity thief, you could be in big trouble. 
-* Destroy the labels from prescription bottles or any other packaging that 
you don't want to be seen. Do you want your neighbors knowing you take 
antidepressants? Do you want potential thieves knowing you just bought a 
diamond necklace? 
236 

* Your Home f 
Unsolicited or Junk Mail 
From the moment you buy or rent your home or apartment, you will be 
exposed to telemarketers and direct-market solicitors—more commonly 
known as junk mailers—who will constantly bombard you with their increas-
ingly prolific and aggressive tactics. Junk mail comes in the form of credit card 
offers, coupons for car rentals and carpet cleaners, sweepstakes applications, 
and flyers for sales at local stores. You might also receive solicitations from 
charities, sometimes with personalized mailing labels or stickers and other 
gifts to encourage you to give. Today, in the course of a week, you're likely to 
get more than ten times as much junk mail as regular mail. In fact, Americans 
as a whole receive about 4 million tons of junk mail each year. Not only is junk 
mail an environmental threat, it is also an annoying burden in your mailbox. 
But is junk mail a threat to your privacy? It's intrusive, often unwanted, 
and also not completely harmless. First of all, junk mail is a sure sign that 
somehow your name and personal information have been entered into a mar-
keting database. More importantly, the information contained in junk mail 
could get in the wrong hands. The junk mail you throw out in the trash con-
tains your personal information that any stranger can access with a little snoop-
ing in the Dumpster. You might reject the offer for the pre-approved Platinum 
Visa card with bonus miles and 12.5 percent annual percentage rate, but the 
identity thief who rummages through your trash might not be so discriminat-
ing—especially since the thief can apply for the credit in your name! Be aware, 
too, that some junk mail is itself a scam to get you to reveal your personal infor-
mation. 
If you receive junk mail (which almost all of us do, often including children 
who are too young to read much less make or spend money), you should know 
how it finds you and how you should handle it. And if you feel that junk mail 
invades your privacy, is harmful to the environment, or wastes your time, there 
is something you can do about it. It is unlikely that you will ever be 100 percent 
free from junk mail, but there are steps you can take that will significantly 
reduce the amount of junk mail you receive. 
How Direct Mail Marketers Get Your Name and Address 
Getting hold of your name and address is big business. The Direct Market-
ing Association (known as the DMA) projects that direct marketing-driven 
237 

sales will surpass $1.7 trillion in 2003, with projections estimating almost 
$2.5 trillion by 2008. As long as the motivation exists, direct marketers will 
continue to add or keep your name and address on their marketing lists. 
The information on these lists comes from countless sources, including 
public records. Sources you probably thought were private can be easily 
penetrated. 
Here are some sources that direct marketers use to get your personal 
information: 
• Phone books. Mailing-list companies compile a list of all people listed 
in the more than four thousand phone books in the United States. 
• Birth, marriage, and divorce records. Marketing companies review 
public-record databases for changes in your legal status so they can 
market products that may interest you. 
• Voter registration records. 
• U.S. Census information. 
• Business or professional associations. Organizations to which you 
belong, such as the Chamber of Commerce or the Rotary Club, might 
sell your name and address to third-party solicitors and marketers. 
• Licenses and permits. The lists of professional organizations of people 
who must hold a state license to work, such as doctors and lawyers, or 
groups that oversee requirements for a permit, allowing the holder to 
drive, hunt, or own a dog, for example, may be accessed. 
• Legal information. Marketers may discover if there are any judgments, 
bankruptcies, or real estate titles in your name. 
• Vehicle registrations. Some marketers access vehicle registration lists. 
And the list goes on. If you have ever: 
• purchased an item from a catalog 
• given money to a political campaign 
• contributed to a charity 
• filled out a product warranty card 
• ordered a magazine subscription 
• taken a mail-in survey; or 
238 

* Your Home f 
Americans as a whole 
receive about 4 million 
tons of junk mail each year. 
any number of other seemingly innocuous acts, the chances are that any per-
sonal information you have provided has been combined with information 
available on public record and is recorded in a computer database. As a result, 
you will more than likely hear from direct mar-
keters repeatedly, given their interest in developing 
long-term relationships with you as a customer or 
contributor. At the same time, the very same com-
panies with whom you have done business will sell 
or rent their lists with your information to other 
companies. This is how you wind up getting mail 
from organizations you know nothing about. 
Some of the biggest players in the direct-marketing field are Acxiom, Don-
nelley Marketing, Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion. Three of these compa-
nies are credit reporting agencies (CRAs). As discussed in chapter 6, "Your 
Shopping," data conglomerators collect a great deal of information about you 
and sell it to various companies who then market products to you. 
How to Reduce Your Junk Mail 
There are many things you can do to minimize the amount of junk mail you 
receive and prevent new junk mail from being delivered. To reduce the 
amount of junk mail you get, pay attention to these privacy tips: 
^ Sign up for the Direct Marketing Association's Mail Preference Service 
(MPS). The Direct Marketing Association (DMA) is the oldest and largest 
trade association in the direct marketing field. About 70 percent of national 
direct marketers belong to the DMA. One of the easiest and most impor-
tant ways you can lessen your junk-mail load is to sign up for this organiza-
tion's Mail Preference Service (MPS). 
The MPS is largely a do-not-mail list. By signing up with the MPS, you 
will largely eliminate solicitations from the major national direct market-
ers that belong to the DMA. This one action will significantly reduce the 
amount of junk mail you receive. However, the MPS will not totally eliminate 
your junk mail. You will still get unsolicited mail from local advertisers, chari-
ties, politicians, and commercial organizations that are not participants in 
MPS, as well as mail addressed to "resident" or "occupant." You will also 
239 

Once your name is on 
the DMA do-not-mail list, 
you will receive no more 
junk mail from member 
marketers, or from other 
companies that may buy 
or rent DMA lists. 
• Prying Eyes • 
continue to receive direct mail from companies with which you have a rela-
tionship. 
When you register with MPS, your name is placed on a list that is sent to 
members of the DMA four times a year, in January, April, July, and October. 
The member marketers match their lists against the 
MPS list and must delete from their lists the names 
and addresses supplied by the MPS. Once your 
name is on the DMA do-not-mail list, you will receive 
no more junk mail from member marketers, or from 
other companies that may buy or rent DMA lists. 
After five years, you need to reregister. Within three 
months of registering, you should start to see an 
appreciable reduction in junk mail. 
There are two ways to register. First, you can send in a postcard or letter 
containing your name, complete home address, and signature to the follow-
ing address: 
DMA Mail Preference Service 
Box 643 
Carmel, NY 10512 
Registering by mail is free. 
Second, you can register online by going to www.dmaconsumers. 
org/cgi/offmailinglist. At the site, complete the registration form, and print 
out a copy for your files. The online registration costs $5, which you will 
need to pay with a credit card. (The credit card payment is processed over a 
secure server.) 
# 
Contact the big direct marketers directly. Even though the big direct-
marketing companies belong to the DMA, you might decide you want to 
contact them directly: 
Acxiom. To request an opt-out form, leave a message on its Consumer 
Advocate Hotline at 877/774-2094, or send an e-mail message to 
optout@acxiom.com. 
Database America Compilation Department. Write to 100 Paragon Drive, 
Montvale, NJ 07645, or call 800/223-7777 or 201/476-2000. 
240 

• Your Home • 
Donnelley Marketing. Request an opt-out by writing to them at Database 
Operations, 416 S. Bell, Ames, IA 50010. 
Equifax (formerly Polk), List Suppression File, 26955 Northwestern Hwy., 
South Field, Ml 48034, 800/873-7655. 
Experian Consumer Services (formerly Metro-
mail), 901 West Bond, Lincoln, NE 68521. To opt 
out, call 402/458-5247. 
Transllnion, List Division, Box, 97328, Jackson, 
MS 39288, 888/567-8688. 
Credit card direct 
marketers mail about 
5 billion unsolicited credit 
card offers annually. That 
means that you can 
expect to receive twenty-
five offers this year. 
^ Opt out of offers of pre-approved credit. An 
easy tip for reducing junk mail is to reduce 
those offers of pre-approved credit cards that flood your mailbox. Credit 
card direct marketers mail about 5 billion unsolicited credit card offers 
annually. That means that you can expect to receive twenty-five offers 
this year. 
As outlined in chapter 4, "Your Credit," the three major credit 
bureaus—Experian, Equifax, and Transllnion—provide credit card issuers 
with lists of names of potential new customers. If you call the credit bureaus' 
toll-free numbers, you can prevent this from happening. The number to call 
is 888/5-OPT-OUT or 888/567-8688. 
When you call the number, an automated voice system will answer and 
lead you through the opt-out process in about three minutes. You need only 
provide your name, phone number, and social security number (don't worry 
about giving it out; they have it already). 
After releasing this information, the first option lets you remove your 
name for two years. The opt-out goes into effect after five business days. 
If you prefer to keep your name off these lists permanently, wait for the 
second option. If you choose to opt out permanently, you will receive a 
form in the mail within five business days. You must fill out the form and 
return it; otherwise, your opt-out request will be downgraded to two 
years. If at a later date you decide you would like to resume getting those 
pre-approved offers, call the same number. If you move, you must repeat 
the call. 
241 

^ Refuse and return mail. The U.S. Postal Service is required to deliver your 
mail, but you are not required to accept it. You can use these simple tactics 
to easily handle two situations: 
For your own junk mail: For first-class junk mail, cross out the address and 
bar code, circle the first-class postage, and write REFUSED: RETURN TO SENDER— 
REMOVE NAME FROM MAILING LIST. The U.S. Postal Service will send the junk 
mail back to the sender. As a rule, you will be removed from that marketer's 
list. Note this tactic does not work for bulk mail. The U.S. Postal Service dis-
cards bulk mail that is undeliverable. In this case, refusing the mail may feel 
good but the tactic does no good. To interrupt bulk-mail deliveries, you have 
to communicate directly with the sender. 
For others' junk mail: In some cases, you receive mail addressed to people 
who no longer live at your address. To eliminate this junk mail, write on the 
outside of the envelope REFUSED: RETURN TO SENDER; RECIPIENT HAS MOVED 
and mail it back. You should see results with this trick. You can also fill out a 
Mail Forwarding Change of Address Form (Postal Form 3575) for the former 
residents. Write MOVED, LEFT N O FORWARDING ADDRESS as the new address. 
Sign your own name but write AGENT FOR THE ABOVE below your signature. If 
possible, give this form directly to your mail carrier so you can be sure the 
information is entered into the National Change of Address database. If all 
else fails, you may even need to follow up with a phone call to the post 
office to ensure that the change gets effectuated. 
*- Remove yourself from sweepstakes, catalog, and coupon lists. By making a 
phone call or filling out an e-mail form, you can remove your name from 
sweepstakes, catalog, and coupon lists. Use these numbers to help reduce 
your mail: 
Sweepstakes: Call the 800 number and ask to be removed from the pub-
lisher's mailing list. Here are some important numbers: 
Publisher Clearing House Sweepstakes 
800/645-9242 
American Family Publishers 
800/237-2400 
242 

* Your Home •-
Catalogs: Call the catalog's 800 number and ask to be removed from its 
mailing list. Calling will prevent you not only from receiving the catalog in 
the future, but also from winding up on someone else's list. Have the mailing 
label handy when you make the call. 
Coupons: Use these numbers to reduce coupon mailings: 
ADVO (mail looks like supermarket fliers, arrives without an address 
and accompanied by a postcard with a picture of a missing child). Call 
888/241-6760 to get off the list, or log on to www.advo.com/html/con-
tacts/index.htm to do so online. 
Val-Pak Coupons (a fat envelope full of coupons). The easiest way to 
get deleted from this list is to log on to www.coxtarget.com/removal_ 
request.html. Val-Pak has regional lists, so if you want to unsubscribe by 
mail, send your request to whatever address is printed on the envelope you 
receive. 
^ Consider NOT filling out a change of address form if you move. When you 
fill out the U.S. Postal Service's Change of Address Form, the information is 
entered into their National Change of Address (NCOA) database, and your 
name and new address in effect get sold to mailing list companies nation-
wide. This is why junk mail finds its way into your mailbox after you move to 
a new address. 
To avoid getting junk mail at your new address, use these two tactics: 
• Send your own postcards announcing your change of address to those 
whose mail you want (or in the case of bills, have) to receive. 
• Fill out an address change form but indicate FOR TEMPORARY MOVE ONLY, 
implying that you will return to your old address in one year. The postal 
service only forwards first-class mail for a year anyway, and temporary 
address changes apparently do not find their way into the NCOA data-
base and therefore do not get sold. 
# Do not fill out product registration or warranty cards. What do your veg-
etable garden and the number of people living under your roof have to do 
with preserving the warranty on your new hair dryer? Nothing. Like many 
others, you have probably been fooled for years into believing that warranty 
cards with their questions about hobbies, income, family, and so on actually 
243 

* Prying Eyes f 
have something to do with warranties. As discussed in more detail in chap-
ter 6, "Your Shopping," these cards are marketing tools to gather your per-
sonal information, which will wind up on mailing lists. As a result, a recently 
enacted California law requires companies to inform California residents 
and consumers that failure to fill out product registration cards will not in 
any way affect a consumer's warranty rights. 
Instead of filling out the warranty card, keep your product receipt and 
discard the card. The only reason to return a warranty card is to be informed 
of future product recalls. If you want to receive information about recalls, 
return the card but include only minimal information, like name, address, 
product serial information, and date of purchase, and be sure to write a 
note stating that this information is not to be sold, traded, or shared. 
If you believe that you have filled out warranty cards in the past and 
want to be removed from the marketing lists created from them, write a let-
ter to the following address requesting that your information be removed 
from their list and not shared with any third parties: 
National Demographics and Lifestyles 
List Order Department 
1621 18th Street, Suite 300 
Denver, CO 80202 
-* Decide whether or not you want to be listed in the phone book. If your 
name is listed in the white pages of the phone book, you are easy prey for 
direct marketers. You may consider having an unlisted number, or listing just 
your name and phone number, but not your address. There are also directo-
ries that are organized by street address and phone number, rather than 
name. These are sometimes called reverse directories, crisscross directo-
ries, or street address directories. These directories are available as printed 
books and online. Go, for instance, to anywho.com, infospace.com, 
switchboard.com, or phonenumber.com, and select the reverse-lookup 
option. Using these directories, anyone can input your phone number and 
find your address and your name. Ask your phone company to remove your 
listing from its street address directory. Also contact the following directory 
companies to request that your name be removed from their mailing lists: 
244 

* Your Home * 
Haines & Company, Inc., publisher of Criss-Cross Directory 
Send written requests to: 
Attn: Director of Data Processing 
8050 Freedom Ave., NW 
North Canton, OH 44720 
800/562-8220 
Equifax (formerly R.L Polk & Co) 
Send written requests to: 
Attn: List Suppression Files 
26955 Northwestern Hwy. 
South Field, Ml 48034 
AnyWho.com 
Send residential removal requests to: 
AnyWho Directory Service 
Attn: Listing Removals 
Box 944028 
Maitland, FL 32794-4028 
Be sure to include your exact listing as it appears on the site, including 
your phone number. 
lnfoSpace.com 
Edit/remove your information via their website: 
First look yourself up on the website, then click on the option to 
edit/remove your listing. You will be asked to check a box asserting that you 
THE DIRTY LIST CLEANERS 
The U.S. Postal Service may not admit that it sells your new address to direct 
marketers. It actually does, but it does so cleverly and indirectly. They use 
this loophole: the Postal Service charges a licensing fee to third-party com-
panies, or "list cleaners," whose job it is to take old direct-mailing lists, revise 
them with new information, and then send them back to direct marketers. 
245 

are in fact the person described in the listing, and the site requires that you 
must be able to receive an e-mail confirmation that contains a link that you 
must click to confirm that the listed information can be changed or 
removed. 
-£ Monitor your purchases by mail. Whenever you buy something by mail or 
online, indicate on your order form that you do not want your name shared, 
sold, or traded. Many online shopping sites also offer the option of taking 
yourself off future mailing lists. 
4t Be thorough. If you want to cover all the bases, register with the MPS multi-
ple times using slight variations of your name (e.g., William Johnson, William 
E. Johnson, Bill Johnson) and address (e.g., 36 Fifth Street, 36 Fifth Street 
Apt. 5). If you have many iterations of your name, you will probably want to 
do this by free mail-in registration. 
%• Watch the calendar. If three months after registering with MPS you are still 
getting junk mail specifically addressed to you, you might want to write 
each company directly and request removal of your name. Make sure to 
reregister with the MPS every five years after your initial signup. 
# 
Shred your offers, especially the pre-approved ones. If you do want to 
receive pre-approved offers, and do not opt out, do not forget to shred, rip 
up, or otherwise mangle this mail before you discard it. These pieces of mail 
provide prime opportunities for identity thieves! Review chapter 3, "Your 
Identity," for information about how identity thieves steal your mail and apply 
for credit cards in your name. 
^ Do not enter sweepstakes. Your odds of winning are infinitesimal, but your 
odds of having your name put on lists and being sold to others is likely. 
Junk Faxes 
Steve Kirsch, a Silicon Valley entrepreneur, has been waging a per-
sonal campaign to eliminate illegal junk faxes by suing junk-fax 
246 

* Your Home f 
senders. Mr. Kirsch has filed a $2.2 trillion class action lawsuit 
against Fax.com, the biggest offender of the junk-fax law. He has 
also set up a website, www.junkfax.org, for those wanting to learn 
more about stopping junk faxes. 
An attorney in Washington, DC, successfully 
sued Fax.com for 
$2.25 million after his law firm received a thousand unwanted faxes 
in one day alone. 
Did you know that junk faxes are illegal in the United States? Even if the 
junk fax contains information about how to stop further junk faxes, it is still 
illegal. Junk faxes are illegal whether they are sent to your home or your office. 
The only unsolicited faxes that are not illegal are ones containing religious or 
political messages, faxes from companies with which you have an existing 
business relationship, or faxes from companies to whom you have expressly 
given written consent to fax you. 
To stop illegal faxes, try the following: 
-fc Call the offender. Call the phone number at the top of the fax (every fax is 
required by law to list this, though some list phony numbers). Tell the faxer 
that you wish to be removed from its list. Also mention that if you ever get 
another junk fax from the faxer, you will file a complaint with the Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) and your state's attorney general's 
office. 
* 
File a complaint with the FCC. Under the law, the FCC has the power to levy 
fines against junk faxers. If the offender is particularly egregious, the FCC has 
in the past levied fines in the million-dollar range. To file a complaint, you can 
call 888/225-5322, fill out an extensive online complaint form at 
www.fcc.gov/cgb/complaints.html, or mail a letter of complaint explaining 
that you received an illegal fax to Federal Communications Commission, 
Common Carrier Bureau, Consumer Information, 445 12th Street SW, Wash-
ington, DC 20554. In your letter, include the date of the offense, your name, 
address, phone number, and your fax number, and foe sure to attach the 
offending fax. 
247 

• Prying Eyes • 
# File a complaint with your state's attorney general's office. To contact your 
state's attorney general, go to the site of the National Association of 
Attorneys General at http://www.naag.org or see the list compiled by Yahoo! 
at http://dir.yahoo.com/Society_and_Culture/Crime/Law_Enforcement/ 
. 
Attorneys_General/U_S States/. 
Thanks to recent federal 
legislation that 
established the National 
Do Not Call Registry 
(DNC), you can reduce 
the telemarketing calls 
you receive by up to 
80 percent. 
Telemarketing Calls 
You are at a critical stage of kneading pie 
dough; you are in the throes of a life-altering 
fight with your spouse; you are just sitting 
down to dinner with your family; you've just 
emerged dripping wet from a relaxing shower, when the phone 
rings. You drop everything to answer it, but you wish you had not. 
The caller is neither a family member nor a friend, but a telemar-
keter—a stranger trying to sell you a product or service. 
Today, using new technologies such as automated-dialing response sys-
tems, telemarketers are estimated to make as many as 104 million calls daily, 
according to statistics from the Federal Communications Commission. It is 
mildly annoying when you get an unsolicited telemarketing call on, say, a 
Monday afternoon, but it is hugely aggravating—and not coincidental—that 
the calls usually come at the most inopportune times. Telemarketers know 
when you're most likely to be home. 
To be fair, telemarketers are simply trying to make a living. But the fact is 
that telemarketers also tried to undo the law to maintain their livelihood. The 
United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit ultimately rejected the tele-
marketers challenges to the law, instead preserving the Do Not Call rules and 
upholding their constitutionality. 
If you're like most people, you may feel that telemarketing calls are a con-
stant disruption and add more stress to your already busy life. You may also 
believe that these calls represent yet another example of a loss of privacy in 
your day-to-day life, and perhaps most galling of all, the calls are an intrusion 
that come directly into your home. 
248 

4 Your Home 
f 
TELEMARKETING SCAMS 
Scams involving junk mail and telemarketing are designed to steal your 
money or get you to disclose your personal information so the scammers 
can steal it from you. In other instances, they are designed to trick you into 
agreeing to receive telemarketing calls. Watch out for these scams: 
The "Free Gift By Calling a Seemingly Local Number" Scam 
You have just won an amazing prize. To claim the prize, you have to 
call a number beginning with area code 809, 284, or 876 right away. 
The phone number sounds like a normal domestic number, so you make 
the call. What you won't know until your exorbitant phone bill arrives is that 
the number you are calling is in the Dominican Republic, the British Virgin 
Islands, or Jamaica, all unregulated places where phone companies can 
charge whatever they want. The so-called 809 scam is among the telemarket-
ing scams that cost Americans $40 billion annually, according to the FTC. 
Next time you get a message to call a number with an unfamiliar area code, 
check the location of the number you're calling at www.allareacodes.com. 
Also, beware of mail, e-mail, and telemarketing scams designed to trick 
you into giving consent to receive telemarketing calls. Consumers who reg-
ister to win a sweepstakes or to receive a free gift might inadvertently be 
granting permission to be solicited. It is important to read all the fine print. 
Do not check any "opt-in" boxes unless you intend to grant consent. 
The "Call from the Official with the Do Not Call Registry" Scam 
Hi! My name is Deloresl I am an official with the Do Not Call Registry 
and I need to verify that you do not want to receive telemarketing 
calls. I'll need some information from you to verify that I'm talking to 
the correct person. Can you give me your social security number or a 
telephone calling-card number? 
Many scams use Do Not Call registration as a means of stealing your 
personal information. It appears that identity thieves are calling con-
249 

sumers and identifying themselves as officials with the Do Not Call Reg-
istry. These scammers tell the consumer that they need to verify that the 
consumer indeed meant to sign up with the registry, and to do so they will 
need some personal information (like social security number, or telephone 
calling-card number.) Be on the lookout for scams like this, and remember 
that once you register with the Do Not Call Registry no one will call you to 
confirm. 
The Do Not Call Registry 
If you are not brazen, do not want to be impolite, or are not devious enough to 
get rid of these calls without having to listen to the entire pitch, there is some-
thing you can do. Thanks to recent federal legislation that established the 
National Do Not Call Registry (DNC), you can reduce the telemarketing calls you 
receive by up to 80 percent. 
The Do Not Call Registry is a federal program, implemented by the Fed-
eral Trade Commission (FTC) in 2003, that generally prevents commercial 
telemarketers from calling you once you register (exceptions are listed below). 
If you think this program is a good idea, you are not alone. On the first day of 
the list's existence, more than 7 million numbers registered. As of January 
2004, the number of registered phone numbers swelled to nearly 56.3 million. 
Although the FTC had originally estimated that people would register 60 mil-
lion numbers in the first year, that estimate now looks conservative in light of 
the interest that has been shown thus far. 
The Do Not Call Registry requires telemarketers to check their lists every 
three months against the phone numbers in the registry and scrub from their 
lists those numbers contained in the registry. The list is set up so within three 
months of signing up for the program, you should notice a significant reduc-
tion in telemarketing calls to your home. 
The law also requires that telemarketers transmit their phone numbers 
and names (or the name of the firm making the call) to your caller ID service. 
The display must also include a phone number that you can call to request 
250 

4 Your Home f 
that the particular company no longer call you. These requirements further 
protect your privacy increase accountability, and help in enforcement efforts. 
If you do pick up a telemarketing call, the law also requires an actual sales rep-
resentative to answer within two seconds of your greeting. This requirement 
will reduce the number of hang-up calls you get from telemarketers using 
automated dialing equipment. 
There are several ways to sign up for the Do Not Call List, and each one is 
quick and easy: 
*• Register by Phone. Call the FTC's toll-free phone number: 888/382-1222. 
When you register by phone, you must call from the telephone number you 
want to register. You may register only one phone number at a time when 
you call the Do Not Call Registry. 
-fc Register Online. Register online at the FTC's website: www.donotcall. 
gov. If you register online, you must provide an e-mail address. The registry 
will send you a confirmation e-mail. To finalize your registration, you must 
click on the link in the e-mail. (Your e-mail address will not be shared.) You 
may register up to three telephone numbers at a time if you register online. 
You will receive a confirmation e-mail for each number you register, and you 
WHAT To Do IF TELEMARKETERS STILL CALL 
If your name has been on the national Do Not Call Registry for at least 
three months and you receive what you believe to be an illegal telemarket-
ing call, you may file a complaint with the FTC at www.donotcall.gov/Com-
plain/ComplainCheck.aspx. You must provide the date of the call, and 
either the phone number or the name of the company that called you. You 
may also file a complaint by calling the registry's toll-free number at 
888/382-1222. Both the Federal Trade Commission and the Federal Com-
munications Commission have the authority to fine telemarketers up to 
$11,000 per violation. This fine can be assessed for each illegal phone call 
made to a number included in the registry. 
251 

must click on the link in each e-mail to complete the process. If you wish to 
register more than three numbers, you may repeat this process online as 
many times as you wish. 
The Do Not Call Registry is only for personal phone numbers; it does 
not apply to business numbers. You can also register your cell phone 
number. 
Your number will remain on the registry for five years from the date you 
register unless either you choose to remove it from the registry, or your 
phone number is disconnected. If your phone number is disconnected for 
any reason (if, for example, you temporarily move, or a billing dispute 
results in your service being discontinued), you must reregister. If you move 
and get a new phone number, you must also reregister. If you are not sure 
when your protection will lapse, click on the Verify a Registration button at 
www.donotcall.gov/confirm/Conf.aspx to check your registration's expira-
tion date. It is a good idea to print out your registration page at the time 
you sign up and save it as a record. 
You can always take your name off the list and resume receiving tele-
marketing calls. To do so, call toll-free 888/382-1222. You must make the 
call from the phone number you want to delete from the registry. Your 
number will be removed from the Do Not Call Registry the next day, but it 
can take up to three months for the telemarketers to start calling you 
again. 
Be aware that many states have their own registries that automatically 
transfer the numbers from their lists to the national Do Not Call Registry. 
Check www.ftc.gov/bcp/conline/edcams/donotcall/statelist.html to see if 
this is the case for your state. In the event your state has a registry that is 
more stringent than the national list, the state's laws will govern. If you have 
any doubt about which registry extends better protection, you should con-
sider signing up for both your state and national programs. 
Telemarketing Calls That Are Still Allowed 
Signing up for the Do Not Call Registry will eliminate most of your telemar-
keting calls, but not all of them. Certain telemarketing groups may still con-
tinue to call you, but they are limited to calling you only between the hours of 
252 

* Your Home * 
8 A.M. and 9 P.M. If you have signed up for the Do Not Call Registry, you can 
still expect to receive calls from: 
• Political organizations. If you do not wish to receive future calls from 
political organizations, ask to be placed on their internal do-not-call 
lists (many organizations maintain these). 
• Charities. If you do not wish to receive calls from charities, ask to be 
placed on the charity's in-house do-not-call list (many charities 
maintain these). 
• Telephone surveyors. If the call is truly to conduct a survey, it is 
permissible. If, however, the caller conducts a survey in conjunction 
with selling goods or services, this is impermissible. 
• Companies with which you have an existing business relationship. 
Those companies with which you have an existing business 
relationship, such as your bank, utility company, or phone carrier, are 
permitted to continue to call you. However, you can ask these 
companies to put you on their internal do-not-call lists. Note that if you 
purchase a product or service from any company, that company is 
deemed to have an existing business relationship with you, but the 
company may only make phone solicitations for eighteen months after 
the date the purchase took place. In addition, an implied business 
relationship with a company is created if you make an inquiry to the 
company or submit an application, even if no purchase ever took 
place. In this case, the company can call you for three months after you 
made the inquiry or application. 
• Companies to which you have given written permission to call. 
There still may be some telemarketing calls you want to receive, even 
after signing up with the Do Not Call Registry. In this case, notify the 
specific companies in writing, and include your signature and phone 
number in your letter. Your letter enables these companies to contact 
you legally until you tell them otherwise. 
• Affiliates. People are often unaware of the loophole that allows 
telemarketing by affiliates of a company with which you have an 
existing business relationship. It is often hard to tell who is an affiliate, 
253 

but the rules of thumb in this context are: the name of the affiliate 
should be similar to the name of the company and the affiliate should 
provide a similar service. 
The Do Not Call Registry is your strongest protection against the assaults 
of telemarketers. Bear in mind these tips when you register and whenever you 
receive telemarketing calls: 
0 Register online if you do not have a private phone exchange. If you live in a 
dormitory or a senior housing complex with a private branch exchange 
(PBX), or if you live in an extremely rural area, you may not be able to regis-
ter by phone. 
# 
Keep a record. When you sign up for the Do Not Call Registry, keep a 
record of your registration. If you register online, print a copy of your confir-
mation. If you register by phone, note the time and date of your phone call. 
-*- Reregister if your phone number changes or is disconnected. If your 
phone number is disconnected for any reason (because you temporarily 
move, or if a billing dispute resulted in your service being discontinued), 
you must reregister. If you move and get a new phone number, you must 
also reregister. 
•fc Demand to be removed from a telemarketing list. Whether or not you 
sign up for the Do Not Call Registry, you can still request that those com-
panies from which you do not wish to receive calls put you on their internal 
do-not-call lists. 
•Jfr Employ basic technology strategies. You can use basic technology to 
enhance your privacy. An answering machine and/or Caller ID will screen 
your calls. 
*• Give your cell phone number as your home phone number. As of now, it is 
illegal for a telemarketer to call a cell phone if the consumer would have to 
pay for the call. 
254 

* Your Home * 
THE Bono M LINE 
• Open house or open book? Renting or buying a home or apartment will 
result in others learning a great deal of personal information about you; 
try to prevent or correct inaccuracies in your credit report and other 
records, and be vigilant about what others do with your documents. 
• Going wireless in the home? Be aware of wireless devices in your home, 
including nanny cams and cordless phones—they can be easily 
intercepted. 
• Mail reduction. To reduce junk mail, sign up for the DMA Mail Preference 
Service, opt out of pre-approved credit offers, and directly contact 
companies from which you do not want to receive mail. 
• Don't call me, I'll call you. To reduce direct-marketing calls, sign up with 
the Do Not Call Registry. Reregister after five years or whenever you move. 
• Junk faxes are illegal. Notify the company and the Federal Communications 
Commission to stop the flow of junk faxes. 
255 

Your Workplace 
« Ma» Baldwin / Cotmrad 
"Meet the new head of security." 
You have worked for the same company for many years. One day, 
management enacts a new policy that requires background checks. 
Yours reveals a seven-year-old misdemeanor for selling a pistol, and 
before you know it your job is on the line. But you have never had a 
run-in with the law, much less touched a gun; the background check 
has mistaken you for someone else. 
You work in a posh resort in Atlantic City. You are required to wear 
a badge that beeps if you fail to wash your hands long enough or 
use soap when you go to the rest room. Every hygiene infraction 
is recorded in your employee file, which is stored in your boss's 
computer. 
256 

In almost all cases, 
your privacy as an 
employee is outweighed 
by your employer's 
business interest. 
• Your Workplace • 
You send your wife romantic e-mails from work. Two weeks later 
you are officially disciplined because you are exploiting company re-
sources for personal use. 
You spill personal and painful details of your 
life to a psychiatrist who is employed by the 
company at which you have worked for more 
than twenty years. The company required that 
you be evaluated by the company's psychiatrist 
in order to receive workers' compensation. The 
fifteen-page intimate psychiatric report, which 
you believed to be confidential, was then circulated by your boss to 
a colleague, and the information instantly became water-cooler gos-
sip. You are later told that the report is not considered private. 
How much is your privacy worth in the workplace? About as much as 
your stock options in your old Internet company. Many people worry about 
the government's Orwellian-like intrusion into their privacy. But government 
is not the only Big Brother. Few people fully grasp the extent to which their 
own bosses keep tabs on them. As it turns out, there are two Big Brothers, and 
one sits in the big office upstairs. 
Perhaps Lewis Maltby of the ACLU Workplace Rights Project put it best: 
"When most Americans go to work in the morning, they might just as well be 
going to a foreign country, because they are equally beyond the reach of the 
Constitution in both situations. And unfortunately, federal law does very, very 
little to fill this void." 
The same actions that may be viewed as unconstitutional violations of 
your rights when performed by the government are perfectly permissible if 
performed by your boss. Your employer can: 
• Read your e-mail—even if your message is marked "private" or even if 
it is deleted 
• Listen to your voice mail, even if you have a password 
• Monitor what is on the screen of your computer and what you have 
saved on your hard drive 
257 

* Prying Eyes f 
• Monitor every website you have ever visited 
• Install software that monitors every keystroke you type into your 
computer, even if you have deleted the text 
• Require you to produce a urine sample so the company can test for 
drugs 
• Read your credit reports and look at your medical records 
• Probe your innermost thoughts with psychological tests 
• Share your personal information with creditors and others 
In matters governing the relationship between employer and employee, 
the balance of power is clearly tipped in favor of the employer. In almost all 
cases, your privacy as an employee is outweighed by your employer's business 
interest. 
The degree to which your privacy rights are protected depends on 
whether you are a public or private employee. If you are a public-sector 
employee, the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution may provide some pro-
tection if you have a "reasonable expectation of privacy." What is "reasonable" 
depends entirely on your situation. 
If you work in the private sector however, the Fourth Amendment is not 
applicable; instead you must rely on federal and state statutes as well as com-
mon law for protection. State laws vary and common law is both confusing 
and unsettled, so you have little legal support to claim that your privacy rights 
have been violated in the workplace. To win a case, you must demonstrate that 
you had a "reasonable expectation of privacy" in the matter at issue. Courts 
rarely find an employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy in the work-
place when using company property to do anything, particularly if you have 
had advance notice of a company policy concerning the conduct at hand. 
In addition to having legal precedents, employers can utilize new tech-
nologies to monitor your actions in the workplace as never before. From key-
board-tracking programs, which record every bit of data you enter into your 
computer, to badges that track your every movement within a building, 
employers now have a disturbingly detailed window into your daily work-
place activities. 
258 

* Your Workplace f 
Pre-Employment 
You think your experience makes you a cinch for the job. You aced 
the interview. Your prospective boss has even asked when you can 
start work. But before you start planning what to wear on your first 
day, think again. Just because the inquiry is over doesn't mean the 
scrutiny has ended. 
Your privacy may be compromised before you're even hired. Your 
prospective employer will gather a great deal of personal information about 
you in the interview and background check: your driving record, your credit 
history, and the results of a drug or psychological test are all available to poten-
tial employers. You'll be asked to verify the details of your résumé, and you can 
expect your prospective employer to do its own extensive double-check. 
If you claim that you have a Harvard law degree, employers will want to 
verify that you did in fact go to Harvard Law. They will also check whether you 
actually made that six-figure salary. According to a 2002 study conducted by 
ADP Screening and Selection Services, over 40 percent of job applicants lie on 
their résumés. Remember the headlines about California's poet laureate or 
Bausch & Lomb's CEO, both of whom included "inaccuracies" on their 
résumés? Or the stories about the president of an evangelical Christian college 
in Georgia who lied about having a master's degree, and a former president of 
the U.S. Olympic Committee who lied about having earned a doctorate? Their 
lies were unveiled, and it's likely that yours will be, too. 
According to one survey of eighty-seven Fortune 500 companies with a 
combined 3.2 million employees, 75 percent of the companies said they collect 
information about employees beyond what workers voluntarily provide (and 
almost half do so without informing the employees). Much of this information 
about you, such as criminal-background and credit checks, comes from data 
collection companies such as ChoicePoint. Other information comes from per-
sonal interviews and perhaps even medical and drug testing. Some employers 
use even more extreme methods such as handwriting analysis, psychological 
testing, genetic testing, and more. 
Why do employers feel compelled to spend so much time and money 
screening job applicants? The most important reason is that employers want 
259 

[:'<&. ;<É*:'^|!i»:; jfc: .^3<>p ;pg"#^ jf*:^; a» *§• 
75 percent of the 
companies said they 
collect information about 
employees beyond what 
workers voluntarily 
provide (and almost half 
do so without informing 
their employees). 
• Prying Eyes • 
to find the most reliable and qualified people to hire. On average in U.S. busi-
nesses, at least half of new hires do not work out. It costs approximately 
$7,000 to replace a salaried employee, $10,000 to replace a mid-level employee, 
and $40,000 to replace a senior executive. 
Your employer also may have legitimate con-
cerns about employee theft, disclosure of trade 
secrets and other confidential information, and 
being subjected to lawsuits involving workplace 
violence and sexual harassment. Lack of due dili-
gence on a job applicant can wreak havoc with a 
company's reputation and cost millions. For exam-
ple, under state statutes that regulate negligent hir-
ing practices—and more than half the states have 
enacted such statutes—your employer may be held 
criminally and financially liable for illegal actions taken by employees who 
were not subjected to reasonable pre-employment screening, even if the 
actions occur off the job. 
Recent events have also prompted employers to take background checks 
more seriously. As a direct result of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 
2001, many employers have conducted thorough background checks not 
only of job applicants, but of existing employees as well. The financial scan-
dals at Enron, Tyco, and WorldCom have also resulted in more thorough 
background checks of applicants, especially for corporate executives, offi-
cers, and directors. 
Finally, federal and state laws require background checks for certain jobs. 
Most states, for example, call for criminal background checks on applicants for 
certain positions, especially those dealing with children, the elderly, or people 
with disabilities. Many state and federal government jobs require not only 
background checks, but even more extensive investigations. 
You know that fudging on your résumé is fraud. So it should be clear to 
you that doing so is not a good idea. It is not simply a legal or ethical issue; it is 
a practical one as well. If, in checking your references, a would-be employer 
discovers that you misrepresented yourself on your résumé—even if the mis-
representation is inconsequential—your credibility will be damaged and you 
may lose the job opportunity. 
260 

4 Your Workplace f 
Background Checks 
For many years, the city of Decatur, Georgia, had a policy of con-
ducting highly intrusive background checks on anyone wishing to 
work in bars or restaurants where alcohol was served. A job appli-
cant was required to disclose, and then permit the city to inquire 
into, "any and all aspects of [his or her] life. " The city obtained 
highly personal information, including the applicant's 
shopping 
habits at drugstores and pharmacies, his or her mental and physical 
condition, and past tax records. Prospective candidates were also 
required to sign an agreement that released the city from liability 
for misuse of any of this information. 
Decatur's policy was extreme, and the policies were later terminated in 
response to pressure applied by the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU). 
But think about your own job-hunting experiences. Have you ever been 
required to take a drug test, submit to a handwriting analysis or a psychologi-
cal test, sign off on releasing your credit report, or even supply your twenty-
five-year-old SAT scores? 
As you think about these scenarios, you should realize that your employer 
has great leeway to collect extensive information about you when conducting 
background checks. For you, the danger of an intrusive background check is 
that it could reveal incorrect or irrelevant personal information that bears no 
relationship to the job for which you are applying. 
The information collected in a background check includes, but is not lim-
ited to: 
• Driving records 
• Criminal records 
• Character references 
• Court records 
• Property ownership 
• State licensing records 
• Vehicle registration 
• Social security number 
261 

• Workers' compensation claims and records 
• Neighbor interviews 
• Employment verification 
• Education records 
• Credit records 
• Bankruptcy records 
• Medical records 
• Military service records 
• Drug test records 
• Sex offender lists 
Be aware that some of this information may not legally be considered in 
the hiring process or can be used only with limitations (see section below for 
details). But once your employer receives incriminating information about 
you, even if it is illegal to consider, human nature makes it difficult to remem-
ber that the information is off-limits. 
The records that cannot legally be used in the pre-offer hiring decision are: 
• Polygraph tests. The Employee Polygraph Protection Act forbids most 
private employers from using polygraph tests as a screening tool on 
applicants or existing employees. Exceptions exist, however, in cases 
where the applicant or employee may be involved with a business that 
provides armored-car personnel, security alarm personnel, or other 
security personnel. 
• Workers' compensation claims. Under the Americans with Disability 
Act (ADA), your prospective employer cannot use the fact that you 
filed a workers' compensation claim to discriminate against your 
application. In some states, however, your employer may access your 
record after making you an employment offer and may use the 
information only if the injury in question might interfere with your 
ability to perform the duties of the job you have been offered. 
• Medical tests. Under the ADA, your prospective employer cannot 
require or conduct a medical examination (including an HIV test) 
before making you an employment offer. After you have received the 
262 

* Your Workplace f 
offer and before you begin work, you may be required to take a 
medical exam if: 
• All entering employees are subject to such a medical exam; 
• Medical information revealed by the exam is collected and 
maintained on separate, confidential forms and is kept in 
confidential files that are separated from other personnel files. 
If your employer withdraws an employment offer because the 
medical exam reveals that you do not meet certain employment 
criteria, it must show either that the criteria do not tend to screen out 
individuals with disabilities, or that the criteria are job-related and 
consistent with business necessity and there is no reasonable 
accommodation that would enable the individual to perform the job 
without undue hardship on the employer. 
• Bankruptcies. Your employer may not discriminate against you 
because you have previously filed for bankruptcy. 
Your employer may need to obtain your permission before using the fol-
lowing: 
• School records. Your educational records, including transcripts, 
recommendations, and financial information, are to be kept 
confidential under federal law As a result, your alma mater will not 
likely release your records without your consent. However, your school 
may release directory information, which includes name, address, dates 
of attendance, degrees earned, and activities, unless you have provided 
written notice asking the school to do otherwise. See chapter 11, "Your 
Everyday Life," which discusses access to college and university records. 
• Military records. For members and former members of the armed 
forces, your service records may be released only if you consent and 
only under limited circumstances. The military may disclose name, 
rank, salary, duty assignments, awards, and duty status without your 
consent. See chapter 2, "Your Personal Information and the Public 
Record," for more information on access to military records. 
• References. When you apply for a job, you will most likely be asked 
for references as well as permission to contact these references. 
263 

Prospective employers rely heavily on reference checking in the hiring 
process, but past employers are likely to verify only your salary, job 
title, and dates of employment to avoid a possible defamation lawsuit. 
Even if your prospective employer may not obtain much revealing 
information in a reference check, it most likely will still try to conduct 
one to protect itself. 
• Credit information. To check your credit, your prospective employer 
will provide you with a document granting it written authorization to 
do so (see section below). See chapter 4, "Your Credit," for more 
information on credit reports. 
• Criminal records. A prospective employer's access to criminal records 
and the extent to which it can consider them as part of a hiring 
decision varies according to state (see section below). See chapter 2, 
"Your Personal Information and the Public Record," for information 
related to arrest records. 
• Drug testing, psychological testing, and genetic testing. Laws 
against drug, psychological, and genetic tests as part of a background 
check are not consistent from state to state and depend upon the type 
of job, especially if you are applying for a job in a private company (see 
section below). 
If your prospective employer violates any of the above rules, you should 
either move on and hope for a more scrupulous boss, or consult an attorney to 
discuss your legal options. 
Credit Information 
John recently went on a big interview with one of the top banks in 
the country. Halfway through the testing process, someone came 
into the room and asked him to leave. Apparently, the company re-
viewed his credit report and discovered that he had a history of late 
payments on his Visa card. Based on that information, the bank con-
cluded that it would not hire John and that it was not worth contin-
uing the interview process. Seem far-fetched? Not according to the 
Washington Post. 
264 

About 50 percent 
of employers rely 
on credit reports in hiring 
for the management 
level or below, and 
70 percent do so for 
executive-level staffing. 
• Your Workplace • 
As discussed in chapter 4, "Your Credit," your credit report reveals a great 
deal about you. It discloses how many loans, credit cards, and mortgages you 
hold; your payment history for each account; whether your bank accounts are 
overdrawn; and what debts you owe. Your report 
also lists your employment history and any liens, 
bankruptcies, or civil legal judgments against you. 
More and more companies are turning to credit 
reports to supplement their assessments of you dur-
ing the application process. About 50 percent of 
employers rely on credit reports in hiring for the 
management level or below, and 70 percent do so for 
executive-level staffing, according to one national 
employment agency. Not only do employers con-
sider your credit record to be a reflection of your character, but they also want to 
ensure that your financial situation will not adversely affect your ability to do 
the job. In some jobs, such as those in the financial sector, employers use your 
credit report to determine how you might handle other people's money. 
Whether you think your credit report is a fair assessment of you is irrele-
vant. Some employers even go beyond the credit report to use Investigative 
Consumer Reports, which are even more intrusive. Investigative Consumer 
Reports contain not only your credit report, but also information on your char-
acter, general reputation, personal characteristics, and mode of living. This 
information is gleaned from interviews with neighbors, friends, and associ-
ates, as well as from certain public and court records. 
Before obtaining either type of credit report from a consumer reporting 
agency, an employer must provide you with a separate document (it can't be 
part of a larger job application) that (1) informs you that a report may be 
requested, and (2) requires your prior written authorization. If your prospec-
tive employer requests an Investigative Consumer Report, the stand-alone 
notice and authorization must also inform you that you have a right to know 
the scope of the investigation requested, and that you have a right to receive a 
written summary of your rights under the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). 
Under the FCRA, if you make less than $75,00x3 a year, the credit search can 
only provide information from within the last seven years; if your income is 
more than $75,0x30, there is no limit. 
265 

When an employer accesses credit or investigative reports, you risk being 
rejected for a job because of damaging information that may be uncovered by 
the investigation. Under the FCRA, however, if an employer relied, even in 
part, on information contained in such reports, the employer is required to 
inform you of this and give you a copy of the report. Of course, an employer 
who learns something damaging can reject you using any number of other 
excuses. This means that you may never know what information ultimately 
sunk your chances, and you may never have an opportunity to correct erro-
neous information. 
Apply some of these practical tips (as well as those listed in chapter 4, 
"Your Credit") relating to your credit report before you apply for a job: 
-*- Make sure the information in your credit report is current and accurate. 
Order your credit report well in advance of applying for a job. 
-fc Correct your bad credit. If you know you have a bad credit report, take 
proactive steps rather than waiting for it to be discovered by a prospective 
employer. In addition to correcting the report before you apply for a job, 
you might consider addressing the issue up front with the prospective 
employer so you can explain the situation. Your candor may be viewed 
favorably. 
-*- Check your other records, such as DMV and court records, to ensure their 
accuracy before you apply for a job. For information on how to do this, see 
chapter 2, "Your Personal Information and the Public Record." 
Criminal History 
In 2002, pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly & Co. dismissed Kimberly 
Kelly, a forty-six-year-old single mother who bounced a $60 check 
while she was going through a rough divorce. She was moving to a 
new town, and she closed her bank account without realizing the 
check had not cleared. The company to whom she had written the 
check pressed charges when it could not collect, and a judge found 
Kelly guilty of a misdemeanor check deception charge. Eli Lilly had 
266 

* Your Workplace * 
been conducting criminal background checks as a post-September 
11 security measure. 
When employers obtain criminal records as part of a background check, 
the legal issue centers on balancing fairness to the employer with your privacy 
as an applicant. Imagine if you are a pharmaceutical employer and you have 
recently hired an impressive candidate who holds master's and doctoral 
degrees in chemistry and a law degree. What if the most basic background 
search would have revealed that this stellar employee had spent six years in 
prison for attempting to murder his wife, his medical degree had been 
revoked, and that he earned his law degree through a correspondence course 
in prison? 
Negligent-hire cases are on the rise, so employers feel obligated to screen 
for criminal or dangerous tendencies in the hiring process. At the same time, 
as an applicant, you might feel violated if your prospective employer is dig-
ging around and investigating an old misdemeanor or a mistaken arrest. 
For these reasons, many states have passed laws governing whether, and 
to what extent, an employer may consider your criminal history in making 
hiring decisions. Unfortunately, neither state nor federal law is completely 
clear. Indeed, laws vary drastically among the states. For example, some 
CRIMINAL CHECKS ON CONTRACT WORKERS AND VENDORS 
Some companies require extensive background searches even on people 
they do not directly employ, such as contract workers and vendors working 
on their premises. For instance, the pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly insti-
tuted a policy requiring background checks on more than seven thousand 
contract workers, mostly construction and food-service workers. The policy 
was implemented immediately after the September 11 attacks. Lilly, of 
course, could not directly fire the workers whose background checks did 
not pass muster, but, according to newspaper reports, most of the workers 
banned from working at Lilly promptly received pink slips from their own 
employers. 
267 

[;^;^'^^%i^^^.:§^-^-^;'^[^'^\.^-
Drug testing is on the 
rise; approximately two-
thirds of employers have 
drug-testing policies. 
• Prying Eyes • 
states outright ban a review of your criminal history; some states allow 
employers to consider criminal history, but only for people working in cer-
tain professions, such as child care, elder care, nursing, and law enforce-
ment; some states do not allow consideration of 
arrests; and some states allow employers to con-
sider convictions, but only if the crimes are rele-
vant to the job. For information on criminal 
records and employment in your state, see 
www.casanet.org/program-management/volunteer-
manage/criminal-bkg-check.htm. Under federal 
law, employers may not categorically deny employment based on the exis-
tence of a criminal history. Instead, employers must consider various factors 
that indicate a connection between the crime committed and the nature of 
the job you seek. 
Drug Testing 
How would you feel if your company required you to take a routine 
drug test but used that test to evaluate other health issues? In 
1988, the Washington, D.C., police department admitted it used 
the drug test samples to screen female employees for pregnancy, 
without the employees' knowledge or consent. 
If you have ever been required to submit to a drug test, you understand 
how invasive testing can be to your privacy. If you have never taken a drug 
test, imagine being required to urinate into a receptacle, perhaps unclothed, 
perhaps under direct observation by those administering the test, perhaps in a 
bathroom where the water supply has been shut off and the toilet water dyed 
blue to prevent sample tampering, and perhaps where the temperature of the 
sample is measured to assure that it is not too cool to be recent. 
Drug testing is one of the most contentious issues in the workplace. In 
addition to its inherent invasiveness, several troubling issues surround drug 
testing. In many cases, the results are simply wrong. Many over-the-counter 
medicines, such as ibuprofen, Midol, Sudafed, and Vicks Nasal Spray, may 
268 

* Your Workplace f 
cause false-positives in a drug test. Finally, companies do not always limit 
access to the results. 
But drug testing is on the rise; approximately two-thirds of employers 
have drug-testing policies, according to the Ameri-
can Management Association. Indeed, some of the 
nation's most well-known corporations, including 
the The New York Times, IBM, Exxon, Federal 
Express, AT&T, Lockheed Martin, and about one-
quarter of the Fortune 500 corporations require 
drug testing after making a conditional offer. 
The law with respect to drug testing is not com-
pletely settled. If you work in the public sector, the 
Supreme Court has recognized the constitutionality 
of testing you if you work in a position critical to 
public safety or the protection of life, property, or 
national security. For example, if you work in avia-
tion, the military, motor vehicle operations, law 
enforcement, or if you handle hazardous materials, 
you can reasonably expect to be tested for drugs. 
If you work in the private sector, you have even fewer rights to refuse to 
take a drug test. Federal law is not wholly applicable to the private sector, and 
state law varies considerably Some states allow drug testing for jobs involving 
public safety; some states allow it for any occupation; some states do not allow 
it at all. For information on workplace-related drug testing in your state, visit 
said.dol.gov/StateLawList.asp. When your employer can conduct drug testing, 
it does not need a warrant, or probable cause, or even a suspicion that you are 
a drug user. Indeed, your employer may conduct drug tests as a routine part of 
its hiring process, or it may require you and other existing employees to be 
tested on a random, suspicion-less basis. 
Finally, as an applicant applying for a job, you have even less of a legal right 
to claim invasion of privacy than if you were already employed. Since you are 
often told in advance and must consent to the test as a condition of employ-
ment, you are theoretically freely choosing to subject yourself to the test. No one 
is forcing you to take the test, and you are free to seek employment elsewhere. 
When your employer can 
conduct drug testing, it 
does not need a warrant, 
or probable cause, or even 
a suspicion that you are a 
drug user. Indeed, your 
employer may conduct 
drug tests as a routine 
part of its hiring process, 
or it may require you and 
other existing employees 
to be tested on a random, 
suspicion-less basis. 
269 

Psychological Testing 
Applicants for security guard positions with Target in California 
were required to take intrusive personality tests as a condition for 
employment. The test included true-false statements about the ap-
plicants' religious and sexual practices, such as: "I feel sure there is 
only one true religion, " "I have been in trouble one or more times 
because of my sex behavior," and "I am very strongly attracted to 
members of my own sex." The applicants sued, the court found the 
questions overly intrusive, and the case ultimately settled for more 
than $1 million. 
Robert Jordan sued after being rejected for a position as a police 
officer with the New London, Connecticut, Police Department. Ap-
parently, Jordan had scored too high on a cognitive test, and the 
Police Department worried that he was too intelligent to last at the 
job. Unbelievably, the court ruled in favor of the police department. 
Increasingly, prospective employers are using psychological or personality 
tests as an additional hiring tool, particularly in light of recent reports of work-
place violence and the events of September 11. Employers use these tests not 
only to screen for violent or dishonest behavior, but also to determine whether 
or not you would fit into the company's culture and whether your traits are 
consistent with the job's requirements. 
Whether your prospective employer can perform a psychological test as 
an additional means to assess you for a job is, however, of questionable legal-
ity. First, these types of tests—and there are hundreds—may run afoul of fed-
eral antidiscrimination laws, like Title VII, if the tests are not specifically 
job-related or if they adversely impact any minority or protected group. Sec-
ond, they may violate the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) if the tests 
are construed as medical tests or include questions that are of a medical 
nature, such as whether you have frequent headaches, or whether you have 
ever sought mental health counseling. Finally, the tests may violate your pri-
vacy rights if they are not job-related or if they delve into intrusive subjects, 
such as sexual, religious, marital, or moral matters, as in the above case. Con-
270 

More than 10 percent of 
employers test employees 
for genetic predispositions 
to diseases. 
• Your Workplace • 
suit a lawyer if you believe you have been unfairly subjected to a psychologi-
cal test. 
Genetic Testing 
Workers at a laboratory at Lawrence Berkeley 
Laboratory in California sued after discovering 
that for decades they were tested without 
their knowledge for syphilis, pregnancy, and 
the genetic trait for sickle-cell anemia. The 
case was settled before the court had a chance to rule. 
The Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway had been covertly test-
ing certain employees for genetic predispositions to carpal tunnel 
syndrome. The railroad tested employees who submitted claims for 
the wrist ailment, in hopes of showing that the workers were predis-
posed to getting the ailment and therefore the company should not 
have to pay. The testing was discovered after one employee's wife, 
a nurse, noticed that the seven vials of blood the company was re-
questing was excessive for a routine medical exam. The employee 
refused to take the exam and was threatened with discharge. The 
employee went to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC), which filed suit. The railroad agreed to settle the case, pay 
$2.2 million, and halt genetic testing. 
Today, companies are increasingly making use of genetic testing in the 
workplace. According to a 1998 survey of the American Management Associa-
tion, more than 10 percent of employers test employees for genetic predisposi-
tions to diseases. 
An executive order, signed in 2000 by President Clinton, bans genetic dis-
crimination against federal employees. But no federal law exists to prevent pri-
vate employers from refusing to hire you or firing you based on genetic 
information they discover. State law varies, with some states prohibiting 
genetic screening as a condition of employment; others prohibiting discrimi-
nation against individuals with certain genetic traits, like sickle cell anemia, 
271 

No federal law exists to 
prevent private employers 
from refusing to hire you 
or firing you based on 
genetic information they 
discover. 
• Prying Eyes • 
Tay-Sachs disease, and so forth; and others permitting testing in certain cir-
cumstances. To see whether your state has genetic nondiscrimination in 
employment laws, go to www.ncsl.org/programs/health/genetics/ndiscrim. 
htm and scroll down to view the chart. 
As an employee, you should be concerned 
about genetic testing. Beyond the invasiveness, 
such testing can have real consequences for your 
employment. As in the example above, such tests 
can be used to target and fire you or other employ-
ees who cause increased company health insurance 
costs or file workers' compensation claims. In addi-
tion, your test may not be kept entirely confidential, 
and it can be given to a future employer, thus following you from job to 
another. 
Online Career Sites 
In 2003, the popular career site monster.com posted a warning on 
its site that read, in part, "Regrettably, from time to time, false job 
listings are listed online and used to illegally collect personal infor-
mation from unsuspecting job seekers." 
If you are searching for a job, you have probably used one of the many 
popular online career sites such as Monster.com, Yahoo!, Hotjobs, or 
CareerBuilder.com. According to the Society for Human Resource Manage-
ment, 96 percent of job seekers look at online job postings. Approximately 50 
million résumés are posted on these sites. 
Online job sites are convenient and helpful. At the same time, you should 
be aware that as career sites look to generate additional revenue, they are 
increasingly sharing and selling your personal information to marketers and 
employers hoping to target certain audiences. For example, according to a 
study authored by Pam Dixon, the director of the World Privacy Forum, many 
online career sites maintain inadequate privacy policies, fail to remove 
deleted résumés, and sell private data to marketers. In addition, some sites, 
272 

• Your Workplace • 
such as USAJOBS and Studentjobs.com, have required users to key in their 
social security numbers to post résumés. According to the same survey, these 
sites have failed to disclose that their job boards are outsourced to 
monster.com. 
CAREER SITE SCAMS 
Job seekers who abandon skepticism in the desperate search for employ-
ment are prime targets for identity thieves. If you post your résumé on an 
online career site, you may increase your chances of being victimized. False 
job postings are listed on the sites and are used to illegally elicit personal 
information—including your social security number, credit card numbers 
and bank account information—from unsuspecting job seekers. 
An unsuspecting user of the online career site Monster.com received a 
letter inviting him to apply for a managerial position at the insurance bro-
kerage Arthur Gallagher. The job seeker wrote back and received an e-mail 
excerpted here: 
Thank you for applying for the Marketing Manager position with 
Arthur Gallagher. I just had a chance to review your résumé and am 
going to send your application through for hiring ... The position will 
require a background check because of the nature of the high level of 
security that we have with several of our clients. I am attaching the 
form in this e-mail. Just open it up, fill it out, and fax it back to 775-
923-7229. 
The job seeker filled out the form that asked for his age, height, weight, 
social security number, bank account numbers, even his mother's maiden 
name. When no one replied, he called Arthur Gallagher headquarters to 
find out what was happening with this application. During the phone call 
he learned that the person who contacted him didn't work there and the 
job posting was a fraud. 
273 

* Prying Eyes * 
Follow these tips when using an online career site: 
^ 
Never divulge personal information. Unless and until you're hired, never 
give out your bank account, social security, or credit card numbers. 
•& Carefully review the career site's privacy policy. Make sure it does not share 
or sell personal information. 
0 Consider using only sites that more fully respect your privacy. For example, 
craigslist.org, nationjobs.com, and medzilla.com have been recommended 
for their privacy policies. 
^ 
Check out recruiters and employers before you hand over any personal 
information. 
-fc Use sites that have job search agents. Don't post your résumé. Instead, 
have a search agent send employer information to you. The site will e-mail 
you when it posts jobs that fit with your criteria. You need to give out only 
minimal information, such as keywords (like marketing or business develop-
ment), desired location, and of course, your e-mail address. 
^ 
Be on the alert for scams. (See page 273.) 
On the Job 
A manager in the technology department of a large corporation 
wrote to a newspaper columnist for advice. His job was to monitor 
his company's computer systems, and in doing so he had become 
aware of some of the most personal things about his fellow col-
leagues: their savings account balances, their bids on eBay, the 
websites they visited, and certain highly personal e-mails, with sub-
jects ranging from the mundane to the entertaining to the graphic, 
including, in one case, the dimensions of the sender's intimate body 
parts. The poor IT manager was experiencing a sort of systems 
overload himself; he complained that he would never look at certain 
employees the same way again. 
274 

• Your Workplace • 
Whether you realize it or not, and whether you like it or not, your 
employer is constantly and increasingly snooping on you during the workday. 
Indeed, according to the American Management Association (AMA), an esti-
mated 80 percent of companies in the United States 
electronically monitor their employees in some 
way. This percentage represents a dramatic increase 
r 
° 
An estimated 80 percent 
from 1997, when only 35 percent of companies 
of c o m p a n i e s in t h e U n i t e d 
monitored their employees. What specifically does 
States electronically 
your employer monitor? Consider the following: 
monitor their employees 
in some way. 
• 63 percent of employers monitor employees' 
Internet use 
• 52 percent of employers review and store employees' e-mail messages 
• 30 percent of employers review and store employees' computer files 
• 15 percent of employers use video surveillance to track their employees 
• 12 percent of employers review and record employees' telephone calls 
• 8 percent of employers review and store employees' voice mail 
messages 
Much of this monitoring is on a spot-check basis, rather than continuous, 
but the reality is that, more and more, your employer is engaging in some 
form of monitoring. 
Why are employers expending so much time and effort monitoring their 
employees? They do it to protect themselves. Consider how employees at Mor-
gan Stanley brought a $70 million lawsuit against the company claiming that 
racist jokes on the company's e-mail system created a hostile work environ-
ment. Likewise, female employees at Chevron brought a case against the oil 
company for sexual harassment. The central evidence in the case was an 
e-mail circulated among co-workers and listing the reasons "Why beer is better 
than women." 
In short, your employer monitors you for the following reasons: 
• To prevent and remedy sexual harassment 
• To prevent workers from divulging—either intentionally or uninten-
tionally—company trade secrets and other confidential information 
275 

• To prevent employees from engaging in illegal computer-related 
activities, such as downloading child pornography or copyright-
protected music, videos, and software 
• To prevent possible defamation or discrimination liability 
• To prevent the company's system from being exposed to viruses 
• To maintain employee productivity 
• To maintain the company's reputation 
Notwithstanding the legitimacy of these business interests, fear of litiga-
tion is the principal driver behind the rise in monitoring. According to a 
2001 survey conducted by the ePolicy Institute, in conjunction with the 
American Management Association and US News & World Report, 68 per-
cent of the companies that engaged in employee monitoring said they did so 
to prevent legal liability. Litigation involving misuse of e-mail, in particular, 
has become increasingly prevalent and costly. According to a 2003 AMA 
study, 14 percent of companies have been ordered by a court to produce 
employee e-mail, and 5 percent have fought workplace lawsuits stemming 
from e-mail. 
As an employee, you should be aware that employers are using the infor-
mation they gather from snooping to punish transgressions. For instance, 
more than 25 percent of the companies surveyed by the AMA fired employees 
for misusing office e-mail or the Internet, and 65 percent disciplined workers 
for such conduct. Such companies, including the The New York Times, Dow 
Chemical, and Xerox, have fired employees for e-mail or Internet misuse. 
What Gives Employers the Right to Monitor? 
How far can your employer go in monitoring your actions at work? The sim-
ple answer is, quite far. The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 
(ECPA), which governs the monitoring of telephones, the Internet, instant 
messaging, voice mail and e-mail, prohibits employers from intentionally 
intercepting or accessing wire, oral, or electronic communications. However, 
this act provides you with little protection from your employer's prying eyes 
and ears because it contains three powerful exceptions. These exceptions 
grant your employer great latitude in monitoring your communications: 
276 

More than 25 percent of 
the companies surveyed by 
the AMA fired employees 
for misusing office e-mail 
or the Internet, and 
65 percent disciplined 
workers for such conduct. 
• Your Workplace • 
• The service provider exception allows the owner of a communi-
cations system to monitor communications in the normal course of 
business to maintain and protect the system. Under this exception 
alone, your employer is likely permitted to 
monitor employee e-mails if it provides an 
e-mail service through a company-owned 
system. 
• The ordinary course of business exception 
is similar to the provider exception, but this 
exception 
applies to 
interception 
of 
telephone calls and possibly e-mails in the 
normal course of business. Your business 
calls may be monitored, but not your 
personal calls. Once your employer realizes it is listening in on a 
personal call, it is required to hang up, unless you have consented to 
having all your calls monitored. 
• The consent exception allows your employer to 
monitor 
communications if you have granted either actual, or sometimes only 
implied, consent. Actual consent is obtained when your employer 
distributes a policy stating that your communications may be 
monitored and you sign it (or sign an employment agreement 
containing similar language). Consent is sometimes implied when your 
employer has a monitoring policy, and even though you do not sign it, 
you still decide to use your company's system. 
Are you starting to sense what this means for you? In the aggregate, these 
exceptions mean that if your employer has provided an e-mail, Internet, IM, 
phone, or voice mail service, and there is no policy stating that workplace com-
munications will never be monitored, and the level of monitoring can be justi-
fied as a business need, your employer has virtually complete license to snoop 
on you at the workplace. 
Further, as a result of the Enron-type scandals, Congress passed another 
federal law that imposes new record-keeping and investigative requirements 
on publicly traded companies. Under this new law, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 
277 

2002, if your employer is a publicly traded company and you look at sensitive 
documents, your employer is required to monitor you to ensure the accuracy 
of financial reporting. Failure to do so can result in the personal liability of 
officers and directors at your company. Indeed, 92 percent of firms in the 
financial sector monitor their employees in some way, according to the AMA. 
Lastly, some states require that information technology workers be legally 
responsible for reporting child pornography found on company computers. 
Illinois and South Carolina are two states with such laws. Child pornography 
is a disturbing and heinous crime for which there is no possible justification, 
but the implementation of this law creates a number of thorny issues. If you 
are an IT worker, you are not trained in law enforcement. So what would you 
do if you found a picture of your colleague's six-year-old daughter in the bath-
tub? Are you required to report it? If you save the picture on a disk as proof, 
are you then violating state law? Unfortunately, because these laws are so new, 
the answers to these and a host of other questions are not yet settled by the 
courts. 
Types of Surveillance at Your Workplace 
You may not like being watched, but perhaps you understand why your 
employer is watching you. What steps can you take to prevent your employer 
from monitoring everything you do? Here is what you need to know about 
the surveillance of your specific communications and activities during the 
workday: 
E-mail 
You are sitting at your desk one morning, typing out your status re-
port and thinking about what you should order for lunch, when out 
of the blue you get the call. It's the head of the human resources 
department asking you to come to your boss's office. When you ar-
rive in the office, the solemn faces that greet you do not bode well. 
You discover that you are being terminated for violation of the com-
pany's e-mail policy. You have ten minutes to clear out your desk 
and vacate the premises. Seized by nausea and disbelief, you know 
278 

-• Your Workplace •-
22 percent of employers 
have terminated 
employees for 
e-mail infractions. 
only one thing. Those dirty Michael Jackson jokes you circulated 
last week suddenly do not seem so funny after all. 
It should be very clear by now that as an 
employee your e-mail is rarely private. If your 
employer has an e-mail system, your employer is 
deemed to own the system and is therefore enti-
tled to review all its contents, including your e-
mails. This is true of any messages sent within the 
company, sent out of the company, or sent to any 
recipient within the company, including all attachments. This means that if 
your buddy sends you some off-base e-mail, attaching the Paris Hilton porn 
video, your boss could be viewing it at the same time you do. Embarrass-
ment may not be all you suffer. According to a study by the Pew Internet 
Project, 22 percent of employers have terminated employees for 
e-mail infractions. 
E-mail is not private even when you're told it is. 
In the case of Smyth v. Pillsbury, an employee was fired after his em-
ployer read e-mails the employee had sent from his home computer 
to his supervisor at work. The e-mails contained comments concern-
ing the sales management staff, including a threat to "kill the back-
stabbing bastards. " The district court said that the employee had 
"no reasonable expectation of privacy" on his employer's system, 
despite the fact that Pillsbury had repeatedly assured employees 
that their e-mails were completely confidential and that they would 
not be used as a basis for discipline or discharge. The company's in-
terest in preventing "inappropriate and unprofessional" conduct 
outweighed the employee's right to privacy. 
You should not expect your e-mail to be private even when you are told 
your e-mail is private. In a court of law, your employer will be able to use your 
e-mail against you. 
279 

E-mail is not private even when it is protected with a password and saved 
in a special folder. 
Nissan in California randomly selected an e-mail from its system as 
part of an employee training session. The message, sent by a sys-
tem analyst named Bonita Bourke, was a personal e-mail that de-
scribed her boss as a "numb-nuts. " Based on this discovery, Nissan 
reviewed all the messages sent by employees in Bourke's work 
group, and the company's search turned up other personal e-mails. 
Bourke was subsequently fired. She and her co-workers sued Nis-
san for invasion of privacy, claiming that because the system al-
lowed employees to protect their e-mail access with passwords, 
they had a legitimate expectation that their e-mail privacy would be 
respected. The court in California rejected this claim. 
Even if you are given a password to access your company's computer sys-
tem, or if you store your e-mails in a password-protected computer folder, the 
courts have ruled in favor of your employer's right to read your e-mails. In 
these cases, the courts have ruled that, as an employee, you have no reason-
able expectation of privacy when e-mails are transmitted over your 
employer's system. 
E-mail is not private when transmitted through a Web-based e-mail account 
If your supervisor monitors your computer activity and finds sexually 
suggestive messages, he or she can fire you. You do not have to be 
the author of the messages; you merely have to receive them from 
your Web-based e-mail account. 
If you think your e-mail is private because you have been using a Web-
based e-mail account in the workplace, think again. You may be using such 
e-mail providers as Yahoo! or Hotmail, among others, because you think 
e-mails on these systems are protected from your employer. In reality, how-
ever, it is almost as simple for your employer to monitor these e-mails as it is to
track those that pass through the main company e-mail system. Current spy 
software, such as eBlaster and sniffer programs, easily captures these e-mails.
280 

* Your Workplace f 
(For more on spyware, see chapter 7, "Your Computer and the Internet.") In 
any event, your employer is legally justified in monitoring these e-mails. 
E-mail accounts are not private even after you delete e-mails 
A woman sued her former boss for age discrimination after she was 
terminated. The employer's case looked airtight until a consultant 
involved in the case was able to undelete an e-mail from the com-
pany president to the HR department instructing it to "get rid of 
the uptight dinosaur. " 
If you think you are safe from your employer's e-mail snooping because 
you deleted certain e-mail, then you should also think again. In reality, deleted 
e-mail is rarely ever truly deleted. 
As detailed in chapter 7, "Your Computer and the Internet," when you 
delete an e-mail from your mailbox, it moves into a deleted message file folder 
where the message continues to exist. When you delete the contents of this file 
folder, the message still survives on your computer or in the server until 
another file is saved over it. The e-mail probably still exists on backup tapes 
made of the system. In addition, a copy of the e-mail probably also exists on the 
computer of the author, and anyone copied or forwarded. There are also spe-
cialists in computer forensics who can retrieve deleted messages and even 
restore an e-mail from magnetic tapes that have been overwritten several times. 
Whether or not an e-mail is truly deleted can have a serious effect on liti-
gation. You probably remember the e-mail trail that confronted Bill Gates in 
the Microsoft antitrust trial, including the infamous "Do we have a clear plan 
on what we want Apple to do to undermine Sun?" e-mail. 
Instant Messaging 
The use of Instant Messaging (IM) is a growing trend at work. Companies like 
AOL have released IM platforms for the workplace. According to research by 
ComScore Media Metrix, the use of IM in American companies grew from 2.3 
billion minutes in September 2000 to 4.9 billion minutes in September 2001. 
As IM becomes more popular in the workplace, more employers are begin-
ning to monitor its usage. 
281 

• Prying Eyes • 
Employers, especially financial companies that worry about record-
keeping, want to monitor IM, and products such as Raytheon Co.'s Silent Run-
ner and Cyber Sentinel 3.0 by Security Software Systems are the answer. These 
products keep an electronic record of every instant message sent, some of 
which may be kept without your knowledge. The 
courts have yet to consider a privacy challenge to IM 
monitoring, but it is only a matter of time. Chances 
are that the courts will view IM as akin to e-mail, 
which, as you now know, enjoys little protection. 
[ «# ** ^'^Mlli^ >:;;pi;'ai^;:.^;;;i»:::.^;;<w» 
Employers can use 
monitoring software that 
takes surreptitious screen 
shots of your computer at 
selected intervals; they 
can monitor what is 
stored in your computer 
terminals and hard disks; 
they can track your 
Internet use, including the 
amount of time you spend 
visiting a particular site; 
and they can track every 
keystroke you enter into 
your computer. 
Cybertracking 
After an unpleasant tiff with your boss, you type 
an e-mail you plan to send to a sympathetic co-
worker: "Our boss is such a $#A&*%* idiot." Be-
fore you fire off the message, you think better of 
it and backspace. You congratulate yourself on 
an admirable display of self-control, but what 
you fail to realize is that your company has in-
stalled spy software that recorded your every keystroke. It works by 
recognizing keywords (like "boss"), or phrases (like "$#A&*%* 
boss"), 
and chances are you will have some explaining to do later on in the day 
From your employer's perspective, monitoring computer and Internet use 
is warranted by concerns about potential liability for sexual harassment and 
discrimination, and possible exposure for other employee misbehavior online. 
Employers are also concerned that their employees are cyber slacking, thereby 
reducing their productivity. According to Websense, an Internet employee 
management company, U.S. businesses lose $63 billion a year from employees 
surfing the Internet on company time. 
The surge in employer snooping has spawned an interest in both the devel-
opment of and demand for monitoring products. A detailed discussion of the 
various monitoring tools available is beyond the scope of this book. However, 
you should be aware that there is a product out there for spying on everything 
you do on your computer. Employers can use monitoring software that takes 
282 

^ Your Workplace f 
surreptitious screen shots of your computer at selected intervals; they can moni-
tor what is stored in your computer terminals and hard disks; they can track 
your Internet use, including the amount of time you spend visiting a particular 
site; and they can track every keystroke you enter into your computer. For 
instance, WinWhatWhere Investigator is software that captures keystrokes, 
e-mails information about your activities when key phrases are identified, and 
even renames itself and changes location so it will remain undetected to you as 
an employee. SpectorSoft's Spector Pro is another spying tool that captures 
screen shots, records e-mail and chat sessions, and logs keystrokes. Pornsweeper 
examines e-mail attachments, looking for any images remotely resembling flesh. 
Unless you yourself are an IT professional, or maybe a NASA engineer, or 
constantly sweep your computer with the latest technology, you have little 
way of knowing that monitoring of your Internet use, e-mail use, or voice mail 
is happening. 
Phone Conversations 
Employers may listen in on employee telephone conversations with clients or 
customers for quality control purposes. According to the American Civil Liber-
WHO ACTUALLY DOES THE SNOOPING? 
Which company employee is responsible for snooping on co-workers' 
e-mail and Internet use? According to a 2003 study conducted by the Cen-
ter for Business Ethics at Bentley College, in the overwhelming majority of 
companies, the task falls to the IT department. Less often, the job is the 
responsibility of the human resources department. Considering how criti-
cal it is that the monitoring process is carried out in a responsible manner 
and that the information on fellow employees does not fall into the wrong 
hands, you probably want to know: Who monitors the monitors? Surpris-
ingly, 25 percent of companies surveyed in the same study do not have pro-
cedures in place to ensure that the monitoring process is not subject to 
abuse, and only 57 percent had any written guidelines whatsoever regard-
ing the monitoring process. 
283 

ties Union, employers eavesdrop on 400 million telephone calls per year at 
workplaces across the United States. Some states, like California, require your 
employer to alert the parties to the call (by either an announcement or beeping 
signal) that the call is being monitored. Federal law, however, allows employ-
ers to monitor such work calls without any such warning. 
Although the Federal Wiretapping Act of 1968 forbids eavesdropping 
unless one of the parties to the call consents, the Electronic Communications 
Privacy Act (ECPA) amended the wiretap law in 1986 by allowing employers 
to listen to your "job-related" conversations. However, as soon your employer 
determines your call is personal, your employer is supposed to hang up. It is 
another matter what your employer actually does, or whether your employer 
may justify a little eavesdropping by saying it takes several minutes to deter-
mine whether your conversation is private or job-related. Employers also have 
the right to monitor the phone numbers dialed by your extension and the 
length of each of your calls. 
Voice Mail 
A male McDonald's employee had an extramarital affair with a fe-
male McDonald's employee working in a neighboring town. The 
male employee's supervisor retrieved incriminating messages from 
the company's voice mail system. (The male employee was given a 
password and assured his voice mail was private.) The supervisor 
then played the steamy messages back to the male employee's wife 
and boss. The male employee was fired. 
Employers have a right to listen to your work voice mail messages if there 
is some work-related rationale for doing so. What little case law there is on this 
subject has been overly accommodating to the employer. If, however, your 
employer told you that your voice mail was private, issued you a password, 
and had no office policy prohibiting voice mail eavesdropping, you may as an 
employee have a privacy claim. 
284 

4 Your Workplace * 
Tip Lines 
Employers have added another surveillance tool to their arsenal: you. One of 
the most effective measures employers can take to prevent and report 
improper employee conduct is the employee tip line. A tip line is a telephone 
hot line that allows you and other employees to report suspicious activity 
anonymously, without fear of reprisal. Call it what you will—the truth of the 
matter is that bosses are using you and your fellow employees to do their dirty 
work, although they may view it as a legitimate means of preventing theft, or a 
laudable way of protecting you and your rights in the workplace. Employee tip 
lines are an increasingly popular trend. 
You may be afraid to call from work, so tip lines are usually available 
twenty-four hours a day. Or you may be reluctant to use an internal tip line for 
fear that information leaks might reveal your identity, so your employer may 
have outsourced the tip line, getting an outside operation to manage it. 
Video Surveillance 
Security officers for Johnson County Community College were pro-
vided with a locker area in which to store their rain gear, radios, 
and other personal items. The security officers also used this area 
as a dressing and changing room. The college installed video sur-
veillance equipment in response to reports of theft from the lock-
ers and a suspicion that the security officers were 
bringing 
weapons on campus. The court held that the employees did not 
have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the locker area be-
cause it was not enclosed (the lockers were located along the wall 
of a storage room), and because the area was not reserved for 
their exclusive use. 
Applicable law does not generally limit your employer's use of video sur-
veillance as long as your employer does not record sound (as proscribed by the 
Federal Wiretapping Act) and as long as cameras focus on publicly accessible 
areas. State laws vary. You are likely to have greater legal protection from 
videotaping in rest rooms, locker rooms, or other places where you as an 
employee would have a reasonable expectation of privacy. Even then, in cer-
285 

tain circumstances, your employer may be allowed to videotape if your com-
pany has a strong enough reason for doing so. 
Audio Surveillance 
In the case of audio surveillance, you have a greater expectation of privacy. 
Taping oral conversations by any device is usually illegal under the Federal 
Wiretapping Act and most state laws. Courts have found employers liable for 
wiretapping violations when they have attempted to record in-person live con-
versations. But the rulings are not applicable to employee telephone conversa-
tions. In one case, several nightshift employees successfully sued their 
employer when on several different days their conversations were taped by 
hidden, voice-activated recording devices. Accordingly, though your employer 
may choose to videotape you at work, your live conversations will probably 
not be recorded on the tape. 
Searches of Persons or Property 
An employee of the Philadelphia Housing Authority left in his desk 
a computer disk containing work-related legal documents as well as 
personal files. His supervisor found the disk and accessed the files 
on it. When the employee tried to sue for unreasonable search and 
seizure, the court ruled that the supervisor acted within her author-
ity in removing the disk from the desk and accessing the files. 
Long before the Internet, computers, or e-mail, employers checked up on 
employees by conducting physical searches. There is no doubt that modern-
day employers continue to conduct searches of offices, desks, personal belong-
ings, file cabinets, lockers, and so on. 
If you work in the public sector, you may be afforded greater privacy pro-
tections by virtue of the Fourth Amendment's ban of unreasonable searches 
and seizures. For instance, the Supreme Court has held that federal public 
employers may conduct searches when they have reasonable grounds to 
believe the searches will reveal evidence of work-related misconduct, and 
when employees have no reasonable expectation that their work areas are 
private. 
286 

Your desk, bookshelf, and 
office are often deemed 
employer property and 
are thus searchable. 
• Your Workplace • 
The situation is quite different if you work for a private company In gen-
eral, private employers enjoy great latitude in conducting searches for work-
related reasons. Unless your employer conducts a search in such a way as to 
reveal information unrelated to the workplace, you 
should not expect any privacy from workplace 
searches. Your desk, bookshelf, and office are often 
deemed employer property and are thus searchable. 
For example, a search of a desk full of items, includ-
ing incriminating bank statements inadvertently 
left after termination, is not unreasonable; nor is a 
search of a desk and credenza, neither of which is locked but both of which 
contain information needed by other employees. 
Extreme Surveillance 
How would you feel if your manager kept a spreadsheet monitoring 
your use of the bathroom, and you were disciplined for heeding na-
ture's call outside the approved break times? 
In addition to cases that involve monitoring bathroom use or hygiene per-
formance, here are a few other extreme surveillance methods that may be 
used by your employer: 
• Use technology to track the attendance, amount of time spent, and 
performance of its executives at company gyms. Companies such as 
Adidas, Goldman Sachs, and GlaxoSmithKline use these technologies. 
• Introduce actors as new hires and have them keep tabs on workers. 
• Hire private investigators, as further discussed in chapter 12, "I Spy, 
You Spy," to catch workers' compensation fraud or other objectionable 
behavior. 
• Use new, advanced, and intrusive attendance-tracking tools to monitor 
workers' attendance, such as biometrics, the science of measuring an 
individual's physical properties, for purposes of authenticating and 
monitoring employees. For example, instead of punching time clocks, 
you would punch in by placing a finger or hand on a sensor. These 
287 

• Prying Eyes • 
practices are used on both hourly wage-earners and white-collar, 
salaried employees. 
• Use locator technologies to keep track of employee whereabouts at all 
times. Many companies require employees to carry badges to get into 
the building and access different areas of the building. These badges 
can track when you've arrived at work, how many cigarette breaks you 
take, how long you've been at lunch, and where in the office you spend 
your time. Some locator technologies are more sophisticated than 
others. For instance, nurses in more than two hundred hospitals wear 
badges connected to infrared sensors to track their every move. 
• Keep tabs on you using Global Positioning Systems (GPS). For 
instance, local news stations place GPS devices in their news trucks. 
Off-Duty Conduct 
A former UPS manager claimed invasion of privacy after UPS in-
sisted he disclose information about an incident that occurred after 
business hours at his home. The incident allegedly involved alcohol 
and emotionally volatile behavior. UPS contacted the manager's 
mental-health providers without his consent. 
A teacher who joined a swingers club was observed by an under-
cover police officer committing acts of oral sex with three different 
men at a party. She was later terminated, and her termination was 
upheld in court. The teacher's conduct was deemed immoral and 
unprofessional, evidencing unfitness to teach. 
Employers have latitude to monitor your behavior off the job as well as in 
the office. Courts have stated that it is legitimate for your employer to know 
about off-duty conduct if the personal information reasonably bears upon 
your fitness for or discharge of your employment responsibilities. As in earlier 
cases, fear of litigation motivates employers to snoop beyond the physical 
dimensions of the workplace. 
288 

4 Your Workplace f 
Office Romance 
Your supervisor discovers that you are dating a co-worker and, cit-
ing the company's antifraternization (no-dating) policy, instructs 
you to end your relationship 
with your co-worker. You refuse, 
telling the supervisor that you did not socialize with your co-
worker on the job and that you that will continue to see your co-
worker during your own time. Your company fires you under its 
antifraternization policy. The court supports your company, finding 
that the antifraternization policy did not violate public policy, and 
that dismissing you did not constitute outrageous conduct on the 
part of your employer. 
Is there no limit to invasions into your privacy in the workplace? It may 
now occur to you that your boss can monitor everything you do, or fail to do, 
at work. Can your boss also tell you whom you can and cannot date? Can your 
boss police your dating? 
With employees spending more and more time in the workplace, office 
romance has been on the rise. Employers are ever more apprehensive about 
the potential liability of these office romances. For example, a relationship 
between a manager and subordinate may result in allegations of favoritism 
from co-workers claiming that the subordinate received preferential treat-
ment. Or, if the office relationship ends badly, the outcome may also be a sex-
ual harassment claim brought by the spurned party. 
In an effort to address such concerns, employers have adopted policies 
specifically addressing workplace dating. Policies range from outright prohibi-
tions on dating co-workers, to policies discouraging, but ultimately allowing, 
office relationships. Other policies may require employees to notify manage-
ment when co-workers become involved. Still others require that one party to 
the relationship quit and seek employment elsewhere. Whether such policies 
ultimately and completely insulate employers is questionable. Nevertheless, 
an antifraternization (no-dating) policy is usually enforceable if the policy and 
its implementation are reasonable, and it can be fairly and consistently 
enforced. 
289 

Protect Your Privacy in the Workplace 
The bottom line is that you don't have much privacy in the workplace, but that 
doesn't mean you can't protect yourself. In the workplace, the best protection 
is educating yourself about your workplace's (or prospective workplace's) poli-
cies and limiting the information you reveal. Here are the key tips to follow: 
^ Recognize that you have little privacy at work. Basically, the law as it per-
tains to monitoring is not on your side. As they say, forewarned is fore-
armed. Knowing that your every move may be monitored may make you 
think twice before acting in inappropriate ways in the workplace. 
^ 
Understand your employer's privacy policy. Before you begin work, take 
time to read and understand your employer's privacy policy (if it exists) and 
then act accordingly. Has your employer established a clear and compre-
hensive communications policy? How does the policy deal with your expec-
tation of privacy at your workplace? If your employer has a clear and 
comprehensive policy, has it been distributed to you before any monitoring 
begins—for instance, on the first day of employment? Did you sign to 
acknowledge consent to the policy? 
-fc Separate your personal life from your work activities. Try to separate your 
personal life from your work activities. For example, whether or not your 
company maintains an antifratemization policy, consider the possible ramifi-
cations before you date someone at work. Always use separate credit cards 
for work expenses and personal expenditures. Finally, refrain from excessive 
personal use of e-mail, the Internet, the telephone, and so forth, and cer-
tainly never use company systems to engage in any inappropriate or illegal 
activity. 
•fc Be particularly careful with e-mail communications. Sending out an e-mail 
from your company's system is akin to writing the same message on com-
pany letterhead. As a practical matter, it is generally a good idea to keep 
your personal e-mails separate from your work e-mails. Even if your 
employer has the capability to monitor Web-based e-mail accounts, you 
290 

* Your Workplace * 
should still use such e-mail both for practical purposes and potentially legal 
purposes (it may be a factor in your favor to demonstrate a "reasonable 
expectation of privacy"). For maximum protection, use only Web-based 
e-mail accounts that are truly private and offer encryption. For information 
on encryption, see chapter 7, "Your Computer and the Internet." 
^ Be cautious with telephone communications. Employers have the right to 
monitor employee telephone conversations. The best way to protect your-
self if you must make truly personal or sensitive phone calls from work is to 
use your digital cell phone or a pay phone. 
-fr Work for companies that respect the privacy of their employees. When you 
apply for a job, you might consider an employer's stance on employee pri-
vacy as further evidence of how the company will treat you. For instance, an 
overly invasive hiring process or zero-tolerance communications policy may 
well signal an unpleasant work environment. Another indication of discord 
may be whether the company has hired an internal privacy officer whose job 
is essentially to define and protect what privacy means for business part-
ners, consumers, and employees. Wired magazine ranked the best and the 
worst public companies with respect to their commitment to employee pri-
vacy. The top-ranked company was IBM, particularly since the appointment 
of Harriet Pearson as IBM's first privacy officer. 
•fr Consider your right to sue if your privacy is violated. If you believe your 
employer has violated your privacy, you can attempt to sue your employer. 
Employees have been successful in cases where an employer used hidden 
recording devices to tape employees' private conversations, or where an 
employer used its own employees to collect urine specimens for drug test-
ing, or where an employer searched a trucking employee's motel room. 
Realize, however, that courts have overwhelmingly sided with employers in 
invasion-of-privacy cases. Nevertheless, if you decide to sue, your success 
will depend on whether you sue under federal or state law, and whether you 
can show a reasonable expectation of privacy in the communication (or the 
location, in search and video surveillance cases) at issue. 
291 

THE BOTTOM LINE 
• To an employer, a job applicant's life is like an archaeological dig. If a 
prospective employer runs a background check, that check will unearth 
more personal information about the applicant than he or she ever 
thought would see the light of day. 
• The hiring process can be a good predictor of corporate culture. If a 
prospective employer asks for things that seem overreaching—like twenty-
five-year-old SAT scores or DNA samples—it might be a sign that this 
might not be an ideal situation and you should look elsewhere. 
• Check the Constitution at the door. When you are at work, using your 
boss's property, you have virtually no right to privacy. 
• You have mail... and your boss has seen every word. Your boss has 
complete license to read your e-mail, even if you've been told it's private, 
even if you use a password, and even if you think it's deleted. 
• Your boss can legally monitor your every move at work. This includes but 
is not limited to what websites you are visiting, any Instant Messages you 
send, what's in your voice mail messages, how often you take bathroom 
breaks, and how photogenic you are on the office surveillance system. 
Under some circumstances your boss can monitor your behavior when 
you are not at work. 
292 

Your Health 
During a routine exam you tell your doctor that you smoked a little 
pot years and years ago. You also mention that you smoked ciga-
rettes when you were going through some hard times in your mid-
twenties. You believe this is ancient history until you are denied 
health or life insurance coverage because that information was in-
cluded in your file. 
You ask your insurer to disclose to your employer details from your 
medical records that are relevant to a work-related wrist injury. In-
stead, the insurance company discloses to your employer not just 
details about your wrist, but also your comprehensive 
medical 

records. The records include sensitive information, like specifics 
about your fertility treatments and a miscarriage you suffered. 
You are separating from your husband. You call your local pharma-
cist to ask him to maintain the confidentiality of your prescription 
information. The next day, your husband contacts the same phar-
macy and requests your prescription records, citing tax purposes. 
After he receives the records, he shares the information with family 
and friends, as well as the Department of Motor Vehicles, to sully 
your reputation and damage your chances of being awarded cus-
tody of your children. 
You receive a call from a hospital worker who informs you that you 
are HIV-positive. Two days later, after much agony and soul search-
ing, you find out that the hospital worker was actually your doctor's 
teenaged daughter, who somehow accessed and collected names 
and contact details for a number of your doctor's patients. Your 
doctor's daughter thought it was a fun practical joke to call her 
father's patients to tell them that they were HIV-positive. 
How would you feel if you were HIV-positive and a health-care 
worker disclosed your condition to a reporter who then disclosed 
your condition in a newspaper without your permission? This is ex-
actly how the world discovered that tennis great Arthur Ashe suf-
fered from AIDS. 
Once upon a time, people developed personal relationships with family 
doctors and expected those relationships to be completely confidential. In a 
safe context, patients could discuss intimate issues such as substance use, fam-
ily issues, or medical history. Most people did not worry about disclosure of 
their personal medical records because they believed such dossiers were pro-
tected, not only because of the confidentiality of their family doctors, but also 
because these files existed only on paper and were locked in the filing cabinets 
of local doctors' offices. 
As in many areas of modern life, privacy in medicine has changed dramat-
ically, even though the basic expectations of those involved have not. Both 
294 

* Your Health • 
Many privacy advocates 
believe that HIPAA forces 
patients to choose 
between access to 
medical care and control 
of their medical 
information. 
patient and doctor still want to protect sensitive information, but technologies 
that allow complete medical files to be shared electronically have compro-
mised patient privacy for the benefits of convenience and efficiency. If you 
live in Rhode Island and you are receiving medical 
treatment in New York City, your physician in Prov-
idence can easily transmit your entire medical his-
tory to the surgeons, the anesthesiologist, and the 
hematologist in New York. If the benefits of this 
aren't obvious enough, then imagine getting in a 
car accident en route to New York. Wouldn't you 
want the emergency room physicians to know 
about your liver condition and your severe allergies 
to certain drugs? Nevertheless, the electronic med-
ical file that may save your life may also allow dozens of people to access your 
medical history. Misuse of medical information has caused job loss, other neg-
ative employment effects, loss or compromise of child custody, social alien-
ation, loss of dignity, and many other crises born of leaked information about 
people's physical or mental health, or that of members of their families. 
In addition to compromises resulting from electronic medical records, 
your medical privacy has also been compromised by electronic billing prac-
tices, managed health care, and improved public health tracking. These new 
methods enable greater ease, accuracy, and advancement for the health indus-
try. The digital records created from so many available medical sources allow 
new viruses to be tracked and prevented, a new drug's side effects to be stud-
ied, and large-scale patterns that unlock medical mysteries and crises to be 
discovered. 
In response to the evolving nature of the health industry and violations of 
medical privacy, Congress passed the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) in 1996 to protect the medical-privacy rights of 
Americans. The act finally came into effect on April 14,2003. Intended to set a 
national standard for medical privacy, and touted as a protection of your 
rights, HIPAA is believed by federal officials to carefully balance patients' pri-
vacy and the health-care industry's responsibility to provide you and other 
Americans with efficient and effective high-quality care. 
The response to HIPAA from privacy advocates, however, hasn't been pos-
295 

itive. The act has been denounced as favoring Big Business (including the gov-
ernment, medical establishments, and health insurance companies). Many pri-
vacy advocates believe that HIPAA forces patients to choose between access to 
medical care and control of their medical information. 
But you do have some choices concerning your health care, and you must 
educate yourself about your privacy rights and understand how the health-
care industry works. Read on to learn how to navigate HIPAA and adopt easy, 
proactive steps to protect your private life to the extent possible without hav-
ing to sacrifice good health care. 
The Contents of Your Medical Records 
In 2002, a Wisconsin emergency medical technician (EMT), who was 
involved in the care of a woman who had overdosed in a suicide at-
tempt, was found guilty of sharing that information with one of the 
woman's professional colleagues. The co-worker later told a num-
ber of other co-workers about the woman's suicide attempt. The 
EMT claimed she shared the information in an attempt to help the 
suicidal woman, but the jury believed that the EMT violated the 
woman's privacy. 
You might believe your medical records only include basic details such as 
vaccinations, allergies, and operations. And, of course, they do include this 
information. But getting the best possible health care and treatment often 
depends on the extensive and sensitive personal information that you reveal 
to a spectrum of health-care workers, from school counselors to personal doc-
tors to surgeons. 
Candor can be lifesaving. For example, if you have certain allergies, you 
may need to disclose them before undergoing anesthesia. If you have heart 
problems, you may need to come clean about bad eating habits for your doctor 
to prescribe effective treatment. If you have a depressed child in psychiatric 
care, your child may disclose information about sexual abuse, including the 
identity of the perpetrator, in the course of treatment. As you interact with 
your various medical providers and doctors you reveal a great deal about your-
296 

4 Your Health f 
self and your family—and you can assume all the information is included in 
your medical record. 
On a basic level, your medical records include data such as your name, 
address, contact numbers, insurance, date of birth, social security number, and 
credit card or checking/banking information. Your record also includes infor-
mation related to your physical health such as height, weight, blood pressure, 
cholesterol levels, and lab test results. Even this basic information is revealing. 
The details of your medical history, however, are more revealing. For 
example, your files will include any diseases you have had (such as sexually 
transmitted diseases), medical conditions you have (such as asthma or dia-
betes), and medications you take. Surgeries or procedures you have undergone 
are also a part of your medical records. You can also expect your report to 
include your family medical history, including your genetic disposition to cer-
tain illnesses. In addition, your complete medical records will include any pre-
scriptions you take, lifestyle issues (such as smoking, alcohol consumption, 
sexual behavior or orientation, any substance abuses, and even participation 
in high-risk activities), disabilities or behavioral disorders, and mental-health 
conditions (like depression or agoraphobia). Finally, your communications to 
and notes made by a therapist in your sessions may also be contained in your 
medical records. 
Other Sources of Your Medical Information 
Researchers at the University of Minnesota mailed a survey to 
twelve hundred transplant recipients who were participating in its 
long-term research study. The university's mailing inadvertently dis-
closed the names of the people who had donated their kidneys to 
their respective recipients. Though the university blamed the 
breach on a software upgrade, it did admit that there was no rea-
son to store the donors' names in that particular database. 
Your doctors and health-care providers aren't the only people who collect 
medical information about you—and the medical records in your doctors' 
offices aren't the only ones that exist. Your information is also collected by var-
297 

Privacy experts say that 
patients themselves 
may be the biggest 
source of medical 
information to marketers. 
• Prying Eyes • 
ious entities in other, less obvious ways, and these entities may, in turn, share 
your information in different situations. Consider these scenarios: 
• You make a medical claim, which may have to 
be investigated 
• You pay for a specific medical treatment by 
check or credit card, and a record of your treat-
ment is contained in your banking or credit card 
statements 
• You are covered through your employer's plan, 
which can make details of your health and med-
ical history a part of your employment record 
• You participate in a research study, which may or may not have 
committed to keeping the results private 
• You file a lawsuit that involves details of your health or medical 
history, which then might become a matter of public record 
• You undergo a free health screening offered in a mall, which may not 
be kept private 
• Your or your child's school record might reflect interactions with 
nurses or counselors, vaccinations, and physical exams 
• You use your own name and e-mail address in a health-related online 
chat room 
• You owe money to a hospital, dentist, or other health service, and the 
debt shows up on your credit report 
• You fill out sensitive personal and family health information on 
consumer surveys that come to your house. Some surveys are accompa-
nied by sweepstakes offers or a chance to win free coupons 
• You have your prescriptions filled by a pharmacy whose privacy notice 
does not satisfactorily limit disclosure of your information 
Your Protections Under HIPAA and Their Limits 
A couple was expecting a baby in a few months, and they were 
making regular visits to their doctor. They developed the necessary 
298 

4 Your Health * 
relationship with the hospital so when delivery time came, the hos-
pital would be ready for them. Sadly, the woman miscarried. Soon 
after the date when the baby would have been born, the couple 
started to receive mail at home that advertised great products for 
their new baby. 
THE MEDICAL PROFILERS 
For the past year you have been clinically depressed and have had 
episodes of migraines and outbreaks of cold sores. Suddenly, you 
start receiving in the mail information and advertisements for prod-
ucts and prescriptions that could alleviate your symptoms. This em-
barrasses you because whenever you go on a business trip you ask 
your neighbor to pick up your mail. Because of this mail, you do every-
thing you can to avoid making eye contact with your mailman. More-
over, you're troubled by the fact that some big pharmaceutical 
company seems to know more about you than your mother does. 
How did they find out? 
Who might be a bigger threat to your privacy than your doctor? You. 
Privacy experts say that patients themselves may be the biggest source of 
medical information to marketers. 
Data aggregators, such as Illinois-based Medical Marketing Service, Inc., 
collect all the medical information they can find about you—and they get 
most of the information from you. How do they do this? They get it from: 
• Surveys mailed to you, many with offers of coupons, sweepstakes, or 
free samples. These surveys ask questions or have you check boxes 
next to ailments that afflict you and your family. In addition to pro-
viding this information, you also reveal your name, address, and tele-
phone number. 
• Health screenings at malls and other public places 
• Loyalty cards at the supermarket if you use the store's pharmacy 
299 

• Health-related websites and chat rooms (including online tests and 
quizzes) 
• Newsletter subscriptions and other ailment-specific mailings that 
you request or buy 
• Calls made to an 800 number for information about a product 
Medical Marketing Service, the most prominent medical data pro-
filer, collects information from millions of surveys and the other sources 
listed above and sells the compiled data to pharmaceutical companies. 
Their data includes lists of people who are afflicted with everything 
from chronic chapped lips to diabetes to menopause to prostate cancer. 
Not only might your name be connected to a particular ailment, but the 
data profiler also cross-references this information with data it has col-
lected about your age, educational level, family dwelling size, gender, 
income, lifestyle, marital status, hobbies, and whether or not you have 
children (and any information about them), whether or not you have an 
American Express or Visa card, and whether you plan to travel or buy 
certain things within the next six months. A pharmaceutical company 
can buy a list from Medical Marketing Service for less than $200 per one 
thousand names. 
A dead infant was discovered in a Dumpster. The local police force 
subpoenaed from the local Planned Parenthood a list of women 
who had received positive pregnancy test results in the nine months 
prior to the incident, as well as contact details for each of these 
women. Only one woman on that list refused to answer any ques-
tions. She stated that she would rather go to jail than answer the 
subpoena with the records it requested. 
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act controls the dis-
closure of your personal medical information by placing limitations on cer-
tain entities that access medical information. The act creates the first national 
standard for accessing medical information. Prior to its introduction in April 
300 

-» Your Health •-
In general, covered 
entities under HIPAA are 
health-care providers, 
health plans, and health-
care clearinghouses. 
2003, access to your records varied by state. For example, if you lived in 
Alabama, you would not have been able to see your own medical records. 
Now, states must comply with HIPAA's minimum national standard, which 
includes not only the right to access your own 
records, but also places limits on the use of your 
medical information in medical marketing. The act 
also provides an option for increased confidential-
ity and gives you a right to an accounting of people 
who have accessed your medical records. However, 
HIPAA does not apply to everyone who sees or 
accesses your health information, as detailed later 
in this chapter. 
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act provides you 
with certain important privacy rights that you previously lacked. First, HIPAA 
establishes a national floor for your privacy protections; it is also possible that 
the state in which you reside provides you even greater protections. Below are 
the minimum privacy rights you have with respect to those entities covered by 
HIPAA. In general, covered entities under HIPAA are health-care providers, 
health plans, and health-care clearinghouses. In addition, HIPAA addresses the 
examples above, such as the extent to which a hospital may send you market-
ing materials and whether your medical records may be used to solve crimes. 
Unfortunately, in some cases HIPAA plays no role. 
Your federal privacy rights under HIPAA include: 
Access to Medical Records. Under HIPAA, you can approach any of the cov-
ered entities and request not only to see, but also to obtain copies of your med-
ical records. In addition, you may request corrections if you identify any 
mistakes within your records. Although any of the covered entities may charge 
you for the cost of copying and sending your records, they must typically pro-
vide access to your records within thirty days of your request. 
Your health-care provider as well as any other covered entity must indi-
cate in its privacy notices how you can obtain a copy of your record. If you 
seek such a copy, it is wise to make the request in writing. If you are turned 
301 

down, you should promptly contact the Office of Civil Rights (OCR) at the 
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS): 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
Office of Civil Rights 
200 Independence Avenue, SW 
Washington, DC 20201 
866/627-7748 
www.hhs.gov 
Notice of Privacy Practices. The covered entities must provide you with a 
notice about how they intend to use your personal medical information as 
well as an overview of your privacy rights with the health plan, doctor, or other 
covered entity. In practice, you were probably provided with the notice on 
your first patient visit after HIPAA's compliance date of April 14, 2003. You 
will also likely need to sign or otherwise acknowledge receipt of this privacy 
notice before your doctor will treat you. If you refuse to sign the form, your 
doctor may try to refuse to treat you and your insurance company may try to 
deny you coverage—even though HI PA A does not give your doctor or health-
care provider the right to refuse to treat you if you don't sign the form. 
Your health plan will mail a notice to you when you enroll in the plan and 
again if substantial changes are made to your policy. You are free to ask any 
covered entity to expand your privacy under the policy, thereby further 
restricting disclosure of your medical information, but the covered entity is 
free to deny your request. 
Limits on Use of Personal Medical Information. HIPAA limits how health 
plans and covered providers may use health information that individually 
identifies you as a patient or a consumer of medical services. In particular, 
doctors and other covered entities must determine the minimal necessary 
information to provide to, for example, billing companies or to secure labora-
tory test results. Some commonsense exceptions exist, such as allowing doc-
tors, nurses, and other providers to share information when it is needed to 
treat you as a patient. If you are in an emergency room, you want your health-
care providers to be able to give you the best-quality care possible. In addition, 
you must sign a specific authorization before a covered entity can release your 
302 

* Your Health f 
Unfortunately, the precise 
marketing areas and 
communications that are 
limited under HIPAA are 
open to interpretation. 
medical information to a life insurer, a bank, a marketing firm, or another out-
side business for purposes not related to your health care. 
Limits on Marketing. HIPAA places certain limits 
on the use of your information for marketing pur-
poses. Unfortunately, the precise marketing areas 
and communications that are limited under HIPAA 
are open to interpretation. In theory, pharmacies, 
health plans, and other covered entities must first 
obtain your written authorization before disclosing 
your patient information for marketing purposes. 
Thus, your authorization must be granted for a covered entity to sell or share 
details of your medical condition or lifestyle with a third party. 
In practice, however, HIPAA makes exemptions, allowing certain entities 
to communicate with you about their own services or products, including dis-
ease-management programs, many of which can aid your treatment. These 
kinds of exemptions potentially leave room for unacceptable practices, 
including: 
• A company that manufactures drugs can pay a pharmacy or doctor to 
send refill alerts to patients 
• Because of a clause regarding marketing that allows a hospital or other 
care facility to notify a patient of services relevant to his or her care or 
treatment, a patient with a sensitive medical condition may still receive 
mail that indicates that condition. For example, a person who is HIV-
positive or who has cancer might get updates about related services. 
• A mailing can be made from a hospital, for example, that specifically 
targets patients nearing Medicare-qualified age with information about 
Medicare 
Explain to your health-care providers exactly how you want the use of 
your personal health information restricted, as HIPAA might not cover all the 
instances you might want to restrict. Understand that your requests will not 
always be guaranteed because of the exceptions made for marketing purposes. 
Available marketing channels are open to debate; it is likely that some of the 
provisions in HIPAA will be disputed in the courts. 
303 

• Prying Eyes • 
Confidential Communications. Under HIPAA, you can request that your doc-
tor, health plan, and other covered entities take reasonable steps to ensure that 
their communications with you are confidential. For example, you can ask a 
doctor to call you at your office rather than at your 
home, and your doctor must comply with any 
request that can be reasonably accommodated. 
A patient with a sensitive 
medical condition may still 
receive mail that indicates 
that condition. For 
example, a person who is 
HIV-positive or who has 
cancer might get updates 
about related services. 
Accounting. HIPAA stipulates your right to an 
accounting of people, companies, or organizations 
that have accessed your medical record in the previ-
ous six years. This right may be important if you 
need to find a paper trail for an insurance com-
pany's rejection of your application, or for a dubi-
ous action made by your employer. However, 
HIPAA does not require this accounting to include any individuals who touch 
your records as a result of treatment, payment, or health-care operations (or 
TPO—treatment, payment, or operations). Given the many individuals who 
will see your medical records during TPO, some privacy advocates believe that 
an accounting of your records will invariably be incomplete. 
Complaints and Penalties. Your medical privacy may be violated in many 
unforeseen ways. For example, your records may be vulnerable when they are 
transferred to a third party; enterprising health-care workers may seek to 
profit from your records by selling them to ambulance-chasing lawyers or 
other opportunists; snoops in the workplace may rummage through your file; 
or, in some instances, staff members in health-care facilities may even have a 
conversation about your medical records in a public place. 
If you believe that your medical privacy has been infringed upon under 
HIPAA, then you can file a formal complaint with the Health and Human Ser-
vices' Office for Civil Rights. The OCR is charged with investigating com-
plaints and enforcing the privacy regulation. Before filing your complaint, you 
should first gather more information about filing complaints by going to the 
website of Health and Human Services at www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa or by calling 
866/627-7748. 
If you plan to file a complaint, the OCR requires that you do so within 180 
304 

* Your Health f 
days of a violation. After you file your complaint, the OCR will conduct an 
investigation and try to resolve the matter. In the case of privacy infractions, 
the government can impose both criminal and civil penalties. The civil penal-
ties are cited at $100 per infraction, not to exceed 
$25,000 a year for one person committing identical 
infractions. For prohibited disclosure of personal 
identifying medical information, criminal penalties 
can be up to $250,000, and sometimes up to ten 
years of imprisonment—when the purpose of the 
disclosure can be traced to an intent to use your 
information for commercial or personal gain, or 
malicious damage. 
Given the many individuals 
who will see your medical 
records during TPO, some 
privacy advocates believe 
that an accounting of 
your records will invariably 
be incomplete. 
Control Over Use of Information. HIPAA outlines cases where your informa-
tion can be used without your consent; cases where your authorization is not 
needed; cases where your authorization is needed; and, finally, a few cases 
where you have an opportunity to either consent or opt out. These cases apply 
only to how your information is handled and do not pertain to treatment. Con-
sent is still required for treatment. With respect to information, however, the 
complexities of HIPAA make it impossible to make generalizations. Here are 
some examples: 
• Your medical information can be used for treatment, payment, or 
health-care operations without your consent 
• Your medical information can be used, without your authorization, in 
situations or in connection with situations involving a requirement to 
disclose under federal or state law; victims of abuse or domestic 
violence; court or administrative proceedings; funeral directors or 
organ procurement; medical researchers; law enforcement agents; and 
threats to public safety or health 
• You must authorize disclosure of your medical information when it 
relates to any psychotherapy notes or when it involves marketing. 
Certain exceptions exist in both cases. For example, a court may compel 
your psychotherapy notes to be disclosed in certain matters 
• You have the opportunity to consent to or opt out of disclosure of a 
hospital's directory information when you are admitted to a hospital 
305 

Access to Your Personal Medical Records 
In 2003, as part of a criminal investigation involving alleged doctor-
shopping, Florida law enforcement officers seized the medical 
records of conservative talk show host Rush Limbaugh. The seizure 
came in the wake of a statement by Limbaugh's former employee, 
who claimed she had sold him thousands of painkillers known as 
"baby blues" (OxyContin pills) over the course of several years. 
The American Civil Liberties Union of Florida subsequently filed a 
motion stating that seizure of the records violated Limbaugh's pri-
vacy rights. 
Medical records from one of the medical centers at the University 
of California were handled by a woman in Pakistan who was work-
ing for an overseas data-transcription service. It is not uncommon 
for a hospital to contract with an offshore agency to perform such 
services to reduce medical costs, even though U.S. medical-privacy 
laws are difficult to enforce overseas. The woman in this case tried 
to use blackmail to gain more pay: she threatened to post the med-
ical records of many American patients online if she did not receive 
what she demanded. In the end she retracted her demands, but the 
threat lingers. 
The law under HIPAA retains kinks that have yet to be fully resolved. As 
a result, which entities HIPAA covers and to what extent they can access your 
medical records is still not consistently and clearly defined. Some confusion 
exists about the relationship between the state medical-privacy laws and the 
minimum federal standards put forth under HIPAA. State law is supposed to 
control when state law is deemed more stringent than HIPAA. The problem, 
however, is that it may take a court to decide whether a state law is more or 
less stringent than HIPAA, given the limited time since HIPAA's enactment 
and the difficulty in interpreting the act's provisions. The State of Texas, for 
example, recently took the position that its state public-information law takes 
precedence over HIPAA, enabling Texas media outlets and individuals to 
access public information that some hospitals and authorities declined to 
release under HIPAA. 
306 

* Your Health f 
As long as the facility in 
question uses any 
electronic means to 
transmit information, as 
almost all health-care 
providers must in this 
modern age, that facility is 
bound to the regulations 
stated in HIPAA. 
Even under HIPAA, medical-privacy laws can still be widely interpreted, 
and a comprehensive, reliable comparison study of state laws and new federal 
laws has yet to be published. One report, the Georgetown Health Privacy 
Report, offers synopses on the medical-privacy 
laws, as they are distinguished from HIPAA, of in-
dividual states. The report can be accessed at 
www.healthprivacy.org/info-url_nocat2304/info-url_ 
nocat search.htm. 
To add to the confusion, not all entities are gov-
erned by HIPAA in the same way—and some aren't 
covered at all. This list details the agencies and peo-
ple who have varying degrees of access to your 
medical records. Some are covered by HIPAA and 
others are not, and some are covered only to an 
extent: 
Medical Institutions and Doctors. This category includes almost anyone who 
supplies health care to the public. As long as the facility in question uses any 
electronic means to transmit information, as almost all health-care providers 
must in this modern age, that facility is bound to the regulations stated in 
HIPAA. (HIPAA refers to these entities as health-care providers.) This group 
includes a host of different people working in the hospital or in your doctor's 
office, any of whom might see your medical records, including nurses, consult-
ing physicians, medical transcribers, typists, and others. During the evaluation 
process that determines the medical service you are to receive, still more peo-
ple might review your medical records. Finally, a diverse range of other med-
ical services and institutions, such as laboratories, pharmacies, nursing homes, 
and other health-care centers, are also subject to HIPAA regulations. 
Health Plans. This group (referred to as health plans under HIPAA) encom-
passes entities that pay for health care, including HMOs (health mainte-
nance organizations), group health plans, employee welfare-benefit plans, 
Medicare and Medicaid, dental insurers, and a good number of long-term-
care insurers. Before they will pay your doctor's bill, insurance companies 
require you to release your medical records. Once your insurance company 
obtains your medical information, it may share your information with other 
307 

companies, such as marketing or payment companies. If you are part of a 
health maintenance organization, your medical records may be shared 
among the network's professionals and hospitals to provide efficient med-
ical service to you, but only to the minimum extent necessary to perform the 
intended purpose. Nevertheless, both health insurance companies and 
HMOs must comply with the HIPAA rules that govern their access to and 
use of your medical information. 
The Medical Insurance Bureau. The Medical Insurance Bureau (MIB) is an 
association of U.S. and Canadian insurance companies that provides informa-
tion and database management services to insurance companies. It is run as a 
consumer-reporting agency that maintains a database of medical profiles for 
about 15 million Americans and Canadians. These profiles are not compre-
hensive—like the records in your doctor's office—but rather are synopses of 
conditions and lifestyles, like a thyroid condition or a smoking habit, which 
are relevant to insurance practices. The hundreds of insurance companies that 
are part of this association research insurance policy applicants through the 
MIB's database, although the MIB's information is not supposed to be the sole 
determinant of the acceptance or rejection of an application. The Fair Credit 
Reporting Act (discussed in chapter 4, "Your Credit") regulates the MIB, but 
patients do not enjoy any extra protection under HIPAA. 
Your Employer. Your employer may gain access to your medical information 
in different ways. In many cases, after you begin work, your employer will ask 
for your consent to reveal your medical information. For example, your com-
pany may be self-insured, which means that your company has set up a health 
insurance plan in which it pays your health-care expenses as well as those of 
your fellow employees. To do so, your company must maintain its own data-
base of employee medical records; the department of your company that 
processes your medical claim is then subject to HIPAA. Alternatively, if your 
employer pays for your medical insurance, it may request from its insurance 
company either basic information, such as enrollment information, or more 
detailed information, such as copies of your medical records, to confirm pay-
ments. If your employer seeks more than the basic information regarding your 
health records, it will likely need to comply with HIPAA procedures. Although 
308 

* Your Health * 
the Americans with Disabilities Act prevents employers from seeking medical 
information from you or requesting a medical exam of you prior to employ-
ment, your employer may legally seek both after you have been offered 
employment, if your employer demands the same 
of others in similarly situated positions. See chap-
ter Q, "Your Workplace," for information on how . 
Government agencies 
medical data may be used in the hiring process. 
| 
a r e typjcaiiy n o t 
subject to HIPAA. 
Government Agencies. When you file claims for 
Medicare, Workers' Compensation, or Social Secu-
rity Disability, the respective government agency will review copies of your 
medical records. In addition, public-health agencies may access your medical 
information for statistical data; certain federal agencies may require your 
records for national security and intelligence; and state agencies may need 
your records for the registries they maintain on births, deaths, and people with 
serious illnesses. Government agencies are typically not subject to HIPAA. 
Courts. Your medical records can be subpoenaed under HIPAA if your med-
ical condition is an issue in litigation, an administrative hearing, or a workers' 
compensation hearing. In these cases, the information in your medical 
records—including handwritten doctor's notes—that pertains to the case 
may be introduced in court. 
Law Enforcement Agencies. Law enforcement agencies may, under HIPAA, 
use your medical records to help them solve crimes, investigate fraud, and 
resolve cases involving fugitives and missing persons. 
Marketers. Direct marketers may use your medical records when you partici-
pate in information health screenings, including tests for high blood pressure 
or cholesterol levels. Different rules under HIPAA apply to marketers. 
Others. A host of other people may access different parts of your medical 
records or medical history, including coroners, medical examiners, funeral 
directors, organ procurement services, and various Internet sites. The majority 
of these individuals or organizations are not subject to HIPAA. On the other 
309 

* Prying Eyes * 
How TO REQUEST YOUR MIB MEDICAL RECORDS 
A woman cannot get health, liability, or disability insurance. She is 
very healthy and leads a healthy lifestyle, so she cannot understand 
the difficulty. She decides to request a copy of her coded medical 
record from the Medical Information Bureau. When she receives her 
profile, she is floored to see that she has been inaccurately noted as 
having Alzheimer's disease as well as a heart condition, neither of 
which she suffers from. 
Have you applied for medical insurance and been turned down? Are 
you 
even thinking of applying for it? In either case, it's a good idea to see what's 
in your file. The Medical Insurance Bureau allows you to access your med-
ical records in their file. The MIB also gives you the opportunity to correct 
any inaccurate or incomplete information that is contained in your medical 
file. It is in your best interest to ensure that the information that insurance 
companies use to evaluate you is both accurate and complete. 
To obtain a copy of your medical record, complete a Request for Disclo-
sure Form. Send the form and $9 to the following address: 
The Medical Information Bureau 
Box 105 
Essex Station 
Boston, MA 02112 
Telephone: 617/426-3660 
Fax: 781/461-2453 
www.mib.com 
e-mail: disclosure@mib.com 
Keep in mind that only 20 percent of consumers have files with the MIB. 
You can download the Request for Disclosure Form at the MIB website at 
www.mib.com or request a copy by writing to the MIB at the address above. 
310 

* Your Health * 
i a j i a g g ^ ^ ^ ; ^ ^ ^ ^ : ^ . ; ^ ; ^ ^ 
hand, businesses that serve as intermediaries between health providers and 
health plans (referred to as health-care clearinghouses) are subject to HIPAA. 
Included are any companies or organizations that receive and process health 
information; reformat or standardize medical data; deal with electronic stor-
age; provide billing and pricing services; or estab-
lish health management and information systems. 
In the course of business, lawyers, accountants, 
software vendors, and many other similar entities 
must work with or see your medical records in 
some form. In such cases, although HIPAA does 
not regulate their activities, your doctor or health-
care provider must have an arrangement with 
these vendors that assures that they will adopt 
appropriate safeguards to protect your medical 
records. In addition, other companies, such as life 
or automobile insurance companies, Internet 
health sites, researchers and law enforcement 
agencies, among others, are not subject to HIPAA, 
even though they receive medical information 
from entities that are subject to HIPAA. 
It is precisely because so many entities can access your information out-
side of the limits of HIPAA that privacy advocates argue that the act falls short 
in protecting your medical privacy. 
Lawyers, accountants, 
software vendors, and 
many other similar 
entities must work with or 
see your medical records 
in some form. In such 
cases, although HIPAA 
does not regulate their 
activities, your doctor or 
health-care provider must 
have an arrangement with 
these vendors that 
assures that they will 
adopt appropriate 
safeguards to protect 
your medical records. 
Medical Privacy In Practice: Separating Fact 
from Fiction 
In 1996, William Calvert, a state health worker in Florida's Health 
and Rehabilitation Services Department, downloaded a list of four 
thousand HIV-positive people to screen dates for himself. He 
shared the information with his friends at a local bar. Two news-
papers were tipped off to Calvert's activities by an anonymous let-
ter sent by someone who had been in the bar. 
311 

In 2002, the pharmaceutical company EH Lilly settled charges with 
the Federal Trade Commission relating to the unauthorized disclo-
sure of customers' personal information. The company had inadver-
tently sent a mass e-mail to customers who had registered 
to 
receive e-mail reminders about taking Prozac. The mass e-mail re-
vealed the names and e-mail addresses of all recipients. 
Are you still confused about how HIPAA applies to you and your everyday 
life? Myths abound regarding HIPAA, but the following should set the record 
straight. 
Doctor Visits, Communications, and Transfer of Medical Records 
A mother gets home from work and finds her daughter crying in 
bed, the sheets drawn over her head. Distraught, the daughter sim-
ply points to the phone answering machine. The mother plays the 
saved message, which says, "Hi, May. This is Karen from Dr. Falker's 
office. I'm calling about your mammogram. The doctor wanted to 
tell you to call radiology and make an appointment to take another 
test right away. Call at your earliest convenience at 883-3444 to 
schedule your appointment. " May was not aware of her right to tell 
the doctor's staff to call her only at work. 
Imagine the alarm experienced by the woman who discovered that 
her medical record of her difficult pregnancy had been accessed 
215 times in a short period of time. As reported in 2000 in the 
Boston Globe, the woman was being treated at a hospital for a very 
uncommon reproductive disorder. The disorder was so unusual that 
many hospital staffers consulted the woman's records to find out 
the intimate details. 
You may notice a few changes the next time you visit your doctor. For 
starters, you need to sign a privacy notice, and signs may be posted about the 
new HIPAA rules and regulations. You might also notice more protections to 
prevent patients from seeing other patients' medical information, such as 
312 

4 Your Health f 
screens placed around the edges of computer monitors. Your doctor or his or 
her assistant may still call your name in a waiting room, although sign-in 
sheets may no longer seek the reason for your visit. 
Do you want to make sure your kids at home 
don't accidentally hear the results of your latest 
blood test? You can now dictate how communica-
tions between you and your doctor—which must be 
confidential—are to be handled. You can specify 
when and where you want your doctor to call you, 
and the address to which bills or any medical corre-
spondence should be sent. Further, your doctor can 
still send you e-mails. The only difference required 
by the act is that your doctor or provider must use 
reasonable and appropriate safeguards to ensure the 
e-mail's confidentiality. Accordingly, you might now 
expect your doctor to send you encrypted e-mails via 
a secure computer network. 
Your doctor does not need your consent to transfer your medical records 
to another doctor or health-care provider if it is for treatment purposes. Under 
HIPAA, treatment includes "consultation between health-care providers 
regarding a patient and referral of a patient by one provider to another." To 
assist in your treatment, your doctor can send your medical records to another 
doctor "by fax or other means." 
Do you want to make 
sure your kids at home 
don't accidentally hear 
the results of your 
latest blood test? 
You can now dictate 
how communications 
between you and 
your doctor—which 
must be confidential— 
are to be handled. 
Hospitals 
A great deal of misinformation exists regarding HIPAA regulation of hospi-
tals. First, hospitals may still provide patient information to family members. 
Medical information is withheld from family only if the patient has so 
requested. Under HIPAA, a health-care provider may "disclose to a family 
member, other relative, or a close personal friend of the individual, or any 
other person identified by the individual" the medical information directly 
relevant to such person's involvement with the patient's care or payment 
related to the patient's care. If the patient is unable to agree or object to dis-
closure because of incapacity or an emergency circumstance, the covered 
entity may determine whether the disclosure is in the best interests of the 
313 

Pjy^J^'-ï^.'j|i^ii^ii|::i§j^;^)g'.j! 
Hospitals can continue 
their practice of 
providing directory 
information. However, 
during the admissions 
process, you now have 
the choice to prevent 
your name from being 
added to the directory. 
• Prying Eyes • 
patient. The professional judgment of the health-care provider should guide 
any decision regarding disclosure of protected health information to a family 
member or friend who is involved in the patient's care, as these disclosures 
are permitted, but not mandatory. 
Hospitals can continue their practice of provid-
ing directory information. However, during the 
admissions process, you now have the choice to pre-
vent your name from being added to the directory. 
If you do not choose to do so, be aware that a hospi-
tal directory not only includes your name, location 
in the facility, and condition, but also discloses such 
information to people who only ask for the patient 
by name. The hospital may even disclose directory 
information to the media and members of the 
clergy. However, under no circumstances will the hospital reveal more than 
directory information without a patient's authorization. 
Any more restricted uses of directory information, such as requiring 
patients to ask to be listed in, or opt into, the directory, are either the hospital's 
own policy or indicate confusion about this aspect of HIPAA. 
Whether a hospital can notify your family if you are a patient at its facility 
depends on the circumstances. If you are present and conscious, you can object 
to the hospital's calling your family. If you are otherwise unable to object, then 
the hospital may disclose your presence at the hospital based upon the profes-
sional judgment of the people treating you. For example, a doctor may call your 
wife if you were in a car accident and are being treated in the emergency room 
for minor injuries; a doctor may contact your husband to let him know that you 
have arrived at the hospital in labor and are about to give birth; a nurse may 
contact your roommate to let him know that you broke your leg falling down 
the stairs, had surgery, and are in recovery; and a doctor may, using such profes-
sional judgment, call your adult daughter if you are incapacitated to inform her 
that you have suffered a stroke and are in the intensive-care unit of a hospital 
Lastly, don't think that HIPAA has ended the days of patients sharing a 
room in a hospital. Hospitals are not required to eliminate semiprivate rooms, 
but doctors will likely exercise greater discretion when talking to a patient 
who shares a room with another. 
314 

* Your Health f 
Your Children's Medical Records 
In 2001, the website of the University of Montana inadvertently 
posted the psychological test results and records of more than sixty 
children and teenagers who had visited and 
i «» v"«^ • " < » • • « • • « » < » 
were diagnosed by the university. 
Any medical information 
contained at your 
As a parent, you can still generally access your 
child's school is not 
children's medical records. If, however, you are not 
subject to HIPAA. 
the minor's legal guardian, then you do not have this 
right. In certain cases, even as a parent or legal guardian, you still cannot access 
your child's file. These cases include: (1) when the minor is the one who con-
sents to care and the consent of the parent is not required under state or other 
applicable law; (2) when the minor obtains care at the direction of a court or a 
person appointed by the court; and (3) when, and to the extent that, the parent 
agrees that the minor and the health-care provider may have a confidential 
relationship. For example, as is the case with respect to all personal representa-
tives under HIPAA, a provider may choose not to treat a parent as a personal 
representative when the provider reasonably believes, in his or her professional 
judgment, that the child has been or may be subjected to domestic violence, 
abuse, or neglect, or that treating the parent as the child's personal representa-
tive could endanger the child. 
Generally, a parent would no longer be the personal representative of his 
or her child once the child reaches the age of eighteen or becomes emanci-
pated, and therefore would no longer control the health information of his or 
her child. Of course, any individual can have a personal representative— 
which may include a parent—who can exercise rights on his or her behalf. 
Some of your child's medical information is maintained at your child's 
school. If you have a child enrolled in any grade from kindergarten to twelfth 
grade, the school may have records detailing the results of physical examina-
tions for sports, counselor notes, or the nature of miscellaneous visits to the 
school nurse. Any medical information contained at your child's school is not 
subject to HIPAA. Instead, the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (or 
FERPA) governs the privacy of all school records. Chapter 11, "Your Everyday 
Life," further explains the privacy of educational records. 
315 

Prescriptions and Pharmacies 
You are sick and cannot make it to the pharmacy to pick up your prescrip-
tions. Does this mean you cannot get your prescription filled? HIPAA 
allows a family member or other individual acting on your behalf to pick 
up your prescription. In fact, you can also ask a family member or friend 
to retrieve medical supplies or even X-rays. Nevertheless, your pharmacy 
may have its own policy that requires your individual presence to get your 
prescription. 
Financial Records 
HIPAA provides no protection when it comes to your medical bills. When you 
pay for treatment or doctor visits, your financial records may very well 
include sensitive health information. If you pay by check or credit card, your 
records will, at the very least, indicate the place at which you received your 
treatments and possibly the treatment itself. A 2003 study by the Federal 
Reserve showed that 50 percent of all collections showing up on credit reports 
are for unpaid medical bills. Anyone knowledgeable about the health-care 
industry may be able to surmise the nature of your treatments from your 
financial records. 
It is nearly impossible to avoid having a financial trail for your medical 
treatments. As detailed in chapter 5, "Your Money," the Gramm-Leach-Bliley 
Act (GLB) governs access to and disclosure of your financial information. 
Under GLB, you may prevent your financial institution from sharing your 
financial information with nonaffiliated third parties. However, a financial 
institution may share your financial records, including any medical informa-
tion contained therein, with its affiliates. In some cases, financial institutions 
may provide an enhanced sense of privacy for your medical information. If you 
are particularly concerned about sensitive medical information, you should 
carefully read your bank's privacy notice or ask a customer representative. 
Credit Information 
If you do not pay your medical bills, you can expect your unpaid bills to even-
tually appear on your credit report as unpaid items. HIPAA does not prevent 
disclosure of your medical information to either a collection agency or a con-
316 

• Your Health • 
sumer or credit-reporting agency (CRA) such as Equifax, TransUnion, or 
Experian. See chapter 4, "Your Credit," for more information. 
Workplace 
At one point in his life, a truck driver consulted 
a treatment program because he wanted help 
with his drinking problem. His insurance com-
pany disclosed that request to his employer, 
and the driver was promptly fired. 
Ben Walker, a thirty-year FBI agent, was forced to retire after the 
FBI randomly obtained Walker's therapy records during a fraud in-
vestigation of Walker's therapist. Upon seeing Walker's records, the 
FBI sought to brand Walker as unfit and took away many of 
Walker's responsibilities, even though he was later determined to 
be perfectly capable of handling his work. 
Depending on the situation, HIPAA may or may not affect your medical 
records in the workplace. Indeed, your employment records and medical 
information may be combined in ways not covered by HIPAA. Understand the 
situation at your own place of employment, because a number of factors con-
tribute to the overall privacy of your personal medical information in the con-
text of your job. 
If you are part of a group medical-insurance plan sponsored by your 
employer, HIPPA governs the plan's use of your medical information, but 
not your employer's activities. In this case, HIPPA restricts the information 
the employer may request about you from the plan itself. However, if your 
employer is self-insured—meaning that your employer assumes the costs 
of your health care as opposed to relying on an outside company—then 
HIPAA regulates your employer's use of your information only in part. That 
means that your employer's use of your health-care data and the claims-
processing procedures that your employer establishes are restricted in the 
same way they are for covered entities. Therefore, regarding its employee 
HIPAA provides no 
protection when it comes 
to your medical bills. 
317 

Prospective employers 
may not make 
employment decisions 
based on your medical 
information without 
your authorization. 
• Prying Eyes • 
insurance program, your employer should issue you a privacy notice, 
restrict the use and disclosure of your medical information, and undertake 
other safeguards to protect your medical information. For example, a self-
insured employer is required to build a firewall 
between the health claims operations and normal 
operations of its company. 
In any event, as discussed in chapter 9, "Your 
Workplace," prospective employers may not make 
employment decisions based on your medical 
information without your authorization. Incidents 
of employers making job-related decisions based 
on medical information may violate HIPAA or the 
federal Americans with Disabilities Act. Nevertheless, your employer may 
obtain your medical information in ways that are not covered by HIPAA. 
Possible sources of this information include drug testing, workers' compen-
sation programs, credit reports obtained in background checks prior to 
employment, or other employee-benefit programs like life or long-term-care 
insurance. 
Health Information and the Internet 
As discussed in chapter 7, "Your Computer and The Internet," any time you 
enter personal information online, you are essentially making the information 
public. Indeed, HIPAA does not apply to the Internet. Nevertheless, the Inter-
net is a great resource for health information, including interactive forums like 
chat rooms and Usenet news groups where information about conditions, 
treatments, and the ensuing outcomes can be found. As always, check each 
website's privacy notice to see if the information you are providing is used for 
any other purposes. If you plan to use an Internet site to purchase over-the-
counter or prescription drugs, you should carefully review the site's privacy 
policy. For example, drugstore.com considers your customer information a 
business asset and will transfer your information to any company that 
acquires drugstore.com. Even if a privacy notice promises absolute privacy, 
you should be skeptical about the amount of control you retain once you have 
posted sensitive data online. 
318 

* Your Health f 
HIPAA and the USA Patriot Act 
Your medical records are subject to the same provisions of the USA Patriot Act 
that require libraries to give federal law enforcement agents your computer 
usage and book-borrowing information upon 
request and without telling you. As explained in 
chapter 11, "Your Everyday Life," Section 215 of the 
USA Patriot Act applies not only to libraries, but also 
to any records kept by a third party including med-
ical records. To obtain your medical records, an 
agent need not even have probable cause that you 
are involved in any potential terrorist activity. If an 
agent certifies that your medical records are 
required for a foreign intelligence investigation, a 
judge will rubber-stamp the request. Your doctor 
would also be obliged to provide your medical 
records to the agent, and you would not be aware or 
informed that your information has been shared 
with the government. In this case, HIPAA provides 
scant protection for your privacy. 
Protect Your Medical Privacy 
"The best patients are the worst patients. Nudge, nudge, nudge. 
Don't sit back and accept anything that fails to satisfy you. Speak 
up, protect your interests."—Claire Fagin, Dean Emerita, University 
of Pennsylvania School of Nursing 
Here is a detailed list of tips to safeguard your medical privacy without 
sacrificing great health care: 
-fc Know your HIPAA rights. As explained in this chapter, HIPAA provides you 
with certain rights to protect your privacy. Make sure not only that you are 
familiar with these rights, but also that you exercise them at appropriate 
If an agent certifies that 
your medical records 
are required for a foreign 
intelligence investigation, 
a judge will rubber-stamp 
the request. Your doctor 
would also be obliged 
to provide your medical 
records to the agent, 
and you would not 
be aware or informed 
that your information 
has been shared with 
the government. 
319 

times. For example, be certain you receive and read a privacy notice from 
any covered entities in the health-care industry with which you come into 
contact. Further, you have the right to access your own private medical infor-
mation with these companies and providers. If you find inaccurate data in 
your record, you can request that the provider make alterations and amend-
ments to the file. You may also request a list of disclosures of your medical 
information (with the exception of those relating to treatment, payment, or 
operations). In cases of particularly sensitive information, you can ask a 
provider or other covered entity to restrict how your medical information is 
used and handled, even if it is not obligated to comply with your request. 
Finally, you can always file a complaint with Health and Human Services. 
*- Be proactive with your doctor or other health-care provider. It is crucial that 
you investigate the privacy practices of your doctor's office, since this is 
where much of your medical care occurs. Your doctor's files are also the 
source from which much of your private medical information originates. You 
can accomplish this by reading your doctor's privacy notice and other com-
munications and by talking to your doctor about your particular concerns. If 
need be, compare your doctor's practices to the practices of other doctors. 
In addition, keep these tips in mind when you visit your doctor: 
• Disclose only information that is relevant to your health. Do not provide 
extraneous information about your medical history or lifestyle if you 
believe it would serve no purpose. 
• If you are asked to sign an authorization for use of your medical 
information, read the form carefully. Try to limit how your information 
will be used by altering the waiver to your specifications, although your 
health-care provider is not required to comply with your requests. 
• Ask to see your records. Make any necessary changes to correct 
inaccurate information. 
• Make sure your doctor's office communicates with you in a manner that 
you want and in a way that makes you comfortable. If you do not want 
your doctor or your doctor's staff to leave messages on your home 
answering machine, provide them with your cellular or business phone 
number. If you do not want test results to be mailed to your home, give 
the doctor's staff an alternate address. 
320 

• Your Health * 
• Tell your doctor about your particular concerns regarding your private 
medical information. Perhaps your doctor can devise an appropriate 
solution to ease your concerns. Perhaps your doctor will delete irrelevant 
information in your records when those records are photocopied or 
otherwise sent to third parties, especially your insurance company. 
-fc Access and review your records. Review your records periodically. In partic-
ular, determine if the Medical Insurance Bureau maintains a record on you, 
and if so, request a copy of the record to check its accuracy. The contact 
information is listed in the MIB section earlier in this chapter. 
^ Know your other rights. Remember that certain records and certain areas of 
medical treatment are covered by additional legislation. For example, med-
ical information contained within your financial records may be governed by 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley (GLB), as discussed in chapter 5, "Your Money." Treat-
ments involving substance abuse or chemical dependency, which are obvi-
ously sensitive, are regulated, beyond HIPAA, by the Public Health Service 
Act, which requires signed authorization by the patient for the disclosure of 
any personal medical information related to relevant conditions or treat-
ment. Genetic testing is covered by HIPAA, but is additionally covered by 
the Genetic Nondiscrimination Act of 2003. 
# Pay your medical bills on time. Once your medical records appear on your 
credit report, many companies and institutions are able to see part of your 
medical information. Accordingly, act before the information appears on 
your credit report. In many cases bills are sent to collection agencies because 
of misunderstandings. Perhaps your insurer was supposed to pay the bill. If a 
bill ends up in the hands of a collection agency because of a misunderstand-
ing, you should dispute the medical bill in writing. Also consider paying the 
bill yourself while you try to resolve the dispute. If the dispute is resolved in 
your favor, your insurance company should reimburse you. For more informa-
tion on your consumer rights in this regard, consult www.ftc.gov. 
-fc Be careful with your own records. File your copies of your medical records 
in a secure place that others cannot access. If you need to make photo-
321 

* Prying Eyes f 
copies for an insurance company, make sure you do not need leave addi-
tional copies at the copier. If you need to submit any records to your insur-
ance company, submit only what is necessary. 
^ 
Read any authorizations to release your information carefully. Look for lan-
guage that indicates that your information may be used for marketing pur-
poses, such as when you complete privacy forms in your doctor's office. If you 
have authorized disclosure of your information and you change your mind, 
revoke the authorization to prevent any further disclosure by that conduit. 
-fc Limit your exposure in court. If you ever need to submit medical records in 
court, limit the portion of the file to what is absolutely necessary, because 
whatever information is submitted can become public record. Ask to be 
notified by covered entities if your records are subpoenaed. 
-fc Write your employer. If you are insured through your employer, state in writ-
ing to the administrator of health operations at your company your urgent 
desire to limit any wrongful disclosure of your medical information. 
•jfr Avoid public health screenings. Do not engage in health screenings offered 
in public places like malls and parking lots, as they are often intended to 
harvest your medical information for marketing purposes, or to compile 
medical profiles that are saleable. However, if your employer has an on-site 
health clinic—and that clinic transmits medical information electronically, as 
it is likely to do—then your visit to your employer's clinic would be subject to 
HIPAA regulations. 
# Be careful online. Be cautious about revealing your medical information on 
the Internet; consider not using your real name or e-mail address in health-
related chat rooms or Usenet news groups. 
•Jfr Avoid consumer surveys. Do not include your own or your family's sensitive 
medical information on consumer reports that arrive in your mail. These 
mailings are often packaged as sweepstakes invitations or opportunities to 
win free coupons. 
322 

* Your Health f 
^ Be careful when ordering medical products. When you order products from 
a medical-supply company, be explicit in requesting it not share your infor-
mation with any other entity. 
# Take your name off the hospital directory. If you are admitted to a hospital 
or other facility for a procedure or treatment, remember that you are to be 
given the choice, as part of the admissions process, of whether or not to be 
listed in the facility's directory. 
-fc Pay the bill yourself with cash. In extreme cases, if you want to be certain 
your condition is not disclosed, visit a different doctor, do not provide the 
doctor's staff with insurance information, and pay the bill yourself with cash 
for maximum privacy protection. 
^ Ask your insurance company questions. Contact your insurance company, 
and inquire about how and if it shares your personal information with any 
other parties. State in writing your desire to restrict any wrongful disclosure 
of your information. 
THE BOTTOM LINE 
• Open up anyway. Your personal medical information and history can be 
revealing, extensive, and sensitive, but you still want to fully disclose your 
medical conditions to ensure the best possible treatment. 
• Hip HIPAA hurray! The federal medical-privacy law referred to as HIPAA 
creates minimum federal standards but applies only to three types of 
entities: health-care providers who transmit information electronically, 
health-care and insurance plans, and health-care clearinghouses such as 
health-care billing services. 
• HIPAA limitations. Beyond the three entities mentioned above, many other 
companies and institutions can access your medical information. HIPAA 
does not apply to many entities and therefore reinforces why you still need 
to be cautious with your personal medical information. 
• HIPAA everyday. You will encounter the effects of HIPAA when you visit 
your doctor, go to the hospital, get prescriptions from pharmacies, pay your 
323 

bills, or seek treatment for your family members. Make sure you fully 
understand your rights under HIPAA. 
• Don't rely solely on HIPAA. Beyond the rights you get under HIPAA, you 
can protect your medical privacy in many other ways, such as being careful 
with your medical records, being cautious when using the Internet for med-
ical information or medical purchases, avoiding public health screenings, 
staying away from medical surveys, and much more. 
324 

Your Everyday Life 
You are grocery shopping and feeling somewhat distracted. You 
stop to read the back of a cookie box when a man stooping behind 
you positions his cell phone underneath your skirt and snaps a 
photo. You are totally unaware of what has happened and also un-
aware that the photo will be seen by millions when it is published 
on the photographer's website. 
Your family signs up for a location-tracking system that turns your 
cell phone into a technological tattletale. Every time you leave your 
house, your wife is sent an automatic e-mail alert: "John has left the 
house at 9:32 P.M." 

Your local car rental agency has a new policy that requires renters to 
supply a thumbprint as identification. You learn that the company 
does not destroy the prints after you return the car, but keeps the 
prints on file for seven years with no promise of safeguarding them. 
Moreover, the company used a GPS device to track your entire trip 
in its car and plans to keep those records in your file, too. 
Every time you look in your rearview mirror you see your freaky ex-
boyfriend, following you to work, to the mall, and anywhere else 
you go. You don't know it, but he placed a GPS device under the 
hood of your car and the device is giving him the information he 
needs to stalk you. 
Someone posts your personal information with an online dating 
service. The posting includes your picture, your real name and ad-
dress, and your alleged desire to have casual sex. 
As you go about your everyday life you are likely to encounter invasions of 
your privacy, many of which are a result of the terrorist attacks of September 
11, 2001. No event in recent history has had such a profound effect on national 
security, law enforcement, individual civil liberties, and privacy. As a direct 
response to the attacks, Congress enacted the vastly complex and ominously 
titled Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools 
Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act, commonly known as the 
Patriot Act. The Patriot Act greatly expanded the government's powers to access 
your personal records, search your home, and monitor your Internet, 
e-mail, and phone usage—and more. 
The hijackings on September 11 changed air travel forever. New measures 
to strengthen security in airports and in the sky have been, or will be, imple-
mented. Some are highly invasive, including background investigations and 
body-scanning at security checkpoints. A new system that would score each 
passenger prior to departure is still in the works. 
The technologies you use every day compromise your privacy in subtle 
ways. These include the cell phone that keeps you connected to your family 
and office; your car's OnStar system, which offers directions when you are 
326 

* Your Everyday Life * 
lost; the E-ZPass that speeds you through highway tollbooths; and the subway 
card that eliminates the need for tokens. 
Your leisure time may also be hazardous to your privacy. Online dating 
may be a superhighway to identity theft or worse. Borrowing a book from a 
library, renting videos or DVDs, or getting tickets to your favorite sporting 
event or concert may reveal more about you than you'd ever expect. 
The risks vary depending upon the technology. Use of cellular phones may 
allow government officials, nosy hackers, and criminals to eavesdrop on your 
conversations. The phones may also make you a target of cell phone fraud. Hid-
den surveillance cameras tape you throughout your day—at the ATM, at the 
convenience store, in the elevator, at a busy intersection—and they compro-
mise your personal privacy. A photo snapped without your knowledge or con-
sent on a stranger's cell phone camera is a privacy invasion, particularly if you 
happen to be dripping wet from the shower in your health club locker room. 
Global-positioning chips, planted in a myriad of devices, sometimes without 
your knowledge, allow others to track you everywhere you go. 
Do you have any education or criminal records that you'd like to keep pri-
vate? Depending upon the circumstances, these also might be exposed. 
Who wants to know where you've been, what you buy, or what you do 
with your spare time? The answer is anyone, to varying degrees and by vari-
ous means: the government and your neighbor, your ex-wife and your new 
girlfriend, the company that rented you a car, and the business that wants to 
sell you a car. 
Privacy and the Patriot Act 
Think twice before you search the Internet and send an e-mail. A 
Web search for information on crop dusters, for instance, may not 
be such a great idea even if you are a farmer. Likewise, you might 
reconsider sending any e-mail joke entitled "Top Ten Reasons to 
Blow Up Washington Monuments. " Between the government's new 
surveillance power and the use of its old favorite, the Internet-
tapping Carnivore, an eavesdropping system developed by the FBI, 
you may just find you have some explaining to do. 
327 

• Prying Eyes • 
Massachusetts state representative Kay Kahn was shocked to dis-
cover that her bank blocked a $300 wire transfer because she is 
married to a naturalized U.S. citizen named Nasir Khan. Apparently 
someone may have been using her husband's 
name as an alias, which resulted in the Kahns 
being put on a watch list. 
Nearly 250 cities, 
towns, and counties— 
encompassing more 
than 19 million 
Americans—have passed 
resolutions condemning 
the Patriot Act. 
When President Bush signed the Patriot Act 
into law on October 26, 2001, your expectations of 
privacy were dramatically reduced in one fell 
swoop. As a response to September 11, the 342-page 
law was passed hastily and with little debate or 
study. The act is designed to expand the resources 
available to law enforcement officials to investigate and prevent both interna-
tional and domestic terrorism. Proponents say that the Patriot Act merely filled 
the holes in existing laws to fight terrorism, and that, without the act, you 
would not be secure. Moreover, even if your civil liberties are affected, propo-
nents say that the United States has a history of expanding such rights in peace-
time and contracting them during times of national crisis or emergencies. 
Critics denounce the Patriot Act as trampling on civil liberties, privacy, 
and the Constitution. They feel the act's provisions are too broad, and the act 
enables the government to spy on law-abiding citizens. They fear that the act 
has been and will continue to be misused for purposes for which it was never 
intended. Indeed, nearly 250 cities, towns, and counties—encompassing more 
than 19 million Americans—have passed resolutions condemning the Patriot 
Act, and numerous lawsuits have been filed to challenge the act. Ordinary citi-
zens, both liberal and conservative groups, and pundits—from the American 
Civil Liberties Union on the left to William S afire on the right—have been 
vocal in their opposition to the act. 
A comprehensive analysis of the Patriot Act—with provisions on every-
thing from immigration to money laundering—is beyond the scope of this 
book. Further, a number of different aspects of the Patriot Act are currently sub-
ject to judicial review at all levels from the U.S. Supreme Court to the district 
courts. As a result, this section will limit discussion to some of the surveillance 
provisions of the act, and how they threaten your privacy. These provisions 
328 

-* Your Everyday Life •-
apply broadly to visitors, permanent residents, and U.S. citizens, and you can be 
a target of these surveillance tools even if you are not a terrorist suspect. 
This is what the Patriot Act has enabled government to do: 
If a government official 
asks your librarian to turn 
over a list of all the books 
you've taken out and a 
record of your Internet 
usage at the library, the 
librarian would be required 
by law to immediately 
comply and not tell you 
what happened. 
Access to Consumer Records. Before the Patriot 
Act, the government had to show probable cause (a 
strong reason) to obtain a search warrant before 
accessing your private records from third parties, 
such as banks, telecommunication providers, hospi-
tals, churches, libraries, bookstores, hotels, airlines, 
credit card companies, and so forth. This is no 
longer the case. Under the act, the government 
need only obtain an ex parte court order, which 
does not require the government to notify you and 
therefore does not give you the opportunity to con-
test the order's validity. This court order is akin to a rubber stamp, since judges 
have virtually no authority to deny it. Furthermore, to obtain the court order 
the government does not have to offer any evidence of wrongdoing, but only 
has to certify that the information is relevant to an investigation. (This is 
equivalent to the government having a belief that the information is relevant, 
and it is a considerably lower standard than probable cause.) Finally, the party 
made to turn over your records is gagged, and thus prohibited from notifying 
you or anyone else about the search. For example, if a government official asks 
your librarian to turn over a list of all the books you've taken out and a record 
of your Internet usage at the library, the librarian would be required by law to 
immediately comply and not tell you what happened. 
Bottom line: Without a warrant and with only minimal judicial oversight, the 
government can conduct records searches on you and virtually anyone. 
Sneak-and-Peek Searches. When investigating ordinary criminal cases, the 
government must obtain a warrant and give you notice before presenting it to 
search your home. This principle of knock and announce is part of the Fourth 
Amendment. An exception was made under the Foreign Intelligence Surveil-
lance Act of 1978 (FISA) to make it easier to investigate foreign agents sus-
329 

pected of terrorism. In FISA cases, a variety of warrants called sneak-and-peek 
are obtained from a secret court. A sneak-and-peak warrant allows the govern-
ment to search your home when you are not there, rummage through your 
personal belongings, and seize physical property including your hard drive, 
but not tell you about it until some point in the future. The Patriot Act expands 
the use of FISA sneak-and-peak warrants from terrorism cases to all criminal 
investigations. The act requires only that notice be given to you after a search 
within a reasonable amount of time, but the time may be extended for good 
cause. The problem is that without notice or your presence, you have no 
opportunity to object if the scope of the warrant is exceeded, or if the police 
are searching the wrong house. 
Bottom line: The Patriot Act broadens what was once a limited exception to the 
standard probable cause and notice requirements of a legal search. Police will 
be reluctant to return to the previous knock-and-announce standard. 
Expansion of Wiretap Laws. As in the case of sneak-and-peak searches, the act 
allows the government to use a lower standard than before when obtaining a 
wiretap order. The Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act previously allowed 
wiretaps when foreign intelligence gathering was the primary purpose. The 
Patriot Act allows wiretaps in criminal cases and justifies them by saying that 
foreign intelligence gathering is a significant purpose for the tap. In addition, 
the act expands the government's surveillance powers by authorizing the rov-
ing wiretap. Wiretaps are no longer limited to one phone or one computer 
within one jurisdiction, but instead apply to any phone or computer you may 
use nationwide, whether or not it belongs to you. For instance, the government 
can order a tap on library, university, or Internet café computers and monitor 
not only you, but also every other user of that computer. The facility, such as 
the library, is not allowed to tell you or anyone else that the monitoring is tak-
ing place. 
Bottom line: The wiretap provisions not only dispense with the probable 
cause standard of the Fourth Amendment, but they also weaken the judicial 
oversight that guards against government fishing expeditions. 
330 

* Your Everyday Life f 
Internet Monitoring. Pen register/trap and trace (PR/TT) searches allow law 
enforcement to monitor telephone numbers dialed from or received by a sus-
pect's telephone. Monitoring addressing information alone is allowed, but the 
actual content of the call is off-limits. PR/TT search orders have always been 
available to law enforcement under a low standard; they need only show that 
the information is relevant to an investigation. The act expands PR/TT laws to 
enable the government to wiretap Internet use, e-mail, and other forms of elec-
tronic communication under the same low standard as telephone PR/TT 
searches. However, what constitutes content monitoring in electronic commu-
nications is not as clearly defined or limited as in the telephone context. For 
instance, in the case of e-mail, the addressing information and the content 
move together in packets. To execute a PR/TT order, the government obtains an 
entire e-mail message but then must separate the e-mail address from the con-
tent of the message. With no external authority monitoring the government's 
actions, how confident are you that the government is doing what it says it is? 
CARNIVORE 
Carnivore is an astonishingly invasive computer system developed by the 
FBI. When connected to an ISP network, Carnivore can intercept millions 
of e-mail messages per second. Carnivore enables the FBI to monitor not 
only the e-mails of its target, but also millions of unrelated e-mails of inno-
cent people who just happen to use the same ISP as the target. Many peo-
ple think the Patriot Act introduced Carnivore, when in fact Carnivore was 
in use for a year before the act. The deployment of Carnivore initially 
required a court order to monitor criminal activity, according to FBI and 
Department of Justice Officials. 
The Patriot Act does not specifically mention Carnivore by name. 
Nonetheless, under the act the government has used Carnivore in PR/TT 
mode to gather addressing information. This means that the government 
does not have to obtain a full wiretap order, but instead a much lower stan-
dard court order, and can potentially see a lot more than just addressing 
information. 
331 

Bottom line: The government can review significantly more information than 
merely the website URL or the To and From lines of e-mails if it is supposed 
to decide for itself what constitutes content. 
Combined, the categories above underscore the privacy concerns that 
have been voiced about the Patriot Act: 
• Centralizes power in one branch of government. Our system of gov-
ernment is based on the three branches, the executive, legislative, and 
judicial, exerting checks and balances on each other's power. The act 
creates one locus of power—the executive branch—to the exclusion of 
all the others. 
• Secrecy. The Department of Justice has refused to reveal anything 
about how the provisions of the act have been used. The department's 
response to any query has been that the information is classified, if it 
responds at all. The fact that most warrants are approved in closed 
courts has also contributed to the aura of secrecy surrounding the act. 
In the words of one staff attorney at the ACLU, "It's this wonderful 
union of Orwell and Kafka." 
• Ordinary U.S. citizens will be swept into the act's net. By eroding the 
long-standing distinction between domestic law enforcement and 
foreign intelligence gathering, the act sidesteps Fourth Amendment 
protections. This means that U.S. citizens, legal residents, and visitors 
are at risk of being spied upon by the government. 
Airline Travel 
A mother and her baby passed through screening before boarding 
a flight at JFK. Security guards at the checkpoint insisted the 
mother drink the three bottles of breast milk in her carry-on to 
prove the bottles did not contain explosives. 
An 80-year-old Grand Rapids great-grandmother was strip-searched 
at the airport after her knee-replacement set off metal detectors. 
332 

• Your Everyday Life • 
To add insult to injury, a man walked into the room where the 
search was being conducted because the door was not locked. 
NASA, in cooperation with a commercial firm, 
is developing brain-monitoring 
devices to 
identify terrorists. Using noninvasive neuro-
electric sensors to collect passengers' brain-
wave and heartbeat patterns, the device will 
apparently determine if you are having any 
suspicious thoughts. Critics wonder if the fear 
of flying—or of the device itself—will trigger 
the sensor. 
Even if you are willing to 
give up all your privacy 
rights within an airport 
setting, are there 
adequate safeguards 
in place to ensure that 
the personal information 
you will need to reveal 
to fly stays confined to 
the airport setting? 
More than 100 million Americans fly each year, 
and the hijackings of September n changed the experience for every one of 
us. The events demonstrated that lax security at the nation's airports could no 
longer be tolerated. In response, the Transportation Security Administration 
(TSA) implemented new security measures such as better training for screen-
ers, machines capable of checking bags for explosives, fortified cockpit doors, 
and an increased number of air marshals on flights. All these measures make 
good safety sense. 
From a privacy perspective, travelers have indicated a willingness to relin-
quish a certain amount of privacy for better security. But how much is too 
much? Some measures already in effect and others only in the planning stage 
may cross the line of what you think is acceptable. Even if you are willing to 
give up all your privacy rights within an airport setting, are there adequate 
safeguards in place to ensure that the personal information you will need to 
reveal to fly stays confined to the airport setting? Here are some of the surveil-
lance technologies already in use: 
• Body scanners. New technology scans some passengers through their 
clothing to detect plastic weapons and explosives that can slip through 
metal detectors. These electronic strip searches may one day be used on 
a large-scale basis, x-raying people as they pass unsuspecting on people 
conveyor belts. For the time being, the concern is that the images 
333 

Do you want your 
fingerprint to be like your 
social security number, 
possibly available for 
sale on the Internet? 
• Prying Eyes • 
remain private, as you would not likely want to see your X-rays appear-
ing on the Internet. 
• Biometrics. Biometrics is technology that uses biological traits to identify 
individuals. The most common biometrics use fingerprint, retinal or iris 
scanning, or face recognition. Although scanning 
faces in a crowd and comparing those faces to a data-
base of suspects (as was done at the Tampa Super 
Bowl) has not proven ready for prime time, other 
uses of biometrics, such as fingerprint scanning, are 
gaining popularity. Authorities began scanning fin-
gerprints and photographing foreigners from certain 
countries arriving at airports as part of the Homeland Security Depart-
ment's US-VISIT program. Fingerprint scanning cannot, however, weed 
out criminals who have yet to make it into the terrorist database. Con-
cerns about this practice relate to how the database is stored and who has 
access to it. Do you want your fingerprint to be like your social security 
number, possibly available for sale on the Internet? 
• Cabin videocams. Southeast Airlines says it plans to install digital 
video cameras throughout the cabins of its planes to record the faces 
and activities of passengers. The airline plans to store the videos for up 
to ten years. Privacy advocates are worried that the videos would 
capture personal information: every business or pleasure trip taken, 
private conversations, and every book title a passenger reads. They 
also worry about improper access to the videos' content. 
• Smart cards. These are ID cards equipped with memory chips that 
store personal data, and they can be used to track your movements. The 
cards would speed up airport check-in, but critics warn that they would 
amount to a national ID system that would facilitate government sur-
veillance. Detractors also say that Smart Cards will not deter terrorism; 
terrorists, like those involved in September 11, or identity thieves 
would simply obtain cards that appear to be legitimate. 
CAPPS II 
Have you been a passenger on a Jet Blue airplane? In 2002, Jet Blue 
provided the records of 5 million of its passengers to a Pentagon 
334 

* Your Everyday Life * 
contractor, which then used other databases from a data-mining 
company to augment almost half of those records with other per-
sonal information, such as income, occupation, and social security 
numbers. The contractor used the information to categorize the pas-
sengers based on their perceived threat levels. Jet Blue released the 
information in violation of its own privacy policy, and without passen-
gers' consent. In fairness, Jet Blue apparently did not know that the 
contractor was conducting a data-mining program that looked like a 
blueprint for CAPPS II. This incident does, however, make you think 
twice about the sensitive data you provide when you travel. 
Despite concerns from airlines and privacy advocates, the U.S. government 
plans to implement an upgraded and expanded profiling system known as the 
Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System, or CAPPS II. Airlines are 
fearful, as in the Jet Blue incident, of alienating their customers when they hand 
over passenger records. Privacy advocates and even Congress have grave con-
cerns that the Transportation Security Administration (TSA) has yet to allay. 
The actual date for the implementation of CAPPS II has not yet been 
finalized. In its current design, the CAPPS II program conducts a two-step 
background check on every airline traveler. First, the system verifies your 
identity by comparing information provided in the reservation system 
against an enormous commercial database, using credit reports and other 
information that data aggregators compile. Second, the system uses some 
sort of algorithm to assign you a risk score using unknown sources and secret 
intelligence information to evaluate whether you pose a risk to security. If 
you are assigned a Green rating, you will pass through security as normal; if 
you are assigned a Yellow rating, you will require additional screening; and 
if you are assigned a Red rating, you will not be allowed to fly and potentially 
can be detained or arrested. 
The disturbing features of this profiling behemoth have been exten-
sively discussed and critiqued by numerous groups, including the American 
Civil Liberties Union. The criticism has focused on four aspects of the profil-
ing system: 
• What data is used? The TSA has not indicated what data is used to 
probe into your identity and assess your threat risk. However, new sys-
335 

-• Prying Eyes f-
tems may link your airline reservation to the commercial databases of 
data-mining companies such as Acxiom and information companies 
such as LexisNexis. These links may reveal certain personal and con-
sumer information about you, such as informa-
tion relating to your purchasing habits, your 
magazine subscriptions, or your family life. 
Moreover, the TSA is not legally required to indi-
cate the types of data it will use. 
• Won't mistakes be made? Given that 100 million 
Americans fly annually, and even assuming an 
impossibly unrealistic accuracy rate of 99.9 per-
cent, mistakes will be made. This means that an 
estimated one hundred thousand individuals will 
be affected annually. Not only will mistakes make 
life miserable for a lot of innocent people, but 
they will also increase the difficulty of finding the 
real terrorists among all the false positives. 
• Is it fair? The profiling systems will likely dis-
criminate against certain groups, such as poor 
people and minorities who typically score lower on credit reports or 
have no credit at all, or people of certain religions or ethnic back-
grounds. 
• Will it really make travel safer? The effectiveness of the system is 
suspect because terrorists may bypass the system by committing 
identity theft and assuming an innocent person's identity. 
New systems may link your 
airline reservation to the 
commercial databases of 
data-mining companies 
such as Acxiom and 
information companies 
such as LexisNexis. These 
links may reveal certain 
personal and consumer 
information about you, 
such as information 
relating to your 
purchasing habits, your 
magazine subscriptions, 
or your family life. 
Your Travel Data 
CAPPS II and Jet Blue reveal the dangers of conjoining your travel data 
with other personal information. But travel data on its own is extremely 
sensitive by nature. Computerized records, such as those stored by the 
Galileo reservation system, one of the world's largest, can reveal myriad 
details on your travel history: everywhere you have ever traveled, when you 
traveled, your travel companions, whether you asked for one bed or two in 
your hotel room, your children's names, your dietary restrictions, and so on. 
336 

wmmsm^§s^:M:'W^-:-M, *m:^>» ;<mi 
• Your Everyday Life • 
Unlike medical, financial, or even video records, your travel records are 
unregulated and open to unrestricted access. 
Frequent-traveler records pose a similar privacy risk. Databases contain-
ing these records constitute one of the airlines' 
biggest assets. Although there are no reports of 
such data being sold, if an airline were ever to go 
out of business, the data could wind up being sold 
or transferred. Your information could wind up in 
the hands of... well, who knows? In and of itself, 
the fact that you've traveled to Florida last April 
might not be interesting to marketers, but if it were 
entered into a database and coupled with other information they have about 
where you stayed and who you were with and where you shopped, you might 
be concerned. 
Unlike medical, financial, 
or even video records, 
your travel records are 
unregulated and open to 
unrestricted access. 
THE NEW MATRIX 
CAPPS II is not the only massive profiling project in development; there's 
also Matrix. Matrix is an ominous example of a huge profiling project devel-
oped not by the government, but by a private company. Florida-based Seisint 
developed Matrix, and the company claims that it is the largest database on 
the planet, with more than 20 billion records. To date, Seisint has received 
$12 million in federal funding. The company combines driver's license, vehi-
cle registration, and criminal records with other government and commer-
cially available data to produce detailed dossiers on its targets. The profiles 
include names, social security numbers, photographs, birth dates, current 
and old addresses, financial information, driving records, criminal histories, 
information on family and friends, and so on. At least fourteen states have 
considered using Matrix, but as of the end of 2003, only Florida was using 
Matrix at full capacity. Nine states, including New York, California, and 
Texas have left the program since its inception. Worries about privacy 
abound. As Barry Steinhardt of the ACLU articulated, "Programs like Matrix 
are a quantum leap backward in the protection of our privacy." 
337 

• Prying Eyes • 
There is little you can do to prevent programs such as CAPPS from collect-
ing information about you, but there are a few ways to make your flying expe-
rience easier under the circumstances. 
|;;^ :; :;^gijigj^ 
If an airline were ever to 
go out of business, your 
frequent flyer records 
could wind up being sold 
or transferred. Your 
information could wind 
up in the hands of. . . 
well, who knows? 
•jfr Don't joke. Don't try to spice up your life or that 
of other passengers by telling inappropriate 
jokes about bombs, guns, or lethal tweezers. 
These jokes will not amuse security personnel, 
and they will likely result in you being delayed or 
possibly even arrested. 
-fc Be aware that certain ticket information might 
cause you to be flagged as a suspicious traveler. 
Triggers include one-way tickets, tickets paid for with cash, and tickets pur-
chased at the last minute. 
& Check your credit report for inaccuracies. If possible, find out if you have an 
unwarranted criminal record (case of mistaken identity, case dismissed, 
acquittal, and so forth). 
Cell Phones 
Imagine if, as you passed a popular fast-food restaurant, you got 
the following text message on your cell phone: "We notice your vis-
its to us have dropped off by 75 percent this month; if you are con-
cerned about your love handles, here's a coupon for one of our new 
super salads. " 
Reports indicate that the National Security Agency may have eaves-
dropped on U.N. Security Council members in New York to deter-
mine how they intended to vote on a proposed resolution about Iraq. 
When asked about the rumors, one European diplomat was blasé 
when responding, "I assume every phone conversation I have either 
on the cell phone or at the office is listened to by several people. " 
338 

Digital phones still rely on 
analog towers during peak 
calling times if the digital 
system is overloaded, or 
when the user has entered 
a roaming area, so even 
digital phones are not 
entirely secure. 
• Your Everyday Life • 
Do you use a cell phone? If so, you are in good company. In 2003, approxi-
mately 90 million cell phones were sold in North America, according to Strat-
egy Analytics, a Boston-based consulting firm, and about 500 million units 
were sold worldwide, according to the Gartner Group. 
Are you worried that someone can listen in on 
your cell phone calls? It is a frightening thought, 
especially given the above examples. However, 
unless you are using an older, analog phone or are 
in a security-sensitive business, you shouldn't 
worry too much. For analog cell phone users, eaves-
dropping is a genuine problem. Analog cell phones 
transmit radio signals that can be easily overheard 
by anyone with a scanner. 
Most newer cell phones are digital. Digital trans-
missions are scrambled for better protection and thus are less vulnerable to 
eavesdropping. Digital networks carry an estimated 85 percent of wireless con-
versations. Unfortunately, digital phones still rely on analog towers during peak 
calling times (usually weekdays from 7 A.M. to 6 or 7 P.M.) if the digital system is 
overloaded, under maintenance, or when you enter a roaming area, so even dig-
ital phones are not entirely secure. Additionally, some Bluetooth-enabled cell 
phones are vulnerable to attackers who exploit a security flaw to download 
stored numbers and other information—a practice known as "snarfing." 
It is generally illegal to purposefully eavesdrop on someone else's cell 
phone call, although exceptions exist for monitoring by law enforcement 
agencies. Under the Communications Assistance for Law Enforcement Act of 
1994 (CALEA), telephone companies are required to ensure that their systems 
can be accessed by law enforcement. The Patriot Act has made it easier for law 
enforcement to eavesdrop on your cell phone calls by eliminating the need for 
the probable cause standard. 
To protect your cell phone privacy: 
•*• Use a digital cell phone, and pay attention if your phone switches to ana-
log mode. When in digital mode, your phone screen may show the letter D 
on the phone's display screen. You may not be able to tell if your digital cell 
phone switches to analog mode. 
339 

* Prying Eyes * 
0 
Never divulge sensitive or personal information while talking on a cell 
phone. Take this precaution even if the phone is digital, especially during 
peak times. 
-fc Switch off Bluetooth functionality. If you have a Bluetooth-enabled handset, 
take this precaution if you're concerned about "snarfing." 
^ 
Contact your wireless provider. Ask about phones that use encryption for 
added security. 
Recording Conversations 
Can you tape your own cell phone calls? The rules vary by state. In general, the 
rule is similar to the rule that governs recording conversations on a landline. 
Some states require that both parties to the conversation consent to the 
recording, but the majority of states require that only one party consents. In 
states covered by the latter rule, you can record virtually all your conversa-
tions. A chart of all states' electronic surveillance laws is available at 
www.ncsl.org/programs/lis/cip/surveillance.htm. 
Cell phone makers seeking to differentiate their products are adding 
recording features to their models, and as they do, legal and privacy issues will 
become a hornet's nest in the near future. Several companies, including Nokia 
and Japan's NTT DoCoMo, have already begun experimenting with recording 
features. 
Cell Phone Fraud 
A Florida man was charged with 139 counts of cell phone subscrip-
tion fraud for illegally obtaining victims' identification information 
and activating cell phone accounts in their names. The fraud cost 
the cell phone carrier around $80,000 in lost charges. 
A Florida judge sentenced a different Florida man to more than 
eleven years behind bars and ordered him to pay almost $1 million 
in restitution for running a cell phone scam while he was in prison. 
The scammer, pretending to be a Sony Pictures executive, used an 
340 

* Your Everyday Life * 
authentic Sony account and tax ID number he had stolen to order 
more than one thousand phones for "an upcoming film shoot. " 
There are two types of cell phone fraud: subscriber fraud and cell phone 
cloning fraud. Subscriber fraud occurs when an identity thief obtains your 
personal information and uses it to set up a cell phone account in your name. 
The thief racks up charges under your name, fails to pay, and the phone com-
pany looks to you to settle the matter. The bills for the fraudulent cell phone 
account are not sent to you, so you have no way of knowing this is occurring 
until it has already happened. The Federal Trade Commission reports that 
phone/utility fraud is the second most common form of identity theft (after 
credit card fraud), and half of this fraud is wireless-subscription fraud. Tips 
presented in chapter 3, "Your Identity," will prevent identity theft from hap-
pening to you. 
Each cell phone is equipped with an Electronic Serial Number and Mobile 
Identification Number (ESN/MIN). Cloning fraud occurs when a thief inter-
cepts a cell phone signal and clones your phone's ID numbers. The ESN/MIN 
are then reprogrammed into the computer chip of another cell phone. After 
cloning, both the legitimate and the fraudulent cell phones have the same 
ESN/MIN combination. You, the legitimate phone user, are billed for the 
cloned phone's calls. 
Cloning fraud is far less common for a variety of reasons, including the 
use of more secure, digital phones, new technological defenses implemented 
by the wireless companies, and the Wireless Telephone Protection Act of 1998, 
which criminalizes the use or sale of cloning hardware or software. 
To avoid cell phone fraud, take the following steps: 
*- Use a digital cell phone and pay attention if your phone switches to analog 
mode. 
-fr Review your bills. Look for calls that you did not make and report them to 
your service provider. 
-fc Never leave your phone out in public. If you're at a coffeehouse, bring your 
phone with you while you run to the bathroom. If you leave the phone unat-
341 

tended, someone can either steal the phone or remove the phone's battery 
and get instant access to the ESN/MIN. 
Your Image 
The privacy of your image is compromised in many ways. Surveillance cam-
eras and cell phone cameras pose particular risks. 
Surveillance Cameras 
In Tuscaloosa, Alabama, a traffic-monitoring camera that usually re-
mained stationary was panning and zooming in on pedestrians walk-
ing down the street. An officer in the state troopers' office had taken 
control of the camera. How was he discovered? The footage, which 
consisted mostly of young women's breasts and buttocks, was acci-
dentally aired during the traffic segment of a local cable TV show. 
Do you know how many times a day your privacy is compromised by 
unseen video cameras? Imagine a typical day in your life. You leave your 
house and are videotaped by your neighbor's private security camera. You buy 
your coffee at a local convenience store and are taped by the store's security 
system. You buy a fare card to ride the subway and are taped by the transit 
authority. You cross a busy intersection and are taped by a traffic camera 
installed by the city. You withdraw money from an ATM and are taped by the 
bank. It's only 9 A.M. and you have already had more video exposure than Paris 
Hilton. 
Video surveillance is increasing in cities such as Washington, D.C., and 
New York. For instance, in the relatively small midtown area of New York, 
there were 284 surveillance cameras in May 2003. As surveillance cameras 
proliferate, people are just beginning to question whether the loss of privacy 
they encounter in fact results in increased security. In Great Britain, which is 
years ahead of the United States in surveillance, there are 1.5 million video 
cameras in public places, and the typical Londoner is photographed on aver-
age three hundred times per day. The cameras have not deterred street crime 
and there is no known instance, according to the ACLTJ, of a video camera 
342 

p p ^ j ^ i ^ ; ^ 
As surveillance caméras 
proliferate, people 
are just beginning 
to question whether the 
loss of privacy they 
encounter in fact results 
in increased security. 
• Your Everyday Life • 
thwarting a terrorist attack. There have, however, been instances of London 
surveillance footage making it onto Internet porn sites, and even an indecent 
shot of the late Princess of Wales. 
In the United States, a backlash is beginning to 
form against surveillance cameras (called red-light 
cameras) used at busy intersections to catch drivers 
who are running red lights. Hundreds of thousands 
of people receive tickets every year because of pho-
tos taken by red-light cameras in use in about sixty 
cities and counties in the United States. Critics, 
many of whom object to the intrusiveness of the 
cameras, say that the primary motivation for 
installing them is profit rather than safety. In San 
Diego, the first court case was decided against the use of red-light cameras to 
issue tickets to speeding motorists. The court did not go so far as to ban the 
cameras entirely, but it did decide that the way the San Diego program oper-
ated was illegal. San Diego's program created a conflict of interest by allowing 
the same private company that installed and operated the cameras to collect a 
sizable cut from each ticket issued. San Diego has since switched to a different 
camera system. 
Camera Phones 
Imagine you are naked in your health club's locker room when you 
notice that the man changing next to you is holding his cell phone 
at an unusual angle. Did he just snap a quick photo of your genitals? 
Perhaps this explains why health clubs around the country are ban-
ning cell phones in their locker rooms. 
Singer Britney Spears, aware of the dangers of unflattering candid 
camera shots, demanded that all camera cell phones be confiscated 
before she appeared at a Rolling Stone party in Los Angeles. 
Camera-equipped cell phones are the latest fad in a world obsessed with 
personal communication devices. An estimated 80 million camera phones 
343 

An estimated 80 million 
camera phones are in 
use today across the 
globe, albeit mostly in 
Asia and Europe. There is 
little doubt these devices 
will become ubiquitous 
in the United States. 
• Prying Eyes • 
are in use today across the globe, albeit mostly in Asia and Europe. There is 
little doubt these devices will become ubiquitous in the United States. New 
phones that record videotape are already being produced. 
As these camera phones proliferate, privacy has 
become the paramount concern worldwide. Hun-
gary has made it an offense to photograph people 
without their consent; and South Korea requires 
that new phones emit a loud beep when taking pho-
tos. In the United States, where the phones are 
newer, the backlash is just beginning. Stories are 
cropping up in the press about camera cell phone 
bans at certain celebrity parties, health club locker 
rooms, certain federal courthouses, schools, public 
rest rooms, Air Force bases, and so on. Concerns 
about camera phones have also caused companies such as Volkswagen and 
Samsung to ban the phones from their research and development depart-
ments out of fear of corporate espionage. 
Portable cameras have been in use for a long time. Why the sudden outcry 
over camera phones? Part of the problem is that on first glance, these phones 
are virtually indistinguishable from regular cell phones. There is, therefore, a 
certain stealthiness to the camera phone, with its small size and discreet lens. 
Finally, the bigger problem is the ability to immediately disseminate the pho-
tos, either to other camera phones or straight to the Internet. 
To their credit, camera phones do bring certain benefits that, in certain 
cases, outweigh their privacy risks. Indeed, camera phones have many legiti-
mate uses, aside from taking pictures of your friends and family. For exam-
ple, they have been a boon to law enforcement efforts. In one case, a New 
Jersey boy thwarted a kidnapping attempt by taking photos of the man who 
tried to lure him into a car as well as the car's license plate. Cell phone cam-
eras have also been handy for documenting events, real estate, accident 
scenes, and more. 
344 

* Your Everyday Life * 
LAWS GOVERNING CAMERA OR VIDEO VOYEURISM 
Technology has developed at the speed of light, but the legal system has 
not kept pace. As is the case with other new technologies, the law has not 
adequately addressed the new privacy threats posed by surveillance and 
cellular cameras. 
Courts traditionally have held that there is no expectation of privacy in 
public places. As discussed in past chapters, courts only find there has 
been a breach of privacy when one has a reasonable expectation of pri-
vacy. As such, courts have held in the past that in places such as locker 
rooms, bathrooms, and dressing rooms people do have a reasonable 
expectation of privacy. 
The first cellular camera cases to reach the courts will probably 
involve the use of cellular cameras in private settings, and the courts will 
have to balance your right to carry a phone with others' right to privacy. 
But the courts will also have to decide whether, just because you are in 
public, it is any less of a violation when someone shoots a picture up your 
skirt or down your blouse. A similar problem exists in the lack of a fed-
eral law to cover the clandestine use of a video camera in public, or video 
voyeurism as it is called. Some experts believe that, at some point, courts 
will find a limit to the concept of waiving your privacy rights merely 
because you are in public. 
Some states are beginning to respond to these problems with legisla-
tion, but the coverage is usually quite specific. Missouri, for instance, bans 
only nonconsensual camera or video use when there is nudity involved 
and the filming occurs in a place where an individual would have a reason-
able expectation of privacy. Only a few states, including California or 
Louisiana, abolish the distinction between private and public spaces. 
Louisiana, for instance, outlaws the use of any camera or video where the 
subject has not consented and the filming or photographing is done for a 
"lewd and lascivious purpose." Furthermore, the state also prohibits the dis-
semination of the images by phone, e-mail, or the Internet. 
A list of states that have passed laws addressing camera or video 
voyeurism is available at www.ncsl.org/programs/lis/cip/surveillance.htm. 
345 

Tracking Technologies 
A family that rented a car from Payless Car Rental in San Francisco 
was horrified to learn that it had incurred an extra $3,000 in fees by 
taking the vehicle beyond state lines. The family was unaware that 
its rental car was equipped with a device that allowed the company 
to track its exact route. 
New technologies make it possible for your precise location to be pin-
pointed. Naturally privacy concerns arise with respect to these tracking devices 
which include your cell phone and other Global Positioning System-enabled 
(GPS) technologies. According to analysts, about 42 million Americans will be 
using some sort of location-based technology by 2005. 
Cell Phone Tracking 
You are standing in front of your local upscale coffee emporium when 
you get an unsolicited text message on your phone from StarCoffee: 
"We notice you are standing in front of Hoity-Toity Coffee. Did you 
know that StarCoffee's lattes are cheaper than Hoity-Toity's?" 
Your daughter is an hour late returning home from school. No 
worry, she has a cell phone that monitors her location. To see if 
she's at the library or at Jason's house again, all you have to do is 
check a map on your computer. 
The FCC mandated that by 2005, wireless carriers must be able to auto-
matically locate callers who dial 911 in emergencies. Millions of phones 
already are Ec^ii-capable, which means that your cell phone company can 
keep tabs on you by means of a Global Positioning System (GPS) chip in your 
cell phone. The chip calculates your geographical coordinates by receiving sig-
nals from satellites. In the United States, cell phone users already make over 
one hundred thousand E911 calls every day. 
Your cell phone may also track you through a process called triangulation. 
346 

What is to prevent your 
cell phone carrier 
from selling or sharing 
your personal location 
information with 
direct marketers? 
• Your Everyday Life • 
Triangulating phones broadcast your identification number to the nearest 
antennas, which enable your carrier to know where you are at any given 
moment. Your carrier can track you as you pass from one antenna to the next, 
calculating your location by the time it takes for the 
signal to reach the antennas around it. 
Cell phone tracking systems are beneficial in 
case of emergency. Do you remember the horrific 
story of the four teenagers who drowned after dial-
ing 911 from their boat on Long Island Sound 
when no one could locate them? Such technology 
might have saved their lives. 
Real privacy issues with these phones exist, and 
there is no legal framework established to offer guidance. What is to prevent 
your cell phone carrier from selling or sharing your personal location informa-
tion with direct marketers, as in the StarCoffee scenario cited above? "Mar-
keters are foaming at the mouth about the prospect of sending e-coupons," 
according to Jason Catlett, the founder and president of Junkbusters Corp. 
Location-based services (LBS)—including targeted marketing and location 
tracking of friends and family—offer a potentially enormous revenue stream 
for wireless carriers, and one that would prove hard to resist. In fact, one esti-
mate expects that LBS could be a $15 billion market by 2007. 
The Wireless Communications and Public Safety Act of 1999 requires 
that your location information be used for non-emergency purposes only 
with your express consent. The problem is that no one really understands 
what consent means in this context. Privacy advocates are worried that wire-
less carriers may bury the consent in a contract's fine print, or that they may 
offer no information at all. Motorola's user's manual and Verizon's website 
are both devoid of any information regarding the privacy of your location 
information. The FCC has remained silent on the topic, and in 2002 the 
agency actually turned down a request from privacy groups and the cellular 
phone industry's association to draw up location data privacy rules. 
Police and government access to your location information also presents a 
troubling privacy problem. Police do not explicitly need warrants to access loca-
tion data, and they have been using this information for years to verify alibis. 
347 

With the government's recent focus on profiling—and corporations' long-
standing interest in targeted marketing—location data is sure to become a 
much sought-after commodity. Combined with data on your buying habits, 
travel plans, income, credit, and other personal data, information about your 
whereabouts will create a detailed picture of who you are and what you do. 
GPS Gadgets 
Wherify's GPS-enabled bracelet, available in Galactic Blue or Cosmic 
Purple, locks onto kids' wrists and pinpoints their exact locations. If 
someone tries to forcibly remove the bracelet, an alarm message is 
sent to the parents. 
Scott Peterson, a California resident charged with killing his preg-
nant wife, Laci, and their unborn son, was tracked after his wife's 
disappearance. Investigators covertly mounted a Global Position-
ing System to his car, which pinpointed his location wherever he 
went. Shortly after her death, Peterson drove the car to San Fran-
cisco Bay, where the bodies would wash up many months later. The 
judge presiding over the case ruled that GPS data is scientifically 
sound enough to be admitted as evidence in his upcoming double-
murder trial. 
Your cell phone and your car's navigation system use GPS technology 
to monitor location, but so do other products. These devices are still rela-
tively costly, but this may soon change. In the very near future, you are 
likely to see inexpensive tracking devices disguised as watches, belts, or 
backpack inserts for your kids. Although few would dispute the merit of 
this technology if you were trying, for instance, to recover an abducted 
child or locate a missing Alzheimer's patient, a very real potential for pri-
vacy abuses can occur if stringent security measures are not in place. See 
chapter 12, "I Spy, You Spy," for a discussion of GPS-enabled devices that are 
available to consumers right now. 
348 

-• Your Everyday Life •-
Car Tracking 
y^agjllpÉlf;;^ 
James Turner rented a van from Acme Rental Car to drive from 
New Haven to Virginia. The rental agency determined that during 
his trip Turner drove over the speed limit 
three times, and the company fined him $150 
for each occurrence, 
even though he was 
never stopped by the police. Acme's 
cars 
were fitted with a GPS system that allowed 
the company to track renters' driving habits 
and levy fines for excessive speed. 
With the government's 
recent obsession 
with profiling—and 
corporations' long-standing 
interest in targeted 
marketing—location data 
is sure to become a much 
sought-after commodity. 
Think your conversations are private in your 
own car? Think again. A recent court case re-
vealed that the FBI had been using an OnStar-type system to eaves-
drop on passengers inside a car. The court ruled against the FBI, but 
not on privacy grounds or on any other constitutional basis. Rather, 
the court based its decision on the fact that the FBI wiretap inter-
fered with the car's emergency services. The FBI's tech teams are 
clearly capable of overcoming the technical problem with the wire-
tap. So under the ruling of this case, the agency is free to wiretap in 
this invasive manner as soon as it comes up with a way to do so that 
will not disable the emergency signal in the car. 
Telematics in automobiles consists of a computer, a wireless connection, 
and a GPS system. Although the telematic industry is still relatively small, ana-
lysts forecast tremendous growth. Marketing consultants Frost & Sullivan esti-
mate there will be 5.5 million telematic-equipped vehicles by 2009, up from 
only seventy-five thousand in 2001. Today, the OnStar system from General 
Motors is the most widely used telematic system. Other telematic systems can 
be found in high-end car brands like BMW, Mercedes, Jaguar, and Lexus. 
OnStar's features include emergency assistance, stolen-vehicle tracking, 
driving directions, and integrated wireless phone service, all of which offer 
safety and convenience to drivers. But with the convenience come real privacy 
concerns. Even if the FBI isn't eavesdropping while you fight with your hus-
band over who has carpool duty, the mere capability for eavesdropping should 
349 

Do you really need Big 
Brother riding shotgun in 
your new Suburban? 
• Prying Eyes • 
give you pause. Is it hard to extrapolate new, insidious eavesdropping inci-
dents at the hands of experienced hackers, government officials, corporate 
spies, organized criminals, or the like? At the very least, this is just one more 
location-based service that enables someone to know where you are at all 
times. Do you really need Big Brother riding shot-
gun in your new Suburban? 
Devices such as Spy-Track enable cars without 
telematic systems to be tracked. Spy-Track, like 
other such devices, is a small black box that is 
installed under a car bumper or car hood and tracks where you go, at what 
time, and at what speeds. The device, and many like it, is marketed to parents 
who are eager to keep tabs on their teens, employers who want to check up on 
their employees, and husbands and wives worried about their spouses' possi-
ble infidelities. You can purchase such devices for less than $1,000. 
If you're about to lease or buy a car, follow this tip: 
•fc Ask first. If you are concerned about the privacy issues coupled with telem-
atic devices, ask if your rental or leasing company uses OnStar. Consider not 
buying or leasing a car that is equipped with the system. 
Electronic Toll Collection Systems 
New York and San Francisco use small electronic antennas positioned 
under freeway overpasses and on signs to calculate motorists' speeds 
by tracking drivers that pass by quickly at electronic tollbooths with E-
ZPass or FastTrack devices. To date, with the exception of searches of 
individuals by law enforcement officials, the information provided by 
these systems has been used only to provide motorists with informa-
tion about freeway travel times, but privacy experts worry that this in-
formation may one day be used to track individuals 
or to 
automatically issue speeding tickets. Imagine how anxious insurance 
companies would be to get their hands on that information. 
New York City officials transferred thirty detectives out of the city's 
narcotics bureau for allegedly claiming false overtime. The detec-
350 

Information picked up by 
the receiver is encrypted, 
but information can be 
intercepted directly from 
the transponder by anyone 
with the right equipment. 
• Your Everyday Life • 
tives were discovered passing through E-ZPass lanes miles from 
where they were supposed to be working. 
Electronic toll systems enable drivers to avoid long lines at the tollbooth 
and the nuisance of grappling for change, but they 
also raise privacy issues. The transponder, or box 
that sticks on the inside of your windshield, contin-
uously transmits location, time, date, serial num-
ber, and identification information via radio 
frequency to a receiver positioned at tollbooths or 
alongside highways. Information picked up by the 
receiver is encrypted, but information can be inter-
cepted directly from the transponder by anyone with the right equipment. 
Systems such as E-ZPass, Smart Tag, and I-Pass, to name a few, that bill 
travelers for using electronic toll payment, must by nature store personal 
information. The agencies running these programs assure their customers 
that the data is not shared with businesses, but privacy experts worry that this 
may not always be the case. 
Government and law enforcement's access to electronic toll collection 
records is also a concern. Law enforcement is already accessing E-ZPass 
records to track individuals. In 2003, when the police were investigating the 
disappearance of a prominent U.S. attorney, they pulled the records of his 
E-ZPass account, which led them to Pennsylvania where his body was found. 
E-ZPass records have also been used in civil cases, such as child custody bat-
tles. The location data may be available without a warrant depending on 
where you live, because according to the New York State Supreme Court, 
"a reasonable person holds no expectation of confidentiality" when using 
E-ZPass on a public highway. 
Follow these tips when you're traveling on toll roads: 
-*• Use cash. If you're concerned about privacy issues at the tollbooth, do not 
use an electronic toll collection device. 
-fc Cover your transponder. If you want to use electronic toll devices, Mylar 
bags or boxes will protect your transponder when it is not in use. These 
bags and boxes prevent your personal information from being transmitted 
351 

from the transponder. Mylar bags are available for free with FastTrak, but 
you must remove the transponder from your windshield to store it. 
EZ Shield, the storage container available for E-ZPass, is a box that shields 
your transponder while it is still affixed to your windshield. It is available for 
$9.95 at www.ezshield.com. 
Metrocard 
Christopher Stewart, a subway employee, was convicted of second-
degree murder and criminal possession of a weapon for murdering his 
girlfriend in 2001. Stewart's alibi fell apart when his Metrocard, still in 
his possession, revealed that he was near the crime scene just before 
the murder. His card revealed that about an hour before the murder 
he was on a southbound S54 bus, which passes near the scene of the 
crime. Ten minutes after the slaying he was on a northbound S54 bus. 
Metrocards are credit card-size transportation passes sold in New York. 
These cards are the preferred way to pay fares on New York City subways and 
buses. What you may not know is that the Metrocard is essentially a floppy 
disk with a serial number printed on it. Every time you swipe the card through 
a turnstile, the data contained on it is relayed back to the Metropolitan Trans-
portation Authority's central computers. 
You may also not know that if you use a credit card to buy your Metro-
card, your individual location may be tracked on subways and buses. Using 
the number of a Metrocard paid for with a credit card or a card in a suspect's 
possession, police have been given access to this location information, for 
instance, to confirm or contest alibis. 
Follow this tip when you use your Metrocard: 
^ Use cash. Buy a Metrocard with cash if you are concerned about the privacy 
of your whereabouts. 
Event Data Recorders 
The South Dakota police sought information from the black box 
contained in former U.S. Representative Bill Janklow's 1995 Cadillac 
after an accident in which he killed a motorcyclist. Janklow was 
352 

-• Your Everyday Life •-
found guilty of manslaughter. The black box in this case was of lim-
ited use because it was an older model, but the case raised the 
public's awareness about the use of black boxes. Since 1999, for ex-
ample, all General Motors cars have contained such black boxes. 
An estimated 25 million 
cars in the United States 
are fitted with event 
data recorders 
An estimated 25 million cars in the United 
States are fitted with event data recorders, or black 
boxes that record information that can be impor-
tant in determining responsibility for an accident, 
such as the speed the car was traveling, whether the 
brake was pressed, whether the driver was wearing 
a seat belt, and steering and airbag performance. Although these devices do 
not currently act as location trackers, it is not hard to imagine this monitoring 
feature being incorporated at a future date. 
The data collected from these black boxes has public-safety value in the 
aftermath of car accidents. If, for instance, you claim to be going only thirty 
miles per hour when you strike and kill a pedestrian, the information con-
tained in the black box may contradict your story by revealing that you were 
in fact going eighty miles per hour in a thirty-mile-per-hour zone. 
But black boxes raise a host of privacy concerns. You may be unaware that 
your car is equipped with a black box. California passed the first law to protect 
the privacy of drivers whose cars are equipped with black boxes. The Califor-
nia law requires automobile manufacturers and dealers to disclose in the 
owner's manual or lease agreement if the car is equipped with a black box. 
Other privacy issues concern access to the black-box data. Should your insur-
ance company be able to access the information to determine if you are the 
type of driver who obeys speed limits? Should this information be available 
when the company sets your policy rates? Should police be able to access the 
black box and its data without a warrant? The California law requires the car 
owner's consent before an agency can access the black box's data, except in 
certain cases such as when a court orders the release. 
Follow this tip when you're buying a car: 
* 
If you do not want a black box in your car, do not purchase automobiles 
that contain them. Most of the black boxes are in GM cars, but some Fords 
also have them. Ask your dealer before buying. 
353 

* Prying Eyes f 
School Software 
One mother in San Jose, California, discovered her daughter was 
cutting classes at Los Gatos High School. To the daughter's chagrin, 
the mother had logged into the school's database and accessed her 
daughter's attendance records. 
Just as some parents use nanny cams to keep their eyes on activity at 
home, they can now use Web-based software to track their kids at school. At 
least 6,500 schools in the U.S. have installed software that enables parents to 
log on from their home or work computers to find out just what little Johnny 
and Jane are up to in school that day. Some parents monitor their kids the way 
that investors monitor their portfolios. 
The software keeps not only a daily record of their children's homework 
assignments and grades, but also information about unexcused absences, 
detentions, missed assignments, and so forth. For more information on school 
software, see chapter 12, "I Spy, You Spy." 
Human Biochips 
Pets and livestock are sometimes implanted with tiny microchips 
that are used to identify them. Could microchips implanted in hu-
man beings be far off? 
A Palm Beach company developed a Tic-Tac-size chip that can be injected 
into humans. Currently, a handheld scanner up to four feet away can read the 
personal information contained on the chip. Although the chip's intended use 
is to contain personal data, and perhaps medical information, one could easily 
envision this technology being used in the future to keep tabs on someone. 
Your Leisure Time 
You encounter situations that compromise your privacy even during your 
leisure time. Whether you are trying to find a date online, visiting libraries 
and bookstores, renting videos, or going to concerts and shows, your personal 
information may be revealed. 
354 

* Your Everyday Life f 
Privacy and Online Dating 
Janet Brice, a fifty-five-year-old divorced woman, was excited about 
her new relationship and she and her boyfriend moved in together. 
Ten months later, while they were still living together, 
Janet's 
boyfriend decided to post a personal ad on www.jdate.com. Al-
though Janet did not see the ad, many of Janet's friends did. 
Bob was a regular browser on a large, reputable online dating site. 
He found a woman he thought was the perfect match; she shared 
his love of square dancing, Fig Newtons, and Weimaraners. After 
exchanging several e-mails and meaningful phone calls, they agreed 
to meet in person. The woman turned out to be a prostitute. She 
harassed Bob and attempted to shake him down for money. She 
was so persistent, he eventually had to move and get an unlisted 
number. 
If online dating was at one time stigmatized as a loser-land, populated by 
perverts, stalkers, and weirdos, this is certainly no longer the case. Online dat-
ing has become wildly popular. Improved technology, including broadband 
and digital cameras, has made online dating easier. Moreover, many people are 
now accustomed to turning to the Internet to find what they need, and they 
view dating as no different. In August 2003, 40 million Americans visited an 
online site in search of a date. Online personals are now one of the most lucra-
tive forms of paid online content; revenue was up 76 percent to $228 million 
in 2002 from 2001, according to Jupiter Research. The online dating field is 
crowded, with sites ranging from the large and established such as Match.com 
and Yahoo.Personals.com, to targeted niche sites that cater to vegetarians, pet 
lovers, and admirers of plus-size women. 
Despite its popularity, online dating poses risks, and not just because an 
estimated 30 percent of those who use these sites are married men or because 
people often post photos that bear absolutely no resemblance to their older, 
pudgier selves. Online dating can be fraught with real dangers, including mis-
representation of identity, threats to personal security, and invasion of privacy 
and identity theft. A potential for abuse exists even if you have never visited a 
355 

ï'0t:'^/^r§è:mr;Èm 
Some unscrupulous online 
dating sites may sell the 
wealth of personal and 
demographic information 
in their databases to third 
parties; others share it 
with affiliates and may sell 
it as part of a company 
sale or bankruptcy. 
• Prying Eyes • 
dating site. Recently, someone posted a profile of a real movie actress on 
Matchmaker.com, and the listing included the actress's real home address, tele-
phone number, and e-mail address. The actress sued for invasion of privacy, 
among other things, but the court ruled in favor of 
the website. 
New sites potentially offer more security. The 
wildly popular Friendster.com, for instance, is pred-
icated on meeting and dating people through 
mutual friends. Meeting people through mutual 
friends presumably reduces the number of, in the 
words of one site member, "axe murderers" you will 
encounter. Another new site, Truebeginnings.com, 
is the first to conduct background checks to elimi-
nate convicted felons from its database. 
Newer forms of wireless dating raise even more concerns. Location-based 
cell phone dating, which is popular in Japan and some parts of Europe, is start-
ing to be introduced in the United States. To use this type of service, you use 
your phone to find people matching your interests who happen to be within a 
few blocks. You send them a quick text message and set up a date. The idea 
appeals to those looking for a more casual, spontaneous approach to dating, 
but it gives other people the creeps. 
Finally, the amount of personal information that these dating websites 
maintain raises privacy concerns. The privacy risks are similar to those raised 
in chapter 9, "Your Workplace," with respect to online job search sites. Some 
unscrupulous online dating sites may sell the wealth of personal and demo-
graphic information in their databases to third parties; others share it with 
affiliates and may sell it as part of a company sale or bankruptcy. 
Use these tips to protect yourself when using online dating sites, or even 
when dating in person: 
-^ Don't use your real name. Don't reveal your real name or other personal 
information in your posting. Be cautious about revealing your personal 
information until you know the person you are e-mailing. Make sure the dat-
ing site strips your e-mail of your name and personal e-mail address. (Most 
sites should do this.) 
356 

* Your Everyday Life f 
-fc Conduct your own background check. Before going out on a date, learn 
about the person by executing a search of the person's name on Google, or 
by checking public records such as marriage certificates, felon convictions, 
real estate records, and so forth, to verify the person's identity. For more 
information, see chapter 12, "I Spy, You Spy." 
# Guard your anonymity. When you are ready to communicate outside the 
security of the online dating service (which should use anonymous e-mail), 
set up your own anonymous e-mail account with an ISP. If you are ready to 
move to phone conversations with your prospective date, do not give out 
your work number or home number, both of which can be placed in a 
reverse directory to reveal your home address. Use your cell phone to make 
the call or, if you make the call from a landline, sign up with your phone com-
pany for blocking beforehand so your number won't appear. 
^ Understand how the site operates. Every dating site operates differently, so 
get a feel for how much of your personal information is stored and how that 
information is tracked. For example, on some dating sites, such as 
JDate.com, profiled subscribers can see the names of other subscribers who 
have read their profiles. 
# Meet in a public place. When agreeing to meet in person, arrange to meet 
in a public place. Do not agree to be picked up at your home, not even in 
front of it, and never get in the person's car. 
-fc Tell a friend. Always tell a friend or relative whom and where you are meet-
ing, and provide them with your date's telephone number when possible. 
*- Remove personal or sensitive information. When you do feel comfortable 
enough to invite your date to your home, be sure to put away any bills, bank 
statements, or other sensitive documents that could be used by an identity 
thief posing as a date. 
Libraries and Bookstores 
Remember when Kenneth Starr outraged the nation by trying to 
subpoena Monica Lewinsky's book purchases from two DC book-
357 

• Prying Eyes • 
stores? Starr supposedly was seeking confirmation that Lewinsky 
bought books as gifts for the president. Rumor had it that the presi-
dent was particularly interested in Nicholson Baker's Vox, a novel 
about phone sex, which Lewinsky purportedly 
bought for him. The two Washington book-
stores took Starr to court, and the matter was 
settled only after Lewinsky herself agreed to 
turn over her purchase records. 
Under the Patriot Act, 
searches and seizures can 
occur without notice to 
the target, without a 
warrant, without a criminal 
subpoena, and without 
any showing of probable 
cause that a crime 
has been committed. 
When asked by a newspaper reporter if the 
government had tried to use the Patriot Act to 
obtain book records from him, the owner of 
the Harvard Book Store in Cambridge, Massa-
chusetts, said that if it had, he would not be 
able to tell anyone. In fact, he felt that under the law he wouldn't 
even be allowed to tell his lawyer. The store's owner then joked that 
he felt, to be prudent, he should call his lawyer every morning to re-
port that he hadn't been approached by the FBI. That way, if one 
morning he didn't place that call, his lawyer could assume the worst. 
Libraries and bookstores traditionally have enjoyed a high level of legal 
protection out of concern for your privacy and your First Amendment rights. 
Indeed, most states have enacted legislation to protect your records of borrow-
ing or buying books. The Patriot Act, however, eradicated this protection. As 
mentioned above, under the Patriot Act, searches and seizures can occur with-
out notice to the target, without a warrant, without a criminal subpoena, and 
without any showing of probable cause that a crime has been committed. 
The government views libraries and bookstores as logical targets for surveil-
lance. First, the government had evidence that the September 11 terrorists used 
library computers to communicate with one another. In addition, books and 
library computers are important sources for potential terrorists to learn about 
possible sites to attack or ways to devise bombs or other hazardous materials. 
Critics believe that the act's provisions concerning bookstores and 
libraries are unconstitutional. Librarians and bookstore owners in particular 
358 

* Your Everyday Life f 
have been vocal in their opposition, to the point of posting warning signs to 
customers and patrons regarding the effects of the Patriot Act. Librarians also 
have been taking other proactive steps to reduce any information that the gov-
ernment might access by undertaking the following: 
• Keeping only minimal information in their records pertaining to 
borrowing cards 
• Shredding borrowing records as soon as books are returned 
• Shredding computer sign-up sheets 
• Erasing the caches on computer hard drives 
When you go to the library: 
-fc Ask first. If you are concerned about the privacy of your library records, ask 
your librarian how long the library keeps book-borrowing and computer 
records. If it keeps them for long periods of time, you might be more com-
fortable trying another library. 
Video Rentals 
In 1988 Judge Robert Bork was a nominee for the Supreme Court. 
His nomination failed. During the proceedings the press obtained 
the judge's video rental history and printed it in the newspaper. It 
turned out that Judge Bork's viewing habits were mostly G-rated 
and relatively uninteresting, but the ability of the press to access 
this information scared enough members of Congress to prompt 
them to enact legislation. Makes you wonder what videos some 
congressional members are renting ... 
Worried that your eclectic video-renting habits, including rental of the 
occasional porn video, will be revealed and ruin your chance of success in your 
child custody battle? The Video Privacy Protection Act (VPPA), which passed 
in 1988 as a direct response to the Judge Bork incident, prohibits video 
providers from disclosing your customer rental records without your 
359 

If you buy a ticket for 
Wrestlemania XX, you 
might just find your inbox 
flooded with spam. 
• Prying Eyes • 
informed, written consent, excepting a police warrant or court order. The 
VPPA also requires video purveyors to destroy personally identifiable cus-
tomer information within a year of the date a rental account is terminated. 
Although the VPPA does not specifically 
cover DVDs and video games, which are also 
rented in video stores, the spirit of the VPPA 
would appear to include them. To date, no legal 
cases have put this issue to the test. However, a 
more unsettling question is whether the Patriot 
Act will have an adverse impact on the VPPA. It 
seems likely that under the act's provisions video records can be accessed in 
the same way as bookstore and library records. 
Tickets to Sporting Events, Shows, and Concerts 
Many fans order tickets to sporting events, shows, concerts, and movies 
through ticketing services, such as Ticketmaster or Télécharge. These ticketing 
services collect certain information about you, such as your name, the name 
and date of the event, your credit card number, your e-mail address, and your 
home address, to fulfill your order. The ticketing agency may need to share 
your information with third-party vendors or the venue in which the event is 
taking place. The nature of the information that is needed and the manner in 
which it is shared with or used by third parties varies by service. Accordingly, 
you need to read the service's privacy policy prior to ordering tickets. 
Suppose you buy tickets through Ticketmaster, which sells 95 million 
event and sports tickets a year through telephone and online channels. Ticket-
master not only collects your information, but also shares your information 
with various event providers. These event providers may include venues, pro-
moters, bands, teams, leagues, and others. These providers are unrestricted if 
they need to share your information with other parties. Moreover, Ticketmas-
ter reserves the right to share your information with its subsidiaries, parents, 
and affiliates. In Ticketmaster's case, this information can be shared between 
and among a diverse number of affiliated companies such as Expédia, 
Hotels.com, Match.com, CitySearch, the Home Shopping Network (HSN), and 
LendingTree, all of which are owned by Interactive Corp, Ticketmaster's par-
ent company. That means that if you buy a ticket for Wrestlemania XX, you 
360 

* Your Everyday Life •• 
might just find your inbox flooded with spam: Hotels.com asking if you'd like 
to book the Smackdown Suite at a nearby hotel; HSN hawking Wrestlemania 
T-shirts and trading cards; and Match.com offering to hook you up with a fel-
low fan to try out your moves. 
Interactive's chief of business operation acknowledges that cross-
marketing scenarios make sense, but he also says that the company is still 
coordinating the activities of its various properties so it isn't yet taking full 
advantage of these marketing opportunities. 
College and University Education 
George O'Leary, a Notre Dame football coach, resigned five days 
after being hired. O'Leary misrepresented his academic and athletic 
background, claiming to have received a master's degree when he 
hadn't and claiming to have lettered three years in college football 
when in fact he had never played in a game. The news came to light 
not because his alma mater released his confidential school records, 
but because a reporter interviewed former players and coaches of 
the college football team. 
Your student educational records are generally confidential under the 
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), also known as the Buck-
ley Amendment. Under FERPA, schools may not disclose your student records 
without your written consent (or your parents', if you are a minor), except in 
certain cases. Student records include your grades, test scores, progress 
reports, evaluations, family information, social security number, medical 
records, parking records, the organizations to which you belonged, and any 
other information that your alma mater collects about you. 
But schools may release your records without your consent in these limited 
situations: 
• To teachers and school officials who have a "legitimate educational 
interest" (to a teacher who is concerned about a student's performance 
and may have a legitimate educational interest in looking at the 
student's standardized test scores, for instance) 
361 

• To concerned parties in connection with financial aid 
• To other schools to which you are applying 
• To comply with a judicial order or lawfully issued subpoena 
• In the case of health and safety emergencies 
In addition, schools may release student information for directories, 
including name, address, telephone number, major, and so forth, but they 
must provide you (or your parents, if you are a minor) the chance to opt out. 
FERPA provides you and your parents (if you're under eighteen) the right 
to view your student records. FERPA also permits you and your parents to 
request corrections of anything contained in your records that you deem inac-
curate or unfair. If the correction is not made, you and your parents have the 
right to place a statement in the record to indicate that the entry is inaccurate 
or unfair. 
The Patriot Act and Student Records 
The Patriot Act creates an exception to FERPA's general protection that school 
records remain confidential. Under the Patriot Act, schools must disclose your 
records without your consent to government agents who request them in con-
nection with an investigation or prosecution of an act of domestic or interna-
tional terrorism. As with library and bookstore records, the government does 
not need a warrant or probable cause; it only has to certify that the informa-
tion is relevant to an investigation. You are not even notified if your records 
are requested. 
To date, an estimated two hundred colleges and universities have handed 
over sensitive information about suspected students to the FBI, INS, or other 
governmental agencies, according to the American Association of Collegiate 
Registrars and Admissions Officers. In addition to obtaining student records, 
the FBI has enlisted campus police in its war on terrorism. According to the 
government, these steps monitor potential terrorist activity and keep tabs on 
the more than two hundred thousand foreign nationals studying in the United 
States. The government justifies its activities by the fact that several of the 
September 11 hijackers were trained at U.S. flight schools and one was in the 
country on a student visa. 
362 

• Your Everyday Life • 
Civil libertarians and privacy advocates worry that the government will 
abuse its broad power if left to its own devices, as it has so many times in the 
past. The Patriot Act allows the government to investigate any students it 
decides are suspicious or fit a certain profile, based, for instance, on ethnicity, 
on affiliations with political groups critical of gov-
ernment policies, or on enrollment in certain 
majors, such as Islamic studies or aviation. 
Other Privacy Issues on Campus 
The Patriot Act allows the 
government to investigate 
any students it decides 
are suspicious or fit a 
certain profile, based, 
for instance, on ethnicity, 
or on affiliations with 
political groups critical 
of government policies. 
In 2004, New York University apologized to 
1,800 students whose names, social security 
numbers, and some of whose phone numbers 
were posted on the university's Web site. The 
information was supposed to be on a protected page of the site, 
but a school official had failed to activate the appropriate security 
mechanisms. 
In addition to student records, there are other issues compromising stu-
dents' privacy: 
• Identity theft. According to a 2002 American Association of Collegiate 
Registrars and Admissions Officers survey, nearly half of U.S. colleges 
use social security numbers as the primary means to track students in 
academic databases, and almost 80 percent display social security 
numbers on official transcripts. In addition, some colleges print the 
social security number on each student's ID card; use the social 
security number as the log-in for the computer system; or post grades 
with the social security number as the identifier. Moreover, students 
are unusually vulnerable to identity theft because many have their 
bills and mail sent home, and thus are not vigilant about unusual 
credit activity. Few students ever review their credit reports. 
• Marketing alliances. Many schools enter into marketing alliances 
where they sell student, alumni, and employee data to credit card 
363 

marketers. The University of Tennessee, for instance, has such a deal 
with First USA. The deal is worth about $16.5 million. 
• Profiling. Unscrupulous marketers illegally use surveys purporting to 
be educational in nature as a front for collecting marketing data from 
high-school students. 
Criminal Law Records 
Just days before the 2000 presidential election, a TV reporter re-
vealed that George W. Bush had an arrest and misdemeanor convic-
tion record for drunk driving near his family's compound in Maine. 
As you know from chapter 2, "Your Personal Information and the Public 
Record," criminal records are public and have long been available to anyone 
who traveled to the courthouse. However, as people have become accustomed 
to accessing more and more information online, the demand for remote access 
to court records has increased. Ordinary citizens can perform criminal-record 
checks on their dates, prospective nannies, or tenants. Journalists and watch-
dog groups believe that online access increases the accountability of judges 
and lawyers. But concerns about privacy, identity theft, and potential threats 
to witnesses and victims must be balanced with the convenience of online 
records. Victims' rights advocates—particularly rape and domestic-violence 
groups—generally oppose making criminal records available over the Inter-
net. These groups don't want victims' addresses revealed for fear the victims 
would be subject to yet more violence or other unwanted attention as victims. 
In response to these concerns, federal courts (which in the past have had 
more experience than state courts in putting their criminal records online) 
must follow rules enacted in 2003 by the U.S. Judicial Conference. The rules 
require that personal information, such as names, social security numbers, 
home addresses, birth dates, names of minor children, and financial informa-
tion be edited from any court documents before the records are placed online. 
Lawyers are scrambling to comply with the policy, which is neither well-
defined nor specific about its implementation date. Some lawyers complain 
that requiring them to comb through thousands of pages of transcripts to edit 
364 

* Your Everyday Life * 
out all personal information is too burdensome. Others are worried that fail-
ing to remove information might lead to liability; if, for instance, someone is 
injured or killed as a result of a lawyer not omitting some piece of personal 
information from court filings. 
State and local courts are moving slower than federal courts in putting 
records online, and what they choose to post varies greatly. Certain counties in 
Florida, for instance, post all case documents online (with information includ-
ing names and addresses); while other places, like Kentucky and New York, 
are conservative about what, if any, criminal records belong online. Most 
courts fall somewhere in between, posting dockets and final rulings, but not 
motions, forms, or exhibits. Other states like California have followed the 
Judicial-Conference policy of blocking access to personal information con-
tained in court records. 
For a list of online court sites, see: www.ncsconline.org/DKIS/info_court 
web sites.html#State. 
Expunging Errors 
A Baltimore man who had spent ten years Imprisoned for a crime he 
did not commit suffered further when the state failed to erase the 
erroneous robbery conviction from his criminal record. The state ig-
nored orders by two judges and left the record open to the general 
public and private employers for twelve years. 
Having a criminal record, even if the case was dismissed or you were 
found innocent, does more than harm your reputation; it hampers your ability 
to obtain credit, employment, and housing. When or if CAPPS II is imple-
mented, a criminal record may also hamper your ability to travel. Many crimi-
nal records are easily accessible online these days, so more and more people 
are seeking to have their records expunged. 
Expunging a criminal record means that your slate is wiped clean. Gener-
ally, first-time offenders of certain types of crimes can have their records 
expunged, as of course may people who were found innocent. Expunging a 
record is slightly different than having a record sealed, which means the file 
remains intact but can be released only to law enforcement agencies. If your 
365 

record is expunged, you can honestly answer any question about prior arrests 
or convictions (assuming no others exist) by saying there are none. 
Laws governing who is eligible to expunge records and the procedure that 
must be followed to do so vary greatly from state to state. You must apply to 
have records expunged; in most cases your record is not automatically 
expunged even if your case is dismissed or your arrest was deemed a case of 
mistaken identity. Not all convictions can be expunged. Many states do not 
allow felony convictions or violent crimes to be expunged. The types of offenses 
most likely to be expunged are juvenile and some misdemeanor charges. If you 
are successful in having a conviction expunged, the information may still be 
considered in any future sentencing should you commit another offense. 
Records that result from federal criminal cases cannot be expunged, except 
in exceptional circumstances, such as proof of government misconduct. 
THE BOTTOM LINE: 
• Just because you're paranoid doesn't mean they're not out to get you. The 
Patriot Act makes it all too easy for the government to place you under 
surveillance, obtain your private records, and prevent you from knowing 
about its searches, all the while eliminating the judicial oversight that 
prevents potential abuse of power. 
• Trying to escape for the weekend? With long lines, intrusive screening and 
surveillance methods, and future threat of color-coded profiling, the days 
of escaping peacefully and anonymously to a deserted island are over. 
• Smile! You're on countless cameras. Whether you are crossing a busy 
intersection, pumping gas, or riding an elevator, surveillance cameras are 
recording your every move. If being photographed by the government and 
business isn't enough, now you have the average Joe with his cell phone 
camera to worry about as well. 
• Modern day hide-and-seek. Your cell phone, the OnStar system in your car, 
your E-ZPass and even your Metrocard are all capable of revealing your 
whereabouts at any given time. 
• Leisure activities, such as borrowing or buying books, getting tickets to 
your favorite events, and looking for companionship online, may be 
hazardous to your privacy. 
366 

I Spy, You Spy 
You and five of your female friends in college collectively receive 
more than one hundred e-mails from the same man. The e-mails in-
clude death threats, graphic sexual descriptions, and references to 
your daily activities. How in the world did he get your e-mail ad-
dresses and learn about what each of you does each day? You want 
to know what to do to get the same information about him. 
A colleague tells you that she saw you on the Camera Watch Project 
site, an experimental site launched by researchers at Carnegie Mel-
lon University in 2003. It offers Web surfers access to a database of 
video images from thousands of public Web cams. Many of the 
people captured are not even aware they are being watched. 

You know it will break your heart, but you want to know everything 
your ex says to his new girlfriend. To your delight, you learn that 
you can tap his phone for only $100. 
It's time to 'fess up. If you are like most people, you don't like being spied 
on. There is something disturbing and even offensive about it. It could scar 
you emotionally or hurt you financially. Think about a camera filming you 
while you are undressing in the locker room of the gym. Think about some of 
the sensitive e-mails you have written and a stranger reading them. Think 
about someone stealing your identity to commit a crime for which you do the 
jail time. 
But what if the tables are turned and you get to do the spying on someone 
else? Does that change things? Have you ever felt the urge to spy? There are 
many reasons for turning the tables, including simple curiosity. Today, it is 
almost irresistibly tempting to turn to the Internet and various online search 
engines to dig up a little dirt or information on someone. Indeed, this type of 
innocent Internet check has become so commonplace that the term "to google" 
someone—or research the person's background on the popular search engine 
Google—is part of today's lexicon. 
The urge to take a quick gander at something you are not supposed to see 
may be too much to resist. In the biblical story, Lot's wife turns into a pillar of 
salt when she turns to look at a sandstorm in contravention of God's wishes. 
And do you remember the legend of Peeping Tom and Lady Godiva? Accord-
ing to legend, Lady Godiva, a beautiful long-haired woman of the eleventh cen-
tury, pledged her legendary ride as a means of persuading her husband, 
Leofric, Earl of Mercia, to lower taxes. When Lady Godiva rode naked on her 
horse, Tom, a tailor, was the only person who saw her. He peeped while every-
one else in town kept their windows shut. 
Today, the term Peeping Tom has become synonymous with voyeurism, 
which has negative connotations. In the words of W.H. Auden, "Peeping 
Toms/are never praised, like novelists or bird watchers,/for their keenness of 
observation." Today you hear about Peeping-Tom cameras or electronic Peep-
ing Toms, both of which are leaps and bounds from the time of the legendary 
Peeping Tom. 
If you are going to spy on other people, you might as well have the tools to 
368 

* I Spy, You Spy * 
do so. Perhaps spy is too strong of a term. Maybe investigate is preferable. After 
all, who has not at one point searched the Web for the name of an old class-
mate? Or a childhood friend? Or researched the background of a potential date 
by asking others about or googling the person? 
Whatever the reason, people do investigate each 
other. There are a variety of reasons people want to 
know more about other people, ranging from whim-
sical to serious, from well-intentioned to question-
able or even unethical or outright illegal: 
• Parents keep tabs on kids' online activities 
• Suspicious wives keep track of their husbands 
• People research potential love interests 
• Businesspeople research individuals with whom they are scheduled to 
have business meetings 
• Insurance companies investigate customers 
• Law enforcement agents and private detectives seek fugitives 
• Parents check nanny applicants for criminal records 
• Neighbors snoop on each other, finding out property details, court 
records, assets, alimony arrangements, and wealth 
• People who were adopted look for birth parents, and vice versa 
• Stalkers track the objects of their obsessions 
• People trace their ancestries and seek other relatives in their families 
• Families and organizations search for missing persons 
• Voyeurs video or photograph victims 
• Employers keep tabs on workers' productivity 
• People involved in litigation investigate the other side's witnesses 
• Suspicious husbands keep track of their wives 
• Kids snoop on parents' online activity 
The list begins with one situation and ends with its inverse. Welcome to 
the nature of snooping. Anything you do can be done back to you. Life today is 
a vicious circle of snooping. 
The strategies, services, and products described in this chapter can be used 
in many ways. If you decide to use any of them, do so with a degree of caution, 
;3j!ji|i&f:'^ 
i^ilBji ': • 0E^0ff^^ 
Anything you do can 
be done back to you. 
Life today is a vicious 
circle of snooping. 
369 

knowing that some techniques are currently banned or under consideration 
for possible legislation. 
In many states, an individual who is not licensed as a detective, an agent 
of law enforcement, or an attorney is prohibited from investigating another 
individual. What this means is somewhat open to interpretation, but it can 
mean that you are breaking the law if, for example, you look into the windows 
of your subject's home. Because of legislation that protects the potential vic-
tims of stalkers, actions that indicate someone is tracking another person or 
spying in various ways are treated more seriously than they have been in the 
past. If you are an employer and you intend to do a background search on a 
potential employee, you are often required to obtain a signed release from the 
applicant before accessing certain pieces of information. Do keep in mind that 
recent advances in computer and other technology have outpaced the legisla-
tion that would regulate their use, albeit not for a lack of effort. Many civil lib-
erties advocates, privacy activists, businesspeople, academics, and politicians 
across the country have tried to get more protective legislation passed. 
If you already know that you would never use any of the tools described in 
this chapter, you may still enjoy an interesting exercise in ethical deliberation. 
The information that follows will educate you about what spy tools are acces-
sible to you... and to everyone else. 
Using the Internet to Conduct Searches 
In a well-publicized article in the January 19, 2004, issue of the 
New Yorker magazine, journalist Katha Pollitt discussed her es-
capade of stalking her ex-boyfriend online. The article was entitled 
"Webstalker: When It's Time to Stop Checking on Your Ex. " In the 
article, Pollitt acknowledged that, by day, she lived a completely 
normal life, but she confessed to being obsessed with tracking the 
details of her ex-boyfriend's life at night. After she put her daugh-
ter to bed at night, Pollitt would often surf the Internet until two in 
the morning, searching for information about both his professional 
and personal lives. Using various search engines and listserv lists, 
she constructed a profile of his life. She discovered details about 
the various seminars he attended, the papers he submitted, a char-
Mi) 

* I Spy, You Spy f 
itable donation he made, and a book he was producing with his 
new girlfriend. She even tried to break into his e-mail account by 
constructing passwords he might use. Finally she discovered that 
her ex and his new girlfriend were selling their apartment. She 
went to the listing on the real estate company's website and 
clicked on the apartment's 
floor plan and photographs 
that 
showed the inside of the apartment. She was finally inside their 
lives or, at least, their apartment. 
Katha Pollitt and her search aside, there are plenty of legitimate reasons to 
research the background of people you want to know more about. Whether 
you are trying to find people, learn a little background information, look for a 
phone number or address, or hire someone to help you in your search, the 
Internet is the best tool at your disposal. 
Search Engines 
You should first turn to the search engines. You may already have a 
favorite search engine, but some of the more popular ones include Google, 
Yahoo!, Alta Vista, and Lycos. New clustering search engines, such as Vivisimo 
at vivisimo.com, integrate and categorize information into various folders. 
These search engines will discover sites on the Internet that contain relevant 
and useful information for your search. As you use the various search engines, 
keep the following tips in mind: 
-fc Try different search engines. Each one might turn up different sites or 
information. 
-*- Start by typing in the name of the person you seek, enclosing the full name 
in quotation marks. The quotation marks restrict the search to a full name, 
so you won't get results for people who have a different last name but the 
same first name (or vice versa) as the person you're seeking. Depending on 
how common the name is, you still may get hundreds of results. 
-fc Search by nicknames or shortened versions of the name. (Use "Bill" instead 
of "William.") You might also want to try searching by first initial and last 
name (wjohnson), using the format for many e-mail addresses. 
371 

•$• Hone your search by using the advanced preferences offered by the search 
engine. 
* If your search returns results that are too broad, consider narrowing your 
search parameters. You might want to search the name in quotes along with 
the person's primary interest, profession, the town where the person 
resides, or one of the schools the person attended. 
Online Directories 
In addition to the search engines, you might want to check the many directo-
ries that include lists of phone numbers, e-mail addresses, or ways to execute a 
"people search." Online directories provide comprehensive information for 
people and businesses, including phone numbers, addresses, and often e-mail 
addresses and fax numbers. For example, try: 
• whitepages.com 
• infospace.com 
• anywho.com 
• whowhere.com 
Yahoo! and other sites such as Addresses.com also have "people search" 
options that allow you to look for e-mail addresses, phone numbers, and mail-
ing addresses by typing in a name and the state where that person lives. A 
number of sites will help you find someone's e-mail address, including: 
• whowhere.com 
• bigfoot.com 
• people.icq.com/whitepages (the ICQ e-mail directory) 
• aol.com/netfind/emailfinder.adp (AOL e-mail finder) 
Reverse Directories 
Online directory assistance services function like regular telephone books: if 
you have a person's name, the service can provide you with that person's 
listed telephone number or address. A reverse directory, on the other hand, 
requires that you have only a phone number to access vital statistics about an 
individual. For example, if a stranger calls you and you get his or her number 
372 

* I Spy, You Spy f 
through caller ID, or the person's telephone number appears on your cell 
phone's display, you can use a reverse directory to find out the caller's name 
and address. Some reverse directories require a zip code in addition to the 
number before they will allow you to access the information you seek. 
Reverse directories have sprung up for all kinds of information. In some 
cases, you need only an e-mail address to access all the personal information 
available for a person. 
Many online directories, including Infospace.com and WhitePages.com, 
also offer reverse-directory search capabilities. This allows their clients to find 
people with only a phone number or an e-mail address in hand. 
Most reverse-directory sites are free, but a few may charge a small fee. If 
you use services that charge a fee, you may be able to get additional informa-
tion, such as: 
• Name and address for an unlisted number 
• Name and address for a disconnected phone number 
• Name and address for an 800 or 900 number 
• Name and address for a cellular phone or pager 
• Name and address for a disconnected cell phone or pager 
• Unlisted address for a name and city and state 
Another option may be to use Finger Gateway technology, which allows 
users to find names from e-mail addresses. Using this technology, you can 
determine such things as when an Internet user last logged in and checked his 
or her e-mail. Many sites consider finger queries a breach of security, so the 
technology is becoming less accessible every year. To find a site that offers this 
search technology, search on Google. 
Search by Interests or Background 
You go out on a blind date. You're confident because you know ex-
actly what questions to ask your date. You already know all her in-
terests, her fantasies, and her obsessions. 
You didn't get this 
information from a Web page or a profile on a dating service. You 
got it by accessing your date's history of chat room 
messages, 
373 

which was not difficult to do. You also discovered not only to which 
forums she contributed, but also exactly what she said. 
You can search for a person based on information you know about his or 
her interests and background. In general, many of the search engines, such as 
Yahoo! or Google, list various directories by subject and organization, and they 
are useful to check. 
You can also turn to any number of specialized directories. For exam-
ple, if you are looking for someone with whom you went to school, you can 
use subscription services, such as Classmates.com. This huge database lists 
more than 35 million graduates from the United States and Canada. You 
must pay a fee to access the information, but it is often worth it because the 
service has reunited many old friends. A number of other alumni-related 
subscription sites provide similar services. If you do not have luck with 
these subscription sites, try finding your school's website. For privacy rea-
sons, you usually cannot access alumni lists without having attended the 
school yourself. You can, however, contact the alumni office and ask the 
school to pass your contact information along to the person you seek, if he 
or she is also an alumnus or alumna of the school. 
An organization in which you may have been a member, whether it be the 
Junior League or a charitable foundation, will perform the same service to help 
you find another member. You will run up against the same privacy principles, 
and sometimes all you can do is leave your contact information with an inter-
mediary at the organization and ask that it be passed on. 
Searching by Profession or Company 
You can look up someone by profession or company. Certain professional 
organizations keep comprehensive directories that list all members of the pro-
fession. To research someone by occupation, you can narrow your search by 
finding portals that are specific for that profession. Here are some examples: 
• For doctors: Try the online Doctor Finder (AMA; www.ama-assn.org) 
or try MedAvenue (www.medavenue.com) 
• For attorneys: Try the Attorney Directory at www.lawinfo.com or the 
Martindale-Hubbell Lawyer Locator at www.martindale.com 
374 

4 I Spy, You Spy t 
• For experts: Find an expert in a specific field or location at www. 
experts.com 
• For contractors: Try the home contractor directory at www.contractors. 
com 
• For teachers: If the person you seek is a 
current public-school teacher and you know 
the name of the town in which he or she 
teaches, look up the school's directory online. 
A number of directories provide information 
about executives in various companies. For exam-
ple, the Hoovers directory at www.hoovers.com provides information about 
executives who work at both public and private companies. The information 
includes the executives' titles, their salaries, and some biographical informa-
tion. Information for public companies is also available on the Securities and 
Exchange Commission website, www.sec.gov, which allows users to research 
the officers of publicly traded companies, their earnings, and the earnings of 
their companies. Another comprehensive site is the LexisNexis site at 
www.lexisnexis.com, which provides similar information but usually costs a 
fee (unless you access the database at a library). 
Searching Real Estate Records 
Perhaps you are curious about how the value of your house compares to the 
value of the home owned by your friends or neighbors. Or perhaps you want 
to find out what your colleague paid for her new house. An easy way to find 
this information is to look at the websites of real estate brokerage houses. 
These sites list houses and apartments that are on the market, including the 
price of the house and photographs of the interior or exterior of the place. For 
greater detail, you might want to access the website of the real estate research 
firm NETR at www.netronline.com. This site publishes the values of homes 
and links to the databases of many states and counties. 
Searching for Political Information 
You can find out if your colleague who said he donated to John Kerry is telling 
the truth by researching a number of sites that identify political donors to var-
I • 
• 
•
•
•
•
«
•
•
• 
**•*»• —»• I 
Are you curious about how 
the value of your house 
compares to the value of 
the home owned by your 
friends or neighbors? 
375 

ious political candidates. As indicated in chapter 2, "Your Information Docu-
ments and the Public Record," federal law requires that political donations of 
more than $200 must be publicly disclosed. Two useful sites are www.opense-
crets.org or www.fecinfo.com, which may also reveal the name of the person's 
company or occupation. 
Searching for Family 
Tracing the family tree is a full-time occupation for many people. You can find 
out not only where you came from, but also discover branches of the family or 
long-lost relatives who are still living. Of course, you can also discover the 
ancestry of other people, like the man or woman you're dating. 
As with any search, start by making notes of anything you know that 
might be useful in charting and researching your family tree. Include as many 
family names and geographical origins as you can. Interview anyone in your 
family who might know valuable details. 
Many tools are available online to help your ancestry search, including 
subscription services that focus on genealogy; databases of historical informa-
tion, maps, and names; and chat groups that provide helpful forums for your 
questions, tips for searching, and forms you can use to request information 
from different sources. 
If you search for ancestry or genealogy on Google or one of the other 
engines, you will turn up sites like www.ancestry.com and www.genealogy. 
com, which provide or link you to databases to aid your research. There are 
also sites where people post their own family trees, and if you register, you can 
search through those charts. Genealogy sites can also be quite helpful if you 
are trying to find a living relative or seeking to learn more about someone's 
background. 
Searching in Discussion Groups and Chat Rooms 
After perusing personal profiles submitted to various online serv-
ices, Mr. Smith harassed single women in his neighborhood via 
e-mail and Internet chat rooms. In addition, he placed surveillance 
software on the victims' computers and stalked them in person. His 
campaign of harassment ended when he deviated from his usual 
376 

4 I Spy, You Spy * 
pattern of behavior and focused his attentions 
on a married 
woman. The woman's husband happened to be an expert in com-
puter security and easily tracked down Mr. Smith's name, address, 
and place of employment. Mr. Smith, it seems, used his skills as a 
network administrator to facilitate his ability to stalk his victims. 
Another way to learn about people is to research online discussion groups 
and chat rooms. In these areas on the Internet, you might discover the specific 
thoughts of the target of your investigation. As discussed in chapter 7, "Your 
Computer and the Internet," any and every posting your target has made to a 
chat room or discussion group is available to any other visitor to the site. Many 
people do not know this is possible, and it is not just possible, it is easy. 
To uncover the contributions a person has previously posted online, you 
can go to a number of different sites, including AltaVista's usenet search 
option or Google Groups at groups.google.com (formerly Dejanews). To exe-
cute the search, input a name or an e-mail address and see what you learn. 
Many usenet search engines have compiled online libraries of the "public 
e-mails" posted on the Internet's bulletin boards and in its chat rooms. 
If you cannot find information on an individual anywhere else online, you 
may be able to make a connection by typing the person's phone number into a 
search engine. Most chat room users do not believe that the trail of places they 
visit is public. By accessing bulletin boards or chat rooms, family members can 
check up on each other, employers can check on employees, employers can 
check on job applicants, and employees can check on employers. 
Public Records 
As you learned in chapter 2, "Your Personal Information and the Public 
Record," you can learn a great deal of information about people from public 
records. Searching public records online can be time-consuming, because 
many states and counties maintain their own databases. But services that com-
pile the databases for you are available and make the searching far more effi-
cient. One of the largest is Search Systems, at www.searchsystems.net. This 
site, with more than fourteen thousand public records, links to specific data-
base websites for different areas and different kinds of records. Some infor-
377 

mation at Search Systems is free, but a number of the databases that it lists 
charge a fee, and they are specified. 
Portals that lead you to public-records databases include: 
• www.searchsystems.net. The largest public records database with 
hundreds of free lists. 
• www.knowx.com. This pay site is a subsidiary of ChoicePoint, one of 
the biggest data aggregators. 
• www.intellius.com. This pay site is another popular choice for public 
records data. 
• www.brbpub.com/pubrecsites.asp. This site lists almost seventeen 
hundred websites that house public records and contains a great deal 
of free information. 
• www.willyancey.com. This accountant's site supplies free links to 
political and legal directories that may be helpful. 
Locator Services 
You can retain a locator service to research the information you are seeking. This 
service is also available through certain websites, including PeopleFind.com. 
Locator services typically charge a fee, which is based on the scope of the 
search you ask the service to perform. People turn to these services when they 
do not have the time or knowledge to execute searches themselves, or if their 
own searches have not yielded good results. The information you are looking 
for may be as minor as the address for a name you provide, but it may also be 
something that is more difficult to secure. Locators can do most of their work 
if they are equipped with a name plus one of the following: previous address, 
date of birth, or social security number. For less than $70 or so, you can often 
receive all of the following as results: the person's aliases, current and past 
addresses, licenses, liens, associates, relatives, property information, concealed-
weapons permits, neighbors, voter registration information, domain name 
registration information, criminal records, bankruptcies, and more. Locators 
also perform specialized services such as neighborhood reports, which detail 
the cost of living in a certain area, the quality of life there, profiles of the neigh-
bors, essential addresses, sex offender information, and more. As with most 
378 

* I Spy, You Spy * 
online services, research the service before you contract to do business with 
them. You never know if a site is legitimate or not without investigating. 
You can also download products like Net Detective, which are essentially 
all the tools a locator uses, for about $30. Within minutes of downloading, you 
can start searching online. 
Spyware or Snoopware 
Imagine you use a public computer at a reputable store that offers 
Internet access. Three days later your accounts have been wiped 
out and your financial information has been sold. You eventually 
find out that a thief had installed keylogging software on the store's 
computers. The scammer captured and sold the personal financial 
information of almost five hundred people, and used that informa-
tion to direct money into her own accounts. Amazingly, the thief 
used spy software that is readily available to anyone online. 
As you read in chapter 7, "Your Computer and the Internet," certain types 
of software can almost be classified as spy tools. Use of software that tracks a 
person's behavior and activity online or on one's computer has been growing 
steadily for many years. Such software, which is known as spyware or snoop-
ware, can be used for innocuous purposes—such as protecting your children 
by keeping an eye on their online activities—or more intrusive purposes— 
such as watching over employees' productivity or tracking a spouse's online 
activities. The software can also be used for illicit reasons, such as keeping a 
log of a computer's activities to collect vital personal information entered into 
that computer. 
The most insidious type of software is installed on a computer so activity 
on that computer can be monitored from afar. Typically, the person whose 
computer is burdened with spyware or snoopware has no idea that anyone is 
tracking his or her activities, as there is virtually no sign to the user that the 
software is there. Spyware can be sent to an unsuspecting person through an 
innocuous e-mail attachment, which, once opened, installs the software on the 
recipient's computer. 
379 

^^^^i|aâ^jg|^|^^^^:."^;-<j»' 
• Prying Eyes • 
A sampling of the different software products that are available include: 
• Software that monitors every activity performed by a computer, includ-
ing chats, instant messages, e-mails sent and received, websites visited, 
keystrokes, programs used and files searched or 
swapped with peers. One software package can also 
make a digital surveillance tape of every task per-
formed by a computer. In fact, corporate networked 
software can perform the same surveillance on a 
network of computers. Employers use such soft-
ware to monitor their staffs. 
• Remote monitoring software package that per-
forms the same recording of activities as the spy-
ware above, but also allows the snoop to be a 
watchdog from thousands of miles away. As a person writes e-mails 
and instant messages, strikes any keys, or visits any websites, the soft-
ware records the computer's operations and sends a record of the entire 
tracking to the snoop's computer, sometimes seconds after the activi-
ties are performed. 
Software that recovers information from a hard drive even if that mate-
rial was deleted. Services and software are available to repair and access 
deleted information on everything from cassette tapes to floppy disks 
to operating systems like Windows. Check www.renewdata.com/ 
data recovery.html for details on data recovery. 
Typically, the person whose 
computer is burdened with 
spyware or snoopware 
has no idea that anyone 
is tracking his or her 
activities, as there is 
virtually no sign to the user 
that the software is there. 
Products You Can Buy 
Jerry and Robin, a highly regarded defense attorney and a real es-
tate banker, recently had a beautiful daughter they named Alison. 
The couple hired a nanny to help care for their child. They discussed 
whether to install a nanny cam in their daughter's room, and de-
bated the pros and cons of monitoring their child and the nanny's 
actions to ensure the safety of their daughter. After much delibera-
tion, they decided against it. As an attorney who had spent his life 
defending the constitutional rights of his clients, Jerry could not 
stomach the nanny cam in their apartment. 
380 

* I Spy, You Spy f 
A woman lived with her sister's fiancé. They were very good friends, 
and he never exhibited any inappropriate behavior. But one day the 
woman found cameras hidden in her bedroom, bathroom, jewelry 
box, and hats. The cameras were broadcasting live video feed into 
his bedroom. 
Vasile Prisca, a Romanian inventor, created a mechanism that sent a 
text message to his cell phone if more than one person was in his 
and his wife's bed when he was not home. The device made this de-
termination by calculating the weight on the mattress. Vasile caught 
his wife's infidelity this way. 
The spying and surveillance products available on the market allow you to 
play James Bond. Items that used to be Hollywood props, outrageously expen-
sive, or simply unavailable to the average citizen are now both quite affordable 
and easily accessible. Surveillance equipment is part of the age of rapidly 
advancing technology. 
The legality of many of these products is questionable or may depend on 
how the product is used. Some tools are illegal while others may require the 
consent of one or both of the parties being listened to or videotaped, or whose 
computer activity is being monitored. Therefore, before using any of these 
items, investigate the law in your own state by contacting your state's attorney 
general's office. One site that provides an overview for electronic surveillance 
law by state is www.ncsl.org/programs/lis/CIP/surveillance.htm. 
First, many widely available consumer products can be used for simple 
spying or investigative purposes: 
• Cell phone cameras. These were originally designed for personal use 
and fun. But these phones have already been used to document crime 
scenes before police arrived, implicating perpetrators who might have 
otherwise gotten away, as well as having been used in health club 
locker rooms to take nude photographs of unknowing health club 
members. 
• GPS devices. Global positioning is a useful tracking service that pin-
points location. It is used for many different reasons, but is especially 
381 

useful as a navigation tool. Many companies offer GPS services with 
the specific purpose of allowing you to investigate your suspicions. GPS 
units can be magnetically attached to a car, and they can last fifteen 
days or more on batteries. Using precision mapping, they track where a 
vehicle goes, where it stops, and how long it stays there. Many parents 
use GPS devices to keep track of their children. 
• Nanny cams (or hidden video cameras). Many parents install these 
devices, with or without a caretaker's knowledge, to confirm that their 
kids are getting good care. Nanny cams are generally not allowed in 
bathrooms or changing rooms of any sort. Keep in mind that nanny 
cams and baby monitors have been used against homeowners: it is pos-
sible for criminals to pick up what is going on inside the house by scan-
ning these wireless transmissions from outside the house. See chapter 
8, "Your Home," for more details. 
Because technology changes so rapidly, more powerful and increasingly 
inexpensive tools become available every day. Here is a sampling of a few of 
the products that have emerged in the marketplace: 
• A DNA test kit for spouses to investigate their suspected partners' 
underwear for traces of semen, when none should be there. This prod-
uct costs less than $50, comes with a money-back guarantee, and offers 
a DNA helpline in case the test turns up positive and the test user wants 
to further investigate the supposed infidelity. 
• An infrared illuminator that allows users to take pictures in total dark-
ness, without anyone knowing. You set up the black box in a pitch-
black room and then snap away for less than $90. 
• A lamp that is actually a wireless video camera that also records sound 
for less than $600. 
• A monitor that you can connect to a phone. If you dial that telephone's 
number, you can listen in on conversation from a remote location for 
less than $300. 
• A cellular phone that operates in the same way as any other cell phone, 
but has added features: If you call the phone from a certain number, 
the cell phone will connect without ringing, so you can access any 
382 

• I Spy, You Spy • 
sounds and conversation happening near the phone. There is no range, 
so if someone takes the phone to another state, you can still call and 
hear everything happening via the microphones in the phone—for 
around $1,500. 
• A microphone that listens through walls. The device is so sensitive that 
it can even pick up a whisper, for less than $250. 
• A cellular scanner that eavesdrops on other cell phone or cordless 
phone conversations, for less than $300. These scanners currently work 
only on analog lines, because digital cell phones scramble their output. 
However, one Canadian company recently marketed a scanner to law 
enforcement officials that can capture digital calls. The cost of the scan-
ner is in the $30,000 range. 
• A cellular phone interceptor that allows you to enter into it up to 
twenty mobile-phone numbers. The device allows you to eavesdrop on 
conversations on any of those phone numbers whenever those phones 
are used. You can also decode touch-tones dialed into the phones, 
thereby learning pass codes to answering services and more, for less 
than $6,000. 
Special Situations 
In certain specialized situations, especially those involving people you hire in 
your home, you might want to conduct very specific investigations. The Inter-
net has made searching for information about people easier than ever before, 
although many of the tips below are tried and true methods that preceded the 
Internet and other tracking technologies. 
Background Search for People You Hire to Work in Your Home 
You want to hire a tutor or nanny for your child. This person is going to spend 
a significant amount of time alone with your child, so you want to verify the 
information in the tutor's or nanny's application. 
Because much legislation has been instituted to protect individuals' privacy 
and to prevent discrimination, you must be careful while conducting any inves-
tigation of another person. Laws vary by state and per category of information. 
It may be unlawful to conduct certain kinds of queries, and it may also be 
383 

* Prying Eyes * 
unlawful to decline an application based on certain categories of information, 
such as age. Educate yourself by consulting books or online information, or by 
contacting an attorney Also review chapter 9, "Your Workplace," to understand
the privacy rights that may apply to your child's nanny or tutor. 
Notwithstanding, here are a few tips to keep in mind and steps to take: 
* Have the applicant fill out a job application. Application forms are available 
online, in stationery stores, and at libraries. These forms often provide a 
space for the applicant's signature and a statement verifying that the appli-
cant gives you permission to confirm the information he or she provided. 
* Ask the applicant to sign a release-of-information form. These forms are 
available from the same sources. A completed form is necessary if you wish 
to access the applicant's credit reports, medical record, or school records. 
-*- Use information on the application to search court records on all levels, 
from federal to local, all of which are open to the public. You must have the 
applicant's current and previous addresses to execute this search. Court 
records are housed at the court offices; on computer databases, which a 
clerk can look at for you; or online. Use www.searchsystems.net as a portal 
to the many databases in different states that house public records. Look for 
bankruptcies, lawsuits, criminal convictions, and drunk-driving charges, or 
any other red flag. 
*- Request a release-of-information form to look at the applicant's credit 
report. As explained in chapter 4, "Your Credit," credit reports contain a 
great deal of basic information that should match the application. For exam-
ple, you can determine any discrepancies in job history by comparing the 
employers listed on the application and the employers provided in the 
credit report. The report also provides information about any liens, lines of 
credit, collections, and aliases associated with the applicant, all of which can 
be important in your decision to hire or reject the person. 
-fr Search medical records, although these may be difficult to access. You prob-
ably want to look at the applicant's medical records, especially in the cases of 
nannies, tutors, or other intimate positions, to see if the applicant has 
384 

4 I Spy, You Spy 
t 
received psychiatric treatment. You must secure a release to access this infor-
mation, but even then, depending on the state and the hospital or institution 
you have contacted, it may be difficult or impossible to see these records. 
-*- Call references; they can be telling. As referenced in chapter 9, "Your Work-
place," some states restrict previous employers from answering questions 
about the referenced person to the dates the person was employed by the 
company. 
Monitoring Your Children's Activities 
As technology advances, and an individual's privacy erodes, parents grapple 
with how far they should go to use technology to protect or monitor their chil-
dren's actions. Can you go too far? Certainly, as chapter 7, "Your Computer and 
the Internet," discusses, you can do a number of things to protect your chil-
dren's privacy online in ways that are fairly commonplace. But what if new 
technological developments entered the marketplace that infringed upon your 
children's privacy, but you—not the government or marketers—were the one 
who would be doing the infringing? 
As people's concerns about their children's safety grow, the lengths to 
which parents are willing to go to protect their children is also shifting. Mea-
sures that were once condemned as far too intrusive are now getting a second 
and third look and sometimes a cautious embrace. Do these measures in fact 
protect, or do they do more harm by eroding trust within families? Here are 
some recent examples: 
School Software. To date, at least 6,500 schools nationwide have installed 
Web-based software that enables parents to log into the school's network from 
their home or work computers and find out just what their children are up to 
in school. Parents can potentially track more than just their children's home-
work assignments and grades; they can see all their children's unexcused 
absences, detentions, missed assignments, and so forth. Privacy experts 
express concerns about student privacy and data security. Hackers have 
already penetrated the software in Washington, Colorado, and California. Oth-
ers worry that cash-strapped schools might be tempted to use the information 
for commercial purposes. 
385 

One company advises 
parents to place GPS 
devices under their cars 
so the parents know 
where their teenagers 
are driving and whether 
the teens are speeding. 
• Prying Eyes • 
Kiddie GPS Products. Current products equipped with Global Positioning 
System (GPS) technology can track your kids' every move. One company 
advises parents to place GPS devices under their cars so the parents know 
where their teenagers are driving and whether the 
teens are speeding. These devices are costly, but 
that is about to change. By 2005, inexpensive cas-
ings for your teen's cell phone will be available. The 
casings include GPS components that will keep you 
informed about your teen's whereabouts at all 
times. No cell phone? How about a low-cost track-
ing device disguised as a watch, belt, or backpack 
insert? And all you have to do is log on to a website 
to see a map pinpointing your child's location. Few 
people would dispute the merit of this technology in recovering an abducted 
child, but there is a very real potential for privacy abuses if stringent security 
measures are not in place. 
Chipping Your Child. This idea seems implausible; can it really be that far off? 
Pets and livestock are often injected with tiny microchips that are used to iden-
tify the animals. Now a Palm Beach company has developed a tiny chip that 
can be injected into humans. Currently, a handheld scanner can read the per-
sonal information contained on the chip from up to four feet away. 
Adoption 
Searches resulting from an adoption are sensitive and emotional events, so 
there are many specific laws and guidelines, as well as support groups, to help 
you navigate through them. A wealth of information is available online to get 
you started on finding either a birth parent or a child previously given up for 
adoption. Here are a few of the basics: 
+ Acquaint yourself with the legal difference between searching for an adult 
birth child and a minor birth child. The specifics on adoption law in your 
state are available from www.law.cornell.edu/topics/Table_Adoption.htm. 
Under the Uniform Adoption Act of 1994, if either a birth parent and an 
386 

* I Spy, You Spy f 
adoptee over seventeen or an adoptive parent of an adoptee under eigh-
teen are willing to disclose their identities via the mutual consent registry 
mentioned below, the identifying information must legally be disclosed. The 
act also allows a suit for disclosure of identifying information for good cause. 
-*- Parents searching for children must decide between an active or passive 
search. For the former, all leads are pursued. For a passive search, where the 
parent posts information on how he or she can be reached, it is the decision 
of the child to contact the biological parent(s). 
-fc Register with an international mutual-consent registry. This procedure pro-
tects the rights of birth parents, the rights of adoptees who wish to remain 
unidentified, and the interests of those who wish to disclose their identities. 
Most states have some form of mutual-consent registry. Those states that 
do not maintain such a registry disclose identities only by court order. The 
International Soundex Reunion Registry (ISRR) is the largest free mutual con-
sent registry in the world: www.plumsite.com/isrr/. 
*- Contact whatever institution was used in the adoption. This may be an 
agency, attorney, hospital, judge, caseworker, doctor, foster-care family that 
preceded adoption, state adoption unit, or county court clerk. 
-*- Gather as much paperwork as possible regarding the adoption. Include 
any document that might be relevant. 
-#• Interview anyone you can find that had anything to do with the adoption. 
Mutual consent is often the critical factor in adoption investigations. 
Most organizations set up to assist you, whether you are the child or the par-
ent, require such mutual consent before connecting two people in such 
investigations. 
Hiring a Private Detective or Investigator 
Are you trying to find a long-lost friend? Are you missing a loved one? Or per-
haps you are wondering why your spouse is spending so many late nights at 
387 

the office? If you are unable to get the information you want from your online 
search or accessing public records, you might consider hiring a public detec-
tive or investigator. The difference between a private detective and private 
investigator varies by state, and the terms are often interchangeable. The most 
important factor is whether the detective or investigator is licensed within the 
state to undertake investigations. Those that are not licensed are restricted 
legally in their investigative activities. 
A private investigator or detective answers your questions or facilitates 
your search. He or she can monitor someone or a situation for your personal 
protection, provide pre-employment verification of an applicant's back-
ground, profile an individual's background, assist in a court case, assess insur-
ance claims and fraud, dig up information for a child custody or child 
protection case, screen an individual prior to marriage, and track a spouse's 
supposed infidelity. 
A private investigator or detective is trained to uncover a great deal of 
information. In addition to accessing many of the public databases and 
other sensitive files on your subject, he or she may also use certain surveil-
lance techniques, including video, audio, and photographs, to provide addi-
tional information. In many cases, the additional information you receive may 
be key to making an important decision. For example, in the workplace, a pre-
employment investigation gives employers the comfort of knowing that they 
are hiring a person with the experience, training, and background they need. 
A pre-employment investigation can also reveal careless driving habits, possi-
ble criminal history, or other undesirable information about a potential 
employee. By discovering this information, employers reduce their chances of 
facing inflated insurance costs, employee pilfering, and loss of money related 
to training and equipment costs for the individual. 
Finding a private detective or investigator is as easy as looking in the yel-
low pages or searching on the Internet. But the decision to hire a professional 
isn't one to be taken lightly, even if doing so is a matter of course for you in the 
normal operations of your profession. A private investigator handles sensitive 
information for his or her clients, whether in a personal or professional con-
text. In some cases, such as a delicate divorce case, hiring a private investigator 
can harm your case if the other party's lawyer views the investigation as 
harassment and convinces the jury of that view. 
388 

* I Spy, You Spy * 
Here are some factors to consider when hiring a private detective or 
investigator: 
# 
Location. Hire a detective or investigator who operates in your desired 
search area. Hiring a local private investigator ensures that the private inves-
tigator has a better understanding of your surroundings and also avoids 
additional transportation expenses. 
^ 
References. Ask around to see if anyone has used an investigator. Refer-
ences from friends and associates are sometimes the best. If you are able to 
get references, check them to determine if the investigator's previous 
clients were satisfied with the results of the agent's work. Note, however, 
that obtaining specific references may be difficult in certain cases because 
of the confidential nature of the investigations. 
-fc Experience. Ask about the investigator's experience and training. Get a 
sense of how long the investigator has worked and his or her previous expe-
riences. Retired police officers are sometimes the best investigators. 
-fc Specialty. As with other professions, even an investigator who has a great 
deal of experience may not be an expert in the area for which you are hiring 
the investigator. Broad experience may suffice unless you have a very 
focused assignment for the investigator. 
^ Other sources. If you are still not satisfied, you might want to check the local 
State Police Certification Unit, the Better Business Bureau, or even the 
Chamber of Commerce to see if any complaints have been filed against the 
investigator you are hiring. 
Stalking 
Edward S. Grenawalt, a former Veterans Administration law en-
forcement officer, meets Paula Reynolds in an America Online chat 
room for law enforcement officers. For years, he threatens her over 
389 

Internet chat rooms, e-mail, and through a website dedicated to 
fallen police officers. The two meet in person only once: in a court-
room, after seven years of harassment and a death threat. 
Robert Harvey Alexander, fifty-two, a deacon in Tampa's First Bap-
tist Church, was a highly respected member of his community. 
That's why it came as a great surprise that in his spare time he had 
been using library computers to harass women on the Internet. He 
would threaten to post derogatory personal remarks or photo-
graphs of the women online unless they engaged in cyber- and 
phone sex with him. Upon arrest, police discovered Alexander's 
Victims List, with one hundred e-mail addresses of female high-
school and college students. 
It is one thing to snoop a little, or possibly even to research someone's 
background. But if you cross the line to stalking, you are entering a wholly dif-
ferent situation. Stalking is difficult to define precisely, but it is essentially 
unwanted action directed at a person. The legal definition varies by state. 
North Dakota, for example, defines stalking as "to engage in an intentional 
course of conduct directed at a specific person which frightens, intimidates, or 
harasses that person, and that serves no legitimate purpose. The course of con-
duct may be directed toward that person or a member of that person's imme-
diate family and must cause a reasonable person to experience fear, 
intimidation, or harassment." For a directory of state stalking statutes, go to the 
Stalking Resource Center at www.ncvc.org. 
Stalking has been a problem in every society throughout history but it has 
come under greater scrutiny and legislative attention during the past several 
years. The first state stalking law was enacted in 1990 in California, and since 
then every state in the country has since passed some type of stalking law. In 
addition, many states now have specific laws that cover cyberstalking. Forty-
five states now explicitly include electronic forms of communication within 
stalking or harassment laws. As a general rule, if the stalking is strictly online, 
the crime is considered a misdemeanor; more severe penalties apply when the 
stalking occurs in person. 
390 

As a general rule, if the 
stalking is strictly online, 
the crime is considered a 
misdemeanor; more severe 
penalties apply when the 
stalking occurs in person. 
• I Spy, You Spy • 
On a federal level, the Interstate Stalking Act makes it a crime for any per-
son to travel across state lines with the intent to injure or harass another per-
son and, in the course thereof, place that person or a member of that person's 
family in a reasonable fear of death or serious bod-
ily injury. A number of serious stalking cases have 
been prosecuted under this law, but the require-
ment that the stalker physically travel across state 
lines renders the law largely inapplicable to cyber-
stalking cases. Certain forms of cyberstalking may 
be prosecuted as a federal crime under different 
federal laws when the stalker uses a telephone or 
telecommunications device to annoy, abuse, harass, 
or threaten any person at the called number. 
The conduct that constitutes stalking varies from state to state. But stalk-
ing typically is understood to involve inappropriate approaches or confronta-
tions, such as appearing at the victim's work or home. It may also involve 
placing unwanted telephone calls, sending unwanted letters, sending 
unwanted e-mails, or sending threatening gifts to the victim. Finally, stalking 
encompasses situations in which the victim, or the victim's family, is threat-
ened, property is damaged, or the victim is physically or sexually assaulted. As 
was the case with the advent of cyberstalking, new ways of stalking people are 
constantly emerging. 
Basic Sleuthing 
Keep these tips in mind when you investigate others. 
# Know the law in your state. This is the most important step if you intend to 
do more than simply enter a long-lost friend's name into an online search 
engine. For example, if you intend to investigate an applicant to tutor your 
kids, know what you are allowed to research. Pursuing the details of the 
applicant's race or age might make you liable for discrimination. To learn 
about the law in your state, contact your state's attorney general's office, 
and review your state's stalking statute. 
391 

* Prying Eyes f 
# Talk to friends and acquaintances. Perhaps the easiest thing to do is to ask 
questions among your network of friends and acquaintances. They may be 
the best people to help, and you may be most comfortable asking them for 
answers to sensitive questions. 
# 
Keep detailed notes. Many people believe they can remember all the 
details of their search as they uncover them, but a paper trail of what you 
have looked into is essential. Often, small, seemingly irrelevant details can 
become the doorways to discovery. For example, if you are searching for a 
long-lost relative, and you uncover his or her marriage certificate, make a 
note of everything on the document. The witness may be an old friend of 
the relative and accessible to you. He or she might be able to inform you of 
the last whereabouts of the person you seek. When you begin your search, 
make a list of everything you know about what you are looking for. Just 
making that list can spark connections. 
# Decide if your search is worth a budget. You will most likely run into fees 
or expenses if you perform any kind of in-depth sleuthing. This could run 
anywhere from a few dollars for an online locator service, to thousands of 
dollars for high-tech surveillance products. There are many ways to do 
free research, especially online, but sometimes spending a few dollars on 
certain databases, for example, can save you days of scrolling through 
websites. 
# Beware of human error. Public records and databases of all kinds are notori-
ously full of errors, including the misspelling of someone's name, the attach-
ment of a name to the wrong social security number, and the merging of 
two people's records into one. Try to match details like date of birth and 
addresses, as well as names and social security numbers, when comparing 
the information you have to the record you have found. If something 
doesn't match, try to pinpoint the error. Understand that records are not the 
ultimate truth. For instance, say you find a record of a landlord suing the 
potential renter you are researching. You may want to decline the renter's 
application. But the previous landlord might have been frivolously litigious, 
bringing a lawsuit against the renter to disguise the fact that the landlord 
392 

* I Spy, You Spy * 
had not made required repairs and was attempting to preempt a lawsuit by 
the renter. This kind of thing is not uncommon, and even if the situation is 
resolved in the renter's favor, the paper trail sometimes still favors the land-
lord. Inquire with your applicant if you have doubts about a finding. 
THE BOTTOM LINE 
• Are you a Peeping Tom? You might think it is fun to investigate others, but 
make sure you know your state's law before you violate any laws. 
• What comes around goes around. Don't think you are outsmarting or 
outspying someone. You may be spying on someone, but they also may be 
spying on you. 
• Search for love in all the right places. It is common to Google a prospective 
date before you go out for an evening together. The Internet can be a 
powerful tool to learn a great deal about others. 
• James Bond stars in the movies only. You may be able to purchase 
sophisticated surveillance and software products, but you are not a secret 
agent. You live in the real world where federal and state laws apply to you. 
• Proceed with caution. In special situations, such as if you hire a private 
investigator or if you realize you have gone too far in terms of following 
someone around (aka stalking), stop what you are doing. Proceed carefully 
and ask yourself if this is what you really want to be doing. 
393 

The Future of 
Privacy 
NOW THAT YOU'VE READ PRYING EYES, you may wonder whether you have trav-
eled in time into the future or back to 1984, that is, to George Orwell's 1984. 
Written in 1948, Orwell's famous novel predicted a world without privacy 
and rife with paranoia. Presiding over the fictitious country of Oceania is a 
totalitarian power known simply as Big Brother. Big Brother and his min-
ions employ a system of total surveillance that includes telescreens, hidden 
microphones, and spies. Whether Big Brother and the party actually moni-
tor everyone's activities at all times is unknown, and is really beside the 
point. Orwell describes the experience of the average citizen: "You had to 
live—did live, from habit that became instinct—in the assumption that 
every sound you made was overheard, and except in darkness, every move-
ment scrutinized." 
394 

Americans will not allow 
their privacy rights to 
erode much longer without 
a popular backlash. 
• The Future of Privacy • 
It is not difficult to draw parallels between 1984 and today. You also live in 
a place and time in which your entire life can be tracked and monitored, and 
the technologies that perform these tasks are becoming more sophisticated by 
the day. The price of computers, database technologies, cameras, chips, and 
spyware or snoopware has decreased while the 
demand for detailed personal information has 
increased. Businesses believe they need your infor-
mation to be competitive in the marketplace. Gov-
ernment believes it needs your information to be 
effective at homeland security. 
After reading this book you may have questions about what the loss of pri-
vacy means in the big picture. Does it mean that privacy is something of the 
past, and that once you lose it you can never get it back? What are the long-
term consequences of the loss of privacy for our democratic system? Is a sys-
tem democratic if government and business can collect information about you 
that you can't ever see (or correct if it's inaccurate)? Are the security measures 
the government has taken worth the risks to your privacy? The only honest 
answer to these questions is that it's still too soon to tell. 
If the past is any indication of the future, Americans will not allow their 
privacy rights to erode much longer without a popular backlash. After all, 
when you live in the world's greatest democracy, you come to expect personal 
privacy, even if you do not enjoy a legal right to it in all situations. When tele-
marketing calls started to interrupt too many family dinners, Americans ral-
lied for a Do-Not-Call Registry. When identity thieves started to steal money 
and peace of mind from millions of people, the public started to push for legis-
lation against identity theft. When citizens understood how the USA Patriot 
Act threatened the privacy of innocent citizens and tipped the balance toward 
a too-powerful law enforcement, they passed resolutions against it in nearly 
250 cities, towns, and municipalities throughout the country. Most Americans 
erroneously assume—even take for granted—that personal privacy is a pillar 
of this country's foundation, as are the individualistic values of life, liberty, and 
the pursuit of happiness. 
For the love of our country and its national security, many of us are willing 
to temporarily defer our individual rights. But if government or business 
overextends itself, we as a people tend to react strongly—and it is likely that 
395 

American citizens will demand the return of our personal privacy Again, the 
U.S. Constitution does not make privacy our right, but many of us see it that 
way. The struggle for privacy in the United States is constant and universal 
and will, in many ways, define the twenty-first century. 
How might your privacy be spared in the long term? A responsive federal 
and state government may eventually limit the power of the USA Patriot Act 
and enact new legislation to protect your privacy. Moreover (and perhaps 
more likely), smart businesses may change their approach and actually protect 
individual personal privacy. Why? Because you and millions of others 
demand it, and if you demand it, then it may make good business sense. Take 
Citibank. Since 2003, this financial conglomerate has actively marketed its 
new credit card that promotes identity theft protection. The company issued 
the card as a response to consumer anxiety about what has become the fastest-
growing crime in the country. The Internet service provider Earthlink has 
devoted significant resources to positioning itself as a strong protector of con-
sumers worried about their online privacy by offering such features as 
parental controls and spam, pop-up, and virus blockers. On a smaller scale, 
consider the actions of local bookstores such as Bear Pond Books in Montpe-
lier, Vermont. Bear Pond decided to purge its records in response to the USA 
Patriot Act, which required bookstore owners to divulge customer files at the 
request of the FBI: "When the CIA comes and asks what you've read because 
they're suspicious of you, we can't tell them because we don't have it," store co-
owner Michael Katzenberg said. "That's just a basic right, to be able to read 
what you want without fear that somebody is looking over your shoulder to 
see what you're reading." 
Retailers understand that a consumer's decision to shop in a certain place 
is dictated by many variables, including price, convenience, and customer serv-
ice. Smart retailers know that privacy protection will become an increasingly 
important factor in a consumer's decision to shop at a certain place. Indeed, 
consumers appear to have developed their own privacy rules when companies 
fail to stem privacy breaches. According to a 2003 Customer Information Pro-
tection Survey, 92 percent of those surveyed said they would cease doing busi-
ness with a company that reported three or fewer privacy violations. Fifty 
percent said they would move their business to another company if they did 
not have confidence in a company's ability to protect their personal data. Smart 
396 

4 The Future of Privacy f 
businesses cater to their customers, and as customers seek to protect their pri-
vacy by using their wallets, companies will respond in kind. 
The financial area may also discover that privacy pays. As competition 
intensifies, financial institutions may decide to extend enticements beyond 
free checking and better interest rates. If financial 
institutions suffer from consumer backlash regard-
Consumer pressure may 
ing information sharing and the extensive dossiers 
e v e n f o r c e m a r k e t e r s a n d 
that are maintained, these institutions will no 
data aggregators to stop 
doubt start to change their policies. In a privacy- 
being privacy pariahs, 
conscious marketplace, some financial institutions 
might differentiate themselves by becoming more attuned to privacy con-
cerns, following in the footsteps of Citibank's identity theft credit card. New 
York Life, by design, exceeds the financial privacy requirements of mailing pri-
vacy notices to its customers by holding focus groups to assess customer pri-
vacy concerns and providing a special toll-free number for its customers to 
seek answers to their privacy-related questions. Other companies may need to 
commit to not sharing your customer data with either affiliates or third par-
ties, or give you the choice to take yourself out of marketing programs alto-
gether. You may soon discover that to win your business your financial 
institution wants to give you more protection than the law requires. 
Consumer pressure may even force marketers and data aggregators to 
stop being privacy pariahs. Indeed, some direct marketers are already begin-
ning to consider a different way of reaching their customers. Historically, mar-
keters have distributed their marketing packages to a wide and untested 
audience. Sophisticated marketers are now acknowledging the efficiency of 
sending marketing pieces only to consumers who have previously agreed to 
receive information from the company. The result: higher acceptance rates 
and lower marketing costs, not to mention better public relations. As for data 
aggregators, a few sophisticated ones, including Acxiom and Equifax, have 
begun to actively promote their privacy policies and data security as a step 
toward appealing to customers, differentiating themselves from their competi-
tors, and limiting the public-relations fallout in the event that any industry 
player violates customer privacy. 
Businesses, too, may realize that by respecting privacy they get better 
results from their employees as well as their customers. These businesses may 
397 

ask themselves, "Even if we have the technology and the ability to track every-
body all the time, do we really want to do so? Even if it is legal, is it justifiable 
to infringe upon our employees' privacy? Should employees be forced to give 
up nearly all their privacy rights when they come to work here?" A perceptive 
business might conclude that excessive monitoring is demeaning and erodes 
the trust that should exist in the workplace. Overzealous surveillance may, in 
fact, be counterproductive, leading to a workforce that is less happy and cre-
ative, and therefore less productive and effective. 
In the past, businesses realized that they could attract top talent if they 
made some concessions. After all, dollars do not always dictate one's decision 
to accept a job. For example, companies with strong maternity policies have 
attracted top female talent, because women review a company's policy before 
accepting a job. The same is true for candidates who want to work in environ-
ments that respect personal privacy. No doubt, Harriet Pearson, IBM's chief 
privacy officer, is pleased that IBM ranked first among the country's largest 
public company in terms of protecting employee privacy. The most-talented 
people have choices, and they are likely to choose companies that maintain the 
least intrusive policies over those with Big Brother-like surveillance. 
Those of us who value our privacy hope that we will get it back simply 
because better privacy from the intrusions of big business and overbearing 
government is better for America. Constant monitoring is inconsistent with 
the values that have made America the greatest democracy in the history of 
the world. The United States is a land of opportunity, entrepreneurialism, 
and rugged individuality—characteristics that come from the freedom to 
create, to think differently, and to know that you can challenge the old way. 
In life as in business, the most creative ideas come from brainstorming ses-
sions where individuals suggest ideas without fear that they will be judged 
or punished for those raw ideas. For a democracy to survive and flourish, cit-
izens need to know that they can be free to be themselves and to express 
themselves without risk of repercussion. Without those freedoms, American 
society degenerates into the communist society of the old Soviet Union or 
the dystopia of Orwell's 1984. Most of us imagine a better future for our 
families and ourselves. 
398 

-• The Future of Privacy f-
Until America turns around 
and values the privacy 
of its people, you must 
take action to protect your 
sensitive communications 
and important 
personal information. 
As W.C. Fields once said, "The future ain't what it used to be." Until Amer-
ica turns around and values the privacy of its people, you must take action to 
protect your sensitive communications and important personal information. 
As a citizen, you need to know the ways in which your government may be 
tracking you and what you can do about it. You 
must push those you elect to office to respect your 
legal and constitutional rights to privacy and to 
adopt new and better standards. As a consumer and 
employee, you need to understand how companies 
collect your personal information, what they do 
with it, and how to decrease your exposure. You 
must force businesses to adopt policies that lead to 
increased protection and limitations on your per-
sonal information by seeking out stores with better privacy protections and 
working at companies with a greater respect for employee privacy policies. As 
a bearer of a social security card, a driver's license, and credit cards, you must 
learn the ways in which thieves can access your personal information and how 
to reduce your chances of identity theft. 
In sum, you must be in a position in which you have as much control as 
possible over your personal information. In a world bursting with exciting 
and dangerous new technologies and laws that cannot possibly keep pace, you 
must do everything you can to empower yourself. The best empowerment 
comes in the form of awareness and self-protection. Scott McNealy, CEO of 
Sun Microsystems, raised eyebrows when he said, "You have zero privacy— 
get over it." He may have been at least half right when he said you have zero 
privacy today, but that doesn't mean you have zero control. 
399 

Notes 
Chapter 1: What Privacy Means to You 
p. 4 . . . than what can be inflicted by mere bod-
ily injury... Louis Brandeis and Samuel War-
ren, "The Right to Privacy," Harvard Law 
Review IV, no. 5 (1890). 
p. 5 ... the 1928 case of Olmstead v. United 
States... Olmstead v. U.S., 277 U.S. 438, 
(1928). 
p. 5 ... the right most valued by civilized men 
... Olmstead, 277 U.S. 438. 
p. 5 ... In Griswold v. Connecticut, a landmark 
case concerning the privacy of a married cou-
ple's decision to use contraceptives... 
Griswoldv. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479 (1965). 
p. 5 ... various guarantees that create zones of 
privacy... Griswold, 381 U.S. 479 
p. 6 ... whether or not to terminate her preg-
nancy ... Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 ( 1973). 
p. 6 ... Bowers v. Hardwick, which involved the 
arrest of Michael Hardwick for violating the 
Georgia criminal anti-sodomy statute... 
Bow-
ersv. Hardwick, 478 U.S. 186 (1986). 
p. 6 ... Lawrence and Garner v. Texas, the 
Supreme Court overruled Bowers by extend-
ing the right to privacy and declaring state 
antisodomy laws unconstitutional... 
Lawrence and Garner v. Texas, 539 U.S. 
(2003). 
p. 8 ... how often she used room deodorizers, 
sleeping aids, and hemorrhoid remedies... 
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, see http://www. 
privacyrights.org/ar/ftc-info mktpl.htm 
p. 9 ... who might have access to our personal 
and business e-mails, our medical and finan-
cial records, or our cordless and cellular tele-
phone conversations ... See http://www. 
newsmax.com/archives/articles/2001/5/21/ 
202254.shtml 
p. 10... In a national survey conducted in Sep-
tember 2000 by the Privacy Council and Priv-
ista... The author of the book was previously 
chief executive officer of Privista; see 
http ://www.privista.com. 
p. 10... offline database it had secured when 
it acquired the company Abacus... Stephanie 
Olsen, "DoubleClick turns away from ad pro-
files," CNET News.com, 8 January 2002, see 
http://news.com.com/2100-1023-
803593.html ?legacy=cnet. 
p. 10.. .for sharing customer information in a 
manner inconsistent with its privacy policy... 
Janet Kornblum, "FTC, Geocities settle on pri-
vacy," CNET News.com, 13 August 1998, see 
http://news.com.com/2100-1023-214423. 
html ?legacy=cnet. 
p. 1 4 . . . noncompliance could lead to fines or 
the loss of U.S. landing rights... "Europe and 
U.S. at Odds on Airlines and Privacy," New 
York Times, 2 November 2003. 
p. 1 4 . . . the jurisdiction of these privacy laws 
will expand... "Europe's New High-Tech Role: 
Playing Privacy Cop to the World," Wall Street 
Journal, 10 October 2003. 
Chapter 2: Your Personal Information 
and the Public Record 
p. 19 ... among the most restrictive states... 
See 
http://www.injersey.com/access/story/ 
1,2331,i909i8,oo.html and http://www. 
dlncoalition.org/dln_issues/gaglaw.htm. 
p. 19 ... Florida and Indiana are among the 
most open... See http://starbulletin.com/ 
96/09/02/news/story 1 .html, 
p. 20... commercial use of social security 
numbers and public records... See 
http ://www.law.com/j sp/article. j sp ?id= 
1046833530025. 
p. 22 ... written permission from the student to 
release any information in a student's 
education record... 
See http:// 
studentsforacademicfreedom.org/archive/ 
december/MerantoFerpai22903.htm. 
p. 23 ... the FBI which operates secretly and is 
unresponsive to public criticism... "The Cam-
pus Files: A Chronicle Special Report," 
SFGate.com, see http://sfgate.com/news/ 
special/pages/2002/campusfiles/documents/ 
3-1.shtml. 
p. 2 4 . . . to check if these individuals under-
reported their incomes... Privacy Rights 
Clearinghouse, see http://www.privacyrights. 
org. 
400 

* Notes f 
p. 26 ... purchased the social security numbers 
and home addresses of these top political 
appointees for $26 each... "Group Found 
Social Security Numbers of Attorney General, 
CIA Director for $26," American Morning, 
CNN, 2 September 2003; for transcript, 
see http://www.consumerwatchdog.org/ 
corporate/nw/nwoo3599.php3. 
p. 3 1 . . . to protect private information con-
tained in driver's licenses... Kim Zetter, 
"Great Taste, Less Privacy," Wired.com, 6 Feb-
ruary 2004, see http://www.wired.com/news/ 
privacy/o, 1848,62 i82-2,oo.html?tw=wn_ 
storypagenexti. 
p. 36 ... an identity thief can get a driver's 
license, a duplicate social security number, 
and much more... 
See http://news.mpr.org/ 
features/19991 i/i5_newsroom_privacy/ 
idtheft.html. 
p. 37 ... and divorced her once he obtained 
French citizenship... 
See http://www.gadens. 
com.au/docushare/dscgi/admin.py/Get/ 
File-317/767106.pdf. 
p. 38... / am very much alive... See http:// 
www.inq7.net/opi/2003/jun/28/text/letter_ 
4-1-p.htm. 
p. 39 ... bank and corporate credit in the offi-
cers' names... Dennis Blank, "Data from fed-
eral records used to commit identity theft," 
Government Computer News, Vol. 19, No. 29, 
2 October 2000. 
p. 40 ... veterans who had filed their DD 214s 
with their county courthouse... Marcia Triggs, 
"Scams Target Veterans for Identity Theft," 
Army News Service, 22 January 2002. 
p. 43 ... and that this information is a matter 
of public record... "Rush fans irate at news-
paper," ABC Action News, Sound Bites, 
see http://www.abcactionnews.com/ 
entertainment/soundbites.shtml. 
p. 43 ... Socorro was fired, and it took him 
seven months to find a new job... "The Fight 
For Digital Privacy," CBSNews.com, 22 Decem-
ber 2003, see http://www.cbsnews.com/ 
stories/2oo3/i2/i8/2003/main589352.shtml. 
p. 45 ... the State of California has lost track 
of more than one-fifth of its approximately one 
hundred thousand registered sex offenders... 
Sean Webby, "Police arrest sex offender," Mer-
cury News, 20 February 2004. 
Chapter 3: Your Identity 
p. 53 ... Buick car company was among the 
golfer's many multimillion-dollar endorse-
ments ... Kimberly Kindy, "DMV can't catch 
tiger by his ID," Orange County Register, 20 
December 2000. 
p. 54 ... taken out in their names in 2002 ... 
See http ://www.google.com/search ?q=cache : 
edXlq81vddEJ :mysite.verizon.net/res6uo8x/ 
identitythievespreyingonseniors.doc+ 
%22identity+theft%22+%22buy+a+house% 
22&hl=en&ie=UTF-8 
p. 60... it's no surprise that identity thieves 
are so successful... See http ://www.debt-info, 
org. 
p. 6 1 . . . average American household has 
seven to ten credit cards... See http://www. 
debt-info.org. 
p. 61... The total loss to fraud was more than 
$437 million, about $228 per victim... David 
McGuire, "FTC Identity Theft Remains Top 
Complaint," Washington Post, 22 January 
2004. 
p. 62 ... Internet-related fraud complaints, 
accounting for 48 percent of the total... David 
McGuire. "FTC Identity Theft Remains Top 
Complaint," Washington Post, 22 January 
2004. 
p. 64... during which he had to pay restitution 
of $j8,6j2.6y... 
See http://www.usdoj. 
gov/usao/md/press_releases/pressoi/ 
lawrencesen.htm 
p. 66 ... But I still have to prove I am me... 
Bob Sullivan, "Identity theft tops consumer 
woes ... again," MSNBC News, see http://www. 
msnbc.msn.com/id/4029541/. 
p. 67 ... a certain cap for lost wages from 
taking time off from work... 2003 Identity 
Theft Resource Center study, see www. 
idtheftcenter.org 
p. 74 ... but could not start work until she 
cleared her name... Kaja Whitehouse, "GET-
TING PERSONAL: ID Theft Hurts Job Seek-
ers, Bad Drivers," Wall Street Journal, 30 
September 2003. 
Chapter 4: Your Credit 
p. 78 ... shocked to discover a $500 lien he 
couldn't account for on his credit report... 
See http://www.pbs.org/moneymoves/ 
hot_topics/ht_i05/creditscore.html. 
p. 78 ... a fraudulent criminal record that did 
not bode well for Kelly's future in sales... See 
http://www.cbc.ca/consumers/market/files/ 
scams/idtheft/cases.html. 
p. 86 ... transferred to his relative who was 
supposed to have paid the bills... See http:// 
www.worldlii.org/ca/cases/CAPrivCmr/2003/ 
12.html 
401 

* Notes f 
p. 88 ... used to access the reporter's balance, 
direct deposits from work, withdrawals, ATM 
visits, check numbers with dates and amounts, 
and the name of his broker... Adam L. Penen-
berg, "The End of Privacy," Forbes Magazine, 
29 November 1999. 
p 95 ... took their identities, stole their money 
and swiped their security... See http://www. 
cybercrime.gov/cummingslndict.htm 
Chapter 5: Your Money 
p. 101... spend more on goods with cards than 
with cash ... "Just One Word: Plastic," Fortune, 
23 February 2004. 
p. 101... and checks to cards... "Just One 
Word: Plastic," Fortune, 23 February 2004. 
p. 103 ... Fleet settled the charges in 2001 ... 
See http://www.ag.state.mn.us/consumer/ 
privacy/privacy%5 Flaw.htm. 
p. 105 ... in a misleading manner to the 
CD holders... See http://www. 
bankofamericasettlement.com/class-notice. 
html or Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, see 
http://www.privacyrightsnow.com/glb_ 
act.htm 
p. 105 ... subscribing to X-rated Internet porn 
sites and calling poo-number sex chat lines... 
See http ://www.consumerfedofca.org/ 
edufund horror.html. 
p. 108 ... MemberWorks paid the bank $4 mil-
lion plus commissions of 22 percent of net rev-
enue on sales of club memberships... Jane 
Hadley, "Bank One agrees to protect credit 
card holders from telemarketers," Seattle Post-
Intelligencer, 1 January 2003. 
p. 116... twenty thousand people were using 
the Diners Club credit card... See http:// 
history1900s.about.com/library/weekly/ 
aa081601a.htm. 
p. 116 ... a total ofy.6 cards per cardholder... 
See http://www.cardweb.com. 
p. 117 ... all their card information and pass-
words were sent to the criminals to use at 
will... See http://www.efc.ca/pages/media/ 
globe. 10dec99.html. 
p. 123 ... merchants lose more than $13 billion 
to bad checks... See 2000 Report by Towers 
Group 
p. 126 ... and 10 percent on checking accounts 
on its website... "Netware Savings principals 
indicted," Charlotte Business Journal, 21 
September 1998. 
p. 127 ... reduces the risk of identity theft sig-
nificantly—up to 18 percent according to one 
account... See http://www.technewsworld. 
com/perl/story/32622.html. 
p. 127 ... to convert to online bill payment by 
the end of 2006 ... "Paying Bills Online, The 
Early Show, 8 November 2003, see http:// 
www.cbsnews.com/stories/2003/11/07/ 
earlyshow/contributors/reginalewis/ 
main582486.shtml. 
Chapter 6: Your Shopping 
p. 138 ... and was on trial at that time for the 
crime... "Largest database marketing firm 
sends phone numbers, addresses of 5,000 
families with kids to TV reporter using name 
of child killer," Business Wire, 13 May 1996. 
p. 138 ... based on that household's specific 
consumer and demographic characteristics... 
Pamela Paul, "Sell it to the Psyche," TIME.com, 
8 September 2003, see http://www. 
time.com/time/insidebiz/article/ 
0,9171,1101030915-4833 i3-i,oo.html. 
p. 139 ... which can include real-time informa-
tion on you ... Richard Behar, "Never Heard of 
Acxiom? Chances Are It's Heard of You," For-
tune, 9 February 2004. 
p. 1 4 1 . . . whether certain individuals were 
purchasing an inordinate number of plastic 
bags... "Privacy and Consumer Profiling," 
Electronic Privacy Information Center, see 
http://www.epic.org/privacy/profiling. 
p. 1 4 1 . . . it's time to mine it for marketing pur-
poses ... See http://www.bicycle-forum.com/ 
general/Retail Performance_Stores_asking_ 
for_customer_name_266101.html. 
p. 142 ... TO NOT RETURN THIS CARD MAY 
AFFECT YOUR WARRANTY... Jim Hightower
"Playground Prozac," Texas Observer, 14 April 
2000. 
p. 143 ... because of the quantities of alcohol 
he purchased, all recorded on his Von's Fre-
quent Shopper card... James Glave, "The Safe-
way to Shop," Wired, 8 October 1999, see 
also http ://www.wired.com/news/print/ 
0,1294,3179 i,oo.html. 
p. 145 ... eventually forced the companies to 
shut down the program... See http://www. 
nocards.org/savings/archive/Waco_Tribune. 
htm. 
p. 145 ... m order to track citizens' possible 
terrorist proclivities... Erik Baard, "Buying 
Trouble," Village Voice, 24-30 July 2002. 
p. 146 ... they did not know who put it there.. 
. See http://www.accessnorthga.com/ 
news/ap_newfullstory.asp?ID= 12469. 
402 

* Notes f 
p. 146 ... recommend to its client that the Of 
should be positioned near the medicine... 
"Retail Intelligence," Primetime Thursday, ABC 
News, 12 December 2002, see http://abcnews. 
go.com/sections/primetime/DailyNews/ 
retail lab 021212.html. 
p. 149 ... it was not testing RFID chips... 
"Chipping away at your privacy," Chicago Sun-
Times, 9 November 2003. 
p. 154... a letter from eBay telling her that the 
request was not legitimate... Andrew Brandt 
and Anne Kandra, "The Great American Pri-
vacy Makeover," PC World, November 2003. 
p. 155 ... to see whether his exploits as a 
hacker were mentioned... See http://news. 
findl aw.com/hdocs/docs/cyberlaw/ 
uslam0803cmp.pdf. 
p. 158 ... disclose your name, city, state, tele-
phone number, e-mail address, user ID history, 
fraud complaints, and bidding and listing his-
tory without a subpoena... EBay Privacy 
Policy, see http://pages.ebay.com/help/ 
community/png-priv.html. 
p. 164... and even a person who had died... 
Grant Gross, "Chicago ID thieves barred from 
internet auctions," ComputerWeekly.com, 
see http://www.computerweekly.com/ 
Article 127461 .htm. 
Chapter 7: Your Computer and the Internet 
p. 178... had broken into computers at the 
Pentagon and commercial and educational 
institutions... James Glave, "Pentagon Hacker 
Exposed by Justice Department," Wired, 18 
March 1998, see also http://www.wired, 
com/news/technology/o, 1282,1 i030,oo.html. 
p. 178.. .the city's fire department and secu-
rity system... "Airport Chaos Puts Boy Hacker 
on Spot," Hobart Mercury, 20 March 1998. 
p. 179 ... software for a computer company in 
Germany... See http://www.shk-dplc.com/cfo/ 
articles/hack.htm. 
p. 179 ... some examples of what hackers can 
do... See http://www.btinternet.com/ 
~shawweb/george/hacks/info.html#damage 
p. 180... crime ring set up by the FBI... "Tes-
timony to the Commerce and Economic 
Development Subcommittee on Electronic 
Commerce," House of Representatives: Com-
monwealth of Pennsylvania, 30 September 
1999. 
p. 180... slowed all traffic on the World Wide 
Web... "New Virus Can Turn You Into a 
Spammer," Wall Street Journal, Di, 29 January 
2004. 
p. 181... searched for fresh computers to 
infect... "Home users suffer web worm woe," 
BBC News.com, 13 August 2003, see http:// 
news.bbc.co.uk/i/hi/technology/3147 i47.stm. 
p. 181... to periodically scan your files... 
SecureAgent Secure eNewsletter, vol. 115,2 
September 2002, see http://www.securenotes. 
com/enewsletter/Volumei 15.htm. 
p. 184... website not connected to the organi-
zation ... Linda Rosencrance, "Red Cross 
warns of Trojan Horse that steals credit card 
data," Computerworld.com, 19 October 2001. 
p. 186 ... Turn on your virus filter... Michelle 
Delio, "What They Know Could Hurt You," 
Wired, 3 January 2002, see also http://www. 
wired.com/news/privacy/o, 1848,49430,00. 
html. 
p. 187... go back and enable your programs... 
CERT Coordinating Center, see http://www. 
cert.org/tech_tips/home networks.html#II-A. 
p. 186 ... were using encryption technology... 
Sean Captain, "Empowering the Wi-Fi User to 
Foil the Snoop," New York Times, 11 March 
2004. 
p. 188... marketing companies such as Dou-
bleClick and LinkExchange as well as Web 
giants Yahoo! and America Online... 
Stephanie Olsen, "Privacy group shines light 
on Web bugs, " CNET News.com, 7 June 2001, 
see http://news.com.com/2100-1023-268055. 
html ?legacy=cnet. 
p. 188 ... to monitor the document and know 
who's accessing or reading it... Cecily Barnes 
and Paul Festa, "Word documents susceptible 
to 'Web bug' infestation," CNET News.com, see 
http://news.com.com/2100-1023-245160.html? 
legacy=cnet. 
p. 188 ... any other virus would, inflicting simi-
lar damages... Cecily Barnes and Paul Festa, 
"Word documents susceptible to 'Web bug' 
infestation," CNET News.com, see http://news. 
com.c0m/2100-1023-245160.html ?legacy=cnet. 
p. 190... 97 percent of the spam it received 
was sent to addresses harvested from the 
Web... "Why Am I Getting All This Spam? 
Unsolicited Commercial E-mail Research Six 
Month Report," Center for Democracy & Tech-
nology, March 2003, see http://www.cdt.org/ 
speech/spam/o303i9spamreport.shtml. 
p. 190... Yahoo!, Hotbot, Internet Archive, and 
others... "Research depot: Using Search 
Engines," Rutgers University Writing Pro-
gram, see http://wp.rutgers.edu/courses/201/ 
research depot/search engines.html. 
p. 191... searching for computers with shared 
disks... Simson L. Garfinkel, "5 biggest 
403 

* Notes * 
threats to your privacy online," MSN Money, 
see http ://moneycentral.msn.com/articles/ 
banking/online/5485.asp. 
p. 191... by simply sending an e-greeting... 
Jon Shwartz, "Spying Software Gains Power 
and Stirs Concern," New York Times, 10 Octo-
ber 2003. 
p. 191... and he used them to access and open 
bank accounts on-line... "Kinko's spy case 
highlights risk of public Internet terminals," 
USA Today.com, 22 July 2003, see http:// 
www.usatoday.com/tech/news/techpolicy/ 
2003-07-22-terminal-fear x.htm. 
p. 192 ... his children's software contained 
heavily encrypted spyware... Dana Hawkins, 
"Privacy Worries Arise Over Spyware in Kids' 
Software," U.S. News & World Report, 3 July 
2000. 
p. 193 ... personal information to marketing 
and advertising companies... See http://www. 
downloadatoz.com/guardie/faqs.html. 
p. 196 ... to search and remove such software 
from your computer... Andrew Brandt, "Pri-
vacy Watch: Don't Let Anyone Secretly Track 
Your Keystrokes," PC World, June 2002. 
p. 197 ... not included in the Windows End 
Task (Ctrl-Alt-Del) dialog box... See http:// 
cexx.org/problem.htm. 
p. 198 .. .for users to report suspected spoof-
ing ... Dominic Timms, "Amazon moves to 
tackle alleged email fraudsters," Guardian Lim-
ited Online, 27 August 2003, see http://www. 
guardian.co.uk/online/spam/story/ 
o, 13427,1030 io7,oo.html. 
p. 199 ... compared to only 7 percent in 2001. 
.. "E-Mail Spam: How To Stop It From Stalk-
ing You," Consumer Reports, August 2003, 
p. 12. 
p. 199 ... billion spam e-mails, in the aggre-
gate, in a single day... "E-Mail Spam: How To 
Stop It From Stalking You," Consumer Reports, 
August 2003, p. 12. 
p. 199 ... as little as $500 to send 1 million 
e-mails... "E-Mail Spam: How To Stop It 
From Stalking You," Consumer Reports, 
August 2003, p. 12. 
p. 201... anti-spam law went into effect July 1, 
2003 ... Brad Wright, "Virginia indicts two on 
spam felony charges," CNN.com, 12 December 
2003, see http://www.cnn.com/2003/TECH/ 
internet/12/ 12/spam.charges/index.html. 
p. 201 ... legal action against more than 
100 spammers since 1997... Grant Gross, 
"AOL, Earthlink sue alleged spammers," 
InfoWorld.com, 18 February 2004, see 
http://reviews.infoworld.com/article/04/02/ 
i8/HNaolspam_ i.html?INTERNET% 
20STANDARDS. 
p. 206 ... Lee's penalty of home detention was 
a warning to others... John Leyden, "Email 
snooping custody battle woman escapes jail," 
Register Newsletter, 22 October 2003, see 
http://www.theregister.co.Uk/content/6/33535. 
html. 
p. 210... simultaneously installed adware to 
track user activity... "When Instant Messages 
Come Bearing Malice," New York Times, 25 
March 2004. 
p. 212 ... program that allows someone to 
take over the computer... "Computer worm 
lures with alleged Zeta-Jones photos," 
USAToday.com, 14 February 2003, see 
http://www.usatoday.com/tech/news/ 
2003-02-14-worm-jones_x.htm. 
p. 215 ... take the following precautions... 
"Ten Internet Tips for Travellers," First Step 
Communications, Pty. Ltd., see http://www. 
firststep.com.au/articles/travellers.html. 
Chapter 8: Your Home 
p. 219 ... may also reveal whether you have 
filed for bankruptcy... See http://www.nolo. 
com/lawstore/products/product.cfm/objectID/ 
567125E8-997E-4F70-82336ED531EDAE25/ 
sampleChapter/6. 
p. 220... claims to screen about fifty thousand 
prospective tenants each month... Dennis 
Hevesi, "When the Credit Check is Only the 
Start," New York Times, 12 October 2003. 
p. 220.. .or whether you made chronic late 
payments... Dennis Hevesi, "When the Credit 
Check is Only the Start," New York Times, 12 
October 2003. 
p. 2 2 1 . . . despite her persistent efforts to clean 
up her credit report... Kenneth R. Gosselin 
and Matthew Kauffman, "Credit Laws Ignite a 
New Battle," Hartford Courant, 12 May 2003. 
p. 223 ... this becomes more likely every day... 
"Comments Of The Electronic Privacy Infor-
mation Center, The Privacy Rights Clearing-
house, Us Pirg, And Consumers Union," 1 
May 2002, see http://www.epic.org/privacy/ 
financial/gib comments.pdf. 
p. 223 ... The co-op board felt that the buyer 
didn't have the right image for their building.. 
. Collin Levey, "Butting In: A co-op board bans 
smoking—and strikes a blow for freedom," 
Wall Street Journal, 2 May 2002. 
404 

-• Notes f 
p. 232 ... but to "reflect the lifestyle" of the tar-
get buyer... Deborah Schoeneman, "Talk to 
the Hand," New York, 19-26 January 2003. 
p. 232 ... stored templates (as in the case in 
many large-scale systems) ... Declan McCul-
lagh, "Scanning the Future of Privacy," CNet 
News.com, 25 March 2003, see http:// 
news.com.com/2100-1029-994080.html. 
p. 233 ... "service providers"for "legitimate 
business activities."... Jeffrey Kosseff, "Com-
cast Will Redo Privacy Policy," The Oregonian, 
23 September 2003. 
p. 233 ... "one of the great privacy issues of 
our time"... Lisa Friedman, "But Who's 
Watching TiVo? Congressman Concerned 
About Makers Selling Private Information," 
Los Angeles Daily News, 1 December 2003. 
p. 234... the original understanding of the 
Constitution into the technological age... Jef-
frey Rosen, "A Victory for Privacy," Wall Street 
Journal, 18 June 2001. 
p. 2 3 4 . . . technology-assisted searches in a 
variety of places, not just the home... Jeffrey 
Benner, "Kyllo: Taking the 5th on the 4th," 
Wired, 3 July 2001, see also http ://www.wired. 
com/news/privacy/0,1848,44785, oo.html. 
p. 235 ... private sexual conduct among con-
senting adults in their homes... "Supreme 
Court Strikes Down Texas Sodomy Law," 
CNN.com, 18 November 2003, see http:// 
www.cnn.com/2003/LAW/06/26/scotus. 
sodomy/index.html. 
p. 236 ... To date, at least six states... Califor-
nia, Hawaii, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Ver-
mont, and Washington, 
p. 237 ... receive about 4 million tons of junk 
mail each year... Clean Air Council, see 
http://www.cleanair.org/Waste/wasteFacts. 
html. 
p. 238 ... sales will surpass $i.y trillion in 
2003 ... See http://www.the-dma.org. 
p. 238 ... projections estimating almost $2.5 
trillion by 2008... See http://www.the-dma. 
org/cgi/dispnewsstand?article=i569 
p. 239 ... Acxiom, Donnelley Marketing, 
Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion... Privacy 
Rights Clearinghouse, see http://www. 
privacyrights.0rg/fs/fs4-junk.htm. 
p. 240... companies with which you have 
a relationship... See http://www. 
dmaconsumers.org and http://www. 
epicenternews.org. 
p. 2 4 1 . . . you can expect to receive twenty-five 
offers this year... See http://www.cardweb. 
com/cardlearn/faqs/2002/jun/i3.amp. 
p. 242 ... Remove name from mailing list... 
See http ://www.obviously.com/junkmail. 
p. 242 ... you have to communicate directly 
with the sender... Electronic Privacy Informa-
tion Center, see http://www.epicenternews. 
org/no.more.junk.mail.htm. 
p. 242 ... entered into the National Change of 
Address database... See http://www. 
obviously.com/junkmail. 
p. 244 ... will not in any way affect a con-
sumer's warranty rights... Privacy Rights 
Clearinghouse, see http://www.privacyrights. 
org/fs/fs4-junk.htm. 
p. 2 4 4 . . . this information is not to be sold, 
traded, or shared... Privacy Rights Clearing-
house, see http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/ 
fs4-junk.htm. 
p. 245 ... and then send them back to direct 
marketers... See http://www.smartmoney. 
com/iothings/index.cfm?story=20031111. 
p. 247 .. .for those wanting to learn more 
about stopping junk faxes... Steve Kirsch, 
"How Steve Kirsch discovered fax.com," Junk-
fax.org, see http://www.junkfax.org/fax/ 
stories/Kirsch.html. 
p. 247 ... FCC has in the past levied fines in 
the million-dollar range... See http://www. 
fcc.g0v/eb/NewsReleases/nr21 cen 1 .html, 
p. 248 ... statistics from the Federal Communi-
cations Commission... Yochi J. Dreazen, "Do 
Not Call Roster Debuts Today," Wall Street 
Journal, 27 June 2003. 
p. 248 ... preserving the Do Not Call rules and 
upholding their constitutionality... "Do Not 
Call rules survive recent Constitutional 
Attack," USA Today, 25 February, 2004. 
p. 2 5 1 . . . increase accountability, and help in 
enforcement efforts... See http://www.ftc.gov/ 
bcp/conline/pubs/tmarkg/donotcall.htm. 
p. 2 5 4 . . . and the affiliate should provide a 
similar service... For more information about 
affiliate sharing of financial information, see 
Fact Sheet 24 at Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, 
see http://www.privacyrights.org/ 
financial.htm. 
Chapter 9: Your Workplace 
p. 259 ... over 40 percent of job applicants lie 
on their résumés... Fifth Annual Hiring Index 
Study (2002) by ADP Screening and Selection 
Services, Society for Human Resource Man-
agement Forum at http://www.shrm.org/ 
ema/library_published/nonIC/CMS_oo6o87. 
asp. 
405 

* Notes f 
p. 259 ... both of whom included "inaccura-
cies" on their résumés... Kris Frieswick, "Liar, 
liar." CFO, Magazine for Senior Financial Exec-
utives, December 2002. 
p. 259 ...the U.S. Olympic Committee who lied 
about having earned a doctorate... Charles J. 
Sykes, "Big Brother in the Workplace," Hoover 
Digest, 2003, No. 3, see http://www-hoover. 
stanford.edu/publications/digest/003/sykes. 
html 
p. 259 ... beyond what workers voluntarily pro-
vide ... Charles }. Sykes, "Big Brother in the 
Workplace," Hoover Digest, 2000, No. 3, 
see http://www-hoover.stanford.edu/ 
publications/digest/003/sykes.html. 
p. 260... half of new hires do not work out... 
"So You're a Player. Do You Need a Coach?" 
Fortune, 7 February 2000. 
p. 260 ... $40,000 to replace a senior executive 
... This statistic, attributed to Recruiting 
Times, and other interesting hiring statistics, 
are quoted at http://www.Backgroundprofiles. 
com/stas.html. 
p. 261... liability for misuse of any of this 
information... "City of Decatur Modifies 
Employee Background Checks in Response to 
ACLU," ACLU, 26 February 2001, see http:// 
www.aclu.org/Privacy/Privacy.cfm?ID=7i44& 
C=132. 
p. 263 ... separated from other personnel files... 
Martha Lester, Julie Werner, and Michèle Con-
treras Sadati, "The Legal Nuts and Bolts of 
Hiring Employees." New Jersey Law Journal, 
26 March 2001. 
p. 264... not according to the Washington 
Post... "On the Job," Washington Post, p. H 3, 
9 March 2003. 
p. 265 ... according to one national employ-
ment agency... According to Victoria Lowe, 
president of Alert Staffing, a national employ-
ment agency, as cited by Carolyn M. Brown 
in "Ways and Means: Bad Credit Blues?" at 
http://www.africana.com/columns/brown/ 
ls20031125.credit.asp. 
p. 267 ... background checks as a post-
September 11 security measure... Tom Zucco, 
"Background check kits worry some," St. 
Petersburg Times, 22 March 2004. 
p. 267 ... promptly received pink slips from 
their own employers... Ann Davis, "Zero Tol-
erance: Employers Dig Deep into Worker's 
Pasts, Citing Terrorism Fears," Wall Street Jour-
nal, 12 March 2002. 
p. 268... without the employees' knowledge or 
consent... Melinda Hawkins, "Drug tests vio-
late basic rights," Alestle (Southern Illinois 
University, Edwardsville), 24 January 2002, 
see http ://www. thealestle.com/news/2002/ 
01/24/Editorial/Drug-Tests.Violate.Basic. 
Rights-i683i3.shtml. 
p. 270.. .the case ultimately settled for more 
than $1 million... Tori Minton, "Don't get psy-
ched out: More companies considering pre-
employment tests," San Francisco Chronicle, 
21 October 2001. 
p. 270... Unbelievably, the court ruled in favor 
of the police department... Thalia Assuras, 
"Connecticut Man Rejected from Police 
Department Because of IQ," transcript from 
CBS This Morning, 10 September 1999. 
p. 2 7 1 . . . The case was settled before the court 
had a chance to rule... U.S. News & World 
Report, Vol. 122, no. 24, 23 June 1997. 
p. 2 7 1 . . . The railroad agreed to settle the 
case, pay $2.2 million, and halt genetic test-
ing ... Sarah Schafer, "Railroad Agrees to Stop 
Gene-Testing Workers," Washington Post, 19 
April 2001. 
p. 272 ... 50 million résumés are posted on 
these sites... Kendra Mayfield, "The Perils of 
Online Job Sites," Wired, 6 March 2003, see 
also http ://www.wired.com/news/print/ 
o,i294,57923,oo.html. 
p. 2 7 4 . . . recommended for their privacy poli-
cies ... Andrea Coombes, "Privacy Rare for 
Online Job Seekers," Daily News, 27 November 
2003. 
p. 275 ... 52 percent of employers review and 
store employees' e-mail messages... This fig-
ure up from 47 percent in 2001. 
p. 276 ... 65 percent disciplined workers for 
such conduct... Romy Riblitzky, "Corporate 
Snooping on the Rise," ABCNews.com, see 
http://abcnews.go.com/sections/business/ 
DailyNews/snoopingo 10418.html. 
p. 277 ... still decide to use your company's 
system... See http://www.npelra.org/legal/ 
monitoring.asp. 
p. 278 ... monitor their employees in some 
way, according to the AMA... Mari Alboher 
Nusbaum, "New Kind of Snooping Arrives at 
the Office," New York Times, 13 July 2003. 
p. 278 ... are you then violating state law?... 
Perry Aftab and Jim Durkin, "Should IT Have 
to Report Child Porn?" Optimize, 1 May 2002. 
p. 279 ... preventing "inappropriate and 
unprofessional" conduct outweighed the 
employee's right to privacy... James Glave, 
"An E-mail Bill for Employees," Wired, 16 Sep-
tember 1999, see also http://www.wired.com/ 
news/politics/o, 1283,2 i792,oo.html. 
406 

* Notes * 
p. 280... The court in California rejected this 
claim... Bourke v. Nissan Motor Corp. 
B068705 (Cal. Ct. App. 1993); and McLaren v. 
Microsoft Corp. WL339015 (Tex. Ct. App. 
1999)-
p. 280... easily captures these e-mails... Sam 
Ames and Rachel Konrad, "Web-based E-mail 
Services Offer Employees Little Privacy," 
CNET News.com, 3 October 2000, see 
http ://news.com.com/2100-1 o 17-2465 43 .html 
p. 281... tapes that have been overwritten sev-
eral times... David Bennahum, "Old Email 
Never Dies," Wired, May 1999, see also 
http://www.wired.eom/wired/archive/7.05/ 
email.html. 
p. 282 ... may be kept without your knowledge 
... Ryan Teague Beckwith, "Plugged In," News-
day, 6 August 2002; Sandra Swanson, 
"Employers Take a Closer Look," Information-
week.com, 15 July 2002. 
p. 283 ... records e-mails and chat sessions, 
and logs keystrokes... Brett Glass, "Are You 
Being Watched?," PC Magazine, 23 April 
2002. 
p. 284... The male employee was fired... 
Huffcutv. McDonald's Corp. 94CV6589 (N.Y. 
!995)-
p. 285 ... the area was not reserved for their 
exclusive use... Thompson v. Johnson County 
Community College, 930 F. Supp. 501 (D. Kan. 
1996). 
p. 286 ... voice-activated recording devices... 
Desilets v.Wal-Mart Stores, 171 F. 3d. 711 (1st 
Cir. 1999). 
p. 286 ... removing the disk from the desk and 
accessing the files... Williams v. Philadelphia 
Housing Authority, WL267108 (E.D. Pa. 1993). 
p. 286 .. .no reasonable expectation that their 
work areas are private... O'Connor v. Ortega, 
480 U.S., 709 (1987). 
p. 287 ... left after termination is not unrea-
sonable ... State v. Lambright, 138 Ariz. 63, 75, 
673 P.2d 1,13 (1983). 
p. 287... both of which contain information 
needed by other employees... O'Bryan v. KTIV 
Television, 64 F.3d 1188, 1193 (8th Cir. 1995). 
p. 287 ... Companies such as Adidas, Goldman 
Sachs, and GlaxoSmithKline use these tech-
nologies ... Andrew Brown, "Big Brother Is 
Watching You Sweat," CNN.com, 30 July 2002, 
see http://www.cnn.com/2002/WORLD/ 
asiapcf/east/07/30/hongkong.fitness.first/. 
p. 287... have them keep tabs on workers... 
Stephanie Armour, "More Workplaces Keep 
Eye, and Ear, on Employees," USA Today, 2rj 
February 2003. 
p. 287 ... compensation fraud or other objec-
tionable behavior... Stephanie Armour, "More 
Workplaces Keep Eye, and Ear, on Employ-
ees," USA Today, 27 February 2003. 
p. 288 ... wage-earners and white-collar, 
salaried employees... Kris Maher, "Big 
Employer Is Watching," Wall Street Journal, 
4 November 2003. 
p. 288 ... infrared sensors to track their every 
move... Dana Hawkins, "Who's Watching 
Now? Hassled by Lawsuits, Firms Probe 
Workers' Privacy," U.S. News & World Report, 
15 September 1997. 
p. 288... GPS devices in their news trucks... 
Chris Baker, "Channel 7 Uses GPS to Dispatch 
its Crews; Some Workers See Privacy Inva-
sion," Washington Times, 23 January 2003. 
p. 288 ... contacted the manager's mental-
health providers without his consent... 
Jonathan Canter, "Drawing the Line on Pri-
vacy at Work," CareerJournal.com, see 
http://www.careerjournal.com/myc/legal/ 
19990209-canter.html. 
p. 288 ... immoral and unprofessional evidenc-
ing unfitness to teach... Pettit v. State Bd. of 
Education, 10 Cal.3d 29 (1973). 
p. 289 ... outrageous conduct on the part of 
your employer... Patton v. J.C. Penney Co., 
301 Or. 117, 719 P.2d 854 (1986). 
p. 289 ... sexual harassment claim brought on 
by the spurned party... Alex Fennel, Christine 
Filosa, and Rebecca Wilson, "Romantic Rela-
tionships at Work: Does Privacy Trump the 
Dating Police?" The Privacy Project, Volume 
70, Issue No. 1, January 2003, see http:// 
www.iadclaw.org/StaticContent/pdfs/ 
RomanticRelationships.pdf 
p. 2 9 1 . . . with respect to their commitment to 
employee privacy... "Ranking Privacy At 
Work," Wired, October 2003; Best Companies: 
IBM, HP, Ford, Baxter Healthcare, and Sears; 
Worst Companies: Eli Lilly, Wal-Mart, The 
New York Times Company, Burlington North-
ern Santa Fe, and Hilton Hotels, 
p. 2 9 1 . . . IBM's first privacy officer... As 
more and more companies have been criti-
cized or sued for privacy-related practices, 
they have begun to hire newly created "pri-
vacy officers." Their job is essentially to define 
and protect what privacy is to their business 
partners, their consumers, and their own 
employees. 
407 

* Notes f 
p. 291... hidden recording devices to tape 
employees' private conversations... Desilets v. 
Wal-Mart Stores, 171 F. 3d. 711 (1st Cir. 1999). 
p. 291... to collect urine specimens for drug 
testing... Mission Petroleum Carriers, Inc. v. 
Solomon, 37 SW.3d 482 (Tex. App.-Beaumont 
2001). 
p. 291... searched a trucking employee's motel 
room... Sowards v. Norbar, 78 Ohio App. 3d 
545,(i992). 
Chapter 10: Your Health 
p. 294... how the world discovered that tennis 
great Arthur Ashe suffered from AIDS... 
"Medican Privacy Stories: Individuals 
Exposed," Health Privacy Project Newsletter, 
November 2003, see http://www. 
healthprivacy.org/usr_doc/Storiesupd.pdf. 
p. 296 ...the EMT violated the woman's privacy 
... Lisa Sink "Ruling upholds patient's privacy," 
Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, 28 May 2003. 
p. 297 .. .no reason to store the donors' names 
in that particular database...}. Marcotty, 
"Names of Donors Are Accidentally Included 
in Letter to Kidney Patients," Minneapolis Star 
Tribune, Ai, 15 January 2002; See http:// 
lists.essential.org/pipermail/med-privacy/ 
2oo2q 1/000310.html. 
p. 301... entities under HIPPA refer to health-
care providers... Technically, HIPAA regu-
lates health-care providers who transmit 
medical information electronically but in 
today's digital environment this applies to 
almost all heath-care providers, 
p. 301... health plans, and health-care clear-
inghouses ... Health-care clearinghouses refer 
to such entities as health-care billing services, 
p. 306 ... seizure of the records violated Lim-
baugh's privacy rights... "Limbaugh admits 
addiction to pain medication," CNN.com, 10 
October 2003, see http://www.cnn.com/2003/ 
SHOWBIZ/10/io/rush.limbaugh/index.html. 
p. 306 ... but the threat lingers... Kim Zetter, 
"Outsourcing: Danger to Privacy," Wired, 20 
February 2004, see http ://www.wired. 
com/news/business/o,i367,62356,oo.html. 
p. 306 ... authorities declined to release under 
HIPAA... Texas News, Star-Telegram, 2 March 
2004. 
p. 3 1 1 . . . sent by someone who had been in the 
bar... "Aids Confidentiality," USA Today, 10 
October 1996. 
p. 312 ... names and e-mail addresses of all 
recipients... "Lilly Privacy Violation Charges 
Are Settled," New York Times, 19 January 2002. 
p. 312 ... the woman's records to find out the 
intimate details... Anne Barnard, "Doctors 
brace for changes on patient privacy," Boston 
Globe, 1 November 2003. 
p. 315 ... of more than sixty children and 
teenagers who had visited and were diagnosed 
by the university... "Poor Security," Health Pri-
vacy Project Newsletter, November 2003, see 
http ://www.healthprivacy.org/usr _ doc/ 
Storiesupd.pdf. 
p. 317 ... perfectly capable of handling his 
work... Alissa J. Rubin, "Records No Longer 
for Doctors' Eyes Only," Los Angeles Times, 1 
September 1998. 
Chapter 1 1 : Your Everyday Life 
p. 326 ... prior to departure is still in the works 
... Matthew Wald, "Privacy Issue Delays 
Change In Airport Screening System," New 
York Times, p. A27,13 February 2004. 
p. 328... which resulted in the Kahns being 
put on a watch list... "Patriot Act LAW! ! ! 
George W Is Watching You Change!" 
Black and White Reader, see http:// 
blackandwhitereader.tripod.com/. 
p. 328 ... contracting them during times of 
national crisis or emergencies... Eric Posner 
and John Yoo, "The Patriot Act Under Fire," 
Wall Street Journal, 10 December 2003. 
p. 328 ... passed resolutions condemning the 
Patriot Act... Dan Kennedy, "State of Surveil-
lance: Let's Just Throw Away the Bill of Rights 
and the Constitution," Boston Phoenix, 19-25 
September 2003. 
p. 329 ... prohibited from notifying you or any-
one else about the search... Section 215 
applies to third-party records. School records 
are controlled by Section 507. Both sections 
are discussed under "College & University 
Education" of the USA Patriot Act of 2001. 
p. 329 ... can conduct records searches on you 
and virtually anyone... Dahlia Lithwick and 
Julia Turner, "A Guide to the Patriot Act, Part 
I," Slate, 8 September 2003, see http:// 
slate.msn.com/id/2087984/. 
p. 330... time may be extended for good cause 
... Dahlia Lithwick and Julia Turner, "A Guide 
to the Patriot Act, Part I," Slate, 8 September 
2003, see http://slate.msn.com/id/2087984/. 
p. 330.. .or if the police are searching the 
wrong house... "Surveillance Under the USA 
PATRIOT Act," ACLU, see http://www.aclu. 
org/SafeandFree/SafeandFree.cfm?ID= 
12203&C=206. 
408 

* Notes * 
p. 330... to tell you or anyone else that the 
monitoring is taking place... "The USA 
Patriot Act," Electronic Privacy Information 
Center, see http://www.epic.org/privacy/ 
terrorism/usapatriot/. 
p. 3 3 1 . . . according to FBI and Department of 
Justice officials... Michael Meehan, "Is Carni-
vore Dangerous? Controversy Continues," 
Computerworld.com, see http://www. 
computerworld.com/securitytopics/security/ 
privacy/story/o,io8oi,54998,oo.html. 
p. 331... does not specifically mention Carni-
vore by name... Dahlia Lithwick and Julia 
Turner, "A Guide to the Patriot Act, Part III." 
Slate, 10 September 2003, see http://slate. 
msn.com/id/2088161/. 
p. 3 3 1 . . . a lot more than just addressing infor-
mation ... Rachel S. Martin, "Watch What You 
Type: As the FBI Records Your Keystrokes, the 
Fourth Amendment Develops Carpal Tunnel 
Syndrome," American Criminal Law Review, 
22 June 2003. 
p. 332 ... wonderful union of Orwell and Kafka 
... "Internet Surveillance Up Since Sept. 
1 ith." USA Today, 28 May 2002, see http:// 
www.usatoday.com/tech/news/2002/05/28/ 
net-surveillance.htm. 
p. 332 ... are at risk of being spied upon by the 
government... "Surveillance Under the USA 
PATRIOT Act" ACLU, see http://www.aclu. 
org/SafeandFree/SafeandFree.cfm?ID= 
12203&C=206. 
p. 333 ... will trigger the sensor... Frank J. 
Murray, "NASA plans to read terrorist's minds 
at airports," Washington Times, 17 August 
2002. 
p. 334 ... see your X-rays appearing on the 
Internet... Dana Hawkins and David LaGesse, 
"Tech vs. Terror," U.S. News & World Report, 
8 October 2001. 
p. 334 ... and every book title a passenger 
reads... Elisa Batista, "Videocams Record Air-
line Flights," Wired, 18 July 2003, see also 
http://www.wired.eom/news/print/o. 
i294,59652,oo.html. 
p. 334. ..ID system that would facilitate gov-
ernment surveillance... Dana Hawkins and 
David LaGesse, "Tech vs. Terror," U.S. News & 
World Report, 8 October 2001. 
P- 335 - used the information to categorize the 
passengers on their perceived threat level... 
Frances Fiorino, "Big Brother, Let's Talk Pri-
vately," Aviation Week, 29 September 2003. 
p. 335 ... data-mining program that looked 
like a blueprint for CAPPSII... Max Blumen-
thal, "Data Debase," American Prospect, 
19 December 2003, see http://www.prospect. 
org/webfeatures/2oo3/i2/blumenthal-m-i2-i9. 
html. 
p. 335 .. .the implementation of CAPPS II has 
not yet been finalized... Matthew Wald, "Pri-
vacy Issue Delays Change In Airport Screen-
ing System," New York Times, p. A27, 13 
February 2004. 
p. 335 ... criticism has focused on four aspects 
of the profiling system... "The Five Problems 
with CAPPS II: Why the Airline Passenger 
Profiling Proposal Should be Abandoned," 
ACLU, 25 August 2003, see http://www.aclu. 
org/SafeandFree/SafeandFree.cfm?ID= 
i3356&c=2o6. 
p. 335 ... information on family and friends, 
and soon... 
Don Campbell, "High-tech Micro-
scopes Expose Americans' Private Lives," USA 
Today, 11 November 2003. 
p. 337 ... travel records are unregulated and 
open to unrestricted access... Edward Has-
brouk, "Covering the Traveler's Electronic 
Trail," BusinessWeek, 22 July 2003. 
p. 337 ... data could wind up being sold or 
transferred... Ryan Singel, "Frequent Fliers 
Fear Privacy Loss," Wired, 18 April 2003, see 
also http ://www.wired.com/news/print/ 
o,i294,58470,oo.html. 
p. 337 ... only Florida was using Matrix at full 
capacity... Madeleine Baran, "Fear Real-Life 
Matrix Will Be Monitoring You," New York 
Daily News, 23 November 2003. 
p. 337 ... New York, California, and Texas have 
left the program since its inception... "New 
York State Quits Terror Database," New York 
Post, p. 6, 12 March 2004. 
p. 337 ... a quantum leap backward in the pro-
tection of our privacy... Madeleine Baran, 
"Fear Real-Life Matrix Will Be Monitoring 
You" New York Daily News, 23 November 
2003. 
p. 338 ...orat the office is listened to by sev-
eral people... Colum Lynch, "Spying Report 
No Shock to U.N.," Washington Post, 4 March 
2003. 
P- 339 • • • 5°° million units were sold world-
wide, according to the Gartner Group... Tom 
Krazit, "Cell Phones Sales Skyrocket," 
PCWorld.com, 8 December, 2003, see http:// 
www.pcworld.com/news/article/o,aid, 113788, 
oo.asp. 
p. 339 .. .an estimated 85 percent of wireless 
conversations... Martin J. Moylan, "Snooping 
409 

-+ Notes f-
on Cell-Phone Calls Is No Longer for Ama-
teurs," Philadelphia Enquirer, 3 June 2002, see 
http://www.philly.com/mld/philly/business/ 
3389603.htm. 
p. 340... have already begun experimenting 
with recording features... Ben Charney, "Cell 
Phone Recording May Breach Privacy." CNET 
News.com, 3 September 2003, see http://news. 
com.c0m/2100-1039-5070618.html. 
p. 3 4 1 . . . and tax ID he had stolen to order 
more than one thousand phones for "an upcom-
ing film shoot... Timothy O'Connor, "Fla. Man 
heads to prison for cell phone scam," Journal 
News, 18 November 2003. 
p. 3 4 1 . . . half of this fraud is wireless-subscrip-
tion fraud ... "National and State Trends in 
Fraud & Identity Theft, January-December 
2003," Federal Trade Commission, 22 January 
2004, see http://www.consumer.gov/ 
sentinel/pubs/TopioFraud2003.pdf. 
p. 3 4 1 . . . the legitimate user, are billed for the 
cloned phone's calls... "FCC Consumer Advi-
sory: Cell Phone Fraud," Federal Communica-
tions Commission, see http://www.fcc.gov/ 
cgb/consumerfacts/cellphonefraud.html. 
p. 342 ... your privacy is compromised by 
unseen video cameras... Terri Sanginiti, "Lots 
of cameras watch you—and catch criminals," 
Newsjournal, 23 February 2004; Currently, 
surveillance video captures your image 12 
times each day. 
p. 342 ... 284 surveillance cameras in May 
2003 ... "Maps of Publicly Installed Sur-
veillance Cameras in New York City," 
NotBored.org, see http://www.notbored.org/ 
scp-maps.html. 
p. 343 ... even an indecent shot of the late 
Princess of Wales... Radley Balko, "Americans 
Need Not Trade Privacy for Security," 
FoxNews.com, 13 March 2002 see http://www. 
foxnews.com/story/o,2933,47823,oo.html. 
p. 343 ... red-light cameras in use in about 
sixty cities and counties in the United States... 
Valerie Alvord, "Calif. Judge Says 'Stop' to Red 
Light Cameras," USA Today, 15 September 
2001. 
p. 343 ... to collect a sizable cut from each 
ticked issued... Valerie Alvord, "Calif, judge 
says 'stop' to red light cameras," USA Today, 5 
September 2001. 
p. 343 ... camera cell phones be confiscated 
before she appeared at a Rolling Stone party 
in Los Angeles... Charisse Jones, "Phones 
make your bad side visible to the world," USA 
Today, 19 October 2003. 
p. 345 ... waiving your privacy rights merely 
because you are in public... Amy Harmon, 
"Smile, You're on Candid Cell Phone," New 
York Times, 8 December 2003. 
p. 345 ... would have a reasonable expectation 
of privacy... Missouri's Wiretapping and 
Eavesdropping Statute, Mo. Rev. Stat. 
S 565-253-
p. 345 ... the dissemination of the images by 
phone, e-mail, or Internet... Louisiana Video 
Voyeurism Statute, LA. Rev. Stat. § 14:283. 
p. 346 ... car was equipped with a device that 
allowed the company to track their exact route 
... Christopher Elliott, "On the Move: Keeping 
tabs on drivers of rental cars," New York Times, 
20 January 2004. 
p. 346 ... some sort of location-based technol-
ogy by 2005... Amy Harmon, "Lost? Hiding? 
Your Cellphone is Keeping Tabs," New York 
Times, 21 December 2003. 
p. 347 ... LBS could be a $15 billion market by 
200J... Brendan Koerner, "Your Cellphone Is 
a Homing Device." 1 July 2003, see http:// 
www.legalaffairs.org/issues/July-August-2003/ 
feature koerner julaug03.html. 
p. 347 ... regarding the privacy of your loca-
tion information... Brendan Koerner, "Your 
Cellphone is a Homing Device," 1 July 2003, 
see http://www.legalaffairs.org/issues/July-
August-2oo3/feature_koernerjulaugo3.html. 
p. 347 ... the agency actually turned down a 
request from privacy groups... Amy Harmon, 
"Lost? Hiding? Your Cellphone is Keeping 
Tabs," New York Times, 21 December 2003. 
p. 348 ... GPS data is scientifically sound 
enough to be admitted as evidence in his 
upcoming double-murder trial... Jason 
Dearen, "Judge rules to allow GPS data," Oak-
land Tribune, 18 February 2004. 
p. 348 ... watches, belts, or backseat inserts for 
your kids... Elisa Batista, "A Kiddie GPS for 
the Masses?" Wired, 12 October 2002, see 
http ://wired.com/news/business/ 
0,1367,5573 i,oo.html. 
p. 349 ... renters' driving habits and levy fines 
for excessive speed... Richard Stenger, 
"Rental Driver Finds Big Brother Over Shoul-
der." 22 June 2001, CBC/Radio Canada, see 
http://www.cbc.ca/consumers/market/files/ 
cars/gps/. 
p. 349 ... will not disable the emergency signal 
in the car... Charles R. Smith, "Big Brother on 
Board," FreeRepublic.com, 12 December 2003, 
see http://209.157.64.200/focus/f-news/ 
io39373/posts. 
410 

* Notes f 
p. 349 ... up from only seventy-five thousand 
in 2001... Brad Smith, "Driving Telematics 
Beyond Safety, Security," Wireless Week, 1 Jan-
uary 2003. 
p. 3 5 1 . . . intercepted directly from the 
transponder by anyone with the right equip-
ment ... Solomon Friedman, "An Envelope of 
Privacy for Your Car," New York Times, 29 Sep-
tember 2002. 
p. 3 5 1 . . . records have also been used in civil 
cases, such as child custody battles... John 
Schwartz, "This Car Can Talk, What it Says 
May Cause Concern," New York Times, 29 
December 2003. 
p. 3 5 1 . . . when using E-ZPass on a public high-
way ... Brendan Koerner, "Your Cellphone Is a 
Homing Device," Legal Affairs, 1 July 2003. 
p. 352 ... Ten minutes after the slaying he was 
on a northbound S54 bus... Adam L. Penen-
berg, "The Surveillance Society," Wired, 
December 2001, see also http ://www. wired. 
com/wired/archive/9.i2/surveillance.html?pg= 
1 &topic=&topic_set=. 
p. 352 ... to confirm or contest alibis... Bren-
dan Koerner, "Your Cellphone Is a Homing 
Device," Legal Affairs, 1 July 2003. 
p. 353 ...all General Motors cars contain such 
black boxes... Becky Worley, "Is There a Black 
Box in Your Car?" Tech Live, aired 15 July 
2002. 
p. 353 .. .25 million cars in the Unites States 
are fitted with event data recorders... Ralph 
Vartabedian, "Your Wheels; Black Boxes 
Prompt Big Brother Objections," Los Angeles 
Times, 5 November 2003. 
p. 353 ... privacy of drivers whose cars are 
equipped with black boxes... Matthew Wald, 
"Motorists' Black-Box Data Protected by Pri-
vacy Law," Contra Costa Times, 23 September 
2003. 
p. 354... unexcused absences, detentions, 
missed assignments, and so forth... Maya Sur-
yaraman, "School Software Helps Parents 
Keep Tabs on Teens," San Jose Mercury News, 
27 October 2003. 
p. 354... can read the personal information 
contained on the chip... Robert Trigaux, "In 
Riskier World, Personal Security Trumps Per-
sonal Privacy," St. Petersburg Times, 24 Febru-
ary 2002. 
p. 355 ... revenue was up 76 percent to $228 
million in 2002 from 2001, according to Jupiter 
Research... Jennifer Saranow, "Funding 
Potential Unleashes an Explosion of Dating 
Sites," Chicago Tribune, 24 December 2003. 
p. 356 ... the listing included the actress' real 
home address, telephone number, and e-mail 
address... Entertainment Industry Litigation 
Reporter, Vol. 15, Issue 8, 8 October 2003. 
p. 356... looking for a more casual, sponta-
neous approach to dating... Jennifer Davies, 
"Romancing the Phone: Cell Phones Become 
Latest High-Tech Means of Meeting," San 
Diego Union-Tribune, 9 December 2002. 
p. 358 ... settled only after Lewinsky herself 
agreed to turn over her purchase records... 
"Bookstores Buck Patriot Act," CBS News.com, 
21 February 2003, see http://www.cbsnews. 
com/stories/2003/o2/2i/national/main54i464. 
shtml. 
p. 358 ... his lawyer could assume the worst... 
Dan Kennedy, "State of Surveillance: Let's Just 
Throw Away the Bill of Rights and the Consti-
tution," Boston Phoenix, 19-25 September 
2003. 
p. 358 ... probable cause that at crime has 
been committed... Anita Ramasastry, "Why 
the ACLU Is Right to Challenge the FBI's 
Access to Library, Bookstore, and Business 
Records under the USA Patriot Act," Modern 
Practice, Issue 23, September 2003. 
p. 359 ... wonder what videos some congres-
sional members are renting... "The Video Pri-
vacy Protection Act (VPPA)," Electronic 
Privacy Information Center, see http:// 
www.epic.org/privacy/vppa. 
p. 360.. .no legal cases have put this issue to 
the test... "The Video Privacy Protection Act," 
Electronic Privacy Information Center, see 
http ://www.epic.org/privacy/vppa. 
p. 361... taking full advantage of these mar-
keting opportunities... David Lazarus, "A 
Ticket Full of Fine Print," San Francisco Chron-
icle, 18 July 2003. 
p. 361... but because a reporter interviewed 
former players and coaches of the college foot-
ball team ... "Academic, athletic irregularities 
force resignation," ESPN.com, 14 December 
2001, see http://espn.go.com/ncf/news/2001/ 
1214/1295624.1111111. 
p. 362 .. .the right to view your student records 
if you are over eighteen... However, certain 
information—such as psychiatric reports and 
other noneducational records held by a coun-
selor, doctor, and so forth— is off limits, even 
to students who are over eighteen, 
p. 362 ... according to the American Associa-
tion of Collegiate Registrars and Admission 
Officers... Ron Southwick, "Investigators 
Seek, and Colleges Provide, Information on 
411 

* Notes f 
Students," Chronicle of Higher Education, 12 
October 2001. 
p. 362 ... one was in the country on a student 
visa ... Dan Egan, "FBI Taps Campus Police in 
Anti-Terror Operations; Students, Faculty 
Groups Fear a Return of Spying Abuses 
Against Activists, Foreign Nationals," Wash-
ington Post, 25 January 2003. 
p. 363 ... enrollment in certain majors, such as 
Islamic studies or aviation... Tina Valkanoff, 
"McCarthyism on Campus?" The Campaign to 
Stop SEVIS, see http://www.stopsevis.org/ 
content.php?aID=6. 
p. 363 ... but a school official had failed to 
activate the appropriate security mechanisms 
... Kate Meyer, "1,000s hit by 2nd recent ID 
flap," Washington Square News, 2 February 
2004. 
p. 363 ... 80 percent display social security 
numbers on official transcripts... Andrea Fos-
ter, "ID Theft Turns Students Into Privacy 
Activists, Colleges Respond by Reducing 
Reliance on Social Security Numbers in Data-
bases," Chronicle of Higher Education, 2 
August 2002. 
p. 363 ... or post grades with the social secu-
rity number as the identifier... Chris Jay Hoof-
nagle, "Recommendations to Create a More 
Privacy-Sensitive College or University," Elec-
tronic Privacy Information Center, 20 October 
2002, see http://www.epic.org/epic/staff/ 
hoofnagle/studentprivacy.html. 
p. 364.. .the deal is worth about $16.5 million 
... Taylor Loyal, "Don't Leave College Without 
It," Motherjones, March/April 2002. 
p. 364 ... a front for collecting marketing data 
from high-school students... "The Family Edu-
cational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) and 
Student Privacy," Electronic Privacy Informa-
tion Center, August 2003, see http://www. 
epic.org/privacy/student. 
p. 364... misdemeanor conviction record for 
drunk driving near his family's compound in 
Maine... "Bush confirms arrest for DUI in 
1976," USA Today.com, 3 November 2000, see 
http://www.usatoday.com/news/opinion/dui. 
htm. 
p. 365 ... not omitting some piece of personal 
information from court filings... Dan Chris-
tensen, "Judicial Conference Oks Plan for 
Redacted Criminal Filings," Legal Times, 10 
November 2003. 
p. 365 ... but not motions, forms, or exhibits... 
"Other Courts' Experiences Show Benefits, Pit-
falls of Online Records," Associated Press 
Newswires, 2 December 2003. 
p. 366 ... convictions (assuming no others 
exist) by saying there are none... "Cleaning 
Up a Criminal Record," Nolo.com, see http:// 
www.nolo.com. 
p. 366 ... except in exceptional circumstances, 
such as proof of government misconduct... 
See http://www.expungemynjrecord.com/ 
faq.htm. 
Chapter 12:1 Spy, You Spy 
p. 368 ... you learn that you can tap his phone 
for $100... "Did You Know?" Digital Fortress, 
seewww.danbrown.com/secrets/digital_ 
fortress/didyouknow.html. 
p. 3 7 1 . . . She was finally inside their lives or, 
at least, their apartment... Katha Pollitt, 
"Webstalker: When it's time to stop checking 
on your ex," New Yorker, 19 January 2004. 
p. 377 ... used his skills as a network adminis-
trator to facilitate his ability to stalk his vic-
tims ... Paul Bocij: "Corporate Cyberstalking, 
An Invitation to Build Theory," First Monday, 
vol. 7, no. 11, November 2002, see http://www. 
firstm0nday.dk/issues/issue7 1 i/bocij/. 
p. 381... broadcasting live video feed into his 
bedroom ... HongDao Nguyen, "Man gets six 
months in jail for spying on housemates by 
using hidden cameras," Mercury News, 13 
December 2003. 
p. 381... Vasile caught his wife's infidelity this 
way... Marie Szaniszlo, "Spyware finds out 
who's naughty or nice," Boston Herald, 14 
December 2003. 
p. 385 ... unexcused absences, detentions, 
missed assignments, and so forth... Maya Sur-
yaraman, "School Software Helps Parents 
Keep Tabs on Teens," Mercury News, 27 Octo-
ber 2003. 
p. 385 ... might be tempted to use the informa-
tion for commercial purposes... Robert 
Tomsho, "How's Your Kid Doing in School? 
Check Online," Wall Street Journal, 4 June 
2002. 
p. 386 ... see a man pinpointing your child's 
location... Elisa Batista, "A Kiddie GPS for 
the Masses?" Wired, 12 October 2002, see 
also http ://wired.com/news/business/ 
o, 1367,5573 i,oo.html. 
p. 386 ... contained on the chip from up to four 
feet away... Robert Trigaux, "In Riskier 
World, Personal Security Trumps Personal Pri-
vacy, "St. Petersburg Times, 24 February 2002, 
see also http://pqasb.pqarchiver.com/ 
sptimes/index.html?ts= 1070318730. 
412 

* Notes * 
p. 387 ... disclosure of identifying information 
for good cause... For more information on 
the Uniform Adoption Act, see http://www. 
webcom.com/kmc/adoption/law/uaa/. 
p. 390... seven years of harassment and a 
death threat... "N.Y. Man Admits Net Death 
Threat," Rapid City Journal, 3 November 2003. 
p. 390... e-mail addresses of female high 
school and college students... "Cyber-Extor-
tion Results in Prison Sentence," Net4TV.c0m, 
8 October 2000, see http://www.net4tv.com/ 
voice/story.cfm?storyid=293i. 
Chapter 13: The Future of Privacy 
p. 396 ... somebody is looking over your shoul-
der to see what you're reading... David Gram, 
"Vt. Bookseller purges files to avoid potential 
'Patriot Act' searches," AP 20 February 2003, 
see http ://www.becomethemedia.com/news/ 
2003/BearPondBooks purges files.htm. 
p. 396 ... a company's ability to protect their 
personal data 
"Theft concerns have some 
consumers saying 'Bah Humbug' this holiday 
season," vontu.com, see http://www.vontu. 
com/newsevents/press_release_ 111903.html. 
p. 397 . ..to seek answers for its privacy-
related questions... "Get Ready for the Pri-
vacy Backlash," Darwin Magazine, 1 August 
2001. 
p. 398 ... largest public company in terms of 
protecting employee privacy... "Report: IBM 
Ranks Best in Employee Privacy," Business and 
Legal Reports, October 2003. 
413 


Resources 
Business and Consumer 
Groups 
Better Business Bureau 
4200 Wilson Blvd., Suite 800 
Arlington, VA 22203-1838 
Phone: 703-276-0100 
Fax: 703-525-8277 
www.bbb.org 
Consumer Action 
www.consumer-action.org 
Consumer Federation of 
America 
1424 16th Street NW, 
Suite 604 
Washington, DC 20036 
www.consumerfed.org 
Direct Marketing Association 
Mail Preference Service 
To remove your name from 
junk mail lists: 
P.O. Box 632 
Carmel, NY 10512 
www.dmaconsumers.org/ 
consumerassistance.html 
www.dmaconsumers.org/ 
privacy.html 
Direct Marketing Association 
Telephone Preference Service 
To remove your name from 
telemarketing phone lists: 
P.O. Box 1559 
Carmel, NY 10512 
www.dmaconsumers.org/ 
consumerassistance.html 
www.dmaconsumers.org/ 
privacy.html 
SafeShopping.org 
www.safeshopping.org 
ShopTheNet.org 
www.shopthenet.org 
Experian 
P.O. Box 2002 
Allen, TX 75013 
Phone: 888-397-3742 
www.experian.com 
Trans Union 
P.O. Box 1000 
Chester, PA 19022 
Phone: 1-800-888-4213 
www.transunion.com 
Government Agencies 
Department of Motor Vehicles 
Online 
www.dmv.org 
Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC) 
445 12th Street SW 
Washington, DC 20554 
Phone: 1-888-CALL-FCC 
(1-888-225-5322) 
Fax: 1-866-418-0232 
E-mail: fccinfo@fcc.gov 
www.fcc.gov 
Federal Election Commission 
999 E Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20463 
Phone: 1-800-424-9530 
www.fec.gov 
Federal Trade Commission 
600 Pennsylvania Avenue, 
NW 
Washington, DC 20580 
www.ftc.gov 
Food and Drug Administra-
tion 
www.fda.gov/oc/buyonline 
Internet Fraud Complaint 
Center (IFCC) 
www.ifccfbi.gov 
National Personal Records 
Center 
Civilian Personal Records 
111 Winnebago Street 
St. Louis, MO 63118 
National Personal Records 
Center 
Military Personal Records 
9700 Page Avenue 
St. Louis, MO 63132-5100 
www.archives.gov/ 
facilities/mo/st_louis.html 
Office of Foreign Assets Con-
trol (OFAC) 
U.S. Department of the Trea-
sury 
Treasury Annex 
1500 Pennsylvania Avenue, 
NW 
Washington, DC 20220 
Compliance hotline: (202) 
622-2490 
www.ustreas.gov/offices/ 
eotffc/ofac/ 
Social Security Administra-
tion (SSA) 
Office of Public Inquiries 
Windsor Park Building 
6401 Security Blvd. 
Baltimore, MD 21235 
www.ssa.gov 
Transportation Security 
Administration (TSA) 
U.S. Department of Trans-
portation 
Office of Civil Rights 
Mail Stop: TSA-6 
400 7th Street, SW 
Washington, D.C. 20590 
For security concerns, phone: 
866-289-9673 
E-mail: TSA-ContactCenter@ 
dhs.gov 
www.tsa.gov/public/index.jsp 
United States Citizenship and 
Immigration Services (USCIS) 
425 I Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20536 
www.uscis.gov 
Credit Bureaus 
Equifax 
P.O. Box 740241 
Atlanta, GA 30374 
Phone: 1-800-685-1111 
www.equifax.com 
415 

* Resources f 
United States Department for 
Health and Human Services 
Office for Civil Rights 
200 Independence Avenue, 
SW 
Washington, DC 20201 
Phone: 202-619-0257 
www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa/ 
United States Department of 
Passport Service 
111 19th Street, NW, 
Suite 500 
Washington, DC 20036 
www.travel.state.gov/ 
passport_services.htm 
United States Government 
Printing Office 
732 N. Capitol Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20401 
www.gpoaccess.gov 
United States Postal Service 
Privacy Office 
475 Lenfant Plaza, SW, Room 
10407 
Washington, DC 20260-2200 
Phone: 1-800-ASK-USPS 
www.usps.com 
Health And Medical 
Medical Information Bureau 
P.O. Box 105 
Essex Station 
Boston, MA 02112 
Phone: 617-426-3660 
Fax: 781-461-2453 
E-mail: disclosure@mib.com 
www.mib.com 
Health Privacy Project 
1120 19th Street, NW, 8th 
Floor 
Washington, DC 20036 
Phone: 202-721-5632 
Fax: 202-530-0128 
E-mail: info@healthprivacy. 
org 
www.healthprivacy.org 
Privacy Advocacy Groups-
General 
American Civil Liberties 
Union (ACLU) 
125 Broad Street, 18th Floor 
New York, NY 10004 
www.aclu.org 
Identity Theft Resource Center 
P.O. Box 26833 
San Diego, CA 92196 
Phone: 858-693-7935 
E-mail: itrc@idtheftcenter. 
org 
www.idtheftcenter.org 
Privacilla 
E-mail: comments@ 
privacilla.org 
www.privacilla.org 
Privacy International 
1718 Connecticut Ave, NW 
Suite 200 
Washington, DC 20009 u S A 
Phone: 202-483-1217 
Fax: 202-483-1248 
www.privacyinternational.org 
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse 
3100 - 5th Ave., Suite B 
San Diego, CA 92103 
Phone: (619) 298-3396 
Fax: (619) 298-5681 
www.privacyrights.org 
PrivacyRightsNow.com 
www.privacyrightsnow.com 
Privacy Advocacy Groups-
Computers And The Internet 
Americans for Computer Pri-
vacy (ACP) 
E-mail: webmaster@ 
computerprivacy.org 
www.computerprivacy.org 
Center for Democracy and 
Technology (CDT) 
1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100 
Washington, DC 20006 
Phone: 202-637-9800 
Fax: 202-637-0968 
E-mail: feedback@cdt.org 
www.cdt.org 
ConsumerPrivacyGuide.org 
www.consumerprivacy guide, 
org 
Electronic Frontier Founda-
tion (EFF) 
454 Shotwell Street 
San Francisco, CA 94110 
Phone: 415-436-9333 
Fax: 415-436-9993 
E-mail: eff@eff.org 
www.eff.org 
416 
Electronic Privacy Informa-
tion Center 
1718 Connecticut Ave. NW 
Suite 200 
Washington, DC 20009 
E-mail: info@epic.org 
www.epic.org 
GetNetWise 
E-mail: webmaster@ 
getnetwise.org 
www.privacy.getnetwise.org 
Online Privacy Alliance 
Hogan and Hartson 
555 13th Street NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
Phone: 202-637-5600 
E-mail: webmaster@ 
privacyalliance.org 
www.privacyalliance.org 
Privacy.net 
E-mail: web@consumer.net 
www.privacy.net 
TRUSTe 
685 Market Street, Suite 560 
San Francisco, CA 94105 
Phone: 415-618-3400 
Fax: 415-618-3420 
www.truste.org 
Workplace And Management 
Groups 
American Management Asso-
ciation 
1601 Broadway 
New York, NY 10019 
Phone 212-586-8100 
Fax: 212-903-8168 
E-mail: customerservice@ 
amanet.org 
www.amanet.org 
ePolicy Institute 
2300 Walhaven Ct., Suite 
200A 
Columbus, OH 43220 
Phone: 1-800-292-7332 
Fax: 614-451-8726 
E-mail: experts@ 
epolicyinstitute.com 
www.epolicyinstitute.com 
Society for Human Resource 
Management 
1800 Duke Street 
Alexandria, VA 22314 
Phone: 1-800-283-
SHRM(7476) 
Fax: 703-535-6490 
www.shrm.org 

Index 
Abacus, 10, 171 
About Checking program, 
124 
Accurint, 20 
ACLU Workplace Rights 
Project, 257 
Acme Rental Car, 349 
ActiveX, 184, 186 
Acxiom Corp., 7-8, 138, 139, 
239, 240, 336, 397 
Addresses.com, 372 
Adidas, 287 
adoption, 386-87 
ADP Screening and Selection 
Services, 259 
AdSubtract, 189 
adverse-action notice, 
221-22, 227 
ADVO, 243 
adware, 196-98, 199, 210 
airline travel, 326, 332-38 
passenger lists, 14, 329 
AirMagnet, 183 
AltaVista, 371, 377 
Amazon.com, 172, 176, 198 
America Online (AOL), 62, 
172, 176, 188, 198, 199, 
200, 210, 281 
American Association of 
Collegiate Registrars and 
Admissions Officers, 
362, 363 
American Bankers 
Association (ABA), 118 
American Civil Liberties 
Union (ACLU), 261, 284, 
306, 328, 332, 335, 342 
American Express, 103, 107 
American Family Publishers, 
242 
American Management 
Association (AMA), 269, 
271, 275, 276, 278 
American Student Lists, 9 
Americans with Disabilities 
Act (ADA), 262, 270, 
309, 318 
anonymizers, 177, 178 
answering machines, 254 
antispyware software, 129, 
157- 163 
antivirus software, 129, 163, 
181, 184, 197, 213, 215, 
396 
AnyWho.com, 245, 372 
Apprentice, The, ix 
arrest records, 42-43 
ATM cards 
cancelling, 72 
destroying, 120 
drawbacks of, 101-2 
fake, 100-101, 117 
limiting liability on, 
118-21 
theft or loss of, 114, 130, 
132-33 
unauthorized charges on, 
74,117-23,132-33 
use of, 8, 101-2 
ATM machines 
entering passwords and 
PINs at, 59 
rigged, 100-101, 120, 
121-22 
AT&T, 269 
attendance-tracking tools, 
287-88 
attorneys 
directories of, 374 
use of public records by, 
20-21 
use of social security 
number, 27 
auctions, 164-65, 168 
audio surveillance, 286, 340, 
388, 393 
equipment for, 381-83 
Aureate, 197 
Australia, privacy laws in, 14 
auto insurers, 78-79, 311, 353 
Automatic Number 
Identification (ANI), 
147-48 
baby monitors, 230, 382 
background checks 
arrest records and, 42-43 
for dating, 357, 393 
for home employees, 
383-85 
information collected in, 
261-62 
by landlords, 219-21 
problems with, 220-21 
by prospective employers, 
259-64, 292, 318, 388 
bank accounts 
closing unauthorized 
accounts, 72 
protecting, 60-61 
Bank of America, 62 
bankruptcies, 46-47, 238 
listed in credit report, 79, 
80, 81, 219 
prospective employers 
and, 263 
bathroom use, monitoring of, 
287, 292, 382 
BBBonline, 160 
BearShare, 186 
Better Business Bureau, 154 
bigfoot.com, 372 
Bill of Rights, U.S., 3, 5 
bills, online payment of, 102, 
126-29 
biométrie scans, 231-32, 
287-88, 334 
birth certificate, 36-37, 238 
blogs, 203, 204-5, 2°7> 2°9 
Bluetooth, 339, 340 
body scanners, 333-34 
bookstores, 329, 357-59, 366, 
396 
Bowers v. Hardwick, 6 
Boyer, Amy Lynn, 19 
brain-monitoring devices, 333 
Brandeis, Louis, 4-5, 9 
Brickstream, 146, 147 
Browser Helper Objects 
(BHOs), 193-94 
Brucia, Carlie, xii 
Buckley Amendment. See 
Family Educational 
Rights and Privacy Act 
(FERPA) 
Bugnosis, 189 
bulletin boards, 203, 204, 
207,211,377 
Bureau of Citizenship and 
Immigration Services 
(BCIS), 40 
Burlington Northern Santa 
Fe Railway, 271 
417 

• Index • 
Bush, George W., 328, 364 
business associations, 238 
Cable Communications Policy 
Act, 232 
cable modems, 179, 214, 233 
cache, 173, 208 
clearing, 176, 178, 215 
Caller ID, 230-31, 254, 373 
camera phones. See cell 
phones 
Can-Spam Act of 2004, 12, 
201 
Canada, privacy laws in, 14 
car tracking, 326-27, 349-50 
CareerBuilder.com, 272 
Carnivore, 11, 327, 331 
cashier's check, Internet 
purchases with, 162, 165 
catalogs, 139, 242, 243 
cell phones 
with cameras, 6, 327, 
343-45, 381 
Do Not Call Registry and, 
252, 254 
eavesdropping equipment, 
383 
fraud, 340-42 
privacy and, 15, 326, 327, 
338-42 
ringless features, 382-83 
tracking with, 346-48, 366 
use at work, 291 
census records, 105, 138, 
238 
Center for Democracy and 
Technology, 189 
charitable organizations, 139, 
140, 253 
Charter Pacific, 105 
chat rooms, 199, 203, 204, 
207, 209, 211, 298, 300, 
318, 373-74, 376-77, 
389-90 
checks and checking 
accounts 
discarding, 236 
protecting, 125-26 
social security number on, 
164 
unauthorized use of, 
74-75, 123-26 
written for medical bills, 
298, 316 
Chevron, 275 
ChexSystems, 124, 126 
children 
medical records of, 315 
monitoring, 385-86 
protecting from Internet 
threats, 207-9, 21&> 379 
school records of, 298 
Children's Online privacy 
Protection Act (COPPA), 
207-8 
ChoicePoint, 20, 24, 139, 140, 
220, 259, 378 
Citibank, 103, 107, 396, 397 
citizenship documents, 39-40 
CitySearch, 360 
civilian records, 41 
Classmates.com, 374 
Clinton, Bill, 271 
co-ops, 223, 225, 226-27 
collection agencies, 125, 316, 
321 
Comcast, 232-33 
Communications Assistance 
for Law Enforcement 
Act (CALEA), 339 
Computer Assisted Passenger 
Prescreening System 
(CAPPS II), 334-36, 365 
computer forensic specialists, 
281 
computer hackers, 130, 155, 
156-57, 178-87, 206, 
210, 385 
computers, 169-216. See also 
e-mail; Internet 
clean sweep of, 214 
data recovery on, 380 
high-speed or broadband 
connections, 179, 198 
operating platforms, 198 
public, 191, 212, 214-15 
scanning, 197 
security of, 129 
threats to, 171, 179-87 
Wi-Fi connections, 179, 
182-83, 215 
workplace monitoring of, 
257-58, 275, 276, 
282-83, 379-80 
ComScore Media Metrix, 281 
Constitution, U.S., 3, 5 
consumer surveys, 20,105, 
138,139,166,297,298, 
299, 322, 324, 364, 
396-97 
contractors, 375 
cookies, 152, 171, 173-74, 
188, 208 
deleting, 215 
disabling, 128, 176, 178, 
189, 213 
cordless telephones, 230, 255 
coroners, 309 
coupons, 242, 243, 298, 299, 
322 
court records, 43-44, 221, 
266, 309, 322, 364-66, 
384 
craigslist.org, 274 
credit bureaus, 56, 239, 317 
alerting, 68-69 
contacting, 98, 241 
credit headers and, 90-91 
death certificate sent to, 39 
free credit reports from, 
12, 65, 83-84 
information sources of, 
81-84 
police report sent to, 70 
purpose of, 77, 88-89 
restrictions on, 65 
use of public records by, 
20 
credit card fraud, 7, 102, 
114-16 
social security number 
and, 28 
credit card receipts, 66 
discarding, 236 
number truncation on, 12, 
58-59, 65 
shredding, 58-59 
signature capture devices 
and, 147 
theft of, 102, 120 
credit card registration 
services, 116 
credit cards and numbers 
cancelling, 72 
charging medical bills on, 
298, 316 
destroying, 120 
drawbacks of, 101-2 
identity theft protection 
for, 396, 397 
limiting number of, 61, 63 
online transactions, 129, 
162-63, !64~65, 167, 
180 
pre-approved, 58, 88-89, 
90, 92, 114, 237, 241 
protecting, 60-61, 274, 399 
scams, 121-22, 198 
separating work from 
personal expenses, 290 
theft or loss of, 52, 54, 66, 
101, 114-16, 130, 
132-33, 179-80, 183, 
192 
418 

• Index • 
unauthorized charges on, 
72, 74, 116, 132-33, 162 
use of, 8, 15, 101, 116 
credit headers, 88, 90-91 
credit history, length of, 87 
Credit Reporting Industry, 85 
credit reports 
access to, 88-94, 219> 3&4 
bankruptcies and, 46, 219 
bounced checks and, 
123-24 
contents of, 79-81, 219 
correcting errors in, 97-99 
discrepancies and 
inaccuracies in, 82-83, 
97, 220-21, 255, 338 
disputes noted in, 80, 
98-99 
fraud alerts on, 65, 68-69 
importance of, 76-77, 
78-79 
laws concerning, 84-85 
medical information in, 
298, 316-17, 321 
mortgages and, 222-23 
obtaining, 12, 29, 56, 65, 
83-84 
personal information in, 
77 
prospective employer's 
viewing of, 259, 264-66, 
318 
reducing access to, 91-94 
reviewing, 29-30, 69-70, 
75,96,99, 121, 167, 226, 
266 
time limitations in, 80-81 
viewers of, 77 
credit requests and inquiries, 
87,96 
credit scams, 93-94 
credit score, 77, 99 
factors determining, 86-87 
insurers' use of, 78-79 
credit unions, 29 
Crimes Against Children 
Research Center, 207 
criminal records, 327, 357, 
364-66 
background checks for, 
260, 264, 266-68 
on contract workers and 
vendors, 267 
expunging errors from, 
365-66 
identity theft and, 73, 74, 
78 
listed in credit report, 79,81 
crisscross directories, 244-45 
Culpepper, George, 22 
Cummings, Philip, 95 
Customer Information 
Protection Survey, 
396-97 
Cyber Sentinel 3.0, 282 
CYBERsitter, 209 
cyber slacking, 282 
cybertracking, 282-83 
data aggregators, 20-21, 
139-40, 397 
arrest records and, 42-43 
direct marketers' use of, 
239 
drivers' personal 
information and, 31-32 
government and, 24 
individual profiling vs., 
161 
information sold to, 137 
Internet, 175 
medical information, 
297-98, 299, 308 
prospective employer's use 
of, 259 
travel data and, 335-36, 
337 
uses of, 7-9 
data recovery, 380 
Database America 
Compilation 
Department, 240 
dating, online, 327, 355-57, 
366, 373-74, 393 
DD 214 form, 40-41 
death certificate, 38-39 
debit cards 
cancelling, 72 
destroying, 120 
drawbacks of, 101-2 
Internet purchases with, 
162 
limiting liability on, 
118-21 
theft or loss of, 114, 130, 
132-33 
unauthorized charges on, 
74,117-23, 132-33 
use of, 8, 101 
debts, outstanding, 81, 87 
Department of Health and 
Human Services, 302, 
304-5 
Department of Homeland 
Security (DHS), 40, 334 
Dictionary attacks, 200 
digital video recorders 
(DVRs), 233 
Diners Club, 116 
direct marketing, 199. See 
also marketing; 
telemarketing 
financial service 
arrangements with, 108 
information-gathering 
methods, 237-39 
list cleaners for, 245 
opting out of, 92 
Direct Marketing 
Association, 163, 
237-38, 239-40, 255 
discount cards. See loyalty 
cards 
divorce certificate, 37-38, 
238 
DNA test kits, 382 
Do Not Call Registry, 12, 
249-54, 255, 395 
doctors. See health-care 
providers 
Docusearch, 19 
domestic abuse victims, 
social security numbers 
of, 28 
Donnelley Marketing, 239, 
241 
DoubleClick, 10, 171, 188 
Douglas, William, 5, 9 
Dow Chemical, 276 
driver's license and record 
checking, 33-34, 164 
direct marketers' use of, 
238 
information contained on, 
31-32 
loss of, 34 
protecting, 33-34, 52, 54, 
399 
social security number on, 
33,57 
Driver's Privacy Protection 
Act of 1994, 31-33 
driving record, 259 
Drug Enforcement 
Administration (DEA), 
140-41 
drug testing, 258, 259, 264, 
268-69, 291, 318 
drugstore.com, 318 
DSL connections, 179, 214 
e-mail 
attachments, 185, 208, 380 
deleting, 213, 281 
419 

• Index • 
e-mail (cont.) 
from doctor, 313 
encrypting, 185, 210, 213, 
216, 291 
HTML-enabled, 185, 
187-88, 189 
law enforcement access to, 
209-10, 331-32 
monitoring, 11 
privacy of, 205-10, 216, 257 
sending, 202-3 
spam, 12, 15, 114, 171, 
198-203, 216, 361, 396 
spam filters, 200 
spyware and, 191, 203, 
280-81 
Web-based, 212-13, 
280-81 
at workplace, 206, 275-81, 
290-92 
e-mail addresses 
requests for, 142 
sale of, 199 
using multiple, 200-202, 
211-12, 357 
E-Z Pass, 15, 327, 350-52, 
366 
Earthlink, 198, 200, 201, 396 
eBay, 62, 100, 127, 153, 158 
eBlaster, 196, 280 
educational institutions, use 
of social security 
information by, 29, 363 
Electronic Communications 
Privacy Act (ECPA), 209, 
230, 276, 284 
Electronic Freedom 
Foundation, 233 
Electronic Fund Transfer Act 
(EFTA), 129 
Electronic Serial Number 
and Mobile 
Identification Number 
(ESN/MIN), 
341 
electronic toll collection 
systems, 15, 327, 350-52 
electronic transactions, 8 
Eli Lilly & Co., 266-67, 3 1 2 
Employee Polygraph 
Protection Act, 262 
Employer Identification 
Number (EIN), 94 
employers 
access to medical 
information, 308-9, 322 
cybertracking by, 282-83, 
377, 379 
health plans provided by, 
298, 307-8, 317-18 
monitoring methods of, 
257-92, 397-98, 399 
off-duty conduct 
monitored by, 288-89, 
292 
searches conducted by, 
286-87 
tests given by, 268-72 
use of background checks 
by, 259-64, 266-68, 292, 
318, 383-85 
use of credit reports by, 
78-79, 92, 258, 259, 
264-66 
use of public records by, 
21 
use of social security 
information by, 29 
encryption software, 182-83, 
185, 210, 213, 216, 291, 
340 
enemy combatants, 13 
Enron, 260 
ePolicy Institute, 276 
Equal Employment 
Opportunity 
Commission (EEOC), 
271 
Equifax, 56, 69, 82, 83, 239, 
241, 245, 317, 397 
escrow services, 151, 165 
Europe 
privacy laws in, 13-14 
RFID technology in, 150 
Evans, David, Paying with 
Plastic, 101 
event data recorders, 
352-53 
Expédia, 360 
Experian, 56, 69, 82, 83, 239, 
241,317 
Exxon, 269 
Fair and Accurate Credit 
Transaction Act of 2003, 
12, 65, 68, 84, 85 
Fair Credit Billing Act 
(FCBA), 129 
Fair Credit Reporting Act 
(FCRA), 24, 47, 85, 
88-89, 9°, 94, 97-98, 
114, 163, 221, 227, 
265-66, 308 
Fair Debt Collection Practices 
Act (FDCPA), 125 
Fair Isaac, 86 
Family Educational Rights 
and Privacy Act 
(FERPA), 315, 361-62 
family searches, 376 
FastTrack, 350 
faxes, junk, 246-48, 255 
FBI file, 25 
FDIC-insured banks, 128 
Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC), 248, 
346, 347 
Do Not Call Registry and, 
250, 251 
junk faxes and, 247 
Federal Election 
Commission, 42 
Federal Express, 269 
Federal Trade Commission 
(FTC), 10, 53, 251, 312, 
341 
reporting spam to, 201 
reporting theft to, 70-72 
Federal Wiretapping Act of 
1968, 284, 285, 286 
feedback profile, vendor, 165 
Fernandez, Jose Sison, 38 
Fidelity Information, 220 
file-sharing programs, 186, 
192 
filtering software, 209 
finance companies, loans 
from, 87 
financial information, 
100-133. See also 
specific topics 
discarding, 131-32, 236 
inventorying, 130-31 
laws protecting privacy of, 
105-8 
medical bills, 298, 316 
online checking of, 215, 
379 
overseas processing of, 
137 
sharing of, 102-5 
taking control of, 130-32, 
133 
financial institutions and 
conglomerates 
affiliated companies, 107 
bounced checks and, 
123-24 
joint marketers or service 
providers, 108 
laws concerning, 105-7 
legal definitions of, 106 
mergers and acquisitions 
of, 103-4 
420 

• Index • 
online banks, 127-28 
personal information 
shared by, 102-5, 132, 
223 
privacy policies and opt-
out notices, 92-93, 106, 
107, 109-13, 128, 132, 
397 
reporting fraud to, 119, 
120-21 
third parties, 107, 109, 132, 
223, 316 
use of social security 
information by, 29 
use of social security 
number, 27 
Finger Gateway technology, 
373 
firewalls, 129, 184, 194, 202, 
213 
Fleet Mortgage, 102-3 
Ford Motor Company, 353 
foreclosures, 46 
Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Act of 1978, 
329-30 
Foreign Intelligence 
Surveillance Court of 
Review, U.S., 12 
Freedom of Information Act 
of 1966, 22-23, 25-26, 39 
freeware, 196-97 
Friendster.com, 356 
Frost & Sullivan, 349 
Fuller, Stephanie, 229 
funeral directors, 309 
Galileo reservation system, 
336 
garbage, 235-36, 237 
Garner, Tyron, 235 
Gartner Group, 339 
Gates, Bill, 199, 201, 281 
genealogy searches, 376 
General Motors, 14, 353 
Genetic Nondiscrimination 
Act of 2003, 321 
genetic testing, 259, 264, 
271-72, 321 
Geocities, 10 
Georgetown Health Privacy 
Report, 307 
Germek, Susan, 164 
giveaways, 202, 242 
GlaxoSmithKline, 287 
Global Positioning Systems 
(GPS), 288, 327, 345, 
348, 381-82, 386 
Goldman Sachs, 287 
Google, 190, 357, 368, 371, 
373, 374, 377 
government 
access to credit reports, 
89-90 
access to electronic toll 
collection methods, 351 
access to location 
information, 347-48 
data aggregators and, 140 
information-gathering and, 
7, 25, 329-32 
use of driving records, 
32-33 
use of public records by, 
21 
use of social security 
number, 27 
Government Printing Office, 
U.S., 25 
government-related 
documents, 39-44 
arrest records, 42-43 
citizenship/immigration 
documents, 39-40 
civilian records, 41 
court and inmate records, 
43-44, 221, 266, 309, 
322,364-65 
jury records, 40 
military records, 40-41 
voting records, 41-42 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
(GLB), 91, 105-6, 109, 
113, 114, 316, 321 
Greenwood, Billy, 235 
Greenwood v. California, 
235-36 
Grenawalt, Edward S., 
389-90 
Griswold v. Connecticut, 5 
Grokster, 186, 197 
Guidescope, 189 
hackers. See computer 
hackers 
Haines & Company, 245 
handwriting analysis, 259 
Harvard Book Store, 358 
health-care clearinghouses, 
311,323 
health-care providers 
access to medical records, 
307, 323 
confidential 
communications, 304, 
312-13, 320-21 
directories of, 374 
privacy notices, 301-2, 
312-13, 318, 320, 322 
Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA), 109, 295-96 
everyday applications of, 
312-24 
kinks in, 295-96 
protections under, 
298-305, 319-20 
health plans 
access to medical records, 
307-8, 318, 323 
confidential 
communications, 304 
marketing and, 303 
screening-out procedures, 
140 
health screenings, 298, 299, 
309, 322, 324 
Hess, Marcus, 178-79 
hijackers, 194-95 
home intercoms, 230 
Home Shopping Network 
(HSN), 360 
Hoover,}. Edgar, 23 
Hoovers, 375 
hospitals, 305, 313-14, 323 
Hotbot, 190 
Hotels.com, 360 
Hotjobs, 272 
Hotmail, 207, 213, 280 
housing-court cases, 221 
human biochips, 354, 386 
hygiene performance, 287 
I-Pass, 351 
IBM, 269, 291, 398 
identity theft, 7, 51-75 
affidavit, 70-71, 72 
auctions and, 164 
bankruptcies and, 47 
birth certificate and, 36 
career sites and, 273 
costs of, 53 
credit headers and, 91 
credit reports and, 77, 
95-97 
criminal records and, 73, 
74,78 
death certificate and, 39 
Do Not Call Registry and, 
250 
driver's license and, 34 
garbage and, 235-36, 237 
housing rentals and, 221 
insurance plans, 67, 71 
421 

• Index • 
identity theft (cont.) 
Internet and, 137, 163, 167 
knowledge of, 67-68 
laws concerning, 12, 59, 
64-66, 395 
long-term consequences of, 
68, 73-75 
online dating and, 327, 
355-57 
online payments and, 127 
organizing records on, 71, 
75 
passport and, 35 
phishing and, 61-62, 129, 
211-12 
protecting against, 53-64, 
114,121,396,397,399 
robbery and, 56, 57, 66, 
102 
scams, 59-60, 61-63 
social security number 
and, 17-18, 27, 28 
statistics on, xii, 53 
student records and, 363 
terrorism and, 336 
victim's course of action, 
66-73 
Identity Theft and 
Assumption Deterrence 
Act, 65 
IDzap Idsecure, 177 
IMG tags, 189 
IMI Data Search, Inc., 43 
immigration documents, 
39-40 
Impasse, 185 
in-store cameras, 146-47, 168 
individual profiling, 161, 
175-76 
information brokers, 90-91 
information-gathering 
Internet and, 170-78, 199, 
207, 209 
legitimate uses for, 7, 21 
marketing and, 7-8, 20, 24, 
104, 136-59, 158-59, 
166, 168, 237-39 
InfoSpace.com, 245-46, 372, 
373 
inmate records, 44 
instant messaging (IM), 208, 
210, 281-82, 292 
insurance policies 
auto, 78-79, 311, 353 
health, 140, 303, 304, 
307-8, 318, 323 
homeowner's, 120 
life, 311, 318 
use of social security 
number, 27 
interactive TV, 233 
Internal Revenue Service 
(1RS), 21, 62, 73 
data aggregators used by, 
24 
International Soundex 
Reunion Registry 
(ISRR), 387 
Internet, 169-216. See also 
computers; e-mail 
ads, 171, 173-74, 175 
adware, 196-98, 199, 210 
antispyware software, 129, 
157, 163 
antivirus software, 129, 
163, 181, 184, 197, 213, 
215 
background checks over, 
219 
bulletin boards, 203, 204, 
207, 211, 377 
cache, 173, 176, 178, 208, 
215 
chat rooms, 199, 203, 204, 
207, 209, 211, 298, 300, 
3 l 8 , 373-74, 376-77, 
389-90 
convenience of, 170 
cookies, 128, 152, 171, 
173-74, J7 6, 178, 188, 
189, 208, 213, 215 
credit card number theft 
over, 101 
credit card scams over, 122 
credit information 
obtained over, 77 
drawbacks of, 170 
encryption software, 185, 
213, 216 
file-sharing programs, 
186 
filtering software, 209 
firewalls, 129, 184, 194, 
202, 213 
fraud over, 61-63, 129 
health Web sites, 300, 318, 
322, 324 
history, 177, 215 
information-gathering 
over, 104, 171-78 
instant messaging (IM), 
208, 210, 281-82 
keystroke-logging 
programs, 130, 191, 192, 
195-96, 258, 282-83, 
379, 380 
law enforcement 
monitoring of, 11, 327, 
331 
listservs, 203, 204 
logging off, 212, 214 
newsgroups, 199, 318, 
376-77 
online dating, 327, 355-57 
online directories, 372 
online job search sites, 
272-74, 356 
online payments over, 102, 
126-29 
online shopping over, 135, 
151-68, 200 
password protection over, 
128 
privacy and, 6, 15 
privacy policies of Web 
sites, 10, 128, 196-97, 
200, 202, 209, 274, 318 
protecting children on, 
207-9 
public areas on, 199, 203-5 
real estate records on, 
225-26, 375 
remote access programs, 
190, 380 
scams, 211-12 
search engines, 371-72 
searches over, 370-77 
site legitimacy, 153-54, 
162, 167, 168 
site security, 128, 155-56, 
162, 168, 185 
spamming over, 12, 15, 
114, 171, 188, 189-91, 
198-203, 216, 361, 396 
spiders, 189-91, 199, 203, 
210 
spoof sites, 129 
spyware, 129, 157, 163, 
174-75, 187, 191-96, 
199, 203, 210, 
280-81 
sweepstakes and 
giveaways over, 202 
Trojan horse programs, 
129, 157, 183-87, 189, 
192, 195, 197, 211 
viruses, 171, 180-87, !88, 
210, 211 
Web browsers, 172-74, 
177-78, 213 
web bugs, 174, 187-89, 
199, 203 
Web logs (blogs), 203, 
204-5, 2°7, 2°9 
422 

• Index t 
workplace use of, 258, 275, 
276, 292 
worms, 181-87, 2 1 2 
Internet Archive, 190 
Internet Protocol (IP) 
address, 173 
concealing, 177 
Internet Service Providers 
(ISPs), 170, 172, 178 
Carnivore and, 11, 331 
communications 
monitoring by, 277 
e-mail and, 205-6 
information maintained 
by, 199-200 
lawsuits against 
spammers, 201 
parental controls offered, 
209, 396 
privacy policies, 209 
service features, 198, 396 
spam filters, 200 
user agreement, 206-7 
Interstate Stalking Act, 391 
Investigative Consumer 
Reports, 265 
Japan, privacy laws in, 14 
Java, 184, 186 
JavaScript, 174, 184, 186 
Jet Blue, 334-35 
Johnson County Community 
College, 285 
junk faxes, 246-48, 255 
junk mail. See mail; 
spamming 
Junkbusters Corp., 347 
Jupiter Research, 355 
jury records, 40 
Kaiser Permanente, 64 
Kazaa, 186, 197 
King, Rodney, x 
Kinko's, 191 
KnowX, 24, 140, 378 
Kyllo, Danny, 233-34 
Kyllo v. U.S., 234 
Lamo, Adrian, 155 
landlords, 219-21, 392-93 
as peeping toms, 229 
right-to-enter issues, 224 
law enforcement 
access to electronic toll 
collection methods, 
351 
access to location 
information, 347-48 
access to medical records, 
309 
cell phone monitoring by, 
339 
data aggregators and, 140 
high-tech snooping and, 
233-34 
information-gathering and, 
7,25 
reporting identity theft to, 
73 
use of camera cell phones, 
344 
Lawrence and Garner v. 
Texas, 6, 235 
Lawrence Berkeley 
Laboratory, 271 
LendingTree, 360 
Lessig, Lawrence, 201 
Lewinsky, Monica, 357-58 
Lexis-Nexis, 20, 155, 336, 
375 
libraries, Patriot Act and, 
319, 327, 329, 357-59, 
366 
licenses, 238. See also 
driver's license and 
record 
lien searches, 226 
Lifeson, Alex, 42-43 
lifestyle organizations, 139 
Limbaugh, Rush, 306 
Lime Wire, 186 
LinkExchange, 188 
list cleaners, 245 
listservs, 203, 204 
LiveUpdate Pro, 190 
location-based services (LBS), 
347 
locator services, 19, 378-79 
locator technologies, 288 
Lockheed Martin, 269 
loyalty cards, 8, 20, 136, 137, 
139, 143-46, 166, 168, 
299 
Lycos, 371 
macros, 188 
magazine subscriptions, 63, 
140 
mail. See also e-mail 
junk or unsolicited, 
237-48, 255 
medical information in, 299 
redirection of, 73 
shredding, 58-59 
theft of, 58, 123 
vacation hold on, 58 
Mail Preference Service 
(MPS), 239-40, 246, 255 
Maltby, Lewis, 257 
marketing 
financial services and, 108 
information-gathering and, 
7-8, 20, 24, 104, 136-50, 
158-59, 166, 168, 
237-39, 397 
loyalty cards, 143-46 
medical information and, 
303, 309 
personalized, 8-9 
point-of-sale methods, 
141-42, 168 
school alliances, 363-64 
targeted, 347 
web bugs and, 187-89 
marriage certificate, 37, 238, 
357, 392 
Match.com, 355, 360 
Matchmaker.com, 356 
Matrix, 337 
McAfee, 185 
McAffee Clinic, 190 
McDermott, Terri, 74 
McNealy, Scott, 1, 399 
medical examiners, 309 
medical information. See 
also health insurance 
access to, 300-302, 306-11, 
384-85 
employer access to, 258 
in financial records, 109 
limits on use of, 302-3, 
305 
listed in credit report, 81, 
82,92 
overseas data workers and, 
306 
prescriptions, 236, 298, 
316 
privacy issues, 293-324 
protecting, 319-23 
records, 296-97 
Medical Information Bureau 
(MIB), 308, 310, 321 
Medical Marketing Service, 
Inc., 299, 300 
medical profilers, 140, 
299-300 
medical tests, 262-63 
Medicare, 309 
medzilla.com, 274 
Megan's Law, 45 
MemberWorks, 108 
meta tags, 190 
Metrocards, 352, 366 
423 

• Index • 
Metromail Corporation, 8-9 
Microsoft Internet Explorer, 
173, 176, 186 
military records, 40-41, 263 
mixed files, 220-21 
money. See financial 
information; specific 
topics 
money order, Internet 
purchases with, 165 
Monster.com, 272, 273 
Morgan Stanley, 275 
mortgages, 222-23, 255 
closing unauthorized 
accounts, 72 
Mothers Against Drunk 
Driving (MADD), 21 
Motor Vehicles, Department 
of 
driver's license 
information and, 30-34 
information from, 138, 266 
use of social security 
information by, 29 
MSN, 198, 200 
multinational corporations, 
nannies, hiring, 383-85 
nanny cams, 228-29, 255, 
382 
NASA, 333 
National Change of Address, 
242, 243 
National Cyber Security 
Alliance, 192 
National Demographics and 
Lifestyles, 244 
National Research Council, 
232 
National Security Agency, 
338 
nationjobs.com, 274 
NationsBank, 105 
NationsSecurities, 105 
Net Detective, 379 
Net Nanny, 209 
NETObserve, 196 
NETR, 375 
Netscape Navigator, 173, 176, 
186 
Netware International Bank, 
126 
New York Life, 397 
New York Times, The, 269, 
276 
New York University, 363 
New Yorker, The, 370-71 
New Zealand, privacy laws 
in, 14 
newsgroups, 199, 318, 
376-77 
Nissan, 280 
Nokia, 340 
Norton AntiVirus, 190, 197 
NTT DoCoMo, 340 
Office of Foreign Assets 
Control (OFAC), 220 
office romances, 289, 290 
official certificates, 36-39 
birth certificate, 36-37 
death certificate, 38-39 
divorce certificate, 37-38 
marriage certificate, 37 
Olmstead, Roy, 5 
Olmstead v. United States, 5 
OnStar system, 326-27, 
349-50, 366 
opting in, 33, 161, 166, 249 
opting out 
of direct marketing, 92-93, 
114, 240-41 
of hospital directory 
information, 305, 314, 
323 
of pre-approved offers, 
92-93,114,241 
in privacy notices, 92-93, 
106, 107, 109-11, 132 
of telemarketing, 114 
on Web sites, 161, 166, 
202 
organ procurement services, 
309 
Orwell, George, 1984, 394, 
398 
P2P programs, 192, 197 
packet sniffing, 180, 182, 
206, 280 
passports, 34-36 
passwords 
changing, 72 
on credit accounts, 64 
on e-mail, 280, 292 
Internet, 156-57, 167, 179, 
182, 210, 212 
protecting, 59, 128, 129 
Patriot Act of 2001, 11-13, 
24, 234, 326, 327-32, 
339,395-96 
bookstore records and, 
358-59 
credit report access 
provisions in, 89-90 
e-mail and, 209-10 
HIPAAand, 319 
scam using, 63 
student records and, 
362-63 
PayPal, 61-62, 127, 129, 165, 
211 
PC Flank, 187 
pc Anywhere, 190 
Pearson, Harriet, 291, 398 
pen register/trap and trace 
(PR/IT), 331 
penetration profiles, 144 
PeopleFind.com, 378 
permits, 238 
personal identification 
numbers (PINs) 
changing, 72 
protecting, 59, 119 
stealing, 102, 117 
personal information. See 
also specific topics 
computer storage of, 214 
in credit report, 77 
discarding, 131-32 
driver's license and record, 
30-34 
filing and storing, 48-49, 
57, 64, 131, 321-22 
financial institutions' 
knowledge of, 102-14 
government-related 
documents, 39-44 
landlord's storage of, 227 
listed in credit report, 81 
loyalty cards and, 136 
marketing of, 138-41 
medical records and 
information, 293-324 
official certificates, 36-39 
online dating and, 356, 
373-74 
online shopping and, 
152-53, 158-62 
online theft of, 179, 
182-83, 208 
overseas processing of, 137 
passport, 34-36 
property holdings, 44-46 
prospective employer's 
viewing of, 259-68, 
388 
protecting, 17-18, 47-50, 
166 
in public records, 16-50, 
318 
reviewing, 47-49 
RFIDs and, 150 
424 

• Index • 
sale of, 138-41, 166, 207, 
209, 272-73 
sharing, 7, 59, 121, 258, 
272-73 
shredding of, 58-59, 132, 
236, 246 
social security, 26-30 
spyware and, 174-75, x&7> 
191-96 
subpoenaed, 137 
tenant-screening services, 
220, 221-22, 227 
travel data, 336-38, 365 
personalized license plates, 
34 
Personicx, 138 
Pest Patrol, 197 
Peterson, Scott, 348 
Pew Internet Project, 279 
PGP public key encryption, 
185 
pharmacies, 236, 298, 299, 
303, 316 
Philadelphia Housing 
Authority, 286 
phishing, 61-62, 129, 
211-12 
phone books, 238, 244-45 
point-of-sale methods, 
141-42, 168 
police reports, filing, 70, 72, 
73 
political donations, 375-76 
political organizations, 139, 
253 
Pollitt, Katha, 370-71 
polygraph tests, 262 
pop-up ads, 171, 196, 396 
Postal Inspection Service, 73 
Postal Service, U.S., 242, 243, 
245 
pre-employment privacy 
issues, 259-62 
Prisca, Vasile, 381 
privacy. See also specific 
topics 
Constitution and, 3 
credit tips for protecting, 
95-97 
debate about, 2-3 
definitions of, 2 
of e-mail, 205-10 
European laws, 13-14 
in everyday life, 325-66 
financial, 105-8 
future of, 394-99 
of garbage, 235-36 
health issues, 293-324 
in the home, 6, 12, 17-55 
Internet and, 169-216 
law enforcement and, 
233-34 
legislation on, 10, 14, 163 
in leisure-time activities, 
354-61 
new challenges to, 6-9, 15 
personal meanings of, 
1-15 
security concerns vs., 9-13 
September 11 terrorist 
attacks and, 1, 9-13, 145, 
220, 260, 267, 270, 326, 
328, 333, 362 
sexual, 5-6, 234-35 
Supreme Court rulings on, 
5-6 
of television viewing 
habits, 232-33 
video surveillance and, 
146-47 
in the workplace, 256-92 
zones of, 5 
Privacy Act of 1974, 22-23, 
25,40-41 
Privacy Council, 10 
Privacy Foundation, 189 
privacy notices 
health-care provider, 
301-2, 312-13, 318, 320, 
322 
opt-out provisions, 92-93, 
106, 107, 109-11, 132, 
397 
responding to, 111-12 
sent by financial 
institutions, 105-13 
privacy policies, company, 
136-37, 152-61, 165, 
166, 168, 233, 277, 290, 
291, 298, 320, 335, 360 
Web sites, 10, 128, 196-97, 
200, 202, 209, 274, 318 
privacy seals, 160 
private investigators 
employer's hiring of, 287 
hiring, 387-89, 393 
use of public records by, 
20-21, 33, 140 
Privista, 10 
Procter & Gamble, 149 
product warranty cards, 105, 
139, 142-43, 166, 168, 
243-44 
professional associations, 238 
property, privacy issues 
concerning, 219-27, 255 
property holdings, 44-46 
psychological tests, 258, 259, 
264, 270-71 
psychotherapy notes, 305 
public health issues, 145, 150 
Public Health Service Act, 
321 
public records 
access to, 19-22, 49 
arrest records as, 43 
bankruptcies, 46-47 
confidential, 21-22 
credit bureaus' use of, 
81-82 
DD 214 forms as, 41 
defined, 17 
direct marketers' use of, 
238 
errors in, 392-93 
government-related, 
39-44 
information contained in, 
18-19 
Internet sources of, 20-21 
medical information in, 
298 
official certificates, 36-39 
personal documents, 
26-36 
personal information in, 
16-50, 105, 139 
property holdings, 44-46 
real estate, 225-27, 238, 
357» 375 
searching, 37, 39, 266, 357, 
378, 384, 388 
Publisher Clearing House 
Sweepstakes, 242 
pyramid schemes, 166 
radio frequency identification 
chips (RFIDs), 148-50, 
168 
Raytheon Co., 282 
Reader Rabbit program, 
191-92 
real estate records, 225-27, 
238, 357, 375 
references, 263-64, 385, 389 
Rehnquist, William, 9 
release-of-information form, 
384 
Remote Administration Tool 
(RAT), 195 
renting apartments or 
homes, 219-20, 224, 255, 
392-93 
research studies, 298 
425 

• 
Index • 
reverse directories, 244-45, 
372-73 
Right to Financial Privacy 
Act, 163 
Roe v. Wade, 5-6 
Rosenfeld, Seth, 23 
Ryder, Winona, 147 
Safire, William, 328 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 
277-78 
satellite TV, 233 
scams 
ATM and credit card, 
121-22 
career site, 273 
credit, 93-94, 96-97, 99 
identity theft, 59-60, 
61-63 
Internet, 211-12 
shopping, 151-52 
telemarketing, 249-50 
school records, 263, 315, 327, 
384 
school software, 354, 385 
ScreenNow Tenant, 220 
screenshot loggers, 196, 258, 
283, 380 
search engines, 371-72 
Search Systems, 377-78 
Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC), 375 
security alert window, 156 
security concerns, national, 
9-13, 395-96. See also 
terrorism 
Security Software Systems, 
282 
SecuritySpace.com, 187 
Seisint, Inc., 20, 337 
sex offenders, 220 
registry of, 45-46 
sexual harassment cases, 275, 
282, 390 
sexual privacy, 5-6, 234-35 
shareware, 196-97 
shoplifting, 146-47, 148-49 
shopping, 134-68, 396-97, 
399. See also shopping, 
online 
automatic number 
identification systems, 
147-48 
database aggregators and, 
7 
information-gathering and, 
138-50 
laws concerning, 163 
loyalty cards, 143-46, 166, 
168 
for medical products, 323 
monitoring, 246 
point-of-sale purchases, 
141-42, 168 
privacy protection while, 
166-68 
product warranty cards, 
142-43, 166, 168 
radio frequency ID chips, 
148-50, 168 
scams, 151 
signature capture devices, 
147, 168 
video surveillance, 146-47 
shopping, online, 135, 137, 
151-68 
auctions, 164-65, 168 
database aggregators and, 
20 
foreign retailers, 155, 167 
monitoring, 246 
password protection, 
156-57, 167 
paying, 162-63 
privacy policies, 158-62 
privacy protection while, 
166-68 
scams, 151 
site legitimacy, 153-54, 
162, 167, 168 
site security, 128, 155-56, 
162, 168 
shredders, 58-59, 132, 236, 
246 
signature capture devices, 
147, 168 
Silent Runner, 282 
Simple Life, The, ix 
Singapore, 150 
smart cards, 334 
Smart Tag, 351 
SmartMouth, 145 
Smith, Robert Ellis, Ben 
Franklin's Web Site, 4 
Smyth v. Pillsbury, 279 
snarfing, 339, 340 
sneak-and-peek searches, 
329-30 
snoopware. See spyware 
Social Security 
Administration, 27, 30, 
73 
Social Security Disability, 
309 
social security information, 
26-30 
availability of, 19, 65, 392 
career site requests for, 
273, 274 
changing, 27-38 
checking accounts and, 
123 
in credit headers, 91 
on death certificate, 39 
number or card, 27-28 
protecting, 17-18, 28-29, 
33, 49, 52, 56-57, 164, 
399 
school use of, 363 
statement, 28, 30 
uses of, 27, 54-55 
Society for Human Resource 
Management, 272 
Socorro, Edward, 43 
South America, privacy laws 
in, 14 
spamming, 12, 15, 114, 171, 
188, 198-203, 216, 361, 
396 
ignoring, 202 
legislation against, 201 
methods of, 199-200 
protecting against, 
200-203 
spiders and, 189-91 
Spears, Britney, 343 
Spector, 196, 283 
SpectorSoft, 283 
spiders, 189-91, 199, 203, 
210 
Spielberg, Steven, 53 
Spy-Track, 350 
Spycop, 196 
SpyCops.com, 192 
Spy detect, 196 
spyware, 129, 157, 163, 
174-75, 187, 191-96, 
199, 203, 210, 280-81, 
379-80 
adware, 196-98, 199, 210 
Browser Helper Objects 
(BHOs), 193-94 
hijackers, 194-95 
keystroke-logging 
programs, 130, 191, 192, 
195-96, 258, 282-83, 
379, 380 
screenshot loggers, 196, 
258, 283, 380 
users of, 192 
workplace use of, 258 
Spyware Eliminator, 197 
stalking, 370-71, 389-91, 
393 
426 

• Index • 
Stalking Resource Center, 390 
Starr, Kenneth, 357-58 
StartPage Guard, 195 
Steinhardt, Barry, 337 
Stephanie's Law, 229 
Stop & Shop, 145 
Strategy Analytics, 339 
street address directories, 
244-45 
student records, 361-64 
Patriot Act and, 362-63 
Studentjobs.com, 273 
subscription bills, 63 
substance abuse, 321 
subway cards, 327, 352 
Sun Microsystems, 1, 399 
supermarket cards, 143-46 
SupportAbility, 190 
Supreme Court rulings on 
privacy issues, 5-6, 234, 
235-36, 269, 286 
sweepstakes, 20, 202, 242, 
246, 298, 299, 322 
Symantec, 185, 190 
T-i connections, 179 
Target, 270 
tax liens, 87, 219 
tax records, 132 
confidentiality of, 21-22 
Taylor, Anthony, 52-53 
teachers, 375 
Télécharge, 360 
Teledata Communications, 95 
telemarketers, 7, 248-54 
allowed calls from, 252-54 
Caller ID and, 231, 254 
Do Not Call Registry and, 
12, 249-54, 255> 395 
financial service 
arrangements with, 108 
opting out of, 114 
personal information sold 
to, 102-3 
scams, 249-50 
scams of, 122 
telematics, 349 
telephone surveyors, 253 
telephones 
automatic number 
identification, 147-48, 
231 
Caller ID, 230-31, 254, 373 
cordless, 230, 255 
Do Not Call Registry and, 
249-54, 255 
number-blocking on, 148, 
167 
PR/TT searches, 331 
recording conversations, 
343 
workplace monitoring of, 
275, 277, 283-84, 290, 
291 
television viewing habits, 
232-33 
tenant-screening services, 
220, 221-22, 227 
terrorism, measures against, 
1, 12-13, 145' 220> 26°' 
267, 270, 326, 328, 333, 
362. See also Patriot Act 
thermal-imaging devices, 234 
Ticketmaster, 360-61 
tickets to events, 327, 
360-61, 366 
TimeSink/Conducent 
TSADBOT, 197 
tip lines, 285 
Title VII, 270 
TiVo, xv, 233 
Toer Gorup, 54 
Total Information Awareness 
program, 11, 12 
Toys "R" Us, 146 
tracking software, 171-78 
tracking technologies, 
346-54 
Transport Layer Security 
protocol, 185 
Transportation Security 
Administration (TSA), 
333. 335-36 
TransUnion, 56, 69, 82, 83, 
220, 239, 241, 317 
Trend Micro, 187 
Trojan horse programs, 
129, 157, 183-87, 192, 
195 
adware, 197 
scams and, 211-12 
Trojan Scan, 187 
Truebeginnings.com, 356 
TRUSTe, 160 
trusts, property holdings in, 
44-45, 226 
Turner, Ted, 53 
tutors, hiring, 383-85 
Tyco, 260 
Uniform Adoption Act of 
1994, 386-87 
University of Minnesota, 297 
University of Tennessee, 364 
University of Texas at 
Austin, 363 
UPS, 288 
US Bank, 108 
US-VISIT program, 334 
USAJOBA, 273 
Usenet. See newsgroups 
user names, Internet, 157 
utility bills 
closing unauthorized 
accounts, 72 
listed in credit report, 82 
reviewing, 63 
shredding, 58-59 
Val-Pak Coupons, 243 
vehicle registrations, 238 
Verisign seal, 156 
victims' rights, 364 
video cameras, 15, 334, 
342-43, 382 
Video Privacy Protection Act 
(VPPA), 163, 359-60 
video rentals, 327, 359-60 
video surveillance, x, xi, 14, 
327, 342-43, 366, 388, 
393. See also in-store 
cameras 
equipment for, 381-82 
at home, 228-29 
at workplace, 275, 285-86, 
291, 292 
virtual private network 
(VPN), 183 
viruses, 171, 180-87, 2 1° 
macros and, 188 
scams and, 211-12 
Visual Basic scripting, 186 
Vivisimo, 371 
voice mail, 257, 275, 284, 292 
voir dire, 40 
voter registration records, 38, 
41-42, 238 
voyeurism, 229, 345, 368-69, 
370, 393 
Wal-Mart, 149, 150 
warranty cards. See product 
warranty cards 
Warren, Samuel, 4-5 
Web browsers, 172-74, 215 
updating, 177-78, 213 
web bugs, 174, 187-89, 199, 
203 
Web logs (blogs), 203, 204-5, 
207, 209 
Websense, 282 
Web Washer, 189 
Wells Fargo, 62 
West Group, 20 
427 

• Index • 
WhitePages.com, 372, 373 
whowhere.com, 372 
Wi-Fi connections, 179, 
182-83,215 
Wi-Fi Protected Access 
(WPA), 183 
Wind Design, 190 
Windows scripting host, 186 
Winfrey, Oprah, 53, 75 
WinWhatWhere 
Investigator, 283 
Wired Equivalent Privacy 
(WEP), 183 
Wired magazine, 291 
Wireless Communications 
and Public Safety Act of 
1999, 347 
wireless devices, 6, 228-30, 
255, 382. See also 
specific types 
Wireless Telephone 
Protection Act of 1998, 
341 
wiretap surveillance, 12, 284, 
285-86, 291, 330, 349 
Woods, Eldrick "Tiger," 52-53 
workers' compensation 
claims, 262, 287, 309, 
318 
workplace. See also 
employers 
e-mail use at, 206, 257, 
275-81, 290-92 
extreme surveillance at, 
287-88 
Internet use at, 258, 275, 
276, 290-91, 292 
medical privacy in, 304, 
317-18 
office romances in, 289, 290 
privacy issues, 256-92, 
397-98, 399 
protecting privacy in, 
290-91 
searches conducted at, 
286-87 
telephone monitoring in, 
275, 277, 283-84, 290, 
291 
video surveillance in, 
285-86 
violence in, 270 
World Privacy Forum, 272 
WorldCom, 260 
worms, computer, 181-87, 
212 
X10 Wireless Technology, 
228 
Xerox, 276 
Yahoo!, 188, 190, 200, 371, 374 
career sites on, 272 
e-mail accounts with, 207, 
213, 280 
My Yahoo service, 152 
personals, 355 
zip code, requests for, 142 
428 

