KEITH DEVLIN: Introduction to Mathematical Thinking (Winter 2014)
Problem Set Week 5
This problem set focuses in part on material covered in Week 5 (Lecture 7), so I recommend you to watch
the lecture and attempt Assignment 7 before submitting your answers. The remainder of this problem
set is revision material. The deadline for completing (and submitting) the problem set is Monday March
10 at 9:00AM US-PST. Note that you can save your entries as you work through the problems, and can
change them at any time prior to submission, but once you submit your answers no further changes are
possible.
1. Let m, n denote any two natural numbers. Is the following a valid proof that mn is odd iﬀm and
n are odd?
If m, n are odd there are integers p, q such that m = 2p+1, n = 2q+1. Then mn = (2p+1)(2q+1) =
2(2pq + p + q) + 1, so mn is odd. That completes the proof.
2. Take the sentence:
You can fool some of the people some of the time, but you cannot fool all of the people all the time.
Let x be a variable for a person, t a variable for a period of time, and let F(x, t) mean you can fool
x at time t. Which of the following mathematical formulas is equivalent to the given statement?
(a) ∃x∃tF(x, t) ∧∃x∃t¬F(x, t)
(b) ∃x∃tF(x, t) ∧¬∀x∃tF(x, t)
(c) ∃x∃tF(x, t) ∧¬∃x∃tF(x, t)
(d) None of the above.
3. True or false? For any two statements φ and ψ, either φ ⇒ψ or its converse is true (or both).
4. Are the following two statements equivalent? ¬(φ ⇒ψ) and φ ∧(¬ψ)
5. Are the following two statements equivalent? (φ ∨ψ) ⇒θ and (φ ⇒θ) ∧(ψ ⇒θ)
6. True or false? There are inﬁnitely many natural numbers n for which √n is rational. (Before
entering your answer, you should construct a proof of the statement or its negation, so you are
sure.)
7. This argument is a proof that 1 = 2. Obviously it is incorrect. Identify exactly what the error is,
and grade the purported proof according to the course rubric. (Remember, this is not a regular
mathematics course of the kind you are probably familiar with. We are working on various elements
of mathematical thinking, mathematical exposition, and the communication of mathematics. The
rubric is designed to focus attention on all of those factors.) Your ”Overall valuation” ﬁgure is the
grade you would assign a student if s/he submitted this proof in a ﬁrst-year college mathematics
course.
Argument to show that 1 = 2.
We start with the identity
1 −3 = 4 −6
Adding 9
4 to both sides to complete the squares, we get
1 −3 + 9
4 = 4 −6 + 9
4

This factors as
(1 −3
2)2 = (2 −3
2)2
Taking the square root of both sides,
1 −3
2 = 2 −3
2
Hence
1 = 2

