
Psychology
A Concise Introduction
Fourth Edition


Richard A. Griggs
University of Florida
Psychology
A Concise Introduction
Fourth Edition
Worth Publishers
A Macmillan Higher Education Company

Senior Vice President, Editorial and Production:  Catherine Woods
Publisher:  Kevin Feyen	
	
	
Acquisitions Editor:  Rachel Losh	
	
Marketing Manager:  Lindsay Johnson
Director of Print and Digital Development:  Tracey Kuehn
Associate Media Editor:  Anthony Casciano
Associate Managing Editor:  Lisa Kinne
Editorial Assistant:  Katie Garrett
Photo Editors:  Robin Fadool and Cecilia Varas
Photo Researcher:  Teri Stratford
Art Director and Cover Designer:  Babs Reingold
Text Designer:  Lyndall Culbertson
Production Manager:  Sarah Segal
Project Editor:  Julio Espin
Illustrations:  Eli Ensor, Matthew Holt, Matthew McAdams, and Evelyn Pence	
Illustration Coordinator:  Matthew McAdams	
	
	
	
Composition:  MPS Limited 
Printing and Binding: RR Donnelley
Cover Painting:  Mary Jones
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013952664
ISBN-13:  978-1-4292-9890-2
ISBN-10:  1-4292-9890-1
© 2014, 2012, 2009, 2006 by Worth Publishers
All rights reserved
Printed in the United States of America
First printing
Worth Publishers
41 Madison Avenue
New York, NY 10010
www.worthpublishers.com

To Bennie, Henry, and Percy—my three shaggy muses


vii
R
ichard A. Griggs is Professor Emeritus of 
Psychology at the University of Florida. After  
earning his PhD in cognitive psychology at 
Indiana University, he went to the University of 
Florida, where he has spent his entire academic 
career. He has won numerous teaching awards at the 
University of Florida and was named APA’s Society 
for the Teaching of Psychology Teacher of the Year for 
4-year Colleges and Universities in 1994. He served on 
the Editorial Board of Teaching of Psychology for over 
a decade, as a Contemporary Psychology consulting edi-
tor for textbook reviews, and as an associate editor of 
Thinking and Reasoning. His two main research areas are 
human reasoning and the teaching of psychology. He 
has published over 100 journal articles, reviews, and 
book chapters, including 38 in Teaching of Psychology. 
He was also one of the originators and developers of 
the Society for the Teaching of Psychology’s online 
resource, A Compendium of Introductory Psychology 
Textbooks, the editor of Volume 3 of the Society’s 
Handbook for Teaching Introductory Psychology, and the 
coeditor of the Society’s Teaching Introductory Psychology: 
Tips from ToP and Teaching Statistics and Research Methods: 
Tips from ToP. When he isn’t busy with professional 
activities, he likes to relax at home with his wife Sherri, 
also a psychologist, and their dog, Percy. His main 
pastimes are golf, reading, and fitness.
About the Author
Johnston Photography

viii
	 xiii 
Preface
	
1	
Chapter 1  THE SCIENCE OF PSYCHOLOGY
	 38	
Chapter 2  NEUROSCIENCE
	 94	
Chapter 3  SENSATION AND PERCEPTION
	140	
Chapter 4  LEARNING
	188	
Chapter 5  MEMORY
	228	
Chapter 6  THINKING AND INTELLIGENCE
	270	
Chapter 7  DEVELOPMENTAL PSYCHOLOGY
	314	
Chapter 8  PERSONALITY THEORIES AND ASSESSMENT
	352	
Chapter 9  SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
	396	
Chapter 10  ABNORMAL PSYCHOLOGY
	G-1 
GLOSSARY
	R-1 
REFERENCES
	NI-1 NAME INDEX
	SI-1 
SUBJECT INDEX
l Brief Contents l

ix
l Contents l
Preface  xiii
	 1 Chapter 1  The Science of Psychology
The Four Major Research Perspectives  1
Perspectives Emphasizing Internal Factors  2
Perspectives Emphasizing External Factors  3
Research Methods Used by Psychologists  7
Descriptive Methods  8
Correlational Studies  11
Experimental Research  16
How to Understand Research Results  24
Descriptive Statistics  24
Frequency Distributions  27
	38 Chapter 2  Neuroscience
The Neuron  39
The Structure of a Neuron  40
How Neurons Communicate  41
Neurotransmitters, Drugs, and Poisons  45
The Nervous System and the Endocrine System  51
The Central Nervous System  52
The Peripheral Nervous System  53
The Endocrine Glandular System  54
Emotions and the Autonomic Nervous System  56
The Brain  61
Going Up the Brain Stem  61
Processing in the Cerebral Cortex  66
Specializations of the Left and Right Hemispheres  77
Consciousness and the Sleeping Brain  81
	94 Chapter 3  Sensation and Perception
How the Physical World Relates to the Psychological World  96
The Detection Question  96
The Difference Question  100
The Scaling Question  101

x
How We See and How We Hear  104
How the Eye Works  105
How We See Color  111
How the Ear Works  114
How We Distinguish Pitch  116
How We Make Sense of What We See  119
Bottom-up Processing and Top-down Processing  120
Perceptual Organization and Perceptual Constancy  122
Depth Perception  128
	140 Chapter 4  Learning
Learning Through Classical Conditioning  141
The Elements and Procedures of Classical Conditioning  141
General Learning Processes in Classical Conditioning  147
Learning Through Operant Conditioning  152
Learning Through Reinforcement and Punishment  153
General Learning Processes in Operant Conditioning  158
Partial-Reinforcement Schedules in Operant Conditioning  163
Motivation, Behavior, and Reinforcement  168
Biological and Cognitive Aspects of Learning  173
Biological Preparedness in Learning  173
Latent Learning and Observational Learning  176
	188 Chapter 5  Memory
Three-Stage Model of Memory  189
Sensory Memory  190
Short-Term Memory  194
Long-Term Memory  196
Encoding Information into Memory  204
How We Encode Information  205
How to Improve Encoding  209
Retrieving Information from Memory  212
How to Measure Retrieval  212
Why We Forget  213
The Reconstructive Nature of Retrieval  218
	228 Chapter 6  Thinking and Intelligence
Problem Solving  229
Blocks to Problem Solving  230
Solution Strategies  233

xi
Thinking Under Uncertainty  238
Judging Probability  239
Hypothesis Testing  244
Intelligent Thinking  251
Intelligence Tests  251
Controversies About Intelligence  256
	270 Chapter 7  Developmental Psychology
Prenatal Development and Infancy  272
Prenatal Development  272
How We Develop During Infancy  274
How We Think Throughout Our Lives  279
How We Learn Language  279
Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive Development  282
Vygotsky’s Sociocultural Approach to Development  289
How Intelligence Changes in Adulthood  291
Moral Development and Social Development  295
Kohlberg’s Theory of Moral Reasoning  295
Attachment and Parenting Styles  298
Theory of Mind  302
Erikson’s Psychosocial Stage Theory of Development  304
	314 Chapter 8  Personality Theories and Assessment
The Psychoanalytic Approach to Personality  316
Freudian Classical Psychoanalytic Theory of Personality  317
Neo-Freudian Theories of Personality  325
The Humanistic Approach and the Social-Cognitive  
Approach to Personality  328
The Humanistic Approach to Personality  329
The Social-Cognitive Approach to Personality  332
Trait Theories of Personality and Personality Assessment  336
Trait Theories of Personality  336
Personality Assessment  340
	352 Chapter 9  Social Psychology
How Others Influence Our Behavior  354
Why We Conform  354
Why We Comply  358
Why We Obey  362
How Groups Influence Us  371

xii
How We Think About Our Own and Others’ Behavior  378
How We Make Attributions  379
How Our Behavior Affects Our Attitudes  382
	396 Chapter 10  Abnormal Psychology
The Diagnosis and Classification of Mental Disorders  397
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders  397
The Perceptual Bias of Labeling  400
Six Major Categories of Mental Disorders  402
Anxiety Disorders  403
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders  407
Depressive Disorders  410
Bipolar and Related Disorders  412
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other Psychotic Disorders  413
Personality Disorders  417
The Treatment of Mental Disorders  420
Biomedical Therapies  421
Psychotherapies  429
Glossary G-1
References R-1
Name Index NI-1
Subject Index SI-1

l Preface l
xiii
T
hose of us who teach introductory psychology have the privilege and the 
challenge of introducing students to our discipline, which is more expan-
sive than ever as research proliferates in many areas. This task has become 
increasingly problematic in recent years as the authors of introductory textbooks 
have struggled to keep pace, resulting in books that are more comprehensive, 
longer, and thus more difficult to complete in one term. The choices of which 
topics to assign and to what depth to cover them have become more difficult for 
teachers. Teachers end up either omitting entire chapters or asking students to 
read chapters at a pace too hurried for optimal learning. Further, introductory 
textbooks have become much more expensive, leading some students to not even 
purchase them. As an introductory psychology teacher, I grappled with these 
critical issues. Psychology: A Concise Introduction is the result of my own search 
for a textbook that includes the essential core content in psychology but is also 
economical in both size and cost.
Chapter Topics.  To make the most informed choices of chapter topics, I con-
sulted Benjamin Miller and Barbara Gentile’s national survey of 761 introduc-
tory psychology teachers at 490 schools (Miller & Gentile, 1998). They asked 
teachers to rate the importance of and need for coverage of 25 different topics 
in their courses. Since my first chapter covers psychology as a science, I chose 
the highest-rated topics in Miller and Gentile’s study as the subjects of the other 
nine chapters. To maintain the book’s brevity, I paired sensation with percep-
tion and cognitive development with social development in single chapters. The 
topic order is the standard one—introduction/methods, neuroscience, sensation/
perception, learning, memory, thinking/intelligence, developmental psychology, 
personality, social psychology, and abnormal psychology. Because the topics of 
emotion, motivation, and states of consciousness were rated just below the cho-
sen topics, I included sections on emotion and consciousness in the neuroscience 
chapter and on motivation in the learning chapter. My choices of chapter topics 
were further validated by Scott Bates’s analysis of topic coverage for 107 introduc-
tory psychology course syllabi (Bates, 2004). His topic coverage findings based on 
syllabi analysis match my chapter topic choices almost perfectly.
Pedagogical Program.  In writing Psychology: A Concise Introduction, I have tried 
to offer solid topical coverage in an engaging, conversational style. The content 
in each chapter has been reduced to the core content within that topic domain. 
Illustrations are full-color and pedagogically sound. Students will find this book 
easy to learn from. It incorporates both pedagogical aids and study guide exercises 
to structure their learning. My choice of pedagogical aids was primarily based 

xiv
on research findings about student perception of the use and importance of the 
many aids employed in textbooks. I included the aids that students report valuing 
and using in their learning. Each chapter begins with an overview in the form of 
a topical outline, and key terms are identified by boldface type and then defined 
both in the text and in a marginal glossary. Detailed summaries are provided at 
the end of each major chapter section. Study guide exercises begin with Concept 
Check questions at the end of each chapter section. These questions lead students 
to think more deeply about the material in that section. For example, a question 
may ask students to contrast concepts to understand differences between them 
or to demonstrate their understanding of a concept by applying it in a novel 
situation. At the end of each chapter there is a list of key terms and a Key Terms 
Exercise to test student knowledge of these terms. A multiple-choice Practice Test 
on the chapter’s content follows the Key Terms Exercise. Answers to this test 
along with answers to the Key Terms Exercise and the sectional Concept Checks 
are provided at the end of each chapter. These exercises combined with the peda-
gogical aids should foster sufficient review and self-assessment, eliminating the 
need for and additional expense of a separate study guide.
Fourth Edition Changes.  Reaching the goal of a textbook that could be covered 
in a single term at a reasonable price without sacrificing essential content was a 
challenge, but based on the overwhelmingly positive market response, the pub-
lisher and I seem to have been successful. With only 10 chapters, Psychology: A 
Concise Introduction has fit nicely into introductory courses on both semester and 
quarter systems. The breadth of the audience for the text has also been gratify-
ing. It has been used successfully at all types of colleges and universities, from 
two-year schools to research institutions. Given this success and to maintain the 
text’s basic goal, the content was expanded and revised only where necessary. 
The 10 chapters (those topics taught most frequently by introductory teachers) 
remain the same, and content additions were made judiciously.
The third edition revisions were well received, so my fourth edition revisions 
are along the same lines. I only made revisions that enhanced the text’s pedagogi-
cal program or visual persona, were absolutely necessary due to recent research 
findings, contributed toward more closure on a particular topic, or had substan-
tial value to student readers. I have updated content where necessary (e.g., new 
analyses of Phineas Gage’s brain damage in Chapter 2; discussion of the dual pro-
cessing model of thinking in Chapter 6; and the complete revision of the coverage 
of mental disorders in Chapter 10 in accordance with the new DSM-5), added 
content that provides better closure on a topic (e.g., discussion of the Twin Towers 
of Pisa illusion to demonstrate the subjective nature of perception in Chapter 3 
and coverage of the BBC Prison Study and its relationship to Zimbardo’s Stanford 
Prison Experiment in Chapter 9) or that has value to students in their everyday 
lives (e.g., addition of the Premack principle of relative reinforcement and its uses 
in the real world in Chapter 4 and extended discussion of the false positive prob-
lem in medical screening in Chapter 6). I also added new concepts if they served 

xv
to strengthen a discussion of a related concept (e.g., addition of the nocebo effect 
in Chapter 1 and the neurocognitive theory of dreaming in Chapter 2).
In this new edition, the visual pedagogical program was expanded and 
strengthened throughout the text. Because this program is an integral part of 
the learning process, I carefully examined each figure, table, illustration, photo, 
and cartoon to ensure that it served a clear pedagogical function, and any that 
needed improvement were either revised or replaced. In addition, the tables were 
redesigned to facilitate their use, and new illustrations, historical photos, and 
cartoons were added where necessary to further improve the pedagogical value of 
the visual program. The text’s interior design was also revised to have a cleaner 
look and thus enhance its use. Because of their success in the first three editions, 
the specific pedagogical aids employed (those that research has found students 
report valuing and using in their learning) and the structure of the integrated 
study guide remain the same. All of the questions in the Concept Check sections, 
Key Terms Exercises, and multiple-choice Practice Tests were reevaluated and 
revised if necessary. In sum, I think that students will find this new edition even 
easier to learn from.
As with the first three editions, the textbook’s smaller size and lower cost allow 
teachers the option of adding supplemental readings to customize their courses 
to fit their own goals and interests. To facilitate the task of finding supplemental 
materials, Worth offers many supplements for this purpose.
Supplements
For Instructors
New! LaunchPad,  Worth’s new online course space, offers a set of prebuilt assign-
ments, carefully crafted by a group of instructional designers and instructors with 
an abundance of teaching experience as well as deep familiarity with Worth con-
tent. Each LaunchPad unit contains videos, activities, and formative assessment 
pieces to build student understanding for each topic, culminating with a random-
ized summative quiz to hold students accountable for the unit. It also includes 
the LearningCurve formative assessment activities while incorporating the full 
range of Worth’s psychology media options: Video Activities, PsychInvestigator, 
PsychSim, Concepts in Action, and others. Based on the latest findings from 
learning and memory research, LearningCurve combines adaptive question selec-
tion, personalized study plans, immediate and valuable feedback, and state-of-the-
art question analysis reports. LearningCurve’s gamelike nature keeps students 
engaged while helping them learn and remember key concepts.
Assign units in just a few clicks, and find scores in your gradebook upon sub-
mission. LaunchPad appeals not only to instructors who have been interested 
in adding an online component to their course but haven’t been able to invest 
the time, but also to experienced online instructors curious to see how other col-
leagues might scaffold a series of online activities. Customize units as you wish, 
adding and dropping content to fit your course.

xvi
Instructor’s Resource Manual,  Andrew N. Christopher, Albion College; Pam 
Marek, Kennesaw State University; and Scott Cohn, Western Colorado State 
University
Thoroughly updated from the last edition, this manual provides a variety of 
resources to help you plan your course and class sessions. Resources include anno-
tated chapter outlines and lecture guides with tips on how to present the material, 
effective classroom activities (including both in-class activities and homework 
assignments) drawn from established sources as well as the authors’ own expe-
riences, and suggestions for using Worth courseware, including LaunchPad, 
Worth’s online course space, and all of Worth’s video resources for introductory 
psychology.
Computerized Test Bank,  Cynthia S. Koenig, St. Mary’s College of Maryland; 
Pam Marek, Kennesaw State University; Sherri L. Jackson, Jacksonville University; 
Richard A. Griggs, University of Florida; and Adrienne Williamson, Kennesaw 
State University
Tied to the pages of Psychology: A Concise Introduction, Fourth Edition, the 
Computerized Test Bank provides over 1,500 multiple-choice factual/definitional 
and conceptual questions. Powered by Diploma, it guides you through the process 
of creating a test, allowing you to add an unlimited number of questions, edit 
questions, create new questions, format a test, scramble questions, and include 
pictures and multimedia links. The accompanying Gradebook enables you to 
record student grades throughout your course and includes the capacity to track 
student records, view detailed analyses of test items, curve tests, generate reports, 
add weights to grades, and more. The disk provides the access point for Diploma 
Online Testing as well as Blackboard-formatted versions of the Test Bank.
Enhanced Course Management Solutions  (Blackboard, Desire2Learn, Angel, 
Canvas, Moodle) allow adopters to access all of this edition’s teaching and 
learning resources in one central location (via their course management system) 
through one seamless, guided experience.
For Classroom Presentation
New! Worth Introductory Psychology Videos,  produced in conjunction with 
Scientific American and Nature, is a breakthrough collection of NEW modular, 
tutorial videos on core psychology topics. This set includes animations, interviews 
with top scientists, and carefully selected archival footage and is available on flash 
drive or as part of the new Worth Video Anthology for Introductory Psychology.
New! The Worth Video Anthology for Introductory Psychology  is a complete 
collection, all in one place, of our video clips from the Video Tool Kit, the 
Digital Media Archive, and the third edition of the Scientific American Frontiers 
Teaching Modules, as well as from the new Worth Introductory Psychology Videos 

xvii
coproduced with Scientific American and Nature. Available on DVD or flash drive, 
the set is accompanied by its own Faculty Guide.
New! Interactive Presentation Slides for Introductory Psychology  is an extraor-
dinary series of PowerPoint® lectures. This is a dynamic yet easy-to-use new way to 
engage students during classroom presentations of core psychology topics. This 
collection provides opportunities for discussion and interaction, and includes 
an unprecedented number of embedded video clips and animations (including 
activities from our ActivePsych series).
PowerPoint®© Slide Sets  In addition to the Interactive Presentation Slides, there 
are two other PowerPoint® slide sets to accompany the text. For each chapter, we 
offer a set that includes chapter art and illustrations and a final lecture presenta-
tion set that merges detailed chapter outlines with text illustrations and artwork 
from outside sources. Each set can be used directly or customized to fit your needs.
Additional Reading for Students
All of the following can be packaged with Psychology: A Concise Introduction, 
Fourth Edition, for a nominal additional cost.
New! Psychology and the Real World: Essays Illustrating Fundamental 
Contributions to Society  This recent project of the FABBS Foundation 
brought together a virtual “Who’s Who” of contemporary psychological scien-
tists to describe—in clear, captivating ways—the research they have passionately 
pursued and what it means to the “real world.” Each contribution is an original 
essay written for this project.
Scientific American Reader to Accompany Psychology: A Concise 
Introduction  To provide a relevant and inexpensive supplementary reader to 
Psychology: A Concise Introduction, the text author, Richard Griggs, went through 
the Scientific American database and selected 10 recent articles that best comple-
ment the 10 chapters in the text. The articles are sequenced to match the chapter 
topic order, and the chapter related to each article will adequately prepare the 
student to read the article. The Scientific American Reader provides another tool 
for enhancing lectures, encouraging discussion, and emphasizing the relevance of 
psychology to everyday life.
Pursuing Human Strengths: A Positive Psychology Guide, Martin Bolt, 
Calvin College  Martin Bolt’s workbook aims to help students build up their 
strengths. Closely following the research, this book provides a brief overview of 
nine positive traits, such as hope, self-respect, commitment, and joy. It also offers 
self-assessment activities that help students gauge how much of the trait they 
have developed, and research-based suggestions for how they might work further 
toward fostering these traits.

xviii
Critical Thinking Companion, Second Edition, Jane Halonen, University of 
West Florida; Cynthia Gray, Alverno College  Tied to the main topics in intro­
ductory psychology, this handbook includes six categories of critical thinking  
exercises—pattern recognition, practical problem solving, creative problem solving,  
scientific problem solving, psychological reasoning, and perspective taking.
Acknowledgments
First, I would like to thank all the reviewers who gave generously of their time and 
expertise in working on the first three editions of Psychology: A Concise Introduction. 
I am also indebted to my supplements author team. I truly appreciate their hard 
work and commitment to excellence.
At Worth Publishers, I am indebted to the many editorial and production 
people who worked on this revision. Special thanks go to Julio Espin (Project 
Editor) and Sarah Segal (Production Manager), who together skillfully man-
aged the text’s production; Tracey Kuehn (Director of Development for Print 
and Digital), who expertly coordinated myriad details among departments; and  
Babs Reingold (Art Director and Cover Designer) who supervised the develop-
ment of the book’s beautiful cover and its art and design program. I would also 
like to specifically thank Mary Jones for her beautiful cover and chapter opening 
art. In addition, I appreciate the dedication and meticulous efforts of my copy  
editor Deborah Heimann and my proofreaders Linda Elliott and Jean Erler. 
My deepest thanks go to Rachel Losh, my current editor, for her insightful and 
invaluable guidance on this fourth edition.
Finally, my thanks extend to my wife, Sherri. Her love, encouragement, and 
unflagging support kept me going through all four editions of this text.

Psychology
A Concise Introduction
Fourth Edition

The Science of Psychology
 THE FOUR MAJOR 
RESEARCH PERSPECTIVES
Perspectives Emphasizing 
Internal factors
Perspectives Emphasizing 
External factors
 RESEARCH METHODS 
USED BY PSYCHOLOGISTS
descriptive Methods
Correlational Studies
Experimental Research
 HOW TO UNDERSTAND 
RESEARCH RESULTS
descriptive Statistics
frequency distributions
1

1
w
hat do you think psychologists do? If you are like most people, when 
you think of a psychologist, you think of a therapist counseling people 
who have problems. If I asked you to name a psychologist, you would 
probably name Sigmund Freud. However, Freud and psychologists who work as 
therapists are not the focus of this book. They will be discussed, but they are only a 
part of psychology’s story. Psychology is a science, not just a mental health profes-
sion. The subjects of this scientific study are you, me, all humans. Some psycholo-
gists may use other animals in their research, but their main goal is usually still to 
understand humans. psychology is the science of behavior and mental processes. 
Psychologists attempt to understand all aspects of both our observable behavior, 
such as speech and physical movement, and internal mental processes, such as 
remembering and thinking, which cannot be directly observed. Psychologists may 
be found in any number of roles, including teaching, researching, consulting, and 
yes, counseling troubled people. This book, however, will focus on the research 
done by psychological scientists, the process by which they’ve accomplished that 
research, and what we’ve learned from their work.
Psychological researchers study everything about us from how our brain works 
and how we see and hear to how we reason and make decisions. The American 
Psychological Association lists 54 different divisions of psychology, and psycholo-
gists specialize in studying each of these different aspects of our behavior and 
mental processing. To learn more about these various subfields and careers in 
psychology, visit www.apa.org/careers/resources/guides/careers.aspx. Although 
there are many diverse areas within psychology, there are only four major research 
perspectives for studying these topics. We will begin with a general overview of 
these four perspectives and then provide descriptions of the major research meth-
ods that psychologists use regardless of their perspective. Understanding these 
perspectives and the research methods used by psychologists will allow you to 
start thinking like a psychologist (like a scientist).
Note that there are other perspectives in psychology that are primarily clinical 
in nature (related to psychological therapy). We will discuss the psychoanalytic 
perspective (which emphasizes the interaction of unconscious forces and child-
hood experiences in personality development) and the humanistic perspective 
(which emphasizes the personal growth motive) in Chapter 8, Personality Theories 
and Assessment.
The Four Major Research Perspectives
There are four major research perspectives—biological, cognitive, behavioral, 
and sociocultural. It’s important to understand that these perspectives are 
complementary. The research findings from the major perspectives fit together 
like the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle to give us a more complete picture. No particu-
lar perspective is better than the others, and psychologists 
using the various perspectives work together to provide a 
more complete explanation of our behavior and mental 
processing.
➤  psychology  The science of 
behavior and mental processes.

2  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
The best way to understand how the major research perspectives differ is to 
consider the major goal of psychologists—to explain human behavior and men-
tal processes. To explain means to know the causes of our behavior and mental 
processes. To facilitate your understanding of these perspectives, I discuss them 
in two different pairs based on the type of causal factors that they emphasize—
internal factors or external factors. The biological perspective and the cognitive 
perspective focus on causes that stem from within us (internal factors); the 
behavioral perspective and the sociocultural perspective focus on causes that 
stem from outside us (external factors). We’ll also briefly consider developmental 
psychology, a research field that provides a nice example of how these perspectives 
complement one another.
Perspectives Emphasizing Internal Factors
The biological perspective and the cognitive perspective focus on internal factors. 
In the case of the biological perspective, our physiological hardware (especially 
the brain and nervous system) is viewed as the major determiner of behavior and 
mental processing. The genetic and evolutionary bases of our physiology are also 
important. In contrast, for the cognitive perspective, the major explanatory focus 
is on how our mental processes, such as perception, memory, and problem solv-
ing, work and impact our behavior. To contrast this perspective with the biological 
perspective, you can think of these mental processes as the software, or programs, 
of the brain (the wetware, the biological corollary to computer hardware).
The biological perspective.  We are biological creatures; therefore, looking 
for explanations in terms of our biology makes sense. Biological psychologists 
look for causes within our physiology, our genetics, and human evolution. They 
argue that our actions and thoughts are functions of our underlying biology. Let’s 
consider an example of what most people would term a “psychological” disorder, 
depression. Why do we get depressed? A biological psychologist might focus on a 
deficiency in the activity of certain chemicals in the nervous system as a cause of 
this problem. Therefore, to treat depression using this perspective, the problem 
with the chemical deficiency would have to be rectified. How? Antidepressant 
drugs such as Prozac or Zoloft might be prescribed. These 
drugs increase the activity of the neural chemicals involved, 
and this increased activity might lead to changes in our 
mood. If all goes well, a few weeks after beginning treatment, 
we begin to feel better. Thus, our mood is at least partly a 
function of our brain chemistry. Of course, many nonbio-
logical factors can contribute to depression, including 
unhealthy patterns of thinking, learned helplessness, and 
disturbing life circumstances. It’s important to remember 
that employing psychology’s complementary perspectives in 
addressing research and clinical issues provides the most 
complete answer.
➤	 biological perspective  A research 
perspective whose major explana-
tory focus is how the brain, ner-
vous system, and other physiologi-
cal mechanisms produce behavior 
and mental processes.
➤ cognitive perspective  A research 
perspective whose major explana-
tory focus is how mental processes, 
such as perception, memory, and 
problem solving, work and impact 
behavior.

The four MAJor ReseArch Perspectives  |  3
In addition to the impact of brain chemistry, biological psychologists also 
study the involvement of the various parts of the brain and nervous system on our 
behavior and mental processes. For example, they have learned that our “eyes” are 
indeed in the back of our head. Biological psychologists have found that it is the 
back part of our brain that allows us to see the world. So, a more correct expres-
sion would be that “our eyes are in the back of our brain.” The brain is not only 
essential for vision, but it is also the control center for almost all of our behavior 
and mental processing. In Chapter 2, you will learn how the brain manages this 
incredibly difficult task as well as about the roles of other parts of our nervous 
system and the many different chemicals that transmit information within it.
The cognitive perspective.  Cognitive psychologists study all aspects of cog-
nitive processing from perception to the higher-level processes, such as problem 
solving and reasoning. Let’s try a brief exercise to gain insight into one aspect of 
our cognitive processing. I will name a category, and you say aloud as fast as you 
can the first instance of that category that comes to mind. Are you ready? The first 
category is FRUIT. If you are like most people, you said apple or orange. Let’s try 
another one. The category is PIECE OF FURNITURE. Again, if you are like most 
people, you said chair or sofa. Why, in the case of FRUIT, don’t people say pome-
granate or papaya? How do we have categories of information organized so that 
certain examples come to mind first for most of us? In brief, cognitive research 
has shown that we organize categorical information around what we consider the 
most typical or representative examples of a category (Rosch, 1973). These exam-
ples (such as apple and orange for FRUIT) are called prototypes for the category 
and are retrieved first when we think of the category.
A broader cognitive processing question concerns how memory retrieval in 
general works. Haven’t you been in the situation of not being able to retrieve 
information from memory that you know you have stored there? This can be 
especially frustrating in exam situations. Or think about the opposite—an event 
or person comes to mind seemingly out of the blue. Why? Even more complex 
questions arise when we consider how we attempt to solve problems, reason, and 
make decisions. For example, here’s a series problem with a rather simple answer, 
but most people find it very difficult: What is the next character in the series 
OTTFFSS_? The answer is not “O.” Why is this problem so difficult? The progress 
that cognitive psychologists have made in answering such questions about cog-
nitive processing will be discussed in Chapter 5, on memory, and Chapter 6, on 
thinking and intelligence (where you can find the answer to the series problem).
Perspectives Emphasizing External Factors
Both the behavioral perspective and the sociocultural 
perspective focus on external factors in explaining 
human behavior and mental processing. The behavioral 
perspective emphasizes conditioning of our behavior 
by environmental events, and there is more emphasis on 
➤	 behavioral perspective  A research 
perspective whose major explanatory 
focus is how external environmental 
events condition observable behavior.

4  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
explaining observable behavior than on unobservable 
mental processes. The sociocultural perspective also 
emphasizes the influence of the external environment, 
but it more specifically focuses on the impact of other 
people and our culture as the major determiners of our 
behavior and mental processing. In addition to condi-
tioning, the sociocultural perspective equally stresses cognitive types of learning, 
such as learning by observation or modeling, and thus focuses just as much on 
mental processing as observable behavior.
The behavioral perspective.  According to the behavioral perspective, we 
behave as we do because of our past history of conditioning by our environment. 
There are two major types of conditioning, classical (or Pavlovian) and operant. 
You may be familiar with the most famous example of classical conditioning—
Ivan Pavlov’s dogs (Pavlov, 1927/1960). In his research, Pavlov sounded a tone 
and then put food in a dog’s mouth. The pairing of these two environmental 
events led the dog to salivate to the tone in anticipation of the arrival of the food. 
The salivary response to the tone was conditioned by the sequencing of the two 
environmental events (the sounding of the tone and putting food in the dog’s 
mouth). The dog learned that the sound of the tone meant food was on its way. 
According to behaviorists, such classical conditioning can explain how we learn 
fear and other emotional responses, taste aversions, and many other behaviors.
Classical conditioning is important in determining our behavior, but behav-
iorists believe operant conditioning is even more important. Operant condi-
tioning involves the relationship between our behavior and its environmental 
consequences (whether they are reinforcing or punishing). Simply put, if we are 
reinforced for a behavior, its probability will increase; if we are punished, the 
probability will decrease. For example, if you ask your teacher a question and he 
praises you for asking such a good question and then answers it very carefully, you 
will tend to ask more questions. However, if the teacher criticizes you for asking 
a stupid question and doesn’t even bother to answer it, you will probably not ask 
more questions. Environmental events (such as a teacher’s response) thus control 
behavior through their reinforcing or punishing nature. Both types of condition-
ing, classical and operant, will be discussed in Chapter 4. The point to remember 
here is that environmental events condition our behavior and are the causes of it.
The sociocultural perspective.  This perspective focuses on the impact of other 
people (individuals and groups) and our cultural surroundings on our behavior and 
mental processing. We are social animals; therefore other people are important to us 
and thus greatly affect what we do and how we think. None of us is immune to these 
social “forces.” Haven’t your thinking and behavior been impacted by other people, 
especially those close to you? Our coverage of sociocultural research will emphasize 
the impact of these social forces on our behavior and mental processing.
To help you understand the nature of sociocultural research, let’s consider a 
famous set of experiments that attempted to explain the social forces operating 
➤	 sociocultural perspective  A research 
perspective whose major explanatory 
focus is how other people and the 
cultural context impact behavior and 
mental processes.

The four MAJor ReseArch Perspectives  |  5
during a tragic, real-world event—the Kitty Genovese murder in 1964 (Latané & 
Darley, 1970). Kitty was returning home from work to her apartment in New York 
City when she was brutally attacked, raped, and stabbed to death with a hunting 
knife. The attack was a prolonged one in which the attacker left and came back 
at least three times. Kitty screamed and pleaded for help throughout the attack, 
but none was forthcoming. Some people living in the building heard her screams 
for help, but no one helped. Someone finally called the police, but it was too late. 
The attacker had fled, and Kitty was dead. Exactly how many people witnessed the 
attack and failed to help is not clear. Initially reported as 38 (Rosenthal, 1964), 
more recent analysis of the available evidence indicates that the number may have 
been much smaller (Manning, Levine, & Collins, 2007). Regardless, no one acted 
until it was too late. To explain why these people didn’t help, researchers manipu-
lated the number of bystanders present in follow-up experiments. Their general 
finding is called the bystander effect (and sometimes the Genovese Syndrome)—
the probability of a victim receiving help in an emergency is higher when there 
is only one bystander than when there are many. In brief, other bystanders may 
lead us not to help. How do we apply this effect to the Kitty Genovese murder? 
The bystanders to the murder led each other not to help. Each felt that someone 
else would do something and that surely someone else had already called the 
police. This research, along with studies of other intriguing topics that involve 
social forces, such as why we conform and why we obey even when it may lead to 
destructive behavior, will be detailed in Chapter 9, on social psychology.
Now you have at least a general understanding of the four major research 
perspectives, summarized in Table 1.1. Remember, these perspectives are comple-
mentary, and, when used together, help us to gain a more complete understand-
ing of our behavior and men-
tal processes. Developmental 
psychology (the scientific 
study of human develop-
ment across the lifespan) is a 
research area that nicely illus-
trates the benefits of using 
multiple research perspec-
tives to address experimental 
questions. A good example 
is the study of how children 
acquire language. Initially, 
behavioral learning prin-
ciples of reinforcement and 
imitation were believed to be 
sufficient to account for lan-
guage acquisition. Although 
these principles clearly do 
play a role (Whitehurst & 
Table 1.1   The Four Major Research Perspectives 
in Psychology
Research Perspective	
Major Explanatory Focus
Biological	
How our physiology (especially the 
brain and nervous system) produces 
our behavior and mental processes 
and how genetics and evolution 
have impacted our physiology
Cognitive	
How our mental processes, such as 
perception, memory, and problem 
solving, work and how they impact 
our behavior
Behavioral	
How external environmental events 
condition our observable behavior
Sociocultural	
How other people and the cultural 
context impact our behavior and 
mental processes

6  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
Valdez-Menchaca, 1988), most developmental language researchers now recog-
nize that biology, cognition, and the sociocultural context are also critical to lan-
guage learning (Pinker, 1994; Tomasello, 2003). Studies of the brain, for example, 
indicate that specific brain areas are involved in language acquisition. Research 
has also revealed that cognitive processes are important as well. For example, 
as children acquire new concepts, they learn the names that go with them and 
thus expand their vocabulary. In addition, it has been shown that the socio-
cultural context of language helps children to learn about the social pragmatic 
functions of language. For instance, they use a variety of pragmatic cues (such as 
an adult’s focus of attention) for word learning. Thus, by using all four research 
perspectives, developmental researchers have gained a much better understand-
ing of how children acquire language. We will learn in Chapter 7 (Developmental 
Psychology) that our understanding of many developmental questions has been 
broadened by the use of multiple research perspectives.
Subsequent chapters will detail the main concepts, theories, and research find-
ings in the major fields of psychology. As you learn about these theories and research 
findings, beware of the hindsight bias (I-knew-it-all-along phenomenon)—the 
tendency, after learning about an outcome, to be overconfident in one’s ability to 
have predicted it. Hindsight bias has been widely studied, having been featured in 
more than 800 scholarly papers (Roese & Vohs, 2012). It has been observed in vari-
ous countries and among both children and adults (Blank, Musch, & Pohl, 2007). 
Research has shown that after people learn about an experimental finding, the 
finding seems obvious and very predictable (Slovic & Fischhoff, 1977). Almost any 
conceivable psychological research finding may seem like common sense after you 
learn about it. If you were told that research indicates that “opposites attract,” you 
would likely nod in agreement. Isn’t it obvious? Then again, if you had been told 
that research indicates that “birds of a feather flock together,” you would probably 
have also agreed and thought the finding obvious. Hindsight bias works to make 
even a pair of opposite research conclusions both seem obvious (Teigen, 1986). 
Be mindful of hindsight bias as you learn about what psychologists have learned 
about us. It may lead you to think that this information is more obvious and easier 
than it actually is. You may falsely think that you already know much of the mate-
rial and then not study sufficiently, leading to disappointment at exam time. The 
hindsight bias even works on itself. Don’t you feel like you already knew about this 
bias? Incidentally, social psychology researchers have found that birds of a feather 
DO flock together and that opposites DO NOT attract (Myers, 2013).
Psychologists’ conclusions are based upon scientific research and thus pro-
vide the best answers to questions about human behavior and mental process-
ing. Whether these answers sometimes seem obvious or sometimes agree with 
common sense is not important. What is important is 
understanding how psychologists conduct this scien-
tific research in order to get the best answers to their 
questions. In the next section, we discuss their research 
methods.
➤	 hindsight bias (I-knew-it-all-along phe-
nomenon)  The tendency, after learning 
about an outcome, to be overconfident 
in one’s ability to have predicted it.

ReseArch Methods Used By Psychologists  |  7
Section Summary
In this section, we learned that there are four major research perspectives in psy-
chology. Two of them, the biological perspective and the cognitive perspective, 
focus on internal causes of our behavior and mental processing. The biological 
perspective focuses on causal explanations in terms of our physiology, especially 
the brain and nervous system. The cognitive perspective focuses on understanding 
how our mental processes work and how they impact our behavior. The biological 
perspective focuses on the physiological hardware, while the cognitive perspective 
focuses more on the mental processes or software of the brain.
The behavioral perspective and the sociocultural perspective emphasize exter-
nal causes. The behavioral perspective focuses on how our observable behavior 
is conditioned by external environmental events. The sociocultural perspective 
emphasizes the impact that other people (social forces) and our culture have on our 
behavior and mental processing.
Psychologists use all four perspectives to get a more complete explanation of 
our behavior and mental processing. None of these perspectives is better than the 
others; they are complementary. Developmental psychology is a research field that 
nicely illustrates their complementary nature.
We also briefly discussed the hindsight bias, the I-knew-it-all-along phenomenon. 
This bias leads us to find outcomes as more obvious and predictable than they truly 
are. You need to beware of this bias when learning the basic research findings and 
theories discussed in the remainder of this text. It may lead you to think that this 
information is more obvious and easier than it actually is. It is important that you 
realize that psychologists have used scientific research methods to conduct  their 
studies, thereby obtaining the best answers possible to their questions about 
human behavior and mental processing.
ConceptCheck | 1
➤	 explain how the biological and cognitive research perspectives differ in their 
explanations of human behavior and mental processing.
➤	 explain how the behavioral and sociocultural research perspectives differ in 
their explanations of human behavior and mental processing.
Research Methods Used by Psychologists
Regardless of their perspective, psychology researchers use the same research 
methods. These methods fall into three categories—descriptive, correlational, 
and experimental. The experimental method is used most often because it allows 
the researcher to explore cause–effect relationships. Remember, the main goal of 
psychology is to explain (through cause–effect relationships) human behavior 
and mental processes. However, sometimes researchers can’t conduct experi-
ments. For example, it is obviously unethical to set up an experiment testing the 
effects of passive smoking on children. Who would knowingly subject a group 

8  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
of children to cigarette smoke? In such situations, psychologists can learn a lot 
by employing the other methods—descriptive and correlational. Researchers 
can carefully observe and describe the health effects on one child in a family 
of smokers, or they can study many families in search of relationships (correla-
tions) between parental smoking and childhood infections. These other research 
methods also provide data for developing hypotheses (testable predictions about 
cause–effect relationships) to examine in experimental research. We’ll discuss 
the three types of methods in the following order: descriptive, correlational, and 
experimental.
Descriptive Methods
There are three types of descriptive methods: observational techniques, case 
studies, and survey research. The main purpose of all three methods is to provide 
objective and detailed descriptions of behavior and mental processes. However, 
these descriptive data only allow the researcher to speculate about cause–effect 
relationships—to develop hypotheses about causal relationships. Such hypotheses 
must then be tested in experiments. With this important limitation in mind, we’ll 
consider the three descriptive methods one at a time.
Observational techniques.  Observational techniques exactly reflect their 
name. The researcher directly observes the behavior of interest. Such observa-
tion can be done in the laboratory. For example, children’s behavior can be 
observed using one-way mirrors in the laboratory. However, behavior in the 
laboratory setting may not be natural. This is why researchers often use natu-
ralistic observation, a descriptive research method in which behavior is 
observed in its natural setting, without the researcher intervening in the behav-
ior being observed. Researchers use naturalistic observation when they are 
interested in how humans or other animals behave in their natural environ-
ments. The researcher attempts to describe both objectively and thoroughly 
the behaviors that are present and the relationships among these behaviors. 
There have been many well-known observational studies of other species of 
animals in their natural habitats. You are probably familiar with some of 
them—Dian Fossey’s study of mountain gorillas in Africa, on which the movie, 
Gorillas in the Mist, was based, and Jane Goodall’s study of chimpanzees in Africa 
(Fossey, 1983; Goodall, 1986). This method is not used only for the observation 
of other species of animals. Observational studies of 
human behavior are conducted in many natural set-
tings such as the workplace and school and in social 
settings such as bars.
Observational techniques do have a major potential 
problem, though. The observer may influence or change 
the behavior of those being observed. This is why observ-
ers must remain as unobtrusive as possible, so that 
the results won’t be contaminated by their presence. 
➤	 descriptive methods  Research methods 
whose main purpose is to provide objec-
tive and detailed descriptions of behav-
ior and mental processes.
➤	 naturalistic observation  A descriptive 
research method in which the behavior 
of interest is observed in its natural set-
ting, and the researcher does not inter-
vene in the behavior being observed.

ReseArch Methods Used By Psychologists  |  9
To overcome this possible shortcoming, 
researchers use participant observation. 
In participant observation, the observer 
becomes part of the group being observed. 
Sometimes naturalistic observation studies 
that start out with unobtrusive observation 
end up as participant observation studies. 
For example, Dian Fossey’s study of gorillas 
turned into participant observation when 
she was finally accepted as a member of the 
group. However, in most participant observa-
tion studies, the observer begins the study 
as a participant, whether in a laboratory or 
natural setting. You can think of this type 
of study as comparable to doing undercover 
work. A famous example of such a study 
involved a group of people posing as patients 
with symptoms of a major mental disorder to 
see if doctors at psychiatric hospitals could 
distinguish them from real patients (Rosenhan, 1973). It turned out that the 
doctors couldn’t do so, but the patients could. Once admitted, these “pseudopa-
tients” acted normally and asked to be released to see what would happen. Well, 
they weren’t released right away. We will find out what happened to them in 
Chapter 10.
Case studies.  Detailed observation is also involved in a case study. In a case 
study, the researcher studies an individual in depth over an extended period of 
time. In brief, the researcher attempts to learn as much as possible about the indi-
vidual being studied. A life history for the individual is developed, and data for a 
variety of tests are collected. The most common use of case studies is in clinical 
settings with patients suffering specific deficits or problems. The main goal of a 
case study is to gather information that will help in the treatment of the patient. 
The results of a case study cannot be generalized to the entire population. They 
are specific to the individual that has been studied. However, case study data do 
allow researchers to develop hypotheses that can then be tested in experimental 
research. A famous example of such a case study is that of the late Henry 
Molaison, a person with amnesia (Scoville & Milner, 1957). He was studied by 
nearly 100 investigators (Corkin, 2002) and is often 
referred to as the most studied individual in the history 
of neuroscience (Squire, 2009). For confidentiality pur-
poses while he was alive (he died in 2008 at the age of 82), 
only his initials, H. M., were used to identify him in the 
hundreds of studies that he participated in for over five 
decades. Thus, we will refer to him as H. M. His case will 
be discussed in more detail in Chapter 5 (Memory), but 
Lady studying chimps, chimp studying lady.
cartoonstock
➤	 participant observation  A descriptive 
research method in which the observer 
becomes part of the group being 
observed.
➤	 case study  A descriptive research 
method in which the researcher studies 
an individual in depth over an extended 
period of time.

10  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
let’s consider some of his story here to illustrate the 
importance of case studies in the development of hypoth-
eses and the subsequent experimental work to test these 
hypotheses.
For medical reasons, H. M. had his hippocampus 
(a part of the brain below the cortex) and the surround-
ing areas surgically removed at a young age. His case 
study included testing his memory capabilities in depth 
after the operation. Except for some amnesia for a period 
preceding his surgery (especially events in the days immediately before the sur-
gery), he appeared to have normal memory for information that he had learned 
before the operation, but he didn’t seem to be able to form any new memories. 
For example, if he didn’t know you before his operation, he would never be able 
to remember your name regardless of how many times you met with him. He 
could read a magazine over and over again without ever realizing that he had 
read it before. He couldn’t remember what he had eaten for breakfast. Such 
memory deficits led to the hypothesis that the hippocampus plays an important 
role in the formation of new memories; later experimental research confirmed 
this hypothesis (Cohen & Eichenbaum, 1993). We will learn exactly what role 
the hippocampus plays in memory in Chapter 5. Remember, researchers cannot 
make cause–effect statements based on the findings of a case study, but they can 
formulate hypotheses that can be tested in experiments.
Survey research.  The last descriptive method is one 
that you are most likely already familiar with, survey 
research. You have probably completed surveys either 
online, over the phone, via the mail, or in person during an 
interview. Survey research uses questionnaires and inter-
views to collect information about the behavior, beliefs, 
and attitudes of particular groups of people. It is assumed 
in survey research that people are willing and able to 
answer the survey questions accurately. However, the word-
ing, order, and structure of the survey questions may lead 
the participants to give biased answers (Schwartz, 1999). 
For example, survey researchers need to be aware of the 
social desirability bias, our tendency to respond in socially 
approved ways that may not reflect what we actually think 
or do. This means that questions need to be constructed 
carefully to minimize such biases. Developing a well-
structured, unbiased set of survey questions is a difficult, 
time-consuming task, but one that is essential to doing 
good survey research.
Another necessity in survey research is surveying a repre-
sentative sample of the relevant population, the entire group 
➤	 survey research  A descriptive research 
method in which the researcher uses 
questionnaires and interviews to collect 
information about the behavior, beliefs, 
and attitudes of particular groups of 
people.
➤	 population  The entire group of people 
that a researcher is studying.
George Price/The New Yorker Collection/www.cartoonbank.com
“Next question: I believe that life is a 
constant striving for balance, requiring 
frequent tradeoffs between morality and 
necessity, within a cyclic pattern of joy 
and sadness, forging a trail of bittersweet 
memories until one slips, inevitably, into 
the jaws of death. Agree or disagree?”

ReseArch Methods Used By Psychologists  |  11
of people being studied. For many reasons (such as time 
and money), it is impossible to survey every person in 
the population. This is why the researcher only surveys a 
sample, the subset of people in a population participat-
ing in a study. For these sample data to be meaningful, 
the sample has to be representative of the larger relevant 
population. If you don’t have a representative sample, 
then generalization of the survey findings to the popula-
tion is not possible.
One ill-fated survey study of women and love 
(Hite, 1987) tried to generalize from a nonrepresen-
tative sample (Jackson, 2012). Shere Hite’s sample 
was drawn mainly from women’s organizations and 
political groups, plus some women who requested and completed a survey 
following the researcher’s talk-show appearances. Because such a sample 
is not representative of American women in general, the results were not 
either. For example, the estimates of the numbers of women having affairs 
and disenchanted in their relationships with men were greatly overestimated. 
To obtain a representative sample, survey researchers usually use random 
sampling.
In random sampling, each individual in the population has an equal 
opportunity of being in the sample. To understand the “equal opportunity” 
part of the definition, think about selecting names from a hat, where each 
name has an equal opportunity for being selected. In actuality, statisticians 
have developed procedures for obtaining a random sample that parallel select-
ing names randomly from a hat. Think about how you would obtain a ran-
dom sample of first-year students at your college. You couldn’t just sample 
randomly from those first-year students in your psychology class. All first-year 
students wouldn’t have an equal opportunity to be in your sample. You would 
have to get a complete list of all first-year students from the registrar and then 
sample randomly from it. The point to remember is that a survey study must 
have a representative sample in order to generalize the research findings to the 
population.
Correlational Studies
In a correlational study, two variables are measured to determine if they are 
related (how well either one predicts the other). A variable is any factor that 
can take on more than one value. For example, age, height, grade point average, 
and intelligence test scores are all variables. In conducting a correlational study, 
the researcher first gets a representative sample of the relevant population. Next, 
the researcher takes the  two measurements on the sample. For example, the 
researcher could measure a person’s height and their weight.
➤	 sample  The subset of a population that 
actually participates in a research study.
➤	 random sampling  A sampling technique 
that obtains a representative sample 
of a population by ensuring that each 
individual in a population has an equal 
opportunity to be in the sample.
➤	 correlational study  A research study 
in which two variables are measured to 
determine if they are related (how well 
either one predicts the other).
➤	 variable  Any factor that can take on 
more than one value.

12  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
The correlation coefficient.  To see if the variables 
are related, the researcher calculates a statistic called the 
correlation coefficient, a statistic that tells us the type 
and the strength of the relationship between two vari-
ables. Correlation coefficients range in value from –1.0 to 
+1.0. The sign of the coefficient, + or –, tells us the type 
of relationship, positive or negative. A positive correla-
tion indicates a direct relationship between two 
variables—low scores on one variable tend to be paired 
with low scores on the other variable, and high scores on 
one variable tend to be paired with high scores on the 
other variable. Think about the relationship between 
height and weight. These two variables are positively 
related. Taller people tend to be heavier. SAT scores and first-year college grades 
are also positively correlated (Linn, 1982). Students who have higher SAT scores 
tend to get higher grades during their first year of college.
A negative correlation is an inverse relationship between two variables—low 
scores on one variable tend to be paired with high scores on the other variable, and 
high scores on one variable tend to be paired with low scores on the other variable. 
A good example of a negative correlation is the relationship for children between 
time spent watching television and grades in school—the more time spent watching 
television, the lower the school grades (Ridley-Johnson, Cooper, & Chance, 1983). 
As you know if you have ever climbed a mountain, elevation and temperature are 
negatively correlated—as elevation increases, temperature decreases. In summary, 
the sign of the coefficient tells us the type of the relationship between the two vari-
ables—positive (+) for a direct relationship or negative (–) for an inverse relationship.
The second part of the correlation coefficient is its absolute value, from 0 to 1.0. 
The strength of the correlation is indicated by its absolute value. Zero and absolute 
values near zero indicate no relationship. As the absolute value increases to 1.0, the 
strength of the relationship increases. Please note that the sign of the coefficient 
does not tell us anything about the strength of the relationship. Coefficients do 
not function like numbers on the number line, where positive numbers are greater 
than negative numbers. With correlation coefficients, only the absolute value of 
the number tells us about the relationship’s strength. For example, –.50 indicates 
a stronger relationship than +.25. As the strength of the correlation increases, 
researchers can predict the relationship with more accuracy. If the coefficient is + 
(or –) 1.0, we have perfect predictability. A correlation of (+ or –) 1.0 means that 
every change in one variable is accompanied by an equivalent change in the other 
variable in the same direction. Virtually all correlation coefficients in psychologi-
cal research have an absolute value less than 1.0. Thus, we usually do not have 
perfect predictability so there will be exceptions to these relationships, even the 
strong ones. These exceptions do not, however, invalidate the general trends indi-
cated by the correlations. They only indicate that the relationships are not perfect. 
Because the correlations are not perfect, such exceptions have to exist.
➤	 correlation coefficient  A statistic that 
tells us the type and the strength of the 
relationship between two variables. The 
sign of the coefficient (+ or –) indicates 
the type of correlation—positive or neg-
ative, respectively. The absolute value 
of the coefficient (0.0 to 1.0) represents 
the strength of the correlation, with 1.0 
being the maximum strength.
➤	 positive correlation  A direct relation-
ship between two variables.
➤	 negative correlation  An inverse rela-
tionship between two variables.

ReseArch Methods Used By Psychologists  |  13
Scatterplots.  A good way to understand the predict-
ability of a coefficient is to examine a scatterplot—a visual 
depiction of correlational data. In a scatterplot, each data 
point represents the scores on the two variables for each 
participant. Several sample scatterplots are presented in 
Figure 1.1 (page 14). Correlational studies usually involve a large number of par-
ticipants; therefore there are usually a large number of data points in a scatterplot. 
Because those in Figure 1.1 are just examples to illustrate how to interpret scatter-
plots, there are only 15 points in each one. This means there were 15 participants in 
each of the hypothetical correlational studies leading to these scatterplots.
The scatterplots in Figure 1.1(a) and (b) indicate perfect 1.0 correlations—(a) a 
perfect positive correlation and (b) a perfect negative correlation. All of the points 
fall on the same line in each scatterplot, which allows us to predict one variable 
from the other perfectly by using the equation for the line. This means that you 
have maximal predictability. Please note that the difference between (a) and (b) is 
the direction of the data points (line). If the data points show an increasing trend 
(go from the bottom left to the top right of the scatterplot) as in (a), it is a posi-
tive relationship. Low scores on one variable tend to be paired with low scores on 
the other variable, and high scores with high scores. This is a direct relationship. 
However, if the data points show a decreasing trend (go from the top left to the 
bottom right) as in (b), there is a negative relationship. Low scores tend to be paired 
with high scores, and high scores with low scores. This is an inverse relationship.
The scatterplot in Figure 1.1(c) indicates no relationship between the two 
variables. There is no direction to the data points in this scatterplot. They are 
scattered all over in a random fashion. This means that we have a correlation near 
0 and minimal predictability. Now consider (d) and (e). First, you should realize 
that (d) indicates a positive correlation because of the direction of the data points 
from the bottom left to the top right and that (e) indicates a negative correlation 
because of the direction of the scatter from the top left to the bottom right. But 
what else does the scatter of the data points tell us? Note that the data points in 
(d) and (e) neither fall on the same line as in (a) and (b), nor are they scattered 
all about the graph with no directional component as in (c). Thus, scatterplots 
(d) and (e) indicate correlations with strengths somewhere between 0 and 1.0. As 
the amount of scatter of the data points increases, the strength of the correlation 
decreases. So, how strong would the correlations represented in (d) and (e) be? 
They would be fairly strong because there is not much scatter. Remember, as the 
amount of scatter increases, the strength decreases and so does predictability. 
When the scatter is maximal as in (c), the strength is near 0, and we have little 
predictability.
The third-variable problem.  Strong correlations give us excellent predictabil-
ity, but they do not allow us to draw cause–effect conclusions about the relation-
ships between the variables. I cannot stress this point enough. Correlation is 
necessary but not sufficient for causation to exist. Remember, correlational data 
➤	 scatterplot  A visual depiction of cor-
relational data in which each data 
point represents the scores on the two 
variables for each participant.

Variable X
(a) perfect positive correlation
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Variable Y
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Variable X
(b) perfect negative correlation
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Variable Y
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Variable X
(d) Strong positive correlation
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Variable Y
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Variable X
(c) Near-zero correlation
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Variable Y
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Variable X
(e) Strong negative correlation
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Variable Y
15
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
m Figure 1.1 | Some Sample Scatterplots | (a) and 
(b) are examples of perfect correlations because there is 
no scatter—all of the data points in each plot fall on the 
same line. The correlation in (a) is positive because the 
data points show an increasing trend (go from bottom left 
to top right) and is negative in (b) because the data points 
show a decreasing trend (go from top left to bottom 
right). (c) is an example of a near-zero correlation because 
the data points are scattered all over and do not show a 
directional trend. (d) is an example of a strong positive 
correlation because there is not much scatter and the 
data points have an increasing trend. (e) is an example of 
a strong negative correlation because there is not much 
scatter and the data points show a decreasing trend.

ReseArch Methods Used By Psychologists  |  15
do not allow us to conclude anything about cause–effect relationships. Only data 
collected in well-controlled experiments allow us to draw such conclusions. This 
does not mean that two correlated variables cannot be causally related, but rather 
that we cannot determine this from correlational data. Maybe they are; maybe 
they are not. Correlational data do not allow you to decide if they are or are not. 
Let’s see why.
DILBERT © 2011 Scott Adams. Used By 
permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights 
reserved
To understand this point, let’s consider the negative correlation between self-
esteem and depression. As self-esteem decreases, depression increases. But we 
cannot conclude that low self-esteem causes depression. First, it could be the 
reverse causal relationship. Isn’t it just as likely that depression causes low self-
esteem? Second, and of more consequence, isn’t it possible that some third factor 
is responsible for the relationship between the two variables? For example, isn’t 
it possible that some people have a biological predisposition for both low self-
esteem and depression or that both self-esteem and depression are the result of a 
brain chemistry problem? Both self-esteem and depression could also stem from 
some current very stressful events. Such alternative possibilities are examples of 
the third-variable problem—another variable may be responsible for the rela-
tionship observed between two variables. In brief, such “third variables” are not 
controlled in a correlational study, making it impossible to determine the cause 
for the observed relationship.
To make sure you understand the third-variable problem, here is a very 
memorable example (Li, 1975, described in Stanovich, 2004). Because of over-
population problems, a correlational study was conducted in Taiwan to iden-
tify variables that best predicted the use of contraceptive devices. Correlational 
data were collected on many different variables, but the researchers found that 
use of contraceptive devices was most strongly correlated with the number of 
electrical appliances in the home! Obviously having 
electrical appliances such as television sets, microwave 
ovens, and toasters around does not cause people to 
use birth control. What third variable might be respon-
sible for this relationship? Think about it. A likely one 
is level of education. People with a higher education 
tend to be both better informed about birth control 
➤	 third-variable problem  An explanation 
of a correlation between two variables 
in terms of another (third) variable that 
could possibly be responsible for the 
observed relationship between the two 
variables.

16  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
and to have a higher socioeconomic status. The former leads them to use con-
traceptive devices, and the latter allows them to buy more electrical appliances. 
Whelan (2013) describes a similar example of the third-variable problem in his 
book Naked Statistics. Consider the positive correlation between a student’s SAT 
scores and the number of television sets that his family owns. Obviously this 
does not mean that parents can boost their children’s test scores by buying 
another half-dozen television sets. Nor does it likely mean that watching lots 
of television is good for academic achievement (we have already learned that it 
isn’t). The most logical explanation would be that highly educated people can 
afford a lot of television sets and tend to have children who test better than 
average. Both the number of television sets and the test scores are likely the 
result of a third variable, parental education. To control for the effects of such 
third variables, researchers conduct an experiment in which they manipulate 
one variable and measure its effect upon another variable while controlling 
other potentially relevant variables. Researchers must control for possible third 
variables so that they can make cause–effect statements. Such control, manipu-
lation, and measurement are the main elements of experimental research, 
which is described next.
Experimental Research
The key aspect of experimental research is that the researcher controls the experi-
mental setting. The only factor that varies is what the researcher manipulates. It is 
this control that allows the researcher to make cause–effect statements about the 
experimental results. This control is derived primarily from two actions. First, the 
experimenter controls for the possible influence of third variables by making sure 
that they are held constant across all of the groups or conditions in the experi-
ment. Second, the experimenter controls for any possible influences due to the 
individual characteristics of the participants, such as intelligence, motivation, and 
memory, by using random assignment—randomly assigning the participants to 
groups in an experiment in order to equalize participant characteristics across the 
various groups in the experiment. If the participant characteristics of the groups 
are on average equivalent at the beginning of the experiment, then any differences 
between the groups at the end of the experiment cannot be attributed to such 
characteristics.
Please note the differences between random assignment and random sampling. 
Random sampling is a technique in which a sample of participants that is repre-
sentative of a population is obtained. Hence it is used not only in experiments but 
also in other research methods such as correlational studies and surveys. Random 
assignment is only used in experiments. It is a control 
measure in which the researcher randomly assigns the 
participants in the sample to the various groups or con-
ditions in an experiment. Random sampling allows you 
to generalize your results to the relevant population; 
random assignment controls for possible influences of 
➤	 random assignment  A control measure 
in which participants are randomly 
assigned to groups in order to equalize 
participant characteristics across the 
various groups in an experiment.

ReseArch Methods Used By Psychologists  |  17
individual characteristics of the participants on the behavior(s) of interest in an 
experiment. These differences between random sampling and random assignment 
are summarized in Table 1.2.
Designing an experiment.  When a researcher designs an experiment, the re- 
searcher begins with a hypothesis (the prediction to be tested) about the cause–effect 
relationship between two variables. One of the two variables is assumed to be the 
cause, and the other variable is the one to be affected. The independent variable 
is  the hypothesized cause, and the experimenter manipulates it. The dependent 
variable is the variable that is hypothesized to be affected by the independent vari-
able and thus is measured by the experimenter. Thus, in an experiment the 
researcher manipulates the independent variable and measures its effect on the 
dependent variable while controlling other potentially relevant variables. If there is a 
causal relationship between the independent and depen-
dent variables, then the measurements of the dependent 
variable are dependent on the values of the independent 
variable, hence the name dependent variable. Sometimes 
the researcher hypothesizes more than one cause or more 
than one effect so he manipulates more than one indepen-
dent variable or measures more than one dependent vari-
able. To help you understand this terminology and the 
mechanics of an experiment, I’ll describe an example.
Let’s consider the simplest experiment first—only two 
groups. For control purposes, participants are randomly 
assigned to these two groups. One of the groups will 
be exposed to the independent variable, and the other 
will not. The group exposed to the independent vari-
able is called the experimental group, and the group 
not exposed to the independent variable is called the 
Table 1.2   Differences Between Random Sampling and Random 
Assignment
Random Sampling
Random Assignment
A sampling technique in which a 
sample of participants that is represen-
tative of the population is obtained
A control measure in which participants 
in a sample are randomly assigned to the 
groups or conditions in an experiment
Used in experiments and some other 
research methods such as correlational 
studies and surveys
Used only in experiments
Allows researcher to generalize the 
findings to the relevant population
Allows researcher to control for possible 
influences of individual characteristics 
of the participants on the behavior(s) of 
interest
➤	 independent variable  In an experiment, 
the variable that is a hypothesized 
cause and thus is manipulated by the 
experimenter.
➤	 dependent variable  In an experiment, 
a variable that is hypothesized to be 
affected by the independent variable and 
thus is measured by the experimenter.
➤	 experiment  A research method in 
which the researcher manipulates one 
or more independent variables and 
measures their effect on one or more 
dependent variables while controlling 
other potentially relevant variables.
➤	 experimental group  In an experiment, 
the group exposed to the independent 
variable.

18  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
control group. Let’s say the experimenter’s hypothesis is that aerobic exercise 
reduces anxiety. The independent variable that will be manipulated is aerobic 
exercise, and the dependent variable that will be measured is level of anxiety. The 
experimental group will participate in some aerobic exercise program, and the 
control group will not. To measure any possible effects of the aerobic exercise 
on anxiety, the experimenter must measure the anxiety levels of the participants 
in each group at the beginning of the study before the independent variable is 
manipulated, and then again after the manipulation. If the two groups are truly 
equivalent, the level of anxiety for each group at the beginning of the study 
should be essentially the same. If the aerobic exercise does reduce anxiety, then 
we should see this difference in the second measurement of anxiety at the end of 
the experiment.
The independent and dependent variables in an experiment must be opera-
tionally defined. An operational definition is a description of the operations or 
procedures the researcher uses to manipulate or measure a variable. In our sample 
experiment, the operational definition of aerobic exercise would include the type 
and the duration of the activity. For level of anxiety, the operational definition 
would describe the way the anxiety variable was measured (for example, a partici-
pant’s score on a specified anxiety scale). Operational definitions not only clarify 
a particular experimenter’s definitions of variables but also allow other experi-
menters to attempt to replicate the experiment more easily, and replication is the 
cornerstone of science (Moonesinghe, Khoury, & Janssens, 2007).
Let’s go back to our aerobic exercise experiment. We have our experimental 
group and our control group, but this experiment really requires a second con-
trol group. The first control group (the group not participating in the aerobic 
exercise program) provides a baseline level of anxiety to which the anxiety of 
the experimental group can then be compared. In other words, it controls for 
changes in the level of anxiety not due to aerobic exercise. However, we also need 
to control for what is called the placebo effect—improvement due to the expec-
tation of improving because of receiving treatment. The treatment involved 
in the placebo effect, however, only involves receiving a placebo—an inactive 
pill or a treatment that has no known effects. The pla-
cebo effect can arise not only from a conscious belief in 
the treatment but also from subconscious associations 
between recovery and the experience of being treated 
(Niemi, 2009). For example, stimuli that a patient links 
with getting better, such as a doctor’s white lab coat 
or the smell of an examining room, may induce some 
improvement in the patient’s condition. In addition, 
giving a placebo a popular medication brand name, 
prescribing more frequent doses, using placebo injec-
tions rather than pills, or indicating that it is expensive 
can boost the effect of a placebo (Niemi, 2009; Stewart-
Williams, 2004; Waber, Shiv, Carmon, & Ariely, 2008). 
➤	 control group  In an experiment, the 
group not exposed to the independent 
variable.
➤	 operational definition  A description 
of the operations or procedures that a 
researcher uses to manipulate or mea-
sure a variable.
➤	 placebo effect  Improvement due to the 
expectation of improving because of 
receiving treatment.
➤	 placebo  An inactive pill or a treatment 
that has no known effects.

ReseArch Methods Used By Psychologists  |  19
Recent research has even found that the placebo effect 
may not require concealment or deception (Kaptchuk 
et al., 2010) and, in the case of pain, that it’s size may 
be impacted by personality traits, such as altruism and 
resilience (Peciña et al., 2013).
The placebo (Latin for “I will please) effect, how-
ever, does have an evil twin, the nocebo (Latin for 
“I  will harm”) effect, whereby expectation of a nega-
tive outcome due to treatment leads to adverse effects 
(Benedetti, Lanotte, Lopiano, & Colloca, 2007; Kennedy 
1961). Thus, expectations can also do harm; hence, the 
nocebo effect is sometimes referred to as a negative 
placebo effect. For example, when a patient anticipates 
a drug’s possible side effects, he can suffer them even 
if the drug is a placebo. Because of ethical reasons, the 
nocebo effect has not been studied nearly as much as 
the placebo effect, but recently Häuser, Hansen, and 
Enck (2012) reviewed 31 studies that clearly demon-
strated the nocebo effect in clinical practice. They 
concluded that the nocebo effect creates an ethical dilemma for physicians and 
therapists—how to fully inform patients of the potential complications of treat-
ment and at the same time minimize inducing these complications through 
nocebo effects. Thus, research on the nocebo effect has mainly centered on its 
critical role in clinical practice whereas much of the research on the placebo effect 
has been concerned with controlling for improvement due to participant expecta-
tions, as in our aerobic exercise experiment.
The reduction of anxiety in the experimental group participants in our aero-
bic exercise experiment may be partially or completely due to a placebo effect. 
This is why researchers add a control group called the placebo group to control 
for the possible placebo effect. A placebo group is a group of participants who 
believe they are receiving treatment, but they are not. They get a placebo. For 
example, the participants in a placebo group in the aerobic exercise experiment 
would be told that they are getting an antianxiety drug, but they would only 
get a placebo (in this case, a pill that has no active ingredient). The complete 
design for the aerobic exercise experiment, including the experimental, placebo, 
and control groups, is shown in Figure 1.2 (page 20). For the experimenter to 
conclude that there is a placebo effect, the reduction 
of anxiety in the placebo group would have to be sig-
nificantly greater than the reduction for the control 
group. For the experimenter to conclude that the 
reduction of anxiety in the experimental group is due 
to aerobic exercise and not a placebo effect, it would 
have to be significantly greater than that observed for 
the placebo group.
from Mordantorange.com, Mike Bannon, cartoonist
➤	 nocebo effect  A negative placebo effect 
due to the expectation of adverse con-
sequences from receiving treatment.
➤	 placebo group  A control group of par-
ticipants who believe they are receiving 
treatment, but who are only receiving a 
placebo.

20  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
Now you may be wondering what is meant by “significantly greater.” This is 
where statistical analysis enters the scene. We use what are called inferential sta-
tistical analyses—statistical analyses that allow researchers to draw conclusions 
about the results of their studies. Such analyses tell the researcher the probability 
that the results of the study are due to random variation (chance). Obviously, the 
experimenter would want this probability to be low. Remember, the experiment-
er’s hypothesis is that the manipulation of the independent variable (not chance) 
is what causes the dependent variable to change. In statistics, a “significant” find-
ing is one that has a probability of .05 (1/20) or less that it is due to chance. Thus, 
a significant finding is one that is probably not due to chance.
Statistical significance tells us that a result probably did not occur by chance, but 
it does not insure that the finding has practical significance or value in our every-
day world. A statistically significant finding with little practical value sometimes 
occurs when very large samples are used in a study. With such samples, very small 
differences among groups may be significant. Belmont 
and Marolla’s (1973) finding of a birth-order effect for 
intelligence test scores is a good example of such a finding. 
Belmont and Marolla analyzed intelligence test data for 
almost 400,000 19-year-old Dutch males. There was a clear 
birth-order effect: First borns scored significantly higher 
than second borns, second borns higher than third borns, 
➤	 inferential statistical analyses  Statistical 
analyses that allow researchers to draw 
conclusions about the results of a study 
by determining the probability that the 
results are due to random variation 
(chance). The results are statistically 
significant if this probability is .05 or less.
Experimental
Placebo
Control
Group
Level of anxiety
assessed before and
after manipulation
Level of anxiety
assessed before and
after manipulation
Level of anxiety
assessed before and
after manipulation
Dependent Variable
(what is measured)
Receives a placebo
No aerobic exercise
or placebo
Participates in
aerobic exercise
program
Independent Variable
(what is manipulated)
Random assignment
of participants
to groups
m Figure 1.2 | Design of Aerobic Exercise and Anxiety Experiment | Participants are 
randomly assigned to groups in order to equalize participant characteristics across the groups. 
The placebo group controls for the placebo effect, and the control group provides a baseline 
level of anxiety reduction for participants who do not participate in the aerobic exercise program 
or receive a placebo. The level of anxiety reduction for each group is determined by comparing 
the measurements of the dependent variable (level of anxiety) before and after manipulating the 
independent variable (aerobic exercise).

ReseArch Methods Used By Psychologists  |  21
and so on. However, the score difference between 
these groups was very small (only a point or two) 
and thus not of much practical value. So remember, 
statistically significant findings do not always have 
practical significance.
The aerobic exercise experiment would also need 
to include another control measure, the double-
blind procedure. In the double-blind procedure, 
neither the experimenters nor the participants 
know which participants are in the experimen-
tal and control groups. This procedure is called 
“double-blind” because both the experimenters 
and participants are blind to (do not know) the 
participant group assignments. It is not unusual 
for participants to be blind to which group they 
have been assigned. This is especially critical for 
the placebo group participants. If they were told 
that they were getting a placebo, there would be 
no expectation for getting better and hence no (or a much reduced) placebo effect. 
But why should the experimenters not know the group assignments of the partici-
pants? This is to control for the effects of experimenter expectation (Rosenthal, 
1966, 1994). If the experimenters knew which condition the participants were in, 
they might unintentionally treat them differently and thereby affect their behav-
ior. In addition, the experimenters might interpret and record the behavior of the 
participants differently if they needed to make judgments about their behavior 
(their anxiety level in the example study). The key for the participant assignments 
to groups is kept by a third party and then given to the experimenters once the 
study has been conducted.
Now let’s think about experiments that are more complex than our sample experi-
ment with its one independent variable (aerobic exercise) and two control groups. In 
most experiments, the researcher examines multiple values of the independent vari-
able. With respect to the aerobic exercise variable, the experimenter might examine 
the effects of different amounts or different types of aerobic exercise. Such manipula-
tions would provide more detailed information about the effects of aerobic exercise 
on anxiety. An experimenter might also manipulate more than one independent 
variable. For example, an experimenter might manipulate diet as well as aerobic exer-
cise. Different diets (high-protein vs. high-carbohydrate diets) might affect a person’s 
level of anxiety in different ways. The two independent variables (diet and aerobic 
exercise) might also interact to determine one’s level of 
anxiety. An experimenter could also increase the number 
of dependent variables. For example, both level of anxiety 
and level of depression could be measured in our sample 
experiment, even if only aerobic exercise were manipulated. 
If aerobic exercise reduces anxiety, then it might also reduce 
1996 Sidney Harris
➤	 double-blind procedure  A control mea-
sure in an experiment in which neither 
the experimenters nor the participants 
know which participants are in the 
experimental and control groups.
“It was more of a ‘triple-blind’ test. The patients didn’t 
know which ones were getting the real drug, the 
doctors didn’t know, and I’m afraid, nobody knew.”

22  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
depression. As an experimenter increases the number of 
values of an independent variable, the number of indepen-
dent variables, or the number of dependent variables, the 
possible gain in knowledge about the relationship between 
the variables also increases. Thus, most experiments are 
more complex in design than our simple example with an 
experimental group and two control groups. In addition, many experimental stud-
ies, including replications, must be conducted to address any experimental question. 
Researchers have a statistical technique called meta-analysis that combines the 
results for a large number of studies on one experimental question into one analysis 
to arrive at an overall conclusion. Because a meta-analysis involves the results of 
numerous experimental studies, its conclusion is considered much stronger evidence 
than the results of an individual study in answering an experimental question.
The various research methods that have been discussed are summarized in 
Table 1.3. Their purposes and data-gathering procedures are described. Make 
sure you understand each of these research methods before going on to the next 
section, where we’ll discuss how to understand research results. If you feel that 
you don’t understand a particular method, go back and reread the information 
about it until you do.
Table 1.3    Summary of Research Methods
Research Method
Goal of Method
How Data Are Collected
Laboratory observation
Description
Unobtrusively observe behavior 
in a laboratory setting
Naturalistic observation
Description
Unobtrusively observe behavior 
in its natural setting
Participant observation
Description
Observer becomes part of the 
group whose behavior is being 
observed
Case study
Description
Study an individual in depth over 
an extended period of time
Survey
Description
Representative sample of a group 
completes questionnaires or 
interviews to determine behavior, 
beliefs, and attitudes of the group
Correlational study
Prediction
Measure two variables to deter-
mine whether they are related
Experiment
Explanation
Manipulate one or more indepen-
dent variables in a controlled set-
ting to determine their impact on 
one or more measured dependent 
variables
➤	 meta-analysis  A statistical technique 
that combines the results of a large 
number of studies on one experimental 
question into one analysis to arrive at an 
overall conclusion.

ReseArch Methods Used By Psychologists  |  23
Section Summary
Research methods fall into three categories—descriptive, correlational, and experi-
mental. There are three descriptive methods—observation, case studies, and surveys. 
Observational studies can be conducted in the laboratory or in a natural setting (natu-
ralistic observation). Sometimes participant observation is used. In participant obser-
vation, the observer becomes a part of the group being observed. The main goal of all 
observation is to obtain a detailed and accurate description of behavior. A case study 
is an in-depth study of one individual. Hypotheses generated from case studies in a 
clinical setting have often led to important experimental findings. Surveys attempt 
to describe the behavior, attitudes, or beliefs of particular populations (groups of 
people). It is essential in conducting surveys to ensure that a representative sample 
of the population is obtained for the study. Random sampling in which each person in 
the population has an equal opportunity to be in the sample is used for this purpose.
Descriptive methods only allow description, but correlational studies allow the 
researcher to make predictions about the relationships between variables. In a cor-
relational study, two variables are measured and these measurements are compared 
to see if they are related. A statistic, the correlation coefficient, tells us both the type 
of the relationship (positive or negative) and the strength of the relationship. The sign 
of the coefficient (+ or –) tells us the type, and the absolute value of the coefficient 
(0 to 1.0) tells us the strength. Zero and values near zero indicate no relationship. As 
the absolute value approaches 1.0, the strength increases. Correlational data may 
also be depicted in scatterplots. A positive correlation is indicated by data points that 
extend from the bottom left of the plot to the top right. Scattered data points going 
from the top left to the bottom right indicate a negative correlation. The strength is 
reflected in the amount of scatter—the more the scatter, the lower the strength. A 
correlation of 1.0 gives us perfect predictability about the two variables involved, 
but it does not allow us to make cause–effect statements about the variables. This is 
because “third variables” may be responsible for the observed relationship.
To draw cause–effect conclusions, the researcher must conduct well-controlled 
experiments. In a simple experiment, the researcher manipulates the independent 
variable (the hypothesized cause) and measures its effect upon the dependent variable 
(the variable hypothesized to be affected). These variables are operationally defined so 
that other researchers understand exactly how they were manipulated or measured. 
In more complex experiments, more than one independent variable is manipulated or 
more than one dependent variable is measured. The experiment is conducted in a con-
trolled environment in which possible third variables are held constant; the individual 
characteristics of participants are controlled through random assignment of partici-
pants to groups or conditions. Other controls employed in experiments include using 
a control group that is not exposed to the experimental manipulation, a placebo group 
that receives a placebo to control for the placebo effect, and the double-blind proce-
dure that controls for the effects of experimenter and participant expectation. The 
researcher uses inferential statistics to interpret the results of an experiment. These 
statistics determine the probability that the results are due to chance. For the results 
to be statistically significant, this probability has to be very low, .05 or less. Statistically 
significant results, however, may or may not have practical significance or value in our 
everyday world. Because researchers have to conduct many studies, including replica-
tions, to address an experimental question, meta-analysis, a statistical technique that 
combines the results of a large number of experiments on one experimental question 
into one analysis, can be used to arrive at an overall conclusion.

24  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
ConceptCheck | 2
➤	 explain why the results of a case study cannot be generalized to a population.
➤	 explain the differences between random sampling and random assignment.
➤	 explain how the scatterplots for correlation coefficients of +.90 and –.90 
would differ.
➤	 Waldman, Nicholson, adilov, and Williams (2008) found that autism preva-
lence rates among school-aged children were positively correlated with 
annual precipitation levels in various states. autism rates were higher in 
counties with higher precipitation levels. try to identify some possible third 
variables that might be responsible for this correlation.
➤	 explain why a double-blind procedure is necessary in an experiment in 
which there is a placebo group.
How to Understand Research Results
Once we have completed an experiment, we need to understand our results and to 
describe them concisely so that others can understand them. To do this, we need 
to use statistics. There are two types of statistics—descriptive and inferential. We 
described inferential statistics when we discussed how to interpret the results of 
experimental studies. In this section, we will be discussing descriptive statistics—
statistics used to describe the data of a research study 
in a concise fashion. The correlation coefficient that we 
discussed earlier is a descriptive statistic that allows us to 
describe the results of a correlational study precisely. For 
experimental findings, we need two types of descriptive 
statistics to summarize our data—measures of central 
tendency and measures of variability. In addition, a 
researcher often constructs a frequency distribution for 
the data. A frequency distribution depicts, in a table or a graph, the number of 
participants receiving each score for a variable. The bell curve, or normal distribu-
tion, is the most famous frequency distribution. We begin with the two types of 
descriptive statistics necessary to describe a data set: measures of central tendency 
and measures of variability.
Descriptive Statistics
In an experiment, the data set consists of the measured scores on the dependent 
variable for the sample of participants. A listing of this set of scores, or any 
set of numbers, is referred to as a distribution of scores, or a distribution of 
numbers. To describe such distributions in a concise summary manner, we use 
two types of descriptive statistics: measures of central tendency and measures 
of variability.
➤	 descriptive statistics  Statistics that 
describe the results of a research study 
in a concise fashion.
➤	 frequency distribution  A depiction, in a 
table or figure, of the number of partici-
pants (frequency) receiving each score 
for a variable.

hoW to UnderstAnd ReseArch Results  |  25
Measures of central tendency.  The measures of cen-
tral tendency define a “typical” score for a distribution of 
scores. There are three measures of central tendency 
(three ways to define the “typical” score)—mean, median, 
and mode. The first is one that you are already familiar 
with—the mean or average. The mean is the numerical 
average for a distribution of scores. To compute the 
mean, you merely add up all of the scores and divide by 
the number of scores. A second measure of central ten-
dency is the median—the score positioned in the middle 
of the distribution of scores when all of the scores are 
listed from the lowest to the highest. If there is an odd 
number of scores, the median is the middle score. If there is an even number of 
scores, the median is the halfway point between the two center scores. The final 
measure of central tendency, the mode, is the most frequently occurring score in 
a distribution of scores. Sometimes there are two or more scores that occur most 
frequently. In these cases, the distribution has multiple modes. Now let’s consider 
a small set of scores to see how these measures are computed.
Let’s imagine a class with five students who just took an exam. That gives us a 
distribution of five test scores: 70, 80, 80, 85, and 85. First, let’s compute the mean 
or average score. The sum of all five scores is 400. Now divide 400 by 5, and you 
get the mean, 80. What’s the median? It’s the middle score when the scores are 
arranged in ascending order. Because there is an odd number of scores (5), it’s the 
third score—80. If there had been an even number of scores, the median would be 
the halfway point between the center two scores. For example, if there had been 
only four scores in our sample distribution (70, 80, 85, and 85), the median would 
be the halfway point between 80 and 85, 82.5. Now, what’s the mode or most fre-
quently occurring score? For the distribution of five scores, there are two numbers 
that occur twice, so there are two modes—80 and 85. This kind of distribution is 
referred to as a bimodal distribution (a distribution with two modes). Remember 
that a distribution can have one or more than one mode.
Of the three measures of central tendency, the mean is the one that is most 
commonly used. This is mainly because it is used to analyze the data in many 
inferential statistical tests. The mean can be distorted, however, by a small set of 
unusually high or low scores. In this case, the median, which is not distorted by 
such scores, should be used. To understand how atypical scores can distort the 
mean, let’s consider changing one score in our sample distribution of five scores. 
Change 70 to 20. Now, the mean is 70 (350/5). The median remains 80, however; 
it hasn’t changed. This is because the median is only a positional score. The mean 
is distorted because it has to average in the value of any unusual scores.
Measures of variability.  In addition to knowing the typical score for a distri-
bution, you need to determine the variability between the scores. There are two 
measures of variability—the range and the standard deviation. The range is the 
simpler to compute. The range is simply the difference between the highest and 
➤	 mean  The numerical average of a distri-
bution of scores.
➤	 median  The score positioned in the 
middle of a distribution of scores when 
all of the scores are arranged from 
lowest to highest.
➤	 mode  The most frequently occurring 
score in a distribution of scores.
➤	 range  The difference between the high-
est and lowest scores in a distribution of 
scores.

26  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
lowest scores in the distribution. For our sample distri-
bution with five scores, it would be 85 minus 70, or 15. 
However, like the mean, unusually high or low scores 
distort the range. For example, if the 70 in the distribu-
tion had been a 20, the range would change to be 85 minus 20, or 65. This would 
not be a good measure of the distribution’s variability because four of the five 
scores are 80 or 85, not very different.
The measure of variability used most often is the standard deviation. In general 
terms, the standard deviation is the average extent that the scores vary from the 
mean of the distribution. In other words, how spread out are the scores? If the 
scores do not vary much from the mean, the standard deviation will be small. 
If they vary a lot from the mean, the standard deviation will be larger. In our 
example of five test scores with a mean of 80, the scores (70, 80, 80, 85, and 85) 
didn’t vary much from this mean, therefore the standard deviation would not 
be very large. However, if the scores had been 20, 40, 80, 120, and 140, the mean 
would still be 80; but the scores vary more from the mean, therefore the standard 
deviation would be much larger.
The standard deviation and the various other descriptive statistics that we have 
discussed are summarized in Table 1.4. Review this table to make sure you under-
stand each statistic. The standard deviation is especially relevant to the normal 
distribution, or bell curve. We will see in Chapter 6, on thinking and intelligence, 
that intelligence test scores are actually determined with respect to standard 
deviation units in the normal distribution. Next we will consider the normal dis-
tribution and the two types of skewed frequency distributions.
Table 1.4     Summary of Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive Statistic
Explanation of Statistic
Correlation coefficient
A number between –1.0 and +1.0 whose sign indicates 
the type (+ = positive and – = negative) and whose 
absolute value (0 to 1.0) indicates the strength of the 
relationship between two variables
Mean
Numerical average for a distribution of scores
Median
Middle score in a distribution of scores when all 
scores are arranged in order from lowest to highest
Mode
Most frequently occurring score or scores in a distri-
bution of scores
Range
Difference between highest and lowest scores in a 
distribution of scores
Standard deviation
Average extent to which the scores vary from the 
mean for a distribution of scores
➤	 standard deviation  The average extent 
that the scores vary from the mean for a 
distribution of scores.

hoW to UnderstAnd ReseArch Results  |  27
Frequency Distributions
A frequency distribution organizes the data in a score 
distribution so that we know the frequency of each 
score. It tells us how often each score occurred. These 
frequencies can be presented in a table or visually in a 
figure. We’ll consider visual depictions. For many human 
traits (such as height, weight, and intelligence), the fre-
quency distribution takes on the shape of a bell curve. In fact, if a large number 
of people are measured on almost anything, the frequency distribution will visu-
ally approximate a bell-shaped curve. Statisticians call this bell-shaped frequency 
distribution, shown in Figure 1.3, the normal distribution.
Normal distributions.  There are two main aspects of a normal distribution. 
First, the mean, the median, and the mode are all equal because the normal dis-
tribution is symmetric about its center. You do not have to worry about which 
measure of central tendency to use because all of them are equal. The same num-
ber of scores fall below the center point as above it. Second, the percentage of 
scores falling within a certain number of standard deviations of the mean is set. 
About 68 percent of the scores fall within 1 standard deviation of the mean; about 
95 percent within 2 standard deviations of the mean; and over 99 percent within 
3 standard deviations of the mean.
These percentages are what give the normal distribution its bell shape. The 
percentages hold regardless of the size of the standard deviation for a normal 
distribution. Figure 1.4 (page 30) shows two normal distributions with the same 
mean but different standard deviations. Both have bell shapes, but the distribu-
tion with the smaller standard deviation (A) is taller. As the size of the standard 
deviation increases, the bell shape becomes shorter and wider (like B).
➤	 normal distribution  A frequency distri-
bution that is shaped like a bell. About 
68 percent of the scores fall within 
1 standard deviation of the mean, about 
95 percent within 2 standard deviations 
of the mean, and over 99 percent within 
3 standard deviations of the mean.
m Figure 1.3 | The Normal 
Distribution | In a normal 
distribution, the mean, the 
median, and the mode are all 
equal because the distribution 
is perfectly symmetrical about 
its center. In addition, about 
68 percent of the scores fall 
within 1 standard deviation of 
the mean, about 95 percent 
within 2 standard deviations 
of the mean, and over 99 per-
cent within 3 standard devia-
tions of the mean.
Number of standard deviations from the mean
+3
–3
+2
–2
0.13%
+1
–1
Mean
0
Frequency
2.15%
13.59% 34.13% 34.13%
99.74%
13.59%
0.13%
2.15%
95.44%
68.26%

28  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
The percentages of scores and the number of standard deviations from the 
mean always have the same relationship in a normal distribution. This allows 
you to compute percentile ranks for scores. A percentile rank is the percentage 
of scores below a specific score in a distribution of scores. If you know how many 
standard deviation units a specific score is above or below the mean in a normal 
distribution, you can compute that score’s percentile rank. For example, the 
percentile rank of a score that is 1 standard deviation above the mean is roughly 
84 percent. Remember, a normal distribution is symmetric about the mean so 
that 50 percent of the scores are above the mean and 50 percent are below the 
mean. This means that the percentile rank of a score that is 1 standard deviation 
above the mean is greater than 50 percent (the percent below the mean) +34 per-
cent (the percent of scores from the mean to +1 standard deviation).
Now I’ll let you try to compute a percentile rank. What is the percentile rank 
for a score that is 1 standard deviation below the mean? Remember that it is the 
percentage of the scores below that score. Look at Figure 1.3. What percentage of 
the scores is less than a score that is 1 standard deviation below the mean? The 
answer is about 16 percent. You can never have a percentile rank of 100 percent 
because you cannot outscore yourself, but you can have a percentile rank of 
0 percent if you have the lowest score in the distribution. The scores on intelli-
gence tests and the SAT are based on normal distributions so percentile ranks can 
be calculated for these scores. We will return to the normal distribution when we 
discuss intelligence test scores in Chapter 6.
Skewed distributions.  In addition to the normal dis-
tribution, two other types of frequency distributions are 
important. They are called skewed distributions, which 
are frequency distributions that are asymmetric in shape. 
The two major types of skewed distributions are illus-
trated in Figure 1.5. A right-skewed distribution is a 
frequency distribution in which there are some unusually 
➤	 percentile rank  The percentage of 
scores below a specific score in a distri-
bution of scores.
➤	 right-skewed distribution  An asymmetric 
frequency distribution in which there are 
some unusually high scores that distort 
the mean to be greater than the median.
m Figure 1.4 | Normal 
Distributions with 
Different Standard 
Deviations | These are 
normal distributions with 
the same mean but different 
standard deviations. Normal 
distribution A has a smaller 
standard deviation than nor-
mal distribution B. As the 
standard deviation for a nor-
mal distribution gets smaller, 
its bell shape gets narrower 
and taller.
Mean
Frequency
B
A

hoW to UnderstAnd ReseArch Results  |  29
high scores [shown in Figure 1.5(a)]. A left-skewed distribution is a frequency 
distribution in which there are some unusually low scores [shown in Figure 1.5(b)]. 
An easy way to remember the difference is that the tail of the right-skewed distribu-
tion goes off to the right, and the tail of the left-skewed distribution goes off to the 
left. A right-skewed distribution is also called a positively skewed distribution (the 
tail goes toward the positive end of the number line); a left-skewed distribution is 
also called a negatively skewed distribution (the tail goes toward the negative end 
of the number line).
Now that we have defined right-skewed and left-skewed distributions, let’s 
consider some examples of each type of distribution so that we get a better 
understanding of these distributions. As you read these examples, visually 
think about what the distributions would look like. Remember, the tail of a 
right-skewed distribution goes to the right (the high end of the scale), and 
the tail of a left-skewed distribution goes to the left (the low end of the scale). 
Also, remember that the tails of these skewed distri-
butions can be very long. Age at retirement is a good 
example of a left-skewed distribution. Most people 
retire in their mid to late 60s or early 70s, some retire 
in their 50s, and relatively few in their 40s or earlier. 
➤	 left-skewed distribution  An asymmetric 
frequency distribution in which there are 
some unusually low scores that distort 
the mean to be less than the median.
m Figure 1.5 | Sample  
Right-Skewed and  
Left-Skewed Frequency 
Distributions | (a) This 
is an example of a right-
skewed frequency distribu-
tion in which the tail of the 
distribution goes off to the 
right. In a right-skewed 
distribution, the mean is 
greater than the median 
because the unusually high 
scores distort it. (b) This is 
an example of a left-skewed 
frequency distribution in 
which the tail of the distri-
bution goes off to the left. 
The mean is less than the 
median because the unusu-
ally low scores distort it.
Mean
Median
Mode
high
Low
Scores
(a) right-skewed distribution
Mean
Median
Mode
high
Low
Scores
(b) Left-skewed distribution
Frequency
Frequency

30  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
Another example would be scores on a relatively easy exam. Most students 
would get As or Bs (high scores), some would get Cs, a few Ds, and hardly any 
Fs (low scores).
The distribution of people’s incomes is a good example of a right-skewed dis-
tribution. The incomes of most people tend to be on the lower end of possible 
incomes, but some people make a lot of money, with very high incomes increas-
ingly rare. The “long tail” phenomenon in the digital business world (Anderson, 
2008) also involves right-skewed distributions. The “long tail” referred to is that 
for the distribution depicting the sales of all the available items in a specific mar-
ket (e.g., music tracks or book titles) as a function of their popularity rank. The 
small number of very popular items comprises the head of the distribution, and 
the very large number of less popular items comprises the long tail. Given their 
much lower stocking and distribution costs versus physical retailers, e-businesses 
can essentially sell the entire distribution; and the aggregate of all of the items in 
the long tail comprises a large market for sales. Figure 1.6 shows the long tail for 
music downloads for online music retailer Rhapsody versus Walmart.
Because unusually high or low scores distort a mean, such distortion occurs 
for the means of skewed distributions. The mean for a right-skewed distribution 
is distorted toward the tail created by the few high scores and therefore is greater 
than the median. The mean for the left-skewed distribution is distorted toward 
the tail created by the few low scores and therefore is less than the median. When 
you have a skewed distribution, you should use the median because atypical 
scores in the distribution do not distort the median. Consider this example from 
Whelan (2013). The median annual income for 10 guys sitting at a bar is $35,000. 
When multibillionaire Bill Gates walks in and sits at the bar, the median remains 
$35,000. If another multibillionaire comes in and sits at the bar next to Bill, the 
Songs available
only at Rhapsody
Titles, ranked by popularity
Downloads
Songs
available
at
Walmart
and
Rhapsody
180,000
10,000
0
5,000
25,000th
50,000th
100,000th
900,000th
m Figure 1.6 | An Example of 
a Right-Skewed Distribution |  
In this case, it is the “long tail” 
phenomenon involving music 
downloads from Walmart and 
online music retailer Rhapsody. 
Adapted from Anderson (2008).

hoW to UnderstAnd ReseArch Results  |  31
median still does not change. Why? Atypical scores do not distort the median. 
This means that you need to know the type of frequency distribution for the 
scores before deciding which measure of central tendency—mean or median—is 
more appropriate. Beware, sometimes the inappropriate measure of central ten-
dency for skewed distributions (the mean) is used to mislead you (Huff, 1954). 
Paulos (2006) in an article subtitled, “It’s mean to ignore the median” describes 
a good example of such misuse from the political arena in the early 2000s. 
Republicans touted the economy’s growth since 2000 using the mean increase in 
family income in the United States whereas the Democrats pushed the economy’s 
lackluster growth using the median increase in family income. If the distribution 
of increase in family incomes across all levels of socioeconomic status was skewed, 
then the median would be the appropriate statistic to use. The distribution was 
indeed skewed, severely left-skewed. The growth in family income not only eluded 
the lower and middle classes, but by and large, it passed up the upper-middle class 
as well. The huge increases in income went mainly to those with already huge 
incomes. Thus, in this case the median was the appropriate statistic to use.
Skewed distributions are also important to understand because various aspects 
of everyday life, such as medical trends (mortality rates for various diseases), are 
often skewed. Let’s consider a famous example of the importance of understand-
ing skewed distributions (Gould, 1985). Stephen Jay Gould, a noted Harvard sci-
entist, died of cancer in 2002. However, this was 20 years after he was diagnosed 
with abdominal mesothelioma cancer and told that this type of cancer had “a 
median mortality rate of 8 months after diagnosis.” Most people would think 
that they would only have about 8 months to live if given this median statistic. 
However, Gould realized that his expected chances depended upon the type of 
frequency distribution for the deaths from this disease. Because the statistic is 
reported as a median rather than a mean, the distribution is skewed. Now, if you 
were Gould, which type of skewed distribution would you want—right or left? 
Many people at first think they would want left-skewed, but you wouldn’t want 
this distribution because everyone would be dead within less than a year. Look at 
its shape in Figure 1.5(b). If it is 8 months from the origin to the median, then it 
is less than 4 months from the median to the end of the distribution. You would 
want a severely right-skewed distribution with a long tail to the right, going on 
for years. This is what Gould found the distribution to be when he examined the 
medical literature on the disease. The distribution had a tail that stretched out to 
the right for many years beyond the median, and Gould was fortunate to be out 
in this long tail, living for 20 more years after getting the diagnosis. When he did 
die, it was from a different type of cancer (Blastland & Dilnot, 2009).
Gould wrote a famous article called “The Median Isn’t the Message,” in which 
he argued that his knowledge of statistics saved him from the erroneous conclu-
sion that he would necessarily be dead in 8 months. In confronting his illness, 
Gould was thinking like a scientist. Such thinking provided him and the many 
readers of his article with a better understanding of a very difficult medical situ-
ation. Thinking like a scientist allows all of us to gain a better understanding of 

32  |  Chapter 1  |  ThE SCIENCE Of PSyChOLOGy
 
ourselves, others, and the world we all inhabit. Such thinking, along with the 
accompanying research, has enabled psychological scientists to gain a much better 
understanding of human behavior and mental processing. We describe the basic 
findings of this research in the remainder of the book. You will benefit not only 
from learning about these findings, but also from thinking more like a scientist 
in your daily life.
Section Summary
To understand research findings, psychologists use statistics—a branch of math-
ematics that provides procedures for the description and analysis of data. In this 
section, we were concerned with descriptive statistics. Measures of central ten-
dency allow a researcher to describe the “typical” score for a distribution of scores 
concisely. There are three such measures: mean, median, and mode. The mean is 
merely the arithmetical average. The median is the middle score when the distribu-
tion is arranged in ascending or descending order. The mode is the most frequently 
occurring score. Of these three measures, the mean is used most often. However, if 
unusually high or low scores in the distribution distort the mean, then the median 
should be used. In addition to describing the typical score, we need to determine the 
variability of the scores. We could use the range—the difference between the high-
est and lowest scores—but unusually low or high scores distort it. The measure of 
variability most often used is the standard deviation, the average extent that the 
scores vary from the mean of the distribution.
The standard deviation is especially relevant to the normal (bell-shaped) frequency 
distribution. Sixty-eight percent of the scores in a normal distribution fall within 
1 standard deviation of the mean, 95 percent within 2 standard deviations, and over 
99 percent within 3 standard deviations. These percentages hold true regardless of 
the value of the standard deviation. They also enable us to compute the percentile 
rank for a specific score in a normal distribution. The percentile rank for a score is the 
percentage of the scores below it in the distribution of scores. All distributions are not 
symmetric like the normal distribution. Two important nonsymmetric distributions 
are the right-skewed and left-skewed distributions. In a right-skewed distribution, 
there are some unusually high scores, leading to the mean being greater than the 
median; in a left-skewed distribution, there are some unusually low scores, leading 
to the mean being less than the median. In both cases, the median should be used 
because the mean is distorted toward the tail of the distribution.
ConceptCheck | 3
➤	 explain what measures of central tendency and measures of variability tell 
us about a distribution of scores.
➤	 explain why the normal distribution has a bell shape.
➤	 explain the relationship between the mean and median in a right-skewed 
distribution and in a left-skewed distribution.

Study Guide
33
Chapter Key Terms
You should know the definitions of the following key terms from the chapter. 
they are listed in the order in which they appear in the chapter. For those you do 
not know, return to the relevant section of the chapter to learn them. When you 
think that you know all of the terms, complete the matching exercise based on 
these key terms.
psychology
biological perspective 
cognitive perspective 
behavioral perspective 
sociocultural perspective 
hindsight bias (I-knew-it-all-
along phenomenon) 
descriptive methods 
naturalistic observation 
participant observation 
case study 
survey research 
population 
sample 
random sampling 
correlational study
variable 
correlation coefficient 
positive correlation 
negative correlation 
scatterplot 
third-variable problem 
random assignment 
independent variable 
dependent variable 
experiment 
experimental group 
control group 
operational definition 
placebo effect 
placebo 
nocebo effect 
placebo group 
inferential statistical analyses 
double-blind procedure 
meta-analysis 
descriptive statistics 
frequency distribution 
mean 
median 
mode 
range 
standard deviation 
normal distribution 
percentile rank 
right-skewed distribution 
left-skewed distribution
Key Terms Exercise
Identify the correct term for each of the 
following definitions. the answers to this 
exercise follow the answers to the Concept 
Checks at the end of the chapter.
  1.	 An explanation of a correlation between 
two variables in terms of another variable 
that could possibly be responsible for the 
observed relationship between the two 
variables.
	 	
 
  2.	 A control measure in an experiment in 
which neither the experimenters nor the 
participants know which participants are 
in the experimental and control groups.
	 	
 
  3.	 The score positioned in the middle of a 
distribution of scores when all of the scores 
are arranged from lowest to highest.
	 	
 
  4.	 An asymmetric frequency distribution 
in which there are some unusually high 
scores that distort the mean to be greater 
than the median.
	 	
 
  5.	 Improvement due to the expectation of 
improving because of receiving treatment.
	 	
 
  6.	 An inverse relationship between two 
variables.
	 	
 

34  |  Chapter 1  |  The Science of Psychology
  7.	 A control measure in an experiment in 
which participants are randomly assigned 
to groups in order to equalize participant 
characteristics across the various groups 
in the experiment.
	 	
 
  8.	 The percentage of scores below a specific 
score in a distribution of scores.
	 	
 
  9.	 A research perspective whose major 
explanatory focus is how the brain, ner-
vous system, and other physiological 
mechanisms produce our behavior and 
mental processes.
	 	
 
10.	 A description of the operations or proce-
dures that a researcher uses to manipu-
late or measure a variable.
	 	
 
11.	 The tendency, after learning about an 
outcome, to be overconfident in one’s 
ability to have predicted it.
	 	
 
12.	 A visual depiction of correlational data 
in which each data point represents the 
scores on the two variables for each 
participant.
	 	
 
13.	 The entire group of people that a 
researcher is studying.
	 	
 
14.	 The difference between the highest and 
lowest scores in a distribution of scores.
	 	
 
15.	 Statistical analyses that allow researchers 
to draw conclusions about the results of 
a study by determining the probability 
the results are due to random variation 
(chance).
	 	
 
Practice Test Questions
the following are practice multiple-
choice test questions on some of the 
chapter content. the answers are given 
after the Key terms exercise answers at 
the end of the chapter. If you guessed 
on a question or incorrectly answered a 
question, restudy the relevant section of 
the chapter.
  1. 	Which of the following major research 
perspectives focuses on conditioning 
by external environmental events as the 
major cause of our behavior?
	a.	 biological
	b.	cognitive
	c.	 behavioral
	d.	sociocultural
  2.	 Which of the following would be the 
best procedure for obtaining a repre-
sentative sample of the students at your 
school?
	a.	 sampling randomly among students in 
the student union
	b.	sampling randomly among students 
studying in the library
	c. 	sampling randomly among the 
students who belong to Greek 
organizations
	d. 	sampling randomly from a list of all 
the students enrolled at your school
  3. 	Which of the following research methods 
allow(s) the researcher to draw cause-
effect conclusions?
	a. 	descriptive
	b. 	correlational
	c. 	experimental
	d. 	all of the above
  4. 	Height and weight are 
 
 correlated; 
elevation and temperature are 
 
 
correlated.
	a.	 positively; positively
	b.	positively; negatively
	c. 	negatively; positively
	d. 	negatively; negatively

Study Guide  |  35
  5. 	Which of the following correlation  
coefficients indicates the STRONGEST 
relationship?
	a. 	+.75
	b. 	–.81
	c. 	+1.25
	d. 	0.00
  6. 	Manipulate is to measure as 
 
 is  
to  
.
	a. 	positive correlation; negative  
correlation
	b. 	negative correlation; positive  
correlation
	c. 	independent variable; dependent  
variable
	d. 	dependent variable;  independent  
variable
  7. 	In an experiment, the ______ group par-
ticipants receive an inactive treatment but 
are told that the treatment will help them.
	a.	 experimental
	b.	control
	c.	 placebo
	d.	third-variable
  8. 	The most frequently occurring score in a 
distribution of scores is the  
, and the 
average score is the  
.
	a. 	mode; mean
	b. 	mean; mode
	c. 	median; mean
	d. 	mean; median
  9. 	About ______ percent of the scores in a 
normal distribution are between –1 stan-
dard deviation and +1 standard deviation 
of the mean.
	a.	 34
	b. 	68
	c. 	95
	d. 	99
10.	 In a left-skewed distribution, the mean is 
______ than the median; in a right-skewed 
distribution, the mean is  
 than the 
median.
	a.	 greater; greater
	b.	greater; less
	c.	 less; greater
	d.	less; less
11.	 Shere Hite’s failure to use ______ resulted 
in misleading findings for her women and 
love survey study.
a.	 a placebo group
b.	a double-blind procedure
c.	 random assignment
d.	random sampling
12.	 Professor Jones noticed that the distribu-
tion of students’ scores on his last biolo-
gy exam had an extremely small standard 
deviation. This indicates that:
a.	 the exam was given to a very small 
class of students.
b.	the exam was a poor measure of the 
students’ knowledge.
c.	 the students’ scores tended to be very 
similar to one another.
d.	the students’ mean exam score was 
less than the median exam score.
13.	 In a normal distribution, the percentile 
rank for a score that is 1 standard devia-
tion below the mean is roughly ______%.
a.	 16
b.	34
c.	 68
d.	84
14.	 Dian Fossey’s study of gorillas is an 
example of ______.
a.	 naturalistic observation
b.	participant observation
c.	 naturalistic observation that turned 
into participant observation
d.	a case study
15.	 Which of the following types of scatter-
plots depicts a weak, negative correlation?
a.	 a lot of scatter with data points going 
from top left to bottom right
b.	very little scatter with data points 
going from top left to bottom right
c.	 a lot of scatter with data points going 
from bottom left to top right
d.	very little scatter with data points 
going from bottom left to top right

36  |  Chapter 1  |  The Science of Psychology
Chapter Concept Check Answers
Concept Check | 1
•	 Both of these research perspectives empha-
size internal causes in their explanations 
of human behavior and mental processing. 
The biological perspective emphasizes the 
role of our actual physiological hardware, 
especially the brain and nervous system, 
while the cognitive perspective empha-
sizes the role of our mental processes, the 
“programs” of the brain. For example, 
biological explanations will involve actual 
parts of the brain or chemicals in the brain. 
Cognitive explanations, however, will 
involve mental processes such as percep-
tion and memory without specifying the 
parts of the brain or chemicals involved in 
these processes. Thus, the biological and 
cognitive perspectives propose explana-
tions at two different levels of internal fac-
tors, the actual physiological mechanisms 
and the mental processes resulting from 
these mechanisms, respectively.
•	 Both of these research perspectives empha-
size external causes in their explanations 
of human behavior and mental processing. 
The behavioral perspective emphasizes 
conditioning of our behavior by external 
environmental events while the sociocul-
tural perspective emphasizes the impact of 
other people and our culture on our behav-
ior and mental processing. Thus, these two 
perspectives emphasize different types of 
external causes. In addition, the behavioral 
perspective emphasizes the conditioning of 
observable behavior while the sociocultural 
perspective focuses just as much on men-
tal processing as observable behavior and 
on other types of learning in addition to 
conditioning.
Concept Check | 2 
•	 The results of a case study cannot be gen-
eralized to a population because they are 
specific to the individual who has been 
studied. To generalize to a population, you 
need to include a representative sample 
of the population in the study. However, 
the results of a case study do allow the 
researcher to develop hypotheses about 
cause–effect relationships that can be 
tested in experimental research to see if 
they apply to the population.
•	 Random sampling is a method for obtaining 
a representative sample from a population. 
Random assignment is a control measure 
for assigning the members of a sample 
to groups or conditions in an experiment. 
Random sampling allows the researcher to 
generalize the results from the sample to the 
population; random assignment controls for 
individual characteristics across the groups 
in an experiment. Random assignment is 
used only in experiments, but random sam-
pling is used in experiments and some other 
research methods such as correlational stud-
ies and surveys.
•	 There would be the same amount of scatter 
of the data points in each of the two scat-
terplots because they are equal in strength 
(.90). In addition, because they are strong 
correlations, there would not be much scat-
ter. However, the scatter of data points in 
the scatterplot for +.90 would go from the 
bottom left of the plot to the top right; the 
scatter for –.90 would go from the top left 
of the plot to the bottom right. Thus, the 
direction of the scatter would be different 
in the two scatterplots.
• Some possible third variables that could 
serve as environmental triggers for autism 
among genetically vulnerable children 
stem from the children being in the house 
more and spending less time outdoors 
because of the high rates of precipitation. 
According to the authors of the study, 
such variables would include increased 
television and video viewing, decreased 
vitamin D levels because of less exposure 
to sunlight, and increased exposure to 
household chemicals. In addition, there 
may be chemicals in the atmosphere 
that are transported to the surface by the 
precipitation. All of these variables could 
serve as third variables and possibly 
account for the correlation.

Study Guide  |  37
• The double-blind procedure is necessary in 
experiments with placebo groups for two 
reasons. First, the participants in the placebo 
group must think that they are receiving a 
treatment that will help, or a placebo effect 
would be negatively impacted. Thus, they 
cannot be told that they received a placebo. 
Second, the experimenter must be blind in 
order to control for the effects of experiment-
er expectation (e.g., unintentionally judging 
the behavior of participants in the experimen-
tal and placebo groups differently because of 
knowing their group assignments).
Concept Check | 3
• Measures of central tendency tell us what 
a “typical” score is for the distribution of 
scores. The three central tendency mea-
sures give us different definitions of “typi-
cal.” The mean is the average score; the 
median is the middle score when all of the 
scores are ordered by value; and the mode 
is the most frequently occurring score. 
Measures of variability tell us how much 
the scores vary from one another, the vari-
ability between scores. The range is the 
difference between the highest and lowest 
scores, and the standard deviation is the 
average extent that the scores vary from 
the mean for the set of scores.
• It has a bell shape because the scores are 
distributed symmetrically about the mean 
with the majority of the scores (about 
68 percent) close to the mean (from –1 
standard deviation to +1 standard devia-
tion). As the scores diverge from the mean, 
they become symmetrically less frequent, 
giving the distribution the shape of a bell.
• In a right-skewed distribution, the mean 
is greater than the median because the 
unusually high scores in the distribution 
distort it. The opposite is true for the left-
skewed distribution. The mean is less than 
the median because the unusually low 
scores in the distribution distort it.
Answers to Key Terms Exercise
  1.	 third-variable problem
  2.	 double-blind procedure
  3.	 median
  4.	 right-skewed distribution
  5.	 placebo effect
  6.	 negative correlation
  7.	 random assignment
  8.	 percentile rank
  9.	 biological perspective
10.	 operational definition
11.	 hindsight bias (I-knew-it-all-along 
phenomenon)
12.	 scatterplot
13.	 population
14.	 range
15.	 inferential statistical analyses
Answers to Practice Test Questions
  1.	 c; behavioral
  2.	 d; sampling randomly from a list of all 
the students enrolled at your school
  3.	 c; experimental
  4.	 b; positively; negatively
  5.	 b; –.81
  6.	 c; independent variable; dependent 
variable
  7.	 c; placebo
  8.	 a; mode; mean
  9.	 b; 68
10.	 c; less; greater
11.	 d; random sampling
12.	 c; students’ scores tended to be very 
similar to one another
13.	 a; 16
14.	 c; naturalistic observation that turned into 
participant observation
15.	 a; a lot of scatter with data points going 
from top left to bottom right

Neuroscience
 THE NEURON
The Structure of a Neuron
how Neurons Communicate
Neurotransmitters, drugs, 
and Poisons
 THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
AND THE ENDOCRINE 
SYSTEM
The Central Nervous System
The Peripheral Nervous System 
The Endocrine Glandular 
System
Emotions and the Autonomic 
Nervous System
 THE BRAIN
Going up the Brain Stem
Processing in the Cerebral 
Cortex
Specializations of the Left and 
Right hemispheres
Consciousness and the 
Sleeping Brain
2

39
o
ur brain controls almost everything we 
do. It is responsible for our perception, 
consciousness, memory, language, intel-
ligence, and personality—everything that makes 
us human. This would seem to be a daunting 
job for an organ that only weighs about three 
pounds. The brain, however, has been estimated 
to consist of about 100 billion nerve cells, called 
neurons (Thompson, 2000). Each neuron may 
receive information from thousands of other 
neurons; therefore, the number of possible com-
munication connections between these billions 
of neurons is in the trillions! One estimate goes 
as high as one thousand trillion, the number 1 
followed by 15 zeroes (Sweeney, 2009). Just as 
your genome is the entire sequence of nucleo-
tides in your DNA, the totality of the connections 
between neurons in your nervous system is referred to as your connectome (Seung, 
2012). Unlike your genome, which is fixed at conception, your connectome changes 
throughout your life. With this vast collection of changing neuronal connections, 
the human brain is the most complex device in the known universe (Buonomano, 
2011). Hence, this complexity may never be completely understood, but it’s an 
intriguing puzzle—human brains trying to understand how human brains work.
In this chapter on neuroscience (the scientific study of the brain and nervous 
system), we will first examine neurons, the building blocks of the nervous system. 
We will look at how neurons transmit and integrate information, and how drugs 
and poisons interrupt these processes (and change our behavior and mental pro-
cesses). We will also consider how some diseases and disorders are related to 
transmission problems.
Once we understand how neurons work, we will consider the hierarchical struc-
ture of the nervous system, discussing its various subsystems—the central nervous 
system and the peripheral nervous system—along with the body’s other major 
communication system, the endocrine glandular system. We will also consider 
emotions and the role of the autonomic nervous system, a division of the peripheral 
nervous system, in explaining how our emotional experiences are generated.
Next, the major parts of the brain (vast collections of neurons) and their func-
tions will be detailed. We will focus mainly on the cerebral cortex, the seat of 
higher mental functioning in humans. Last, we will consider what consciousness 
is and what brain activity during sleep (a natural break from consciousness) tells 
us about the five stages of sleep and the nature of dreaming.
The Neuron
Why are psychologists interested in how neurons work? Isn’t this biology and 
not psychology? The answer is that it’s both. Humans are biological organisms. 
To understand our behavior and mental processes, we need to understand their 
biological underpinnings, starting with the cellular level, the neuron. How we feel, 
“The body is made up of millions and millions of 
crumbs“
Tom Swick/Cartoonstock

40  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
learn, remember, and think all stem from neuronal activity. So, how a neuron 
works and how neurons communicate are crucial pieces of information in solving 
the puzzle of human behavior and mental processing.
In explaining how a neuron works, we will talk about how neurons commu-
nicate with each other. We have a fairly good understanding of how information 
is transmitted, but we do not have as good an understanding of exactly how 
these vast communication networks of neurons oversee what we do and make us 
what we are. These more complex questions are the remaining key pieces of the 
puzzle to be solved. In this section, we will cover the part of the story that is best 
understood—how the building blocks of the nervous system, the neurons, work. 
We begin with a discussion of the neuron’s structure and parts.
The Structure of a Neuron
The brain and the nervous system are composed of two types of cells—neurons 
and glial cells. Neurons are responsible for information transmission through-
out the nervous system. They receive, send, and integrate information within the 
brain and the rest of the nervous system. Glial cells (or glia, Greek for “glue”) 
constitute the support system for the neurons. For example, glial cells take away 
the waste products of neurons, keep the neurons’ chemical environment stable, 
and insulate them, allowing neurons to do their work more efficiently. The num-
ber of neurons we have is impressive, but we have about 10 times more glial cells 
to support the work of these billions of neurons. Thus, around 90 percent of the 
cells in the brain are glial cells. Glial cells are only about one-tenth as large as neu-
rons, so they occupy about the same amount of space as neurons (Kalat, 2007).
Recent research is questioning the idea that glial cells merely provide a support 
system for neurons (Fields, 2008, 2009, 2011; Koop, 2009). It appears that not 
only do neurons and glial cells communicate but also that glial cells communicate 
with each other in a separate but parallel network to the neuronal network, influ-
encing the brain’s performance. Glial cells also appear to influence the formation 
of synapses and to aid in determining which neuronal connections get stronger or 
weaker over time, both essential to learning and to storing memories. In addition, 
glial cells may play an important role in mental disorders such as schizophre-
nia and depression and in neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s and 
Alzheimer’s. Whereas neuroscientists are excited by all of these possibilities and 
the prospect of doing research on these cells that have been largely ignored until 
recently, neurons are still viewed as the most important cells for communication 
within the human nervous system and thus will be the focus of our discussion.
Neurons all have the same basic parts and structure, and 
they all operate the same way. A generic neuron with all of the 
important parts identified is depicted in Figure 2.1. The three 
main components of a neuron are the dendrites, cell body, 
and axon. Let’s first get a general idea of the main functions 
of these three parts and their relationships to each other.
➤	 neurons  Cells that transmit infor-
mation within the nervous system.
➤ glial cells (glia)  Cells in the 
nervous system that comprise the 
support system for the neurons.

The Neuron  |  41
Dendrites are the fibers that project out of the cell body like the branches of 
a tree. Their main function is to receive information from other neurons. The 
dendrites pass this information on to the cell body, which contains the nucleus 
of the cell and the other biological machinery that keeps the cell alive. The cell 
body also decides whether or not to pass the information from the dendrites on 
to other neurons. If the cell body decides to pass along the 
information, it does so by way of the axon—the long, singu-
lar fiber leaving the cell body. At its end, the axon subdivides 
into axon terminals, branchlike endings. The main function 
of the axon is to conduct information from the cell body 
to the axon terminals in order to trigger the transmission 
of information with other neurons. Axons vary greatly in 
length, with the longest ones going from the spinal cord to 
the toes. Given this general understanding of the parts of 
the neuron, let’s look more closely at exactly how they are 
involved in transmitting information.
How Neurons Communicate
The first point to note in learning about how neurons com-
municate with each other (and sometimes with muscles 
and glands) is that the process is partly electrical and partly 
➤	 dendrites  Fibers projecting out of 
the cell body of a neuron whose 
function is to receive information 
from other neurons.
➤ cell body  The part of the neuron 
that contains its nucleus and the 
other biological machinery to keep 
the cell alive and that decides 
whether or not to generate a neural 
impulse in order to pass incoming 
information on to other neurons.
➤ axon  The long, singular fiber 
projecting out of the cell body 
of a neuron whose function is to 
conduct the neural impulse from 
the cell body to the axon terminals 
triggering chemical communication 
with other neurons.
Dendrites
electrical impulse
(travels down axon)
axon
Myelin sheath
axon terminals
Cell body
m Figure 2.1 | The Structure of a Neuron | The three main parts of a neuron are the 
dendrites, cell body, and axon. The dendrites receive information from other neurons and pass 
it along to the cell body. The cell body decides whether the information should be passed on 
to other neurons. If it decides it should, then it does so by means of an electrical impulse that 
travels down the axon—the longer, thin fiber coming out of the cell body. The pictured neuron 
has a myelinated axon. Please note that there are periodic gaps where there is no myelin. The 
impulse jumps from one gap to the next down the axon. When the impulse reaches the axon 
terminals, it triggers chemical communication with other neurons.

42  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
chemical. Within a neuron, it’s electrical—an actual electrical impulse is generated 
and travels down the axon. Communication between neurons, however, is chemi-
cal. The neurons don’t actually touch each other. They are separated by a micro-
scopic gap that chemical molecules travel across to carry their message. We’ll first 
describe the electrical part and then explain this “chemistry” between neurons.
The electrical impulse.  The electrical part of the story begins with the mes-
sages received by the dendrites from other neurons. These inputs are either excit-
atory (telling the neuron to generate an electrical impulse) or inhibitory (telling the 
neuron not to generate an electrical impulse). The cell body decides whether or not 
to generate an impulse by continually calculating this input. If the excitatory input 
outweighs the inhibitory input by a sufficient amount, then the cell body will gener-
ate an impulse. The impulse travels from the cell body down the axon to the axon 
terminals. This impulse is an all-or-nothing event, which means that there is either 
an impulse or there is not; and if there is an impulse, it always travels down the axon 
at the same speed regardless of the intensity of the stimulus input. So, how are the 
varying intensities of stimuli (for example, a gentle pat on the cheek versus a slap) 
encoded? The answer is straightforward. The intensity of the stimulus determines 
how many neurons generate impulses and the number of impulses that are gener-
ated each second by the neurons. Stronger stimuli (a slap rather than a pat) lead to 
more neurons generating impulses and generating those impulses more often.
The impulses in different neurons travel down the axon at varying rates up to 
around 200 miles per hour (Dowling, 1998). This may seem fast, but it is much 
slower than the speed of electricity or computer processing. A major factor deter-
mining the impulse speed for a particular neuron is whether or not its axon is 
encased in a myelin sheath—an insulating layer of a white fatty substance. With no 
myelin sheath, the impulse travels slowly down the axon in a continuous fashion, 
like a fuse burning down on a stick of dynamite. The rate is faster in axons encased 
in myelin because the impulse can only be regenerated at the periodic gaps in the 
sheath where there is no myelin. A myelinated axon (like the one in Figure 2.1) looks 
like a string of sausages with gaps between the sausages. The impulse “leaps” from 
gap to gap instead of traveling continuously down the axon. To understand why 
this is faster, think about walking across a room in a heel-to-toe fashion (continu-
ously touching the heel of your advancing foot to the toes of your lagging foot) 
versus taking long strides to get to the other side. Striding is clearly much faster.
Damage to this myelin sheath will result in serious problems. For example, mul-
tiple sclerosis causes deterioration of the myelin sheath that encases neuronal axons. 
This means that impulses can no longer leap down the axon, or eventually even 
travel down the axon, so information transmission is greatly slowed. People with 
multiple sclerosis experience incapacitating behavioral changes, such as difficulty in 
moving. Sadly, there is presently no cure for multiple sclerosis.
Given its white color, myelin is also responsible for the dis-
tinction between white matter and gray matter in the brain. 
Myelinated axons make up the “white” matter; unmyelinated 
axons, cell bodies, and dendrites make up the “gray” matter. 
➤	 myelin sheath  An insulating layer 
covering an axon that allows for 
faster neural impulses.

The Neuron  |  43
Why the distinction? Myelination creates a whitish appearance because of the 
white color of the myelin. Unmyelinated parts of a neuron appear grayish. If we 
were able to look at the two cerebral hemispheres of the brain, they would appear 
grayish because we are mainly looking at the billions of cell bodies that make up 
their outside layer. Hence, the expression, “Use your gray matter.”
Chemical communication between neurons.  What happens when the 
electrical impulse reaches the axon terminals? The answer is depicted in Figure 2.2. 
Electrical
impulse
Sending
neuron
Electrical
impulse
Axon terminal
Receptor sites on
receiving neuron
Synaptic gap
Vesicle containing
neurotransmitter
molecules
Neurotransmitter molecule
Reuptake
Receiving neuron
Sending neuron
2. When the electrical impulse 
reaches an axon terminal, it causes 
the vesicles to open and the 
neurotransmitter molecules to be 
released into the synaptic gap. The 
molecules cross the synaptic gap and 
enter receptor sites on the dendrites 
of the receiving neuron.
1. An electrical impulse travels
down the axon to the axon
terminals.
3. After carrying their 
message, the 
neurotransmitter 
molecules return to the 
synaptic gap, where 
some of them undergo 
reuptake and are taken 
back into the sending 
neuron. Others are 
destroyed in the gap.
m Figure 2.2 | Synaptic Communication Between Neurons | Neurons communicate 
with each other chemically. As explained in the figure, there are three steps. (1) When the elec-
trical impulse in a neuron reaches the axon terminals, it causes neurotransmitter molecules in 
the terminal vesicles to be released into the synaptic gap between neurons. (2) These molecules 
cross the gap and fit into receptor sites on the dendrites of other neurons, thereby carrying their 
messages. (3) The neurotransmitter molecules then go back into the gap, where they are either 
taken up by the sending neuron (reuptake) to be used again or are destroyed by enzymes.

44  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
In the axon terminals, there are tiny vesicles (sacs) containing 
a neurotransmitter, a naturally occurring chemical in our 
nervous system that specializes in transmitting information. 
When the impulse reaches the sending neuron’s axon termi-
nals, it causes the vesicles to open and the neurotransmitter 
molecules to come out and go into the synaptic gap (or  
synapse), the microscopic gap (less than a millionth of an 
inch wide) between neurons. Two thousand of these tiny syn-
aptic gaps would fit comfortably inside the thinnest of 
human hairs (Lynch & Granger, 2008). The neurotransmitter 
molecules cross the gap and enter receptor sites on the den-
drites of other neurons. This is achieved by what is termed  
binding—neurotransmitter molecules fit into the dendrite 
receptor sites on the receiving neuron like a key fits into a 
lock. After delivering their message, the molecules go back 
into the gap. Some are destroyed by enzymes in the gap, but others undergo reup-
take—they are taken back into the axon terminals of the sending neuron to be 
used again. Because synapses are the channels of communication between neu-
rons and the means by which the brain accomplishes most of what it does, they 
are vital to our well-being. Our mind and behavior are controlled by our synapses. 
Neuroscientist Joseph LeDoux sums this up very succinctly in his book Synaptic 
Self (2002)—“You are your synapses.” (p. ix).
So who discovered the synapse, which is so critical to our existence? Synapses 
were first documented by Spanish anatomist Santiago Ramón y Cajal in the  
nineteenth century (Rapport, 2005). Ramón y Cajal, often referred to as the father 
of neuroscience, shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1906 for his 
contributions to our understanding of the nervous system. However, Ramón y 
Cajal did not use the word synapse to refer to the microscopic gap between neurons. 
It was Sir Charles Scott Sherrington, another Nobel Prize winner, who coined this 
term. According to Rapport (2005), when Sherrington was writing material for a 
new edition of Michael Foster’s A Textbook of Physiology, he grew tired of having to 
continually invent ways to describe the conduction of an impulse across a gap to 
dendrites. To eliminate this problem, Sherrington coined the term synapse, which 
appeared for the first time in Foster’s seventh edition in 1897.
Brain scans.  In order to carry out their essential communication work, neurons 
require oxygen and other nutrients such as blood sugars. This is why about 
20 percent of the body’s blood supply is pumped to the brain (Gazzaniga, Ivry, & 
Mangun, 2002), and the brain consumes about a quarter of the body’s oxygen 
(Ackerman, 2004). Without oxygen, neurons die within minutes. Neurons doing 
more work require even more oxygen and nutrients. This fact is the key to how 
various types of brain scans work. There are several types of brain scans, but we 
will discuss two that are often used by psychology researchers.
In positron emission tomography (PET) scans, a harmless dose of radioactive 
glucose (sugar) is introduced into the bloodstream. The radioactive glucose moves 
to those areas that are more active, and when the glucose is metabolized by the  
➤ neurotransmitter  A naturally 
occurring chemical in the nervous 
system that specializes in transmit-
ting information between neurons.
➤ synaptic gap (synapse)  The 
microscopic gap between neurons 
across which neurotransmitters 
travel to carry their messages to 
other neurons.
➤ positron emission tomography 
(PET) scans  A visual display of the 
activity levels in various areas in 
the brain generated by detecting 
the amount of positron emission 
created by the metabolization of 
radioactive glucose in each area.

The Neuron  |  45
neurons, it emits positrons (atomic par-
ticles emitted by radioactive substances) 
that are detected and measured by  
a computer. Active areas show up 
on the computer-generated image as 
brighter colors than less active areas. In 
this manner, PET scans are used to tell 
us which areas are most active, and thus 
more involved, while a person performs 
some task, such as reading or talking.
Another type of scan that has 
become popular, functional magnetic  
resonance imaging (fMRI), does not 
require radioactivity being introduced 
into the bloodstream, but rather focus-
es on the amount of oxygen brought 
to the various areas. The areas that are 
more active are provided with more 
oxygen through increased blood flow 
to them. The fMRI detects these areas 
with increased blood flow and high-
lights them in its computerized image 
of brain activity. Variations in blood 
flow are depicted as variations in color in the image. Like PET scans, fMRI scans are 
used to study the functions of various brain parts and locations. Actually, fMRI is pre-
ferred over a PET scan because it is noninvasive and produces a much sharper picture.
Historically, we learned about brain function only by observation of brain-
damaged individuals and postmortem comparisons of damaged and normal 
brains. Modern brain scans have allowed us to learn about structures and func-
tions while the neurons are still healthy and active. Whereas brain scans have 
definitely helped to gain new insights into the brain and are invaluable to brain 
research, some researchers think that the explanatory power of brain scans 
has been vastly overstated (Legrenzi & Umiltà, 2011; Satel & Lilienfeld, 2013). 
Shermer (2008) and Uttal (2003) provide discussions of the limitations of brain 
scanning and what it can and cannot show.
Neurotransmitters, Drugs, and Poisons
Fifty to 100 different chemicals in our nervous system func-
tion as neurotransmitters (Valenstein, 2005). In this section, 
we will look at seven of them that we know quite a bit about—
acetylcholine, dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine, GABA 
(gamma-aminobutyric acid), glutamate, and endorphins. We’ll 
identify some of the behaviors and mental processes in which 
each of these neurotransmitters plays a major role, provide 
➤	 functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI)  A computerized 
image of the activity levels of vari-
ous areas in the brain generated 
by detecting the amount of oxygen 
brought to each area.
Tony Zuvela/Cartoonstock.com

46  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
some examples of how poisons and drugs bring about their effects by impacting the 
synaptic communication process for particular neurotransmitters, and explain how 
some disorders and diseases may result from excessive activity or a deficit in activity 
for particular neurotransmitters. In the discussions of drugs and poisons, we will 
use the agonist versus antagonist distinction. An agonist is a drug or poison that 
increases the activity of one or more neurotransmitters; an antagonist is a drug or 
poison that decreases the activity of one or more neurotransmitters. We’ll see that 
agonists and antagonists bring about their effects in many different ways.
Acetylcholine.  Acetylcholine (ACh) is a neurotransmitter involved in learning, 
memory, and muscle movement. When it is located in the brain, it impacts learn-
ing and memory. Alzheimer’s patients tend to have lower levels of ACh. At muscle 
junctures throughout our body, ACh leads to muscle contractions, allowing us to 
move the various parts of our body. Its role in muscle movement shows how poi-
sons work in agonistic or antagonistic ways to impact the normal level of neu-
rotransmitter activity. There are several poisons that paralyze us (prevent muscle 
movement) by preventing ACh from fulfilling its movement function. Let’s look at 
three such poisons and see how they achieve this same effect, but in different ways.
First, consider botulinum poison (sometimes called botulin), a toxin involved 
in food poisoning. Botulinum poison is an antagonist that blocks the release 
of ACh at muscle junctures, leading to paralysis and, if not treated, death. The 
chest and diaphragm muscles become paralyzed, so the victim cannot breathe. 
An extremely mild form of this poison is what is used in the Botox treatment 
for facial wrinkling, where the facial muscles are temporarily paralyzed, thus 
smoothing them. Curare, the poison that South American Indians put on the 
tips of their spears and arrows, paralyzes by occupying the receptor sites for ACh, 
thereby preventing the ACh molecules from getting in and 
delivering their message. Like botulinum poison, curare is 
an antagonist for ACh and can kill by paralyzing critical 
muscles. Another poison, black widow spider venom, is an 
agonist for ACh, and can also lead to death by paralysis. 
Black widow spider venom causes the continuous release 
of ACh, flooding the synapse. This initial effect is agonistic, 
leading to uncontrollable convulsive movement due to the 
heightened ACh activity, but death occurs through paralysis 
after the supply of ACh has been exhausted. But don’t worry. 
Though there’s enough poison in a black widow spider bite 
to kill other insects, humans rarely die from such bites.
Dopamine.  Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that impacts 
our arousal and mood states, thought processes, and physical 
movement, but in a very different way than ACh. Low levels of 
dopamine in the basal ganglia, brain structures that we will 
discuss later in the chapter, lead to Parkinson’s disease, 
which causes movement problems such as muscle tremors, 
➤	 agonist  A drug or poison that 
increases the activity of one or 
more neurotransmitters.
➤	 antagonist  A drug or poison that 
decreases the activity of one or 
more neurotransmitters.
➤	 acetylcholine (ACh)  A neu-
rotransmitter involved in learning, 
memory, and muscle movement.
➤	 dopamine  A neurotransmitter 
involved in arousal and mood 
states, thought processes, and 
physical movement.
➤	 Parkinson’s disease  A disease in 
which the person has movement 
problems such as muscle tremors, 
difficulty initiating movements, and 
rigidity of movement. These move-
ment problems stem from a scarcity 
of dopamine in the basal ganglia.

The Neuron  |  47
difficulty initiating movements, and rigidity of movement. Actor Michael J. Fox 
and boxer Muhammad Ali both have Parkinson’s disease. Physicians first 
attempted to treat Parkinson’s disease by injecting dopamine through the blood-
stream. This did not work, however, because dopamine could not get through the 
blood–brain barrier—a protective mechanism by which the blood capillaries sup-
plying the brain create a barrier that prevents dangerous substances from accessing 
the brain. The downside is that some good substances, such as dopamine in the 
case of Parkinson’s disease, also cannot gain access. However, L-dopa, a drug for 
Parkinson’s disease, can pass through the blood–brain barrier. It contains the pre-
cursors to dopamine, so once in the brain, L-dopa is converted to dopamine. Thus, 
L-dopa functions as an agonist for dopamine by increasing its production. 
However, L-dopa is not effective for all Parkinson’s patients, and as Parkinson’s 
disease progresses, L-dopa becomes less effective for those it does help.
There are also side effects of L-dopa that resemble some of the symptoms of 
schizophrenia—a psychotic disorder in which a person loses touch with reality 
and suffers from perceptual and cognitive processing deficits, such as hallucina-
tions, false beliefs, and deficits in attention. This makes sense, however, because 
one of the main explanations for schizophrenia involves an excess of dopamine 
activity, and dopamine impacts our thought processes. In fact, traditional anti-
psychotic drugs for schizophrenia work antagonistically by globally blocking 
receptor sites for dopamine so that dopamine cannot enter them, thereby reduc-
ing its level of activity. Conversely, some of the side effects of these antipsychotic 
drugs resemble the movement symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, because these 
powerful drugs also lessen the activity of the dopamine in the movement system 
involving the basal ganglia.
The effects of addictive stimulants (such as amphetamines and cocaine) 
illustrate dopamine’s involvement in our arousal and mood states. For example, 
amphetamines act as agonists for dopamine activity by continually stimulating 
the release of dopamine from axon terminals, thereby depleting it. Similarly, 
cocaine creates an agonistic effect by blocking the reuptake of dopamine, which 
means dopamine accumulates in the synapse. Cocaine thus 
prolongs its effect on other neurons by forcing dopamine to 
deliver its message to these neurons repeatedly, thereby using 
it up. The downside is that these dopamine-caused “high” 
arousal states are temporary and are followed by “crashes” 
created by the shortage of dopamine that follows. The 
pleasurable mood effects of these addictive stimulants are 
thought to arise from the release of dopamine in the brain’s 
reward centers. Other addictive drugs such as painkillers, caf-
feine, and nicotine also increase dopamine activity in these 
centers.
Serotonin and norepinephrine.  In addition to dopamine, 
cocaine blocks the reuptake of serotonin and norepinephrine— 
neurotransmitters involved in levels of arousal and mood, 
➤	 blood–brain barrier  A protective 
mechanism by which the blood 
capillaries supplying the brain 
create a barrier that prevents 
dangerous substances access 
to the brain.
➤	 L-dopa  A drug for Parkinson’s 
disease that contains the precur-
sors to dopamine so that once it is 
in the brain, it will be converted to 
dopamine.
➤	 serotonin and norepinephrine 
Neurotransmitters involved in 
levels of arousal and mood, sleep, 
and eating.

48  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
sleep, and eating. These two neurotransmitters play a major role in mood disor-
ders such as depression. The best-known and most prescribed antidepressant 
drugs, such as Prozac, Paxil, and Zoloft, are selective serotonin reuptake  
inhibitors (SSRIs)—antidepressant drugs that achieve their agonistic effect by 
selectively blocking just the reuptake of serotonin. SSRIs only partially block 
reuptake (unlike cocaine) so they do not exhaust the neurotransmitter supply, 
and there are no subsequent “crashes.” Some other antidepressant drugs, such as 
Cymbalta, Pristiq, and Effexor, work by blocking the reuptake of both serotonin and 
norepinephrine. These drugs are called selective serotonin and norepinephrine  
reuptake inhibitors (SSNRIs). SSRIs, SSNRIs, and other types of antidepressant 
drugs will be discussed more fully in the section on biomedical therapies in 
Chapter 10.
GABA and glutamate.  GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) is the main 
inhibitory neurotransmitter in the nervous system. Thus, its primary role is to 
keep the brain from becoming too aroused. It works like the brakes on a car by 
preventing mental processes or behavior from going unchecked. For example, it 
lowers arousal and anxiety and helps regulate movement. Antianxiety drugs (tran-
quilizers) are agonists for GABA, increasing GABA activity and thereby lowering 
anxiety. Lack of GABA activity may also contribute to epilepsy, a brain disorder 
leading to uncontrolled movement and convulsions. Tranquilizers, such as 
Valium and Librium, sometimes also serve as antiepileptic 
treatments because they have been found to block epileptic 
convulsions.
Glutamate is the main excitatory neurotransmitter in 
the nervous system. It is involved in memory storage and 
pain perception. Excessive glutamate activity, however, can 
be dangerous, leading to the death of neurons. For example, 
strokes lead to overstimulation of glutamate synapses and 
the subsequent loss of neurons that literally excite them-
selves to death. Deficient glutamate activity can also cause 
problems. Glutamate levels that drop too low can even cause 
coma. Research has also found that abnormal levels of glu-
tamate activity may play a central role in the neurochemistry 
of schizophrenia (Goff & Coyle, 2001; Javitt & Coyle, 2007). 
Hence, antipsychotic drugs that impact glutamate activity 
levels are presently undergoing clinical trials by pharmaceuti-
cal companies (Stone, 2011).
Endorphins.  Endorphins are a group of neurotransmit-
ters that are involved in pain relief and feelings of pleasure. 
They represent the nervous system’s natural painkillers. 
When endorphins are released, we feel less pain and experi-
ence a sense of euphoria. Endorphins, therefore, help explain 
good feelings such as the “runner’s high.” Higher than 
➤	 selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs)  Antidepressant 
drugs that achieve their agonistic 
effect on serotonin by selectively 
blocking its reuptake.
➤	 selective serotonin and  
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors 
(SSNRIs)  Antidepressant drugs 
that achieve their agonistic effect 
on serotonin and norepinephrine by 
selectively blocking their reuptake.
➤	 GABA (gamma-aminobutyric 
acid)  The main inhibitory neu-
rotransmitter in the nervous 
system. It is involved in lowering 
arousal and anxiety and regulating 
movement.
➤	 glutamate  The main excitatory 
neurotransmitter in the nervous 
system. It is involved in memory 
storage, pain perception, strokes, 
and schizophrenia.
➤	 endorphins  A group of neurotrans-
mitters that are involved in pain 
relief and feelings of pleasure.

The Neuron  |  49
normal endorphin levels have been found in runners following a marathon 
(Mahler, Cunningham, Skrinar, Kraemer, & Colice, 1989). Morphine and heroin 
are painkilling drugs that achieve their agonistic effects by binding to endorphin 
receptors, thereby increasing endorphin activity (Pert & Snyder, 1973). (Actually, 
the word “endorphin” is a contraction of the words “endogeneous,” which means 
originating within, and “morphine.”) These painkillers also trigger the brain’s 
reward centers, causing the release of dopamine.
Endorphins may also play a role in biologically explaining placebo effects 
on pain. Remember, as we discussed in Chapter 1, a placebo drug is an inert 
substance that has no pharmacological effect. The expectation of improvement 
created by taking the placebo may stimulate the release of endorphins, resulting 
in an actual decrease in pain. Similarly, stimulation of endorphins may partially 
explain how acupuncture, the Chinese medical practice of inserting needles at 
specified sites of the body, leads to pain relief (Pert, 1999).
Table 2.1   Neurotransmitters and Some of Their Functions
Neurotransmitter
Involved in:
Acetylcholine (ACh)
Learning, memory, muscle movement
Dopamine
Arousal and mood states, thought processes, 
physical movement
Serotonin and Norepinephrine
Levels of arousal and mood, sleep, eating
GABA (main inhibitory  
neurotransmitter)
Lowering arousal and anxiety, regulating 
movement
Glutamate (main excitatory  
neurotransmitter)
Memory storage, pain perception, strokes, 
schizophrenia
Endorphins
Pain relief and feelings of pleasure
2006 Thaves/Distributed by NEA, Inc.
All of the neurotransmitters that we have discussed are summarized in 
Table 2.1 along with some of the behaviors and mental processes in which they 
play a major role.

50  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
Section Summary
In this section, we discussed how billions of neurons, the building blocks of the 
nervous system, work and communicate with each other. All three parts of a neuron 
are involved. The dendrites receive the information from other neurons and pass 
it on to the cell body, which decides whether or not to pass the information on to 
other neurons. If the information is to be passed on, an electrical impulse is gener-
ated and travels down the axon. When this impulse reaches the axon terminals, 
neurotransmitter molecules are released and travel across the synaptic gap, carry-
ing the message to other neurons, and then are destroyed or return to the sending 
neuron to be used again. It is this chemical communication that allows the neurons 
to transmit and integrate information within the nervous system, giving us our 
perceptions, feelings, memories, and thoughts, as well as our ability to move. Glial 
cells aid in this information transmission process by serving as a support system 
for the neurons.
Acetylcholine (ACh), dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine, GABA, glutamate, 
and endorphins are seven major neurotransmitters that impact many important 
aspects of our behavior and mental processing. Some disorders and diseases 
involve excessive activity or a deficit in activity for particular neurotransmitters. 
In addition, drugs and poisons achieve their effects by changing the activity level 
of particular neurotransmitters in either agonistic or antagonistic ways. Agonists 
increase the level of neurotransmitter activity; antagonists decrease it. This neuronal 
chemistry is the source of all of our behavior and mental processes, but we are only 
aware of its products (our behavior and mental processing) and not the intercellular 
chemistry itself. In the next section, we will consider the nervous system at a more 
global level by examining its major subdivisions—the central nervous system and 
the peripheral nervous system. We will also discuss the body’s other major com-
munication system—the endocrine glandular system.
ConceptCheck | 1
➤	 explain why you can think of a neuron as a miniature decision-making 
device.
➤	 explain why neural impulses are faster in neurons with myelinated axons 
than in those with unmyelinated axons.
➤	 explain why drugs that block the reuptake of neurotransmitters are consid-
ered agonists.
➤	 explain why treatment of parkinson’s disease with L-dopa leads to some 
side effects that resemble the thought disorder symptoms of schizophrenia 
and why the side effects of traditional antipsychotic drugs lead to side 
effects resembling parkinson’s disease.

The Nervous SysteM and the Endocrine SysteM  |  51
The Nervous System and 
the Endocrine System
In this section, we will present an overview of the nervous 
system and the other major communication system of the 
body, the endocrine glandular system. We will also discuss 
the three types of neurons in the nervous system. An overview 
diagram of the major subdivisions of the nervous system is 
given in Figure 2.3. The two major parts are the central nervous system (CNS), 
made up of the brain and spinal cord, and the peripheral nervous system (PNS), 
the remainder of the nervous system throughout the body, linking the CNS with 
the body’s sensory receptors, muscles, and glands. One part of the peripheral ner-
vous system, the autonomic nervous system, plays an important role in emotional 
experiences. We will learn how it does so once we learn more about the general 
nature of the nervous system and its major divisions and the body’s other major 
communication system, the endocrine glandular system.
parasympathetic
nervous system
“Rest-and-digest” system,
controls the body during
its normal rest state
Sympathetic
nervous system
“Fight-or-flight” system,
controls the body when
it is aroused
Nervous system
Central
nervous system
(CNS)
peripheral
nervous system
(pNS)
autonomic
nervous system
Regulates internal bodily
environment (e.g.,
functioning of heart
and stomach)
Spinal cord
Connects brain
and PNS and
enables spinal
reflexes
Somatic
nervous system
Conduit for incoming
sensory input and outgoing
commands from brain
to skeletal muscles
Brain
Control center
for entire
nervous system
m Figure 2.3 | The Nervous System and Its Major Subdivisions | The nervous system 
first divides into the central nervous system (the spinal cord and brain) and the peripheral 
nervous system (the remainder of the nervous system throughout the body). The peripheral ner-
vous system has two parts—the somatic (or skeletal) nervous system and the autonomic nervous 
system. The autonomic nervous system also has two parts—the sympathetic nervous system 
and parasympathetic nervous system.
➤	 central nervous system (CNS)  The 
brain and spinal cord.
➤	 peripheral nervous system 
(PNS)  The part of the nervous 
system that links the CNS with the 
body’s sensory receptors, muscles, 
and glands.

52  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
There are three types of neurons in the nervous system. Interneurons, which 
integrate information within the CNS by communicating with each other, are only 
in the CNS. Interneurons also intervene within the spinal cord between sensory 
and motor neurons that are only in the PNS. Sensory neurons carry information 
to the CNS from sensory receptors (such as the rods and cones in the eyes), mus-
cles, and glands. Motor neurons carry movement commands from the CNS out 
to the rest of the body. Bundles of sensory neurons are called sensory nerves. Most 
enter the CNS through the spinal cord, while some (from the head) enter the brain 
directly through holes in the cranium (the skull around the brain). Collections of 
the motor neurons are called motor nerves. They exit the CNS through the spinal 
cord or, for the head, from the cranium. To begin to understand the role that these 
neurons play, we’ll next discuss the CNS and the role of the spinal cord.
The Central Nervous System
Both parts of the CNS, the spinal cord and the brain, are totally encased in bone— 
the spinal cord within the spinal column and the brain within the cranium—for 
protective reasons. In addition, for further protection, both are surrounded by 
cerebrospinal fluid for cushioning. We will detail the spinal cord’s role in the CNS 
here, and then discuss the brain in the last section of this chapter.
The spinal cord spans from the stem of the brain down through the neck and 
the center of the spinal column. The spinal cord has two main functions. First, it 
serves as the conduit for both incoming sensory data and outgoing movement com-
mands to the muscles in the body. This is why a spinal cord 
injury, such as that suffered by actor Christopher Reeve, may 
result in paralysis and in difficulty breathing. Second, it pro-
vides for spinal reflexes. A spinal reflex is a simple automatic 
action not requiring involvement of the brain. A good example 
is the knee-jerk reflex in which a leg jerks forward when the 
knee is tapped. Only sensory neurons and motor neurons 
are involved in this reflex. The knee-jerk reflex might appear 
to have no use, but it is an example of a stretch reflex that is 
important to maintaining our posture and for lifting objects.
For most spinal reflexes, however, interneurons are also 
involved. Sensory neurons connect with interneurons in the 
spinal cord, which then connect with motor neurons. The sen-
sory information is also sent up to the brain by way of inter-
neurons, but the brain is usually not involved. A good example 
of such a spinal reflex is the withdrawal reflex. When we touch 
something extremely hot or painful, we jerk away. These 
reflexes normally occur without interference from the brain so 
that they can occur rapidly. The brain can stop a spinal reflex 
by sending commands to override the reflexive response, but 
for obvious reasons it usually chooses not to interfere.
➤	 interneurons  Neurons that inte-
grate information within the CNS 
through their communication with 
each other and between sensory 
and motor neurons in the spinal 
cord.
➤	 sensory neurons  Neurons in the 
PNS that carry information to 
the CNS from sensory receptors, 
muscles, and glands.
➤	 motor neurons  Neurons in the 
PNS that carry movement com-
mands from the CNS out to the rest 
of the body.
➤	 spinal cord  The conduit between 
the brain and the PNS for incoming 
sensory data and outgoing move-
ment commands to the muscles.
➤	 spinal reflex  A simple auto-
matic action of the spinal cord not 
requiring involvement of the brain, 
such as the knee-jerk reflex.

The Nervous SysteM and the Endocrine SysteM  |  53
The brain is the control center for the entire nervous system, but it couldn’t per-
form this job without agents to carry out its commands and to provide informa-
tion about the activities of the rest of the body and the world outside. We will next 
discuss the PNS, the system that provides these supportive functions for the brain.
The Peripheral Nervous System
Not only does the PNS gather information for the brain about the external environ-
ment and the body’s internal environment through the sensory nerves, it also serves 
as the conduit for the brain’s commands to the rest of the body through the motor 
nerves. To carry out these tasks, the PNS has two parts working in concert with each 
other—the somatic (or skeletal) nervous system and the autonomic nervous system.
The somatic (skeletal) nervous system carries sensory input from receptors 
to the CNS and relays commands from the CNS to the skeletal muscles to control 
their movement. Skeletal muscles are those that are attached to bone, such as 
the muscles of the arms and legs. As we have already discussed, the primary neu-
rotransmitter for these muscles is acetylcholine. The autonomic nervous system 
regulates the functioning of our internal environment (glands and organs such as 
the stomach, lungs, and heart). The somatic nervous system is thought of as vol-
untary, but the autonomic system is usually thought of as involuntary, operating 
on automatic (hence the name, autonomic) to maintain our internal functioning 
such as heartbeat, respiration, and digestion. This is why we are generally unaware 
of what the autonomic nervous system is doing.
The autonomic system has two parts—the sympathetic ner-
vous system and the parasympathetic nervous system. These 
two systems normally work together to maintain a steady inter-
nal state. However, the sympathetic nervous system is in con-
trol when we are very aroused, as in an emergency, and prepares 
us for defensive action. The parasympathetic nervous system 
takes over when the aroused state ends to return the body to 
its normal resting state. Some effects of each part of this dual 
autonomic system on the glands and muscles that they impact 
are shown in Table 2.2. In general, the sympathetic nervous sys-
tem expends energy, and the parasympathetic nervous system 
conserves energy. The two systems are connected to essentially 
the same glands and organs, but generally lead to opposite 
effects. For example, the sympathetic leads to pupil dilation, 
accelerated heartbeat, and inhibited digestion; the parasympa-
thetic leads to pupil contraction, slowed heartbeat, and stimu-
lated digestion. Given these actions, the sympathetic nervous 
system is usually referred to as the “fight-or-flight” system; it 
prepares us for one of these two actions in times of emergency. 
In contrast, the parasympathetic nervous system has some-
times been called the “rest-and-digest” system (Dowling, 1998).
➤	 somatic (skeletal) nervous system 
The part of the PNS that carries 
sensory input from receptors to the 
CNS and relays commands from 
the CNS to skeletal muscles to 
control their movement.
➤	 autonomic nervous system  The 
part of the PNS that regulates the 
functioning of our internal environ-
ment (glands and organs like the 
heart, lungs, and stomach).
➤	 sympathetic nervous system  The 
part of the autonomic nervous 
system that is in control when we 
are highly aroused, as in an emer-
gency, and need to prepare for 
defensive action.
➤	 parasympathetic nervous system 
The part of the autonomic nervous 
system that returns the body to its 
normal resting state after having 
been highly aroused, as in an 
emergency.

54  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
The Endocrine Glandular System
The endocrine glandular system, the body’s other major communication sys-
tem, is not part of the nervous system, but these two systems are connected in 
order to maintain normal internal functioning. The endocrine glandular system 
works with the autonomic nervous system in responding to stress, and it also 
plays an important role in such basic behaviors as having sex and eating and in 
normal bodily functions, such as metabolism, reproduction, and growth.
The endocrine glandular system communicates through messengers in the 
bloodstream. Endocrine glands secrete chemical substances within the body 
into the bloodstream; exocrine glands (such as sweat and tear glands) secrete 
substances outside the body. The substances secreted by the 
endocrine glands are hormones. A hormone is a chemical 
messenger produced by the endocrine glands and carried by 
the bloodstream to target sites throughout the body. Some 
hormones (adrenalin and noradrenalin secreted by the adre-
nal glands) are chemically similar to some neurotransmitters 
(epinephrine and norepinephrine), but neurotransmitters 
are released at their targets (other neurons), while hormones 
have to travel through the bloodstream to reach their targets. 
For example, the male sex hormone, testosterone, travels 
from the male sex glands through the bloodstream to target 
sites in facial skin to stimulate hair growth.
The endocrine glandular system is controlled by its con-
nection with a part of the brain called the hypothalamus 
(to  be discussed in the next section). The hypothalamus 
controls the most influential gland in the endocrine system, 
the pituitary gland, which releases hormones essential for 
➤	 endocrine glandular system  The 
body’s other major communica-
tion system. Communication is 
achieved through hormones that 
are secreted by the endocrine 
glands and travel through the 
bloodstream to their target sites.
➤	 hormone  A chemical messenger 
that is produced by an endocrine 
gland and carried by the blood-
stream to target tissues throughout 
the body.
➤	 pituitary gland  The most influen-
tial gland in the endocrine glandu-
lar system. It releases hormones 
for human growth and hormones 
that direct other endocrine glands 
to release their hormones.
Table 2.2   Some Functions of the Sympathetic 
and Parasympathetic Nervous Systems
Sympathetic 
Nervous System
Parasympathetic 
Nervous System
Dilates pupils
Contracts pupils
Contracts blood vessels
Dilates blood vessels
Speeds heart rate
Slows heart rate
Speeds breathing
Slows breathing
Inhibits salivation
Activates salivation
Inhibits digestion
Stimulates digestion
Activates sweat glands
Inhibits sweat glands
The sympathetic and parasympathetic 
divisions of the autonomic nervous 
system work together to coordinate 
our internal functioning, including our 
heart, stomach, and glandular activity. 
In general, the sympathetic system 
arouses and expends energy while 
the parasympathetic system calms 
and conserves energy.

The Nervous SysteM and the Endocrine SysteM  |  55
human growth, and also releases hormones that direct other endocrine glands to 
release their hormones. For example, it is the pituitary gland that directs a male’s 
sex glands to secrete testosterone. The pituitary gland, located near the base of the 
brain, thus functions like the master of the endocrine system, which is why it is 
sometimes referred to as the “master gland.” The hypothalamus, through its con-
trol of the pituitary gland, is thus able to regulate the endocrine glandular system.
Other endocrine glands—such as the thyroid gland, the adrenal glands, the 
pancreas, and the sex glands—are located throughout the body. The thyroid 
gland, which affects our growth and maturation among other things, is located 
in the neck. The adrenal glands, which are involved in our metabolism and help 
to trigger the “fight-or-flight” response with commands from the autonomic ner-
vous system, are situated above the kidneys. The pancreas, located between the 
kidneys, is involved in digestion and maintaining our blood-sugar levels. The tes-
tes (in males) and ovaries (in females) secrete sex hormones. The major endocrine 
glands along with their main functions are depicted in Figure 2.4.
m Figure 2.4 | The Endocrine Glandular System | The endocrine glandular system 
works with the autonomic nervous system in responding to stress. It also plays an impor-
tant role in such basic behaviors as having sex and eating and in such normal bodily func-
tions as metabolism, reproduction, and growth.
hypothalamus
(brain structure
controlling the
pituitary gland)
pituitary gland
(secretes growth hormone
and many other hormones
that direct other endocrine
glands to release their
hormones)
thyroid gland
(regulates body
metabolism rate)
adrenal glands
(produce adrenaline and
noradrenaline triggering
fight-or-flight response)
pancreas
(involved in digestion 
and maintenance of blood 
sugar levels)
Ovary
(secretes estrogen and
progesterone, female
sex hormones)
testis
(secretes testosterone,
male sex hormone)

56  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
Emotions and the Autonomic Nervous System
Most of us experience anger, fear, joy, love, hate, and many other emotions. 
Emotions play an important part in our lives, and the autonomic nervous system, 
especially the sympathetic division, plays an important role in how we experience 
and express emotions. Think about the heightened state of arousal and the bodily 
feelings that accompany various emotions. For example, we may feel our blood 
pressure rising, our heart pounding, our body trembling, or butterflies in our 
stomach. Such bodily arousal and feelings stem from autonomic nervous system 
activity, which prepares us for our emotional reactions. But exactly what is an 
emotion, and how do emotions arise?
The three components of emotion.  Psychologists usually define an emotion 
as a complex psychological state that involves three components: (1) a physical 
component—a state of physiological arousal triggered by the autonomic nervous 
system; (2) a behavioral component—outward expression of the emotion, includ-
ing facial expressions, movements, and gestures; and (3) a cognitive component— 
our appraisal of the situation to determine which emotion we are experiencing and 
how intensely we are experiencing it.
First, let’s consider the physical component of emotion. In emotional situ-
ations the autonomic nervous system increases our physiological arousal. The 
sympathetic nervous system goes into its “fight-or-flight” mode—our heart rate 
and breathing increase, our blood pressure surges, we start sweating, our pupils 
dilate, we begin trembling, our digestion stops, and so on. This aroused state 
prepares us to react emotionally to the situation, whether our reaction is to 
run from an attacker, hug a loved one, or laugh at a roommate’s joke. Different 
emotions seem to lead to subtly different patterns of autonomic nervous system 
arousal (Levenson, 1992). The language we use to describe different emotional 
states reflects the different patterns in arousal states for these emotions (Oatley & 
Duncan, 1994). For example, we say we are “hot under the collar” when angry, 
but that we have “cold feet” when afraid. These descriptions parallel differences 
in body temperature for these two basic emotions; we have a higher than normal 
body temperature when we are angry and a lower one when we are afraid.
The behavioral component of emotion is the product of the somatic nervous 
system. It provides the nonverbal, expressive behavior for the emotion—our facial 
expressions, such as smiles and frowns, and our body language, such as clenching 
our fists. Some emotion researchers have proposed a facial-feedback hypothesis, 
which assumes that the facial muscles send messages to the brain, allowing the 
brain to determine which emotion is being experienced 
(Izard, 1990; Soussignan, 2002). For example, when we see 
someone we truly care for and haven’t seen for some time, we 
automatically start smiling; signals about this facial expres-
sion are sent to the brain to help the brain determine what 
emotion is being experienced. In fact, there is even evidence 
that watching another person’s facial expressions causes 
➤	 emotion  A complex psychologi-
cal state that involves a state of 
physiological arousal, an outward 
behavioral expression of the emo-
tion, and a cognitive appraisal of 
the situation to determine the spe-
cific emotion and its intensity.

The Nervous SysteM and the Endocrine SysteM  |  57
a reciprocal change in our own facial muscles (Dinberg & 
Thunberg, 1998). If they smile, we smile. Signals are sent not 
only from the facial muscles but also from the entire motor 
nervous system to the brain, contributing to the cognitive 
appraisal component of the emotion.
The cognitive component of emotion appraises the 
situation to determine what emotion we are experiencing. We 
perceive the changes in bodily arousal and behavioral responses within the situ-
ational context, and then, using the knowledge we have stored in memory about 
emotions, we determine what emotion we are experiencing. For example, if your 
hands are sweating, you feel butterflies in your stomach, your mouth is dry, and 
you are about to give a speech to a large crowd, then your brain will easily deduce 
that you are anxious.
Next, we will consider how this cognitive component interacts with the physi-
cal and behavioral components to produce our emotional experiences as we con-
trast some of the major theories of emotion.
Theories of emotion.  Many theories have been proposed over the last century 
to explain emotion. We’ll consider three of them—the James-Lange theory, the 
Cannon-Bard theory, and the Schachter-Singer two-factor theory. To see how 
these theories differ, we’ll contrast them with what is referred to as the “common-
sense” explanation of emotion, which proposes that the subjective experience of the 
emotion triggers the physiological arousal and behavioral response. For 
example, you are out hiking and you see a bear (an emotion-provoking  
stimulus). The commonsense view would say that you cognitively rec-
ognize a dangerous situation and react emotionally by realizing you are 
afraid. This emotional feeling of fear triggers the arousal of the auto-
nomic nervous system—for example, your heart races and you start 
sweating—and a behavioral response—you back away slowly. (Don’t run 
from a bear. It triggers their chase instincts.) The commonsense view 
proposes the following order of events—you realize you are afraid, and 
then the physiological arousal and behavioral response follow. Our 
heart races and we start sweating and back away because we are afraid.
American psychologist William James and Danish psychologist Carl 
Lange developed one of the earliest theories of emotion (Lange & James, 
1922). They disagreed with the order of events proposed by the com-
monsense theory and argued that the emotional feeling does not precede, 
but rather follows, the physiological arousal and behavioral response. 
According to the James-Lange theory, physiological arousal and back-
ing away are responses to the stimulus of seeing the bear. You then inter-
pret these autonomic and behavioral responses as the emotion fear. You 
determine that you are afraid because you are sweating, your heart is rac-
ing, and you are backing away. The emotional feeling occurs after, and as 
a result of, the arousal and behavioral responses. The particular emotion 
experienced depends upon the specific arousal and response patterns.
William James
Bettmann/Corbis
Carl Lange
The Royal Library of Denmark, Dept. of Maps, 
Prints and Photographs.
➤	 James-Lange theory  A theory of 
emotion proposing that an emotion 
is determined from a cognitive 
appraisal of the physiological 
arousal and behavioral responses, 
which occur first.

58  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
Walter Cannon, the physiologist most responsible for discovering 
the functions of the autonomic nervous system, had different ideas 
about the role of arousal in emotion. He and another physiologist, 
Philip Bard, developed what is called the Cannon-Bard theory (Bard, 
1934; Cannon, 1927). This theory argues that arousal patterns for dif-
ferent emotions are too physiologically alike to be used to determine 
which emotion is being experienced. Instead, they proposed that an 
emotion-provoking stimulus (the bear) sends messages simultane-
ously to the peripheral nervous system and the brain. The autonomic 
nervous system produces the physiological arousal responses such as 
our heart racing; the motor nervous system produces the behavioral 
response (backing away); and the brain produces the emotional feel-
ing (fear). These three responses occur simultaneously, but indepen-
dently. So, according to the Cannon-Bard theory, the arousal and 
behavioral responses do not cause the emotional feeling, and the 
emotional feeling does not cause the responses. They all happen at 
the same time.
Subsequent research on these two theories has not strongly sup-
ported either one but has indicated that the cognitive component 
may play a larger role than previously thought. These early theories 
did not emphasize this component. The last theory of emotion that 
we will discuss, Stanley Schachter and Jerome Singer’s two-factor 
theory, illustrates the emerging importance of the cognitive compo-
nent (Schachter & Singer, 1962). Schachter and Singer agreed with 
the James-Lange theory that arousal was a central element in our experience 
of emotion, but also with the Cannon-Bard theory that physiological arousal 
is too similar to distinguish different emotions. According to the Schachter-
Singer two-factor theory, there are two important ingredients in determining 
the emotion—physiological arousal and cognitive appraisal. The physiological 
arousal tells us how intense the emotion is, while the cognitive appraisal of 
the entire situation (the arousal responses such as our heart racing, the behav-
ioral response of backing away, and the situational aspect of being alone with 
the bear) allows us to identify (label) the emotion, leading 
to the emotional feeling (fear). In the two-factor theory, 
cognitive appraisal precedes the emotion. This is different 
from the Cannon-Bard assumption that arousal and the 
emotion occur simultaneously. The two-factor theory is 
contrasted with the three earlier theories in Figure 2.5.
Schachter and Singer’s experimental work to test their 
theory only provided partial support, but their theory has 
spurred much discussion and research on the role of cogni-
tive appraisal in emotion. As mentioned earlier, the auto-
nomic arousal patterns for some emotions are not the same, 
but some argue that these pattern differences may be too 
➤	 Cannon-Bard theory  A theory of 
emotion proposing that an emotion 
is determined from simultaneously 
occurring physiological 
arousal, behavioral responses, 
and cognitive appraisal.
➤	 Schachter-Singer two-factor theory 
A theory of emotion proposing 
that an emotion is determined 
by cognitive appraisal of the 
physiological arousal and the 
entire environmental situation.
Walter Cannon
Bettmann/Corbis
John Hopkins Medical Archive
Philip Bard

The Nervous SysteM and the Endocrine SysteM  |  59
small to allow the differentiation of most emotions (Lang, 1994). However, these 
emotions also lead to different patterns of brain activity (Damasio et al., 2000). 
Could these patterns be used to differentiate emotions?
To help resolve this question, Joseph LeDoux (1996, 2000) proposes that there 
are different brain systems for different emotions. Some emotional responses 
might be the product of a brain system that operates as a reflex system without 
cognitive appraisal. Fear is probably such an emotion. LeDoux actually has some 
evidence that the fear response can be generated almost instantaneously—before 
higher-level cognitive appraisal of the situation could occur. Such fast respond-
ing would have survival value from an evolutionary point of view by allowing us 
to make quick, defensive responses to threats without having to wait on slower, 
cognitive appraisal.
Other emotions, however, may entail using a brain system that relies on cogni-
tive appraisal and the use of past emotional experiences in this appraisal. This sys-
tem would be responsible for more complex emotions, such as love or guilt, that 
do not require an instant response. In sum, this theory not only accommodates 
Commonsense theory
James–Lange theory
Schachter–Singer two-factor theory
Cannon–Bard theory
Stimulus:
Sight of bear
Emotional feeling
(fear)
Emotional feeling
(fear)
Physiological
arousal and 
behavioral responses
Physiological
arousal and 
behavioral responses
Physiological
arousal and 
behavioral responses
Physiological
arousal and 
behavioral responses
Stimulus:
Sight of bear
Stimulus:
Sight of bear
Stimulus:
Sight of bear
Emotional feeling
(fear)
Emotional feeling
(fear)
Cognitive appraisal
of situation and
identification of emotion
m Figure 2.5 | Theories of Emotion | The commonsense theory argued that our feeling of 
fear causes our physiological arousal and behavioral responses. The James-Lange theory pro-
posed just the opposite—our physiological arousal and behavioral responses cause us to feel 
afraid. According to the Cannon-Bard theory, the physiological and behavioral responses and 
the feeling of fear occur simultaneously. The Schachter-Singer two-factor theory asserted that 
cognitive appraisal of the physiological arousal and behavioral responses and the entire situation 
leads to the identification (labeling) of the emotion (fear), which leads to our feeling of fear.

60  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
much of what we know about emotion but also provides a general framework for 
research on the roles of various brain structures in generating our emotions. We 
now turn to a discussion of these brain structures and what we presently know 
about them and their roles not only in emotion but also in thought, language, 
memory, and the many other information-processing abilities we possess.
Section Summary
In this section, we dicussed the two major communication systems within the 
body—the nervous system, which uses neurotransmitters to communicate, and the 
endocrine glandular system, which uses slower-acting hormones to communicate. 
The nervous system is composed of two main divisions—the central nervous sys-
tem (CNS), which consists of the brain and spinal cord, and the peripheral nervous 
system (PNS), which links the CNS with the body’s sensory receptors, muscles, 
and glands. Sensory neurons carry information from the PNS to the CNS, and 
motor neurons carry movement commands from the CNS to parts of the PNS. The 
spinal cord not only serves as the conduit for this information but also is respon-
sible for spinal reflexes, automatic actions not requiring involvement of the brain. 
Interneurons integrate all information processing within the CNS.
The PNS has two parts that work in concert with each other—the somatic ner-
vous system carries sensory information to the CNS and relays commands from the 
CNS to skeletal muscles to control their movement, and the autonomic nervous sys-
tem regulates our internal environment. To do this, the autonomic system has two 
parts working together—the sympathetic nervous system, which expends energy, 
and the parasympathetic nervous system, which conserves energy. The sympathetic 
is in control during emergencies to help us prepare for defensive action; once the 
emergency is over, the parasympathetic helps us return to our normal resting state.
The endocrine glandular system is not part of the nervous system, but the two 
systems work together to maintain normal internal functioning. The endocrine 
glandular system plays an important role in many basic behaviors, such as eating 
and having sex, and normal bodily functions, such as metabolism, growth, and 
reproduction. The brain controls the endocrine glandular system through the hypo-
thalamus, which controls the master gland within the system, the pituitary gland.
We also discussed how the autonomic nervous system plays a critical role in the 
physical component of our emotional experiences by triggering a state of physiolog-
ical arousal, which prepares us for our emotional reactions. An emotion is the result 
of the interplay between this physical component, a behavioral component (the 
outward expression of the emotion), and a cognitive component (an appraisal of the 
entire situation to determine which emotion we are experiencing). The major expla-
nations of emotion have varied in the proposed relationships among these three 
components, as well as their importance. More recent theories of emotion, such as 
Schachter and Singer’s two-factor theory, have emphasized the importance of the 
cognitive appraisal component, and the idea that cognition must precede emotion. 
However, this is not always the case. LeDoux’s proposal that different brain systems 
may be responsible for different emotional responses (those that require cognitive 
appraisal versus those that do not) can account for both emotional reactions in 
which cognition precedes emotion, and those in which emotion precedes cognition.

The Brain  |  61
ConceptCheck | 2
➤	 explain the differences between sensory neurons, motor neurons, and inter-
neurons with respect to location and function.
➤	 explain why the sympathetic nervous system has been referred to as the 
“fight-or-flight” system and the parasympathetic nervous system as the 
“rest-and-digest” system.
➤	 explain how hormones differ from neurotransmitters.
➤	 explain why the pituitary gland is referred to as the “master gland.”
➤	 explain how the James-Lange theory and the Cannon-Bard theory of emo-
tion differ.
The Brain
The brain has evolved from the brain stem structures that link the brain to the 
spinal cord all the way up to the cerebral cortex. As we go up the brain stem, pro-
cessing gets more complex. In fact, it is the very top, the cerebral cortex, that dif-
ferentiates our brains from those of all other animals. The cerebral cortex enables 
such complex processes as decision making, language, and perception. Even so, all 
of the structures below the cerebral cortex are essential for normal behavior and 
mental processing. This will become clearer as we discuss each structure’s role in 
this complex, interactive system we call the brain.
Going Up the Brain Stem
Between the spinal cord and the cortex, there are two sets of brain structures— the 
central core and the limbic system. The brain stem and structures near the brain 
stem (cerebellum, thalamus, and basal ganglia) can be thought of as the central 
core of the brain. Surrounding the top border of the brain stem are the limbic sys-
tem structures—the hypothalamus, hippocampus, and amygdala. Our discussion 
will start with the central core structures going up the brain stem to the limbic 
system structures.
The central core.  Figure 2.6 shows the central core brain 
structures. The brain stem spans from the spinal cord up to 
the thalamus. The first brain stem structure is the medulla, 
which links the spinal cord to the brain. The medulla is 
involved in regulating essential body functions such as heart-
beat, breathing, blood pressure, digestion, and swallowing. 
This is why damage to the medulla can result in death. A 
drug overdose that suppresses proper functioning of the 
medulla can also lead to death. Just above the medulla, where 
the brain stem bulges, sits the pons. Along with the medulla, 
➤	 medulla  A brain stem structure 
involved in many essential body 
functions, such as heartbeat, 
breathing, blood pressure, diges-
tion, and swallowing.
➤	 pons  A brain stem structure that 
serves as a bridge between the 
cerebellum and the rest of the 
brain and is involved in sleep and 
dreaming.

62  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
the pons serves as a passageway for neural signals to and from higher areas in the 
brain. The pons (Latin for “bridge”) functions as a bridge between the cerebellum 
and the rest of the brain and is involved in sleep and dreaming.
The reticular formation is a network of neurons running up the center of the 
brain stem and into the thalamus, which is involved in controlling our different 
levels of arousal and awareness. This function was demonstrated by Moruzzi and 
Magoun (1949) in research with cats. When they stimulated a sleeping cat’s retic-
ular formation, the cat awoke and entered a very alert state. When they severed 
the connections of the reticular formation with higher brain 
structures, however, the cat went into a coma from which it 
could never be awakened. The reticular formation also plays 
a role in attention by deciding which incoming sensory infor-
mation enters our conscious awareness.
The cerebellum is involved in the coordination of our move-
ments, our sense of balance, and motor learning. Cerebellum 
means “little brain” in Latin, and it looks like two minihemi-
spheres attached to the rear of the brain stem. The cerebellum 
has roughly the same surface area (if unfolded) as a single 
Thalamus
Reticular
formation
Medulla
Pons
Basal ganglia
Hippocampus
Amygdala
(a)
(c)
(b)
m Figure 2.6 | The Central Core Brain 
Structures | The central core of the brain includes 
(a) the brain stem (which includes the medulla 
and the pons), the thalamus attached to the top 
of the brain stem, and the reticular formation that 
passes through both; (b) the cerebellum, which 
extends from the back of the brainstem; and 
(c) the basal ganglia that surround the thalamus. 
The hippocampus and amygdala are limbic system 
structures.
➤	 reticular formation  A network of 
neurons running up the center of 
the brain stem that is responsible 
for our different levels of arousal 
and consciousness.
➤	 cerebellum  A part of the brain 
involved in the coordination of our 
movements, sense of balance, and 
motor learning.
Cerebellum
Spinal cord

The Brain  |  63
cerebral hemisphere does (Bower & Parsons, 2007), but it is comprised of smaller 
neurons so it takes up far less space. Only making up about 10 percent of the 
brain’s weight (Rilling & Insel, 1998), it has more neurons, an estimated 70 billion  
(Azevedo et al., 2009), than the rest of the brain combined. This is because the 
great majority of cerebellar neurons are granule neurons which are very small and 
can be densely packed into a smaller space. The cerebellum coordinates all of our 
movements, such as walking, running, and dancing. Damage to the cerebellum will 
lead to very unsteady, unbalanced movement. Alcohol depresses the functioning 
of the cerebellum, leading to the uncoordinated movements typical of someone 
who is drunk. This is why some of the tests for being drunk involve coordinated 
movement. In addition, the cerebellum is the location of motor learning, such as 
how to ride a bicycle or to type. There is also some emerging evidence indicating 
that the cerebellum not only coordinates movement but may also play a role in 
integrating and coordinating sensory input and in mental functions such as plan-
ning (Bower & Parsons, 2007). Lastly, recovery from cerebellar damage, and even 
from removal of the cerebellum at a young age, is relatively good. Why this is so 
remains unanswered.
The thalamus, located at the top of the brain stem, serves as a relay station for 
incoming sensory information. As such, it sends each type of sensory information 
(visual, auditory, taste, or touch) to the appropriate location in the cerebral cor-
tex. The only type of sensory information that does not pass through the thala-
mus is olfactory (smell) information. Smell information goes directly from the 
receptors in our nose to the cortex. The basal ganglia are on the outer sides of the 
thalamus and are concerned mainly with the initiation and execution of physi-
cal movements. Like the cerebellum, the basal ganglia are affected by alcohol, 
and so make the movements required by tests for drunken 
driving difficult to execute. The basal ganglia are actually a 
group of various interacting brain regions. As we discussed 
earlier in this chapter, abnormally low dopamine activity in 
one region of the basal ganglia results in Parkinson’s disease. 
Another disease that involves difficulty in controlling move-
ments is Huntington’s chorea, which stems from problems in 
another region of the ganglia in which there are GABA and 
acetylcholine deficits.
All of the various central core structures are summarized 
in Table 2.3 along with some of their major functions.
The limbic system.  Surrounding the top border (or 
“limbus” in Latin) of the brain stem is the limbic system, 
which is made up of the hypothalamus, the amygdala, and the 
hippocampus. These limbic structures play an important role 
in our survival, memory, and emotions. Figure 2.7 shows the 
three parts of the limbic system. The hypothalamus is a very 
tiny structure, weighing about half an ounce, which is named 
after its location—below the thalamus (“hypo” means “below” 
➤	 thalamus  A part of the brain that 
serves as a relay station for incom-
ing sensory information.
➤	 basal ganglia  A part of the brain 
that is involved in the initiation and 
execution of movements.
➤	 limbic system  A group of brain 
structures (hypothalamus, hippo-
campus, and amygdala) that play 
an important role in our survival, 
memory, and emotions.
➤	 hypothalamus  A part of the brain 
that is involved in regulating basic 
drives such as eating, drinking, 
and having sex. It also directs 
the endocrine glandular system 
through its control of the pituitary 
gland and the autonomic nervous 
system to maintain the body’s 
internal environment.

64  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
in  Greek). The hypothalamus controls the 
pituitary gland (and so directs activity in the 
endocrine glandular system) and the autonomic 
nervous system to maintain the body’s internal 
environment, such as regulating body tempera-
ture. It also plays a major role in regulating basic 
drives such as eating, drinking, and having sex. 
Thus, this tiny structure plays a huge role in both 
our behavior and our survival.
The hippocampus is involved in the forma-
tion of memories. Hippocampus may seem like 
a rather strange name, but like many parts of the 
brain, it was given a name that matched its visual 
appearance. The hippocampus looks somewhat 
like a seahorse, and “hippocampus” means “seahorse” in Greek. Recall the case study 
of H. M. that we discussed in Chapter 1. H. M. had his left and right hippocampal 
structures removed for medical reasons and as a result suffered severe memory defi-
cits (Corkin, 1984). Subsequent research on H. M. and other people with amnesia 
has shown the hippocampus to be critical for the formation of certain types of new 
memories (Cohen & Eichenbaum, 1993), which we will discuss in Chapter 5.
The hippocampus has also been found to have the capacity to generate new 
neurons, a process called neurogenesis (Gage, 2003; Kempermann & Gage, 
1999). The research group most responsible for demonstrat-
ing neurogenesis in humans is led by Fred Gage. Given that 
brain imaging techniques cannot detect neuronal growth 
and that ethics prohibit neurosurgery to detect such growth 
Table 2.3   Central Core Structures and Some of Their Functions
Central Core Structure
Functions
Medulla
Involved in essential body functions, such as heart-
beat, breathing, blood pressure, and swallowing
Pons
Serves as bridge between cerebellum and rest of 
brain and involved in sleep and dreaming
Reticular Formation
Responsible for our different levels of arousal and 
consciousness
Cerebellum
Involved in coordination of our movements, sense 
of balance, and motor learning
Thalamus
Serves as relay station for incoming sensory 
stimuli (except for olfactory sensory information)
Basal Ganglia
Involved in initiation and execution of movements
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
gland
Amygdala
Hippocampus
m Figure 2.7 | The Limbic System | Positioned 
around the top of the brain stem is the limbic system— 
the hypothalamus, hippocampus, and amygdala.
➤	 hippocampus  A part of the 
brain involved in the formation 
of memories.

The Brain  |  65
in humans, Gage and his colleagues developed a very clever 
way to demonstrate that such growth exists. BrdU is a 
traceable substance that has been used in cancer treatment 
to track how rapidly the disease is spreading. BrdU is inte-
grated into the DNA of cells preparing to divide. Hence it 
becomes part of the DNA of the new cells and all future 
descendents of the original dividing cells. Thus, BrdU func-
tions as a marker for new cells. Because BrdU cannot be administered to healthy 
people, Gage and his colleagues examined postmortem hippocampal tissue of 
cancer patients who had been injected with BrdU before their deaths, and new 
noncancerous cells with BrdU were found (Eriksson et al., 1998; van Praag et al, 
2002). Although the purposes of neurogenesis in the hippocampus of humans 
are not yet clear, some research suggests that it may play a key role in depression 
(Jacobs, van Praag, & Gage, 2000a, 2000b). We will consider this hypothesis in 
Chapter 10 (Abnormal Psychology).
Located just in front of the hippocampal structures are the amygdala left and 
right structures. Amygdala means “almond” in Greek, and these structures look 
like almonds. The amygdala plays a major role in regulating our emotional experi-
ences, especially fear, anger, and aggression. It is also responsible for generating 
quick emotional responses directly, without cortical involvement (LeDoux, 2000). 
The first evidence for the amygdala’s role in emotional behavior was done on wild, 
rather violent rhesus monkeys (Klüver & Bucy, 1939). The monkeys’ amygdalas 
were surgically removed. The surgery transformed the monkeys into calm, tame 
animals, clearly changing their emotional behavior. Other research has indicated 
that the amygdala also provides the emotional element in our memories and 
guides our interpretation of the emotional expressions of others (LeDoux, 1996).
All three structures in the limbic system are summarized in Table 2.4 along 
with some of their major functions.
➤	 amygdala  A part of the brain that 
is involved in emotions by influenc-
ing aggression, anger, and fear 
and by providing the emotional 
element of our memories and the 
interpretation of emotional expres-
sions in others.
Table 2.4   Limbic System Structures and Some of Their Functions
Limbic System Structure
Functions
Hypothalamus
Involved in regulating basic drives such as 
eating, drinking, and having sex; directing the 
endocrine glandular syste; and maintaining 
the body’s internal environment
Hippocampus
Involved in the formation of memories and via 
neurogenesis may play a role in depression
Amygdala
Involved in emotions by influencing aggression, 
anger, and fear and by providing emotional 
element of our memories and the interpretation 
of emotional expressions in others

66  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
Processing in the Cerebral Cortex
All of the brain structures that we have discussed so far are 
important to our behavior and survival. The most important 
brain structure, however, is the cerebral cortex, the control 
and information-processing center for the nervous system. 
This is where perception, language, memory, decision making,  
and all other higher-level cognitive processing occur. The 
cerebral cortex physically envelops all of the other brain 
structures, except for the lowest parts of the brain stem and 
cerebellum. It is by far the largest part of the brain, account-
ing for about 80 percent of its total volume (Kolb & Whishaw, 
2001). The cerebral cortex consists of layers of interconnected 
cells that make up the “bark” or covering of the brain’s two 
hemispheres, which are called cerebral hemispheres. The two 
hemispheres are separated on top by a deep gap but joined 
together farther down in the middle by the corpus callosum, a bridge of neurons 
that allows the two hemispheres to communicate.
The cerebral cortex is very crumpled in appearance with all sorts of bulges and 
gaps. This allows more cortical surface area to fit inside our rather small skull. 
If we were to unfold the cerebral cortex to check the amount of surface area, we 
would find the area to be about the size of four sheets of notebook paper or one 
newspaper page. Think about this. You couldn’t fit four sheets of paper into your 
pants pocket unless you crumpled them up. This is the same principle that applies 
to fitting the large surface area of the cerebral cortex into the small space within 
the skull. It is this large amount of surface area in the cerebral cortex that not only 
allows our complex cognitive processing but also differentiates our brains from 
those of all other animals. To see where different 
types of processing occur in the cerebral cortex, we 
need to learn the geography of the two hemispheres. 
This geography is rather simple in that the outer sur-
face of each hemisphere is divided into four defined 
parts, called lobes, which we will discuss first.
The four lobes.  Figure 2.8 shows the four lobes in 
the left hemisphere. They are the same in the right 
hemisphere and are named after the specific bone 
area in the skull covering each of them. Two distinc-
tive fissures (gaps) serve as boundary markers for 
three of the lobes. The central fissure (also called the 
fissure of Rolando) runs down the center of each 
hemisphere, and the lateral fissure (also called the 
Sylvian fissure) runs back along the side of each 
hemisphere. The four lobes are named for the four 
bones of the skull that overlie them. The frontal lobe 
➤	 cerebral cortex  The layers of 
interconnected cells covering the 
brain’s two hemispheres. This 
is the control and information-
processing center for the nervous 
system; it is where perception, 
memory, language, decision  
making, and all other higher-level 
cognitive processing occur.
➤	 corpus callosum  The bridge of 
neurons that connects the two 
cerebral hemispheres.
➤	 frontal lobe  The area in each 
cerebral hemisphere in front of 
the central fissure and above the 
lateral fissure. The motor cortex is 
in this lobe.
The cerebral cortex of the human brain is very 
crumpled. This allows more cortical surface area 
to fit inside our rather small skull. The actual 
surface area, if unfolded, is about the size of 
four sheets of notebook paper.
Geoff Tompkinson/Science Source

The Brain  |  67
is the area in front of the central fis-
sure and above the lateral fissure, and 
the parietal lobe is the area located 
behind the central fissure and above 
the lateral fissure. The temporal lobe 
is located beneath the lateral fissure. 
The remaining lobe is the occipital 
lobe, which is located in the lower 
back of each hemisphere. Brynie 
(2009) explains how to find your 
occipital lobes. Run your hand up the 
back of your neck until you come to a 
bump and then place your palm on 
the bump. Your palm is squarely over 
the occipital lobes. The frontal lobes 
are the largest of the lobes. Their loca-
tion is easy to remember because they 
are in the front of the hemispheres 
and directly behind our forehead. 
Now that we know these four areas, 
we can see what we have learned about 
what type of processing occurs in each 
of them. We begin with the well-
defined areas for producing voluntary 
movement of different parts of the body, such as raising a hand or making a fist, 
and for processing various types of sensory input, such as touch, visual, and  
auditory information.
The motor cortex.  The motor cortex, the frontal lobe 
strip of cortex directly in front of the central fissure in each 
hemisphere, allows us to move different parts of our body. 
The two motor cortex strips are related to the body by 
contralateral control—each hemisphere controls the volun-
tary movement of the opposite side of the body. This means 
that the motor strip in the left hemisphere controls move-
ment in the right side of the body, and the motor strip in the 
right hemisphere controls movement in the left side of the 
body. It is also interesting that the amount of space allocated 
to a specific body part in the motor cortex is not related to 
the actual size of the body part, but rather to the complexity 
and precision of movement of which that part is capable. 
Smaller parts that can make complex movements, such as 
our fingers, get a large amount of space, and larger parts, 
such as our torso, that cannot make complex movements do 
Frontal 
lobe
Primary motor area
Primary 
somatosensory area
Central 
fissure
Lateral
fissure
Temporal 
lobe
Parietal 
lobe
Occipital 
lobe
Primary 
visual area
Primary 
auditory area
m Figure 2.8 | The Four Lobes and the Sensory-Motor 
Processing Areas | This figure shows the four lobes in the left 
hemisphere. They are exactly the same areas in the right hemi-
sphere. The central fissure separates the frontal lobe from the 
parietal lobe, and the temporal lobe is located beneath the lateral 
fissure running along the side of the hemisphere. The occipital lobe 
is toward the lower back of the hemisphere. The motor cortex is 
the strip in the frontal lobe directly in front of the central fissure; 
the somatosensory cortex is the strip in the parietal lobe directly 
behind the central fissure. Primary auditory processing occurs in the 
temporal lobe, and primary visual processing in the occipital lobe.
➤	 parietal lobe  The area in each 
cerebral hemisphere in back of 
the central fissure and above the 
lateral fissure. The somatosensory 
cortex is in this lobe.
➤	 temporal lobe  The area in each 
cerebral hemisphere located 
beneath the lateral fissure. The pri-
mary auditory cortex is in this lobe.
➤	 occipital lobe  The area located 
in the lower back of each cerebral 
hemisphere. The primary visual 
cortex is in this lobe.
➤	 motor cortex  The strip of cortex in 
each cerebral hemisphere in the 
frontal lobe directly in front of the 
central fissure, which allows us to 
move different parts of our body.

68  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
not get much space. Figure 2.9 illustrates this with what is called a homunculus 
(“little man” in Greek)—a body depiction with the size of each body part propor-
tional to its amount of area in the motor cortex and not its actual size. Note that 
the body parts are arranged in a toe-to-head fashion spanning from the top of the 
motor strip to the bottom. It is as if the homunculus is hanging by its toes over 
the side of the hemisphere.
The somatosensory cortex.  The somatosensory cortex, 
the parietal lobe strip of cortex directly behind the central fis-
sure in each hemisphere, is where our body sensations of 
pressure, temperature, limb position, and pain are processed. 
“Somato” is Greek for body. Somatosensory, then, refers to 
the body senses. In addition to information about touch, the 
somatosensory cortex receives input about temperature and 
pain and information from the muscles and joints that allow 
Hip Knee
Ankle
Toes
Trunk
Neck
Arm
Wrist
Fingers
Thumb
Brow
Eye
Face
Lips
Jaw
Tongue
Swallowing
Hip Knee
Toes
Trunk
Neck
Arm
Fingers
Thumb
Eye
Face
Lips
Jaw
Tongue
Nose
Hand
Foot
Leg
Teeth
Gums
Output: Motor cortex
(Left hemisphere section
controls the body’s right side)
Input: Somatosensory cortex
(Left hemisphere section receives
input from the body’s right side)
m Figure 2.9 | Homunculi for the Motor Cortex and the Somatosensory Cortex | These homun-
culi are for the left hemisphere. This means that the motor strip controls the right side of the body, and the 
somatosensory strip receives signals from the right side of the body. The amount of space for each body part 
in the motor strip is based on the complexity and precision of movement for that part, and the amount of space 
for each body part in the somatosensory strip is related to the part’s sensitivity. For both strips, the body is 
arranged from foot to head starting from the top of the hemisphere. (Adapted from Penfield & Rasmussen, 1968.)
➤	 somatosensory cortex  The strip 
of cortex in each cerebral hemi-
sphere in the parietal lobe directly 
in back of the central fissure, 
which allows us to sense pressure, 
temperature, and pain in different 
parts of our body as well as the 
position of our body parts.
(a)
(b)
(c)

The Brain  |  69
us to monitor the positions of the various parts of the body. As in the motor cortex,  
there are contralateral relationships between the somatosensory strips and sides 
of the body. The somatosensory strip in the left hemisphere interprets the body 
sensory information for the right side of the body, and the strip in the right hemi-
sphere interprets this information for the left side of the body. In addition, the 
amount of space within these strips is not allocated by the size of the body part. 
In the somatosensory cortex, it is allocated in accordance with the sensitivity of 
the body part—the more sensitive, the more space. For example, the lips and other 
parts of the face are more sensitive, so they have larger processing areas than body 
parts, such as our torso, that are not as sensitive. The homunculus for the 
somatosensory strip is given in Figure 2.9. Like the motor strip, the body is 
arranged from toe to head, starting at the top of the strip.
You may be wondering how the homunculi for the motor and somatosensory 
strips were determined. They were the result of pre-surgical brain evaluations car-
ried out by Canadian neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield who applied mild electrical 
stimulation via a single electrode to a patient’s brain before performing surgery 
for epilepsy (Buonomano, 2011; Seung, 2012). Because the brain itself does not 
have pain receptors, these surgeries could be performed in conscious patients 
with only local anesthesia applied to the scalp where incisions were to be made. 
After pulling back the scalp and opening the skull to expose the brain, Penfield 
applied electrical probes to different locations in the brain. By carrying out mul-
tiple stimulations and meticulously recording the patient’s response to each one, 
Penfield was able to identify the abnormal tissue causing the patient’s seizures 
and delineate those areas surrounding the tissue that he had to avoid damag-
ing during the surgery. In using this technique to carry out pre-surgical brain 
evaluations of his patients, Penfield amassed a large body of stimulation data, 
which led to the first detailed large-scale functional map of the human cerebral 
cortex (Penfield & Boldrey, 1937; Penfield & Rasmussen, 1968). He found that 
when a particular area in the motor cortex was stimulated, a specific part of the 
patient’s body moved and when a particular area in the somatosensory cortex was 
stimulated, the patient reported feeling a sensation in a specific body part. These 
data were used to create the homunculi for the two strips. Using fMRI images, 
researchers have replicated Penfield’s functional mappings for these two strips 
(Seung, 2012). The researchers observed which locations in the motor strip were 
activated by touching parts of a subject’s body and which locations in the somato-
sensory strip were activated when a subject moved parts of the body.
The visual cortex and the auditory cortex.  There are two other important 
areas for processing sensory information in Figure 2.8 (page 67) that we haven’t 
discussed yet. These are the primary processing areas for our two major senses, 
seeing and hearing. The visual cortex is located in the occipital lobes at the back 
of the hemispheres, and the auditory cortex is in the temporal lobes. Figure 2.8 
shows where they are located in the left hemisphere. They have the same locations 
in the right hemisphere. The size of the primary visual cortex varies between 

70  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
individuals over a threefold range in surface 
area and volume (Dougherty et al., 2003). The 
reasons for this variability are not known. 
Interestingly, Schwartzkopf, Song, and Rees 
(2011) found a strong negative correlation 
between the magnitude of two context illu-
sions and the surface area of the primary 
visual cortex. Thus, the smaller your primary 
visual cortex, the more dramatic some visual 
illusions appear. The primary visual cortex and the primary auditory cortex are 
only the locations of the initial processing of visual and auditory information. 
These primary areas pass the results of their analyses on to areas in the other lobes 
to complete the brain’s interpretation of the incoming visual or auditory informa-
tion. These secondary cortical processing areas are part of what is termed the 
association cortex—all the areas of the cerebral cortex, except for those devoted 
to primary sensory or motor processing.
The four cerebral lobes and the type of sensory/motor processing that occurs 
in each lobe are summarized in Table 2.5.
Given the different locations of the visual cortex and the auditory cortex, you 
may think that seeing and hearing function entirely separately from each other. The 
reality, however, is that there is plenty of crosstalk between them. A good example of 
this interaction is the McGurk effect, which demonstrates that the brain integrates 
visual and auditory information when processing spoken language (McGurk & 
MacDonald, 1976). The McGurk effect arises out of conflicting auditory and visual 
information. A person’s lip movements influence what we hear. For example, if 
you listen to an audio track of a syllable (“ba”) spoken repeatedly while you watch 
a video clip of a person making the lip movements as if repeatedly saying another 
syllable (“ga”), you actually hear a third syllable “da,” the brain’s best guess after 
Table 2.5   The Four Cerebral Lobes and Type of Sensory/Motor 
Processing in Each Lobe
Cerebral Lobe
Type of Sensory/Motor Processing
Frontal
Includes motor cortex, which allows us to move the 
different parts of our body
Parietal
Includes somatosensory cortex where our body 
sensations of touch, temperature, limb position, 
and pain are processed
Temporal
Includes primary auditory cortex where auditory 
sensory information is initially processed
Occipital
Includes primary visual cortex where visual sensory 
information is initially processed
➤	 association cortex  All of the 
cerebral cortex except those 
areas devoted to primary sensory 
processing or motor processing. 
This is where all the higher-level 
cognitive processing that requires 
the association (integration) of 
information, such as perception 
and language, occurs.

The Brain  |  71
merging the information from the two senses. You will have a much better under-
standing of the McGurk effect if you experience it, and you can find several Web 
sites that allow you to do so just by doing an online search for the McGurk effect. 
The McGurk effect is a good example of how visual information can exert a strong 
influence on what we hear, but it is just one example of how our senses interact. 
There are many others, such as the smell of food influencing its taste. In interpret-
ing the world, the brain blends the input from all of our senses.
It is important not to confuse sensory interaction in general and the McGurk 
effect, which all of us with normal sensory capabilities can experience, with syn-
esthesia, a rare neurological condition in which otherwise normal people have 
cross-sensory experiences in which stimulation in one modality leads to auto-
matic, involuntary experiences in another modality. For example, in synesthesia, 
sounds may evoke tastes, and colors may evoke smells. In addition, perception of 
a form (e.g., a number) may induce an unusual perception in the same modality 
(e.g., a color). Although grapheme-color synesthesia (seeing letters, words, and 
numbers in colors) and sound-color synesthesia (seeing sounds as colors) are the 
most common types of synesthesia (Brang & Ramachandran, 2011), there are 
many other types. The exact number is not known. Some people with synesthe-
sia appear to use this union of the senses to inspire their art (Ramachandran & 
Blakeslee, 1998). For example, Russian artist Wassily Kandinsky said that when 
he saw colors, he also heard music, leading him to develop his style of abstract 
painting (Blakeslee & Blakeslee, 2008). It was as if he was capturing music on 
canvas. Synesthesia affects only 2–4 percent of the population and is believed to 
stem from some type of cross-wiring in the brain in which normally separate areas 
of the brain elicit activity in each other (Brang & Ramachandran, 2011). Although 
familial linkage analyses have shown a strong genetic component, the precise 
genes involved in synesthesia have not been identified, and why this sensory 
anomaly has remained in our gene pool remains a mystery. As Eagleman (2011, 
p. 80) points out in discussing the tiny genetic changes that cause synesthesia, 
“microscopic changes in brain wiring can lead to different realities,” demonstrat-
ing once again that reality is more subjective than most people realize.
The association cortex.  Most of the cortex (about 70 percent) is association 
cortex. This is where all the higher-level processing such as decision making,  
reasoning, perception, speech, and language occurs. These areas were named the 
association cortex because higher-level processing requires the association (inte-
gration) of various types of information. Scientists have studied the association 
cortex for over a century, but they are only beginning to understand the functions 
of some of the association areas (helped greatly by the recently developed scan-
ning technologies, such as PET scans and fMRI). For example, Sergent, Ohta, and 
MacDonald (1992) and Kanwisher, McDermott, and Chun (1997) used PET scans 
and fMRI, respectively, and found a small region on the underside of the temporal 
lobe near the intersection of the temporal and occipital lobes that responded 
most strongly to faces. Kanwisher and her colleagues named it the fusiform face 
area (FFA). Subsequent fMRI studies have confirmed the engagement of the FFA 

72  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
during a range of facial perception tasks (Tong, Nakayama, Moscovitch, Weinrib, 
and Kanwisher, 2000). The asymmetry of the FFA (it is much larger in the right 
hemisphere) leads to a right-hemisphere specialization for face recognition 
(Kanwisher, 2006; Kanwisher & Yovel, 2009). Hence, it is the right hemisphere 
that is mainly at work when we process faces.
Damage to the FFA has also been found to play a role in prosopagnosia 
(sometimes called face blindness), a condition that impacts a person’s ability to 
recognize faces including relatives, friends, and acquaintances or even themselves 
in a mirror (Greuter, 2007; Hadjikhani & de Gelder, 2002). Although a person 
with prosopagnosia cannot consciously recognize faces, some part of their brain 
does unconsciously distinguish familiar faces from unfamiliar ones because they 
show a higher skin conductance response to familiar faces (Tranel & Damasio, 
1985). Sadly, prosopagnosia cannot be cured, but people with prosopagnosia 
learn other ways of recognizing people, such as memorizing a person’s speech 
patterns, their gait, how they wear their hair, and so on. Surprisingly, prosop-
agnosia also occurs among people without brain damage and is highly heritable 
(Wilmer et al., 2010).
During the nineteenth century and most of the 
twentieth century, however, brain scans obviously 
weren’t available, so scientists had to learn about 
the association areas by other methods. One major 
method was to study the behavior of people who had 
suffered brain damage in accidents and strokes, or had 
brain surgery for medical reasons. Their behavioral 
and mental processing deficits were then related to the 
particular cortical areas where damage or surgery had 
occurred. A railroad worker’s tragic accident in 1848 
gave us some hints as to what type of processing occurs 
in our frontal lobes (Macmillan, 2000). Phineas Gage 
was taking a break from tamping some blasting pow-
der into a rock with a metal tamping iron. He was dis-
tracted and the tamping iron slipped, generating some 
sparks that caused the powder to explode. The explo-
sion caused the metal tamping iron, which was 3 feet 
7 inches long, 1¼ inches in diameter, and 13½ pounds 
in weight, to fly through his left cheek and head, exit-
ing through his left frontal lobe (Ratiu, Talos, Haker, 
Lieberman, & Everett, 2004; Van Horn et al., 2012). 
Before Ratiu et al.’s study, most researchers believed 
that both frontal lobes were damaged, but Ratiu et al. 
showed that the cerebral injury was limited to the left 
frontal lobe. Their computerized tomography scan of 
Gage’s skull clearly shows this, and Van Horn et al. ver-
ified the damage was localized to the left frontal lobe.
Phineas Gage’s doctor had this picture of 
the tamping iron and Phineas’s skull taken in 
1868 to document the case. Seeing the iron 
and the skull side by side makes it difficult 
to believe that Gage survived, but he did. He 
died 12 years later in 1860 at age 36, probably 
from hypothermia stemming from an epileptic 
seizure (Fleischman, 2002).
Courtesy, Woburn Public Library, Woburn MA/Glennon Archives.

The Brain  |  73
Gage survived, but his personality was greatly changed. As 
his doctor and friends pointed out, Gage was “no longer Gage” 
(Macmillan, 2000). He became very irresponsible, impulsive, and 
disorderly; had great difficulty making decisions and reasoning; 
and cursed regularly. This led neuroscientists to hypothesize 
that the frontal lobes played a major role in such behaviors. 
Subsequent collaborative evidence from similar cases and from 
studies using other techniques such as brain scans confirmed 
that this is the case (Klein & Kihlstrom, 1998). The frontal lobes 
play a major role in our planning, decision making, judgment, 
impulse control, and personality, especially its emotional aspects. 
Actually, the cortical area destroyed in Gage’s left frontal lobe 
(the prefrontal cortex just behind the forehead and in front of the 
primary motor cortex) was essentially the left portion of the cor-
tex that was disconnected from the rest of the brain in the infa-
mous lobotomies performed on hundreds of patients in mental 
hospitals in the middle part of the twentieth century. The frontal 
lobes may also be partially responsible for the bad decisions and 
risky behavior of teenagers, because frontal lobe development is 
not complete until the late teens and possibly even the early 20s 
(Sabbagh, 2006).
What happened to Phineas Gage? While it has proved very 
difficult to fill in the exact details of Gage’s subsequent life, 
Fleischman (2002) provides a general account. Following his 
recovery, Phineas tried to return to his job as railroad foreman, 
but because of the “new” Gage’s vulgar, unreliable behavior, the railroad let him 
go. It appears that for a brief period of time he traveled around New England 
exhibiting himself along with the tamping iron, possibly ending up in P. T. 
Barnum’s American Museum sideshow in New York City. After this, because 
he got along very well with horses, he worked for awhile in a livery stable in 
New Hampshire near his hometown. In 1852 he traveled, taking the tamping 
iron with him, to South America to care for horses and be a stagecoach driver 
in Chile. His work as a stagecoach driver and the fact that he supported him-
self throughout his post-accident life seem to indicate that he at least partially 
adapted to his injury (Macmillan & Lena, 2010). Because of health issues he 
returned in 1859 to California where his family had moved; and after recover-
ing, he found work as a farmhand. In 1860 he began suffering epileptic seizures 
(likely due to slow changes in his brain tissue damaged in the railroad accident), 
and at that time, physicians could not control such seizures. These seizures killed 
him, 11½ years after the accident. The immediate cause of death was probably 
hypothermia  created by the seizures (during which the body cannot control its 
internal temperature). If you want to find out more about Phineas Gage, go to 
www.uakron.edu/gage/, a Web site created by Malcolm Macmillan, the world’s 
leading authority on Gage.
A drawing of a 3-D computer 
reconstruction of Phineas 
Gage’s injury with the bar in 
place. (Adapted from Ratiu, 
Talos, Haker, Lieberman, & 
Everett, 2004.)

74  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
In 2012, an accident similar to that 
of Phineas Gage happened in Rio de 
Janeiro, Brazil. A 24-year old construc-
tion worker, Eduardo Leite, survived 
after a 6-foot metal bar fell from the 
fifth floor of a building under con-
struction and went through his hard 
hat, entering his skull and partially 
exiting between his eyes. Although the 
bar stayed in Leite’s head, he remained 
conscious; and the bar was success-
fully removed by doctors in a 5-hour 
surgery. Remarkably, Leite was lucid 
and showed no negative behavioral 
consequences after the operation. 
The hospital’s head of neurosurgery 
said that Leite escaped by just a few 
centimeters from losing his right 
eye and becoming paralyzed on the 
left side of his body. The computer-
ized tomography scan of Leite’s skull 
pierced by the bar shows that the 
bar entered in front of the motor 
cortex in the right hemisphere and 
exited the right frontal lobe just above 
the right eye. The doctors concluded 
that the bar went through “non-elo-
quent” areas of the brain, areas that 
have no discernible cognitive, motor, 
or sensory functions. Phineas Gage 
was not so fortunate. By using connectograms (circular diagrams depicting 
the brain’s major white matter connective tracts in the brain), Van Horn et al. 
(2012) found that Gage’s accident damaged some of the major white matter 
tracts that connect the frontal lobe with the other three lobes and the limbic  
system, leading to Gage’s dramatic behavioral changes. In Leite’s case, his brain 
damage may not have disrupted his brain’s connective networks as Gage’s damage 
did, possibly accounting for the difference in the behavioral consequences observed.
Early brain researchers also analyzed the brains of deceased people, relating a 
person’s brain analysis to their behavior while living. Using this technique, two 
nineteenth-century researchers, Paul Broca and Karl Wernicke, 
studied people with aphasias—speech and language dysfunc-
tions—and made some major discoveries about where speech 
and language abilities occur in the brain. By examining the 
brains of deceased persons who had lost their ability to speak 
fluently while alive, Paul Broca, a French brain researcher, 
➤	 Broca’s area  An area in the cere-
bral cortex responsible for fluent 
speech production. It is in the 
left frontal lobe of the majority of 
people, regardless of handedness.
Miguel Couto Hospital/AP Photo
This computerized tomography scan shows the skull of Eduardo 
Leite pierced by a 6-foot metal bar. The bar was removed during a 
5-hour surgery, and Leite showed no negative consequences after 
the operation.

The Brain  |  75
identified an area in the left frontal lobe that is 
named after him, Broca’s area, which is respon-
sible for fluent speech production (see Figure 
2.10). Damage to Broca’s area leads to Broca’s 
aphasia—the inability to generate fluent speech 
while maintaining the ability to understand 
speech and read silently.
Broca’s area is only in the left hemisphere 
in the majority of people, both right-handed 
and left-handed (unlike the sensory and motor 
processing areas that are in each hemisphere). 
This means that speech production seems to 
be a specialization of the left hemisphere (the 
comparable area in the right hemisphere is 
usually not used for speech production). So, 
what is this area in the right hemisphere used 
for? One possible answer that has been offered 
is singing and music. People with Broca’s area 
damage often retain these abilities (Besson, 
Faita, Peretz, Bonnel, & Requin, 1998). This 
means that singing and speaking seem to originate from different areas of the 
brain. What about Broca’s area in deaf people who use sign language? Will dam-
age to Broca’s area impact their ability to use sign language? The answer is yes. 
Broca’s area seems important for both the production of speech and its comple-
ment in the deaf, sign language (Corina, 1998).
People with damage to Broca’s area do not have a problem understanding the 
speech of other people or reading silently, which means these skills must involve 
other areas. One of these areas is in the left temporal lobe and is named after its 
discoverer, Karl Wernicke, a German researcher. Wernicke’s area is responsible 
for the comprehension of speech and reading. Figure 2.10 shows exactly where 
this area is located. Damage to this area leads to Wernicke’s aphasia—incoherent 
speech and the inability to understand the speech of others and to read. Wernicke’s 
area functions as the understanding center for incoming speech and text.
Like Broca’s area, Wernicke’s area is only in the left temporal lobe of the major-
ity of people (regardless of handedness). Many people have the misconception that 
these speech and language centers normally reside in the hemisphere opposite to a 
person’s handedness. This is only the case for a very small number of right-handers 
and some left-handers, however. Speech and language centers are located in the 
left hemisphere for about 95 percent of right-handers and 
70 percent of left-handers (Springer & Deutsch, 1998).
Broca and Wernicke examined the brains of deceased people 
who had speech and language dysfunctions in order to identify 
the speech and language centers in the brain. So perhaps this 
cortical localization technique could be used with highly intel-
ligent people to identify the keys to their genius, the neural 
➤	 Wernicke’s area  An area in the 
cerebral cortex responsible for 
comprehension of speech and text. 
It is in the left temporal lobe of the 
majority of people, regardless of 
handedness.
Broca’s 
area
Wernicke’s 
area
m Figure 2.10 | Broca’s Area and Wernicke’s 
Area | Broca’s area and Wernicke’s area are responsible 
for speech production and the comprehension of speech 
and text, respectively. They are located only in the left 
hemisphere for the majority of both left- and right-
handed people.

76  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
basis of intellect? What about the brain 
of acclaimed genius, Albert Einstein? Was 
it studied after his death in 1955? The 
answer is a much qualified yes, because 
his brain was not studied in the careful, 
systematic manner that you would think 
it would be. The journey that Einstein’s 
brain took was indeed a bizarre odyssey 
(Abraham, 2001). With the exception of 
his brain and eyes, his body was cremated 
on the day of his death; but to this day no 
one seems to know where the ashes are 
(Lepore, 2001). The examining patholo-
gist at Princeton Hospital where Einstein 
died, Dr. Thomas Harvey, removed the 
brain and took dozens of photographs of 
the whole and partially dissected brain before having it partitioned into 240 blocks 
of tissue, preparing a roadmap of the locations in the brain that yielded the dis-
sected blocks, and sectioning and staining histological slides from the blocks.
Despite Harvey’s meticulous preservation of Einstein’s brain and the distribu-
tion of some brain sections to a few researchers, nothing had yet been published 
23 years later when Harvey was interviewed in 1978 (Lepore, 2001). During this 
time period, Harvey kept most of the brain hidden away for his own personal 
research. He stored these remaining dissected and labeled brain pieces in glass 
jars of formaldehyde in a cider box in his office. Einstein’s brain usually accom-
panied him when he traveled. In fact, Dr. Harvey made a trip across America to 
visit Einstein’s granddaughter with some of the photographs and slides and some 
pieces of the brain floating in formaldehyde in a Tupperware bowl in a duffel bag 
in the trunk of a car (Paterniti, 2000).
Starting in the 1980s Harvey did dole out some more of the slides and pho-
tographs to researchers. This led to six peer-reviewed publications and a few 
speculative differences between Einstein’s brain and those of people with normal 
intelligence (Falk, Lepore, & Noe, 2012). For example, Diamond, Scheibel, Murphy, 
and Harvey (1985) found a higher glia to neuron ratio in the left parietal lobe, and 
Witelson, Kigar, and Harvey (1999) found that the gross anatomy of Einstein’s 
brain seemed within normal limits with the exception of his parietal lobes. These 
findings led to the hypothesis that Einstein’s unusual parietal lobes might have pro-
vided the neural basis for his visuospatial and mathematical skills. In 2007 Harvey 
died, but fortunately Dr. Harvey’s Estate donated 14 of Harvey’s photographs of 
Einstein’s whole brain (last seen in 1955) along with some of the histological slides 
and the roadmap that identifies the brain locations that yielded the slides to the 
National Museum of Health and Medicine (Falk, Lepore, & Noe, 2012).
Granted access to these materials, Falk et al. (2012) were able to describe the 
external gross neuroanatomy of Einstein’s entire cerebral cortex in comparison to 
This is a photo of Dr. Thomas Harvey with a jar containing 
pieces of Albert Einstein’s brain.
Michael Brennan/Getty Images

The Brain  |  77
85 normal human brains. Many of the photographs show structures that were not 
visible in the photographs previously analyzed. Falk et al. found that Einstein’s 
brain was of unexceptional size but had very unusual morphology. The complex-
ity and pattern of convolutions and folds in the prefrontal lobe, parietal lobe, 
visual cortex, and primary motor and somatosensory cortices gave these parts 
a much larger surface area than in normal brains. Falk et al. also speculated on 
the meaning of their findings. For example, the expanded prefrontal cortex may 
have contributed to the neurological substrates for some of Einstein’s remarkable  
abilities, and the unusual parietal lobes are consistent with the earlier hypothesis 
that they may have provided the neurological underpinnings for his visuospatial 
and mathematical abilities. But the long, strange journey for Einstein’s brain 
hasn’t ended. In 2012, digital preservations of some of the slides of Einstein’s 
brain became available to the general public as an iPad application. You have to 
wonder whether Einstein would have wanted images of his remains sold to non-
scientists for $9.99.
Specializations of the Left and Right Hemispheres
Next, we will consider the question of whether there are any hemispheric spe-
cializations other than speech, language, and face perception. To try to answer 
this question, researchers have examined patients who have had their corpus 
callosum, the cortical bridge between the two hemispheres, severed as a medical 
treatment for severe cases of epilepsy. William Van Wagenen performed the first 
split-brain surgery in 1940 (Gazzaniga, 2008). Not many people have had this 
surgery, and because of improved medications and other modes of treatment for 
epilepsy, it is done even more rarely now. The rationale behind this surgery was 
that the epileptic seizures would be lessened in severity if they were confined to 
only one hemisphere. Indeed, the surgery did provide this benefit. However, it 
also created a group of people (usually referred to as “split-brain” patients) in 
which the two hemispheres of the brain could not communicate, comprising an 
ideal group for studying the question of hemispheric specialization. According 
to Gazzaniga (2008), there have only been 10 split-brain patients who have been 
well tested. First, we will discuss the general experimental procedure who has been 
used to study the hemispheric specialization question with these patients.
Studying the two hemispheres.  To understand the experimental procedure 
for studying the two hemispheres, we first need to understand how the visual 
fields, the eyes, and the cerebral hemispheres are related. These relationships are 
shown in Figure 2.11. Our field of vision has two halves—the left visual field (what 
is to the left of center in our field of vision) and the right visual field (what is to 
the right of center in our field of vision). Light waves from the left visual field go 
to the right half of each eye, and those from the right visual field go the left half 
of each eye. Each visual field is processed by half of each eye. The right half of each 
eye connects with the right hemisphere, and the left half of each eye with the left 
hemisphere. This means that the eyes and the hemispheres, with respect to 

78  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
This relationship between the visual fields and the 
hemispheres is important because it allows information 
that is presented briefly in one visual field to go to only 
one hemisphere. With split-brain patients, the information 
cannot be transferred to the other hemisphere because the 
corpus callosum connecting their two hemispheres has 
been severed. By examining how split-brain patients can 
identify the presented information (orally, visually, or by 
touch), researchers can study the hemispheric specializa-
tion question.
Recall that the speech and language centers (Broca’s 
and Wernicke’s areas) are only in the left hemisphere 
of the vast majority of people. This would mean that a 
split-brain patient should only be able to identify infor-
mation orally when it is presented briefly in the right 
visual field (it is this field that feeds information to the 
left hemisphere). In fact, this is what has been found with 
split-brain patients. For example, if a picture of a spoon 
were flashed briefly in the left visual field, a split-brain 
patient would not be able to say that it was a spoon. But 
if we blindfolded the split-brain patient and asked her 
to identify the flashed object from a group of objects by 
touch with the left hand, the split-brain patient can do 
this (Gazzaniga, 1992). Remember that the somatosen-
sory strip in the right hemisphere is connected to the left 
hand. However, even after identifying the spoon as the 
object presented, a split-brain patient would not be able to 
identify it orally if asked what was in her left hand. What 
would happen if the blindfolded split-brain patient were 
processing incoming visual information, are not contralat-
erally related. Rather, the visual information in half of each 
eye goes to each hemisphere. The visual information in the 
right halves goes to the right hemisphere, and the visual 
information in the left halves goes to the left hemisphere. 
Thus, information in the left visual field goes only to the 
right hemisphere, and information in the right visual field 
goes only to the left hemisphere. The following diagram 
should help you remember this processing sequence:
Left visual field
Right visual field
Right half of each eye
Left half of each eye
Right hemisphere
Left hemisphere
m Figure 2.11 | The Pathways for 
Processing Information in the 
Left and Right Visual Fields | The 
information from the left visual field 
goes to the right half of each eye and 
then to the right hemisphere. The infor-
mation in the right visual field goes to 
the left half of each eye and then to the 
left hemisphere. Half of the fibers from 
each eye cross over at the optic chiasm 
to go to the opposite hemisphere—the 
right half in the left eye go to the right 
hemisphere and the left half in the right 
eye go to the left hemisphere.
Left
visual field
Right
visual field
Optic
nerves
Optic
chiasm
Visual area
of left
hemisphere
Corpus
callosum
Visual area
of right
hemisphere

The Brain  |  79
asked to move the object from her left hand to her right hand? She would now 
say that she was holding a spoon. The information that it was a spoon would be 
gathered through touch by her right hand and sent to the somatosensory strip 
in her left hemisphere, allowing her to transfer this information to the speech 
centers in the left hemisphere.
Split-brain patients are also sometimes asked to identify the presented infor-
mation by pointing with the appropriate hand (left hand for right hemisphere, 
right hand for left hemisphere). A clever use of this methodology involves 
simultaneously presenting different objects to each hemisphere. For example, an 
orange might be shown in the right visual field so it goes to the left hemisphere,  
and an apple in the left visual field so it goes to the right hemisphere. If then 
asked to use the left hand to identify what was presented, the split-brain patient 
would  point  to the apple; but if she had been asked to use the right hand, 
she would have pointed to the orange. In each case, the nonresponding hemi-
sphere would be baffled by the other hemisphere’s response.
What we know about the left and right hemispheres.  The two most 
prominent researchers on split-brain questions have been Roger Sperry and 
Michael Gazzaniga. Sperry led most of the early split-brain research and in 1981 
won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his discoveries concerning  
the functional specializations of the cerebral hemispheres. Sperry’s  
student, Michael Gazzaniga, who conducted the first studies with 
human split-brain participants in the early 1960s at the California 
Institute of Technology under the guidance of Sperry and neurosur-
geon Joseph Bogen (Gazzaniga, Bogen, & Sperry, 1962), has contin-
ued this line of inquiry for the past five decades (Gazzaniga, 2005, 
2008). Now let’s see what these studies with split-brain participants 
have told us about hemispheric specialization.
We know that the speech and language centers are specialties of 
the left hemisphere. This is why the left hemisphere is sometimes 
referred to as the verbal hemisphere. This does not mean, however, 
that the right hemisphere has no verbal ability. It can’t produce 
speech, but it can understand simple verbal material. In addition, 
the left hemisphere is better at mathematical skills and logic, while 
the right is better at spatial perception, solving spatial problems 
(block design), and drawing. The right hemisphere is also better at 
face recognition. Due to the asymmetry in the fusiform face area, 
recognition of faces is faster when faces are presented in the left- than 
the right-visual field of both split-brain patients (Stone, Nisenson, 
Eliassen, & Gazzaniga, 1996) and normal people (Yovel, Tambini, & 
Brandman, 2008). In general, the left hemisphere is more analytic, 
analyzing wholes into their elements or pieces; the right hemisphere 
processes information in a more holistic fashion, combining pieces 
into wholes (Reuter-Lorenz & Miller, 1998). The right gets the big 
picture (the “forest”); the left focuses on the smaller details (the 
Roger Sperry
Keystone/Hulton/Getty Images
Michael Gazzaniga
Courtesy of Michael Gazzaniga

80  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
“trees”). This information-processing style difference between the two hemi-
spheres is sometimes referred to as global versus local processing.
Support for this general processing style difference between the hemispheres 
has been corroborated by research with brain-damaged patients using hierarchi-
cal stimuli developed by David Navon (1977). These hierarchical stimuli consist 
of a large letter (the global, holistic level) that is composed of smaller versions of 
another letter (the local or analytic level). See the example in Figure 2.12a in which 
the large letter H is composed of smaller As. Delis, Robertson, and Efron (1986) 
used such stimuli to study perceptual encoding in brain-damaged patients. The 
patients were asked to study the hierarchical stimulus and then redraw it from 
memory after a brief period of distraction. The patients with right hemisphere 
damage who were dependent on their left hemisphere often drew As unsystemati-
cally scattered about the page (see Figure 2.12b). They remembered the constitu-
ent elements of the original stimulus 
but not the overall pattern. In con-
trast, the patients with left hemisphere 
damage who were dependent on their 
right hemisphere often drew a large 
capital H but with no As (see Figure 
2.12c). They remembered the global 
pattern but not the constituent ele-
ments. Thus, the right hemisphere spe-
cializes in synthesizing global, holistic 
patterns, whereas the left hemisphere 
specializes in analyzing the details of 
a stimulus. Fink et al. (1996) have also 
observed this hemispheric processing 
style difference in PET scan data when 
normal participants were attending to 
either the global or local level of Navon 
hierarchical figures.
This processing difference along 
with all of the other specialization 
differences that have been observed 
in split-brain patients have led to the 
expressions “left-brained” and “right-
brained” to refer to people who seem 
to excel at the skills normally attrib-
uted to left and right hemispheres, 
respectively. We must remember, how-
ever, that these differences in hemi-
spheric performance are for people 
whose two hemispheres can no longer 
communicate. When normal people 
(a)
(b)
(c)
m Figure 2.12 | Sample Hierarchical Stimulus and 
Recall Results for Such Stimuli by Brain-Damaged 
Patients | (a) The sample hierarchical stimulus is a capital 
h made up of little as. (b) Patients with right hemisphere 
damage (dependent on the left hemisphere) could remem-
ber the details of the hierarchical stimulus (the as) but not 
the overall pattern (h). (c) Patients with left hemisphere 
damage (dependent upon the right hemisphere) could 
remember the overall pattern (h) but not its details (the as). 
(Adapted from MacNeilage, Rogers, and Vallortigara, 2009.)

The Brain  |  81
are performing a task, the two hemispheres are constantly 
interacting and sharing information. There is no forced 
separation of labor as in the split-brain patient. It may be the 
case that one hemisphere tends to play a larger role in some 
tasks, but both hemispheres are involved (Corballis, 2007; 
Hellige, 1993). This is why it is not very accurate to say someone is “left-brained” 
or “right-brained.” It is best not to make the distinction. Nearly all of us are 
“whole-brained.”
Consciousness and the Sleeping Brain
There are many questions left for neuroscientists to answer about the brain and its 
many functions, but the most intriguing questions concern human consciousness— 
What is consciousness and what underlies it? Probably the best way to think about 
consciousness is as a person’s subjective awareness of his inner thinking and feeling 
as well as his immediate surroundings. Thus, consciousness is both internal (one’s 
thoughts and feelings) and external (what’s going on in one’s environment).
Most brain (and bodily) functioning goes on without our conscious awareness. 
For example, you are presently recognizing the letters and words in this paragraph, 
but you are not consciously aware of the actual processing required to accomplish 
this recognition. You are only consciously aware of the results of the recognition 
process (the meaningful collection of words). Even if you wanted to, you couldn’t 
become consciously aware of this processing by the brain. Think about the billions 
of neurons communicating with each other within your brain and nervous system 
at this very moment. You cannot become aware of activity at this neuronal level of 
processing. Our consciousness is privy to only some of the results of this processing.
We can describe waking consciousness as our tuning in to both our internal and 
external worlds, but questions about exactly what underlies it (how it is generated)  
or why it evolved remain open for debate. Similarly, we are still pondering the 
question of why we experience sleep—a natural, altered state of consciousness. We 
do, however, have some better answers to questions about what the brain is doing 
during sleep. Electrical recordings of brain activity during sleep allow us to measure 
different stages of sleep and to tell us when we are dreaming. So first we’ll examine 
the stages of sleep and how they are related to dreaming. Then, we will briefly dis-
cuss theories that have been proposed to explain why we sleep and why we dream.
The five stages of sleep.  The various stages of sleep have been determined by 
monitoring the electrical activity in the brain using an electroencephalograph 
(EEG). Small electrodes are attached to the scalp and connected to recording 
equipment that produces a real-time graph of electrical activity in the cortex of 
the brain. In Figure 2.13 on the following page, a sample EEG for the awake, 
relaxed state is shown along with sample EEGs for the five stages of sleep. As we 
slip into sleep and pass through the first four stages, our brain waves change, in 
general becoming progressively slower, larger, and more irregular, especially in 
Stages 3 and 4. Stage 1 sleep, which lasts about 5 minutes, is followed by about 
➤	 consciousness  An individual’s 
subjective awareness of their 
inner thinking and feeling and their 
external environment.

82  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
20 minutes of Stage 2 sleep, which is charac-
terized by periodic bursts of rapid activity 
called sleep spindles. Some researchers 
believe these spindles represent the activity 
of a mechanism that lessens the brain’s sen-
sitivity to sensory input and thus keeps the 
person asleep. The fact that older people’s 
sleep contains fewer spindles and is inter-
rupted by more awakenings during the night 
is consistent with this explanation.
Next are the two stages comprising slow-
wave sleep—the brief, transitional sleep of 
Stage 3 and then the deep sleep of Stage 4. 
These two stages, especially Stage 4, are 
characterized by delta waves—large, slow 
brain waves. You are now completely asleep 
and this initial period of slow-wave sleep 
lasts for about 30 minutes. In deep sleep, the 
parasympathetic nervous system dominates. 
So, muscles relax, heart rate slows, blood 
pressure declines, and digestion is stimu-
lated. Mysteriously, the brain is still moni-
toring environmental information, though 
it is outside our conscious awareness. If a 
sensory stimulus is important, such as a 
baby’s cry, or very strong, such as a slam-
ming door or a breaking glass, it will break 
through the perceptual barrier created by 
sleep and awaken us.
Near the end of your first period of deep 
sleep (about an hour after falling asleep), 
you return through Stages 3 and 2 and enter REM (rapid eye movement)  
sleep, the most fascinating stage of sleep. REM sleep is characterized by very 
rapid waves somewhat like those of Stage 1 sleep. However, you are still sound 
asleep. REM sleep is sometimes referred to as paradoxi-
cal sleep because the muscles are relaxed, but other body 
systems and the brain are active, following a waking  
pattern. Heart rate rises, breathing is more rapid, eyes move 
back and forth rapidly under closed eyelids, and one’s 
genitals become aroused. The brain is also highly active; 
both oxygen consumption and cerebral blood flow increase. 
Strangely, given all of this internal activity, the muscles are 
relaxed, leaving the body essentially paralyzed except for 
occasional muscle twitching.
➤	 REM (rapid eye movement) 
sleep  The stage of sleep that is 
characterized by rapid eye move-
ments and brain wave patterns 
that resemble those for an awake 
state and in which most dreaming 
occurs. REM sleep is sometimes 
referred to as paradoxical sleep 
because the bodily muscles are 
immobilized but much of the brain 
is highly active.
Awake, relaxed
Stage 1 sleep
Stage 2 sleep
Stage 3 sleep
Stage 4 sleep
REM sleep
Spindle (burst of activity)
Delta waves
Eye movement phase
m Figure 2.13 | Sleep Stages and the Brain 
Waves Associated with Each Stage | The vari-
ous stages of sleep are indicated by changes in the 
brain waves in the EEG recordings. As you pass from 
awake to deep sleep (Stages 3 and 4), the brain waves 
get larger and slow down. After deep sleep, you 
ascend back through Stages 3 and 2 into REM sleep, 
for which the waves are more rapid and resemble 
those of Stage 1.

The Brain  |  83
REM sleep indicates the beginning 
of dreaming; it is the stage during 
which most dreaming occurs. How do 
we know this? If people are awakened 
during Stages 1 through 4, they only 
occasionally report dreaming; but if 
awakened during REM sleep, people 
usually recall dreams that they were 
having. This is as true for people who 
say they dream as for those who say 
they rarely do so, which means that we 
all dream whether we realize it or not. 
This first bout of REM sleep typically 
lasts about 10 minutes and completes 
the first sleep cycle of the night. The 
cycle of stages, in which we move out of 
and back into REM sleep, repeats itself 
about every 90 minutes throughout 
the night. Deep sleep (Stages 3 and 4) 
gets briefer and eventually disappears, 
as Stage 2 and REM sleep periods get 
longer with each sleep cycle. Over the 
course of the night, you have four or 
five REM sleep periods, amounting to 
about 20 to 25 percent of your sleep 
time (Figure 2.14).
We spend on average about 2 hours a night dreaming, which works out to 
about 6 years of dreaming across our lifetime, given current life expectancies. We 
don’t remember many of our dreams, though. The dreams we do remember are 
usually from our last phase of REM sleep, right before we wake up. Many dreams 
are highly emotional and unpleasant. For example, people often dream of being 
attacked or pursued. This may be due to the fact that the frontal lobes (respon-
sible for rational thought) are shut down during REM sleep, but the amygdala 
and the hippocampus, the limbic system structures responsible for emotion and 
memory, are active, creating the irrational imagery and emotional experiences of 
our dream world. Given the strong visual nature of dreams, what are the dreams 
of blind people like? Research indicates that people born blind or who go blind 
very early in life do not have visual dreams. Their dreams are just as emotional, 
but involve other sensations, especially sounds.
Why do we sleep and dream?  We do not know why we sleep, but we know 
that we need sleep. You cannot cheat sleep; it will always overcome you. 
Inadequate sleep has a high cost. Sleep-deprived people have impaired concen-
tration and a general bodily feeling of weakness and discomfort, and they may 
Sleep stages
1
2
3
4
0
Hours asleep
2
1
3
5
6
7
4
8
REM and Stage 2
periods get longer
as night progresses
Stages 3 and 4
get briefer and
eventually disappear
as night progresses
REM
Awake
m Figure 2.14 | The Pattern of Sleep-Stage Cycles 
During a Night’s Sleep | After passing through the first 
four stages of sleep, we return through Stages 3 and 2 to 
enter REM sleep. This completes the first sleep-stage cycle. 
As this cycle is repeated throughout a typical night’s sleep, 
the deep sleep stages (3 and 4) get briefer and disappear, 
and the Stage 2 and REM sleep periods get longer.

84  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
even hallucinate. Sleep deprivation also suppresses your immune system, lessen-
ing your ability to fight off infection and disease. Sleep-deprived people are also 
more vulnerable to accidents. For example, traffic accidents increase following 
the shortened sleep accompanying the 1-hour time change in the spring (Coren, 
1993). All of this may help explain why people who typically sleep 7 or 8 hours 
outlive those who are chronically sleep deprived (Dement, 1999). College stu-
dents are notorious for being sleep deprived, with as many as four out of five not 
getting adequate sleep. Beware of sleep deprivation and its negative effects. Sleep 
deprivation makes it more difficult to concentrate, study, and take exams. So, 
creating a large sleep debt will, in simple terms, “make you stupid” (Dement, 
1999, p. 231).
We clearly need sleep. How much, however, varies greatly with individuals. 
On the average, though, we spend about a third of our lives sleeping. Why? 
Three possible answers have been proposed, and the actual answer probably 
involves all three. First, sleep seems to serve a restorative function by allow-
ing the brain and body time to rest and recuperate from the daily wear and 
tear of our existence. Sleep is necessary for optimal functioning. Second, 
sleep helps us process what we learn. It allows the brain the opportunity to 
consolidate our day’s experiences into our memory banks for later retrieval 
and use. Indeed, there is research evidence that memory is often strengthened 
and enhanced following a period of sleep (Stickgold & Ellenbogen, 2009). 
REM sleep is especially important in relation to memory. Disruption of REM 
sleep (by being constantly awakened during this stage) following learning 
impairs our memory for this learning (DuJardin, Guerrien, & LeConte, 1990). 
Disruption of other sleep stages does not impair memory similarly. Third, 
sleep may have evolved as an adaptive process. It served a protective function 
for our ancestors, increasing their survival by keeping them safe from preda-
tors during the night and from the dangers of wandering around cliffs in the 
dark. Those who stayed in their caves and slept had a better chance of surviv-
ing and passing on their genes.
So, sleep has clear advantages. But why do we dream? One answer is the 
critical role of REM sleep in learning—providing the opportunity for memory 
consolidation of new information (Stickgold, Hobson, Fosse, & Fosse, 2001). 
Other answers to the question of why we dream have also been proposed. About 
a hundred years ago, Sigmund Freud proposed that dreams were disguised 
outlets for the inner conflicts of our unconscious (Freud 1900/1953a). But 
given its lack of scientific support, the Freudian view has been rejected by most 
contemporary sleep researchers. There are many contemporary theories of why 
we dream, but all have their critics. One explanation, however, that has received 
much attention is the activation-synthesis theory (Hobson, 2003; Hobson & 
McCarley, 1977; Hobson, Pace-Scott, & Stickgold, 2000). This physiological 
theory proposes that neurons in the pons fire spontaneously during REM sleep, 
sending random signals to various areas in the cortex and the emotional areas 
in the limbic system. The signals are random, but the brain tries to make sense 

The Brain  |  85
of them and produce a meaningful interpretation. Thus, a dream is the brain’s 
synthesis of these signals. However, because the signals evoke random memories 
and visual images, the brain has a difficult time weaving a coherent story, often 
resulting in the bizarre and confusing nature of our dreams. This relates to a 
major criticism of the theory: dream content is more coherent, consistent over 
time, and concerned with waking problems and anxieties than the activation-
synthesis theory would predict (Domhoff, 2003). Criticisms aside, this theory 
has led to a wide body of research on the neurological stuff that dreams are 
made of and thus greatly increased our knowledge of the physiological basis of 
dreaming.
In contrast to the activation-synthesis theory of dreaming, the neurocogni-
tive theory of dreaming emphasizes the parallels between waking cognition 
and dreaming (Domhoff, 2011). Neurocognitive theory argues that explain-
ing dreams as our subjective interpretations of random neural firing is too 
simple and that dreams are meaningful products of our cognitive abilities, with 
continuity between waking and dreaming cognition. Most dreams are about 
people and activities that are well-known to the dreamer and reflect our waking 
concerns, personality, emotions, and interests (Domhoff, 1996; Nir & Tononi, 
2010). According to neurocognitive theory, the dreams of children younger 
than 9- or 10-years-old are simpler and less emotional and bizarre than adult 
dreams. Why? Children’s dream development parallels the gradual develop-
ment of advanced cognitive abilities, such as visual imagination. Once their 
cognitive abilities are more advanced, their dreams become more complex. In 
brief, dreams are a product of our normal cognitive processes, but they use self-
generated sensory data during sleep rather than external sensory input as they 
do when we are awake.
Although sleep researchers do not agree about why we dream, they do agree 
that REM sleep is essential. This is clearly demonstrated by the REM sleep 
rebound effect—a significant increase in the amount of REM sleep following 
deprivation of REM sleep. The fact that REM sleep and the rebound effect are 
observed in other mammals implies a definite biological need for this type of 
sleep. Exactly what that need is, however, remains an open question.
Section Summary
In this section, we discussed many of the major structures in the brain. Between the 
spinal cord and the cerebral hemispheres, there are two sets of brain structures—the 
central core and limbic system. The central core is made up of the medulla, pons, 
and reticular formation (parts of the brain stem) and the cerebellum, thalamus, and 
basal ganglia (structures near the brain stem). The medulla regulates essential body 
functions, such as breathing and blood pressure, and the pons serves as a bridge 
between the cerebellum and the rest of the brain. The reticular formation is involved 
in controlling different levels of arousal and awareness. The cerebellum is involved 
in the coordination of movement and motor learning, the thalamus serves as a relay 

86  |  Chapter 2  |  NEuROSCIENCE
station for incoming sensory information, and the basal ganglia are involved in the 
initiation and execution of physical movements. Surrounding the top of the brain, 
the limbic system structures (hypothalamus, hippocampus, and amygdala) play 
important roles in our survival, memory, and emotions.
As we move up the brain stem to the cerebral hemispheres, the functioning gets 
more complex. It is the top cortical layer that gives us all of our complex abilities 
(such as language, perception, and decision making) and makes us “human.” Each 
cerebral hemisphere is divided into four lobes—frontal, parietal, temporal, and 
occipital. The motor cortex in the frontal lobes allows us to move different parts of 
our body. The somatosensory cortex in the parietal lobes is where our body sensa-
tions of touch, temperature, limb position, and pain are processed. Both the motor 
cortex and the somatosensory cortex are related to the two sides of our body in a 
contralateral fashion—the left hemisphere controls the movement of, and processes 
body sensations from, the right side of the body, and the right hemisphere does so 
for the left side of the body. The primary visual cortex is in the occipital lobes, and 
the primary auditory cortex is in the temporal lobes. The remaining area in the two 
hemispheres, about 70 percent of the cortex, is called the association cortex. All of 
the higher-level cognitive processing, including perception and decision making, 
occurs in the association cortex. Such processing requires the association of various 
types of information.
Research has shown that the frontal lobes play a major role in our planning, 
reasoning, impulse control, and personality—especially its emotional aspects. We 
have also learned that the speech and language areas are only in the left hemi-
sphere in the majority of people, regardless of handedness. Broca’s area in the left 
frontal lobe is responsible for speech production, and Wernicke’s area in the left 
temporal lobe is responsible for the comprehension of speech and text. In addition, 
research on split-brain patients (whose hemispheres cannot communicate because 
they have had their corpus callosum surgically severed) has shown that there are 
processing differences between the two hemispheres. For example, the left spe-
cializes in speech, language, mathematical skills, and logic; the right specializes 
in spatial perception, face recognition, and drawing. In addition, the right hemi-
sphere specializes in processing stimuli at the holistic, global level, whereas the 
left hemisphere analyzes stimuli into their elements or pieces. We must remember, 
however, that in normal people, the two hemispheres are constantly interacting. 
One hemisphere may play a more major role in some tasks, but both hemispheres 
are involved.
Neuroscientists have much more to learn not only about the brain but also 
about consciousness, a person’s awareness of his inner thinking and feeling and 
his external environment. We have learned much about sleep, a natural altered 
state of consciousness, through the use of EEG recordings of the brain’s electrical 
activity while sleeping. Such recordings indicate the occurrence of five different 
stages of sleep, with the REM (rapid eye movement) sleep stage as the one during 
which most dreaming occurs. We can’t yet explain definitively why we sleep or 
why we dream, but both are clearly essential. Sleep-deprived people suffer many 
consequences ranging from impaired concentration to weakened immune systems. 
A rebound effect for REM sleep (a significant increase in REM sleep) follows REM 
sleep deprivation.

The Brain  |  87
ConceptCheck | 3
➤	 explain where in the cerebral cortex (which hemisphere, lobe, area in the 
lobe, and part of that area) is active when you feel a slap on the left cheek of 
your face.
➤	 explain which areas in the cerebral cortex are involved and how they are 
involved when you shadow (repeat aloud) someone’s speech.
➤	 explain what types of behavioral deficits would be observed in a person who 
suffered damage to her cerebellum.
➤	 explain how you could demonstrate that a split-brain patient knows what 
was briefly flashed in his left visual field, even though he cannot say what 
was flashed.
➤	 this 400-year-old painting, Vertumnus, was done by Giuseppe arcimboldo, a 
sixteenth-century Italian painter who is best known for creating imaginative 
portraits from such objects as fruits, vegetables, flowers, books, and other 
objects. Vertumnus is a portrait of rudolf II of prague made from fruits, flowers,  
and vegetables. Let’s use this portrait to test your understanding of both the 
processing differences between the two hemispheres and the relationship 
between the visual fields and the hemispheres. Suppose Vertumnus is flashed 
briefly in the left visual field of a split-brain patient and he is instructed to point 
with the appropriate hand to what he saw given the choice of the two words 
“face” and “fruits.” Which hand would he use and which word would he point 
to? Why? Now suppose the painting had been flashed briefly in his right visual 
field. Which hand would he use and which word would he point to? Why?
➤	 explain why reM sleep is sometimes referred to as paradoxical sleep.
The Art Archive at Art Resource, NY

Study Guide
88
Chapter Key Terms
You should know the definitions of the following key terms from the chapter. 
they are listed in the order in which they appear in the chapter. For those you do 
not know, return to the relevant section of the chapter to learn them. When you 
think that you know all of the terms, complete the matching exercise based on 
these key terms.
neurons
glial cells (glia)
dendrites 
cell body
axon
myelin sheath
neurotransmitter
synaptic gap (synapse)
positron emission 
tomography (PET) scan
functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI)
agonist
antagonist
acetylcholine (ACh)
dopamine
Parkinson’s disease
blood–brain barrier
L-dopa
serotonin
norepinephrine
selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs)
selective serotonin and 
norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitors (SSNRIs)
GABA (gamma-aminobutyric 
acid)
glutamate
endorphins
central nervous system (CNS)
peripheral nervous system 
(PNS)
interneurons
sensory neurons
motor neurons
spinal cord
spinal reflex
somatic (skeletal) nervous 
system
autonomic nervous system
sympathetic nervous system
parasympathetic nervous 
system
endocrine glandular system
hormone
pituitary gland
emotion
James-Lange theory
Cannon-Bard theory
Schachter-Singer two-factor 
theory
medulla
pons
reticular formation
cerebellum
thalamus
basal ganglia
limbic system
hypothalamus
hippocampus
amygdala
cerebral cortex
corpus callosum
frontal lobe
parietal lobe
temporal lobe
occipital lobe
motor cortex
somatosensory cortex
association cortex
Broca’s area
Wernicke’s area
consciousness
REM (rapid eye movement) 
sleep
Key Terms Exercise
Identify the correct key term for each of the 
following definitions. the answers to this 
exercise follow the answers to the Concept 
Checks at the end of the chapter.
  1.	 A chemical messenger that is produced 
by an endocrine gland and carried by 
the bloodstream to target sites through-
out the body.
	 	
 
  2.	 The part of the brain involved in the coor-
dination of our movements, sense of  
balance, and motor learning.
	 	
 

Study Guide  |  89
  3.	 An insulating layer of a white fatty sub-
stance on an axon that allows for faster 
neural impulses.
	 	
 
  4.	 A visual display that shows the activity 
of various areas in the brain by detect-
ing the level of positron emission arising 
from radioactive glucose being metabo-
lized in each area.
	 	
 
  5.	 A naturally occurring chemical within the 
nervous system that specializes in trans-
mitting information between neurons.
	 	
 
  6.	 The areas in the cerebral cortex not 
devoted to primary sensory processing or 
motor processing.
	 	
 
  7.	 A drug or poison that decreases the activ-
ity of one or more neurotransmitters.
	 	
 
  8.	 The part of the peripheral nervous  
system that carries sensory input from 
receptors to the CNS and relays com-
mands from the CNS to skeletal muscles 
to control their movement.
	 	
 
  9.	 The bridge of neurons that connects the 
two cerebral hemispheres.
	 	
 
10.	 The major inhibitory neurotransmitter in 
the nervous system.
	 	
 
11.	 Cells in the nervous system that comprise 
the support system for the neurons.
	 	
 
12.	 Drugs that achieve their agonistic effect 
on serotonin by selectively blocking its 
reuptake.
	 	
 
13.	 A group of neurotransmitters that are 
involved in pain relief and feelings of 
pleasure.
	 	
 
14.	 A brain stem structure involved in many 
essential body functions, such as  
heartbeat, breathing, blood pressure, 
digestion, and swallowing.
	 	
 
15.	 The area in each cerebral hemisphere in 
back of the central fissure and above the 
lateral fissure. The somatosensory cortex 
is in this lobe.
	 	
 
Practice Test Questions
the following are practice multiple-choice 
test questions on some of the chapter 
content. the answers are given after the 
Key terms exercise answers at the end of 
the chapter. If you guessed or incorrectly 
answered a question, restudy the relevant 
section of the chapter.
  1.	 The main function of the ______ is to 
receive information from other neurons.
a.	 dendrites 
b.	cell body
c.	 axon
d.	axon terminals
  2.	 Which of the following is an agonist?
a.	 curare
b.	GABA
c.	 botulinum poison
d.	amphetamine

90  |  Chapter 2  |  Neuroscience
  3.	 An SSRI works by blocking the reuptake 
of ______.
a.	 dopamine
b.	serotonin
c.	 norepinephrine
d.	GABA
  4.	 Which type of neuron carries information 
from the CNS to the PNS?
a.	 sensory neuron
b.	motor neuron
c.	 interneuron
d.	glial
  5.	 Which of the following is an action of the 
parasympathetic nervous system?
a.	 pupil dilation
b.	stimulation of digestion
c.	 accelerated heartbeat
d.	raised blood sugar levels
  6.	 The actions of the pituitary gland are con-
trolled by the ______.
a.	 hippocampus
b.	amygdala
c.	 hypothalamus
d.	medulla
  7.	 The limbic system consists of the ______.
a.	 thalamus, hypothalamus, and 
amygdala
b.	hypothalamus, medulla, and reticular 
formation
c.	 amygdala, hypothalamus, and 
hippocampus
d.	basal ganglia, amygdala, and 
cerebellum
  8.	 In the majority of people, Broca’s area 
is located in the ______ hemisphere, and 
Wernicke’s area is located in the ______ 
hemisphere.
a.	 right; right
b.	right; left
c.	 left; right
d.	left; left
  9.	 Information in a person’s left visual field 
goes to the ______ half of each eye and 
then to the ______ hemisphere.
a.	 left; left
b.	left; right
c.	 right; right
d.	right; left
10.	 Which of the following stages of sleep is 
referred to as paradoxical sleep?
a.	 Stage 2
b.	Stage 3
c.	 Stage 4
d.	REM sleep
11.	 The ______ theory of emotion proposes 
that the physiological arousal and behav-
ioral responses and the emotional feeling 
all occur simultaneously but indepen-
dently.
a.	 Schachter-Singer two-factor
b.	Cannon-Bard
c.	 James-Lange
d.	“commonsense”
12.	 At dinner, when John picks up his fork, 
his ______ nervous system controls the 
movement of his fingers. His ______ 
nervous system regulates his stomach 
and controls the digestion of food.
a.	 autonomic; autonomic
b.	autonomic; somatic
c.	 somatic; autonomic
d.	somatic; somatic
13.	 Damage to the right hemisphere will 
most likely disrupt a person’s ability 
to ______.
a.	 balance a checkbook
b.	recognize faces
c.	 do logic problems
d.	give speeches
14.	 Botulinum poisoning (food poisoning) 
causes paralysis by blocking the release 
of ______, and curare paralyzes by 
occupying the receptor sites for ______.

Study Guide  |  91
a.	 acetylcholine; acetylcholine
b.	acetylcholine; GABA
c.	 GABA; acetylcholine
d.	GABA; GABA
15.	 The amount of space devoted to each 
part of the body in the motor cortex 
is ______.
a.	 proportional to the actual size of that 
part of the body
b.	proportional to the complexity and pre-
cision of movement of which that part 
of the body is capable
c.	 the same for all body parts
d.	greater for your torso than for your 
hands
Chapter Concept Check Answers
Concept Check | 1
•	 We can think of the neuron as a miniature 
decision-making device because the cell 
body of the neuron has to decide whether 
or not to generate an electrical impulse 
based on the incoming information from 
other neurons. If the excitatory input out-
weighs the inhibitory input by a sufficient 
amount, the cell body will decide to gener-
ate an impulse.
•	 Neural impulses are faster in neurons  
with myelinated axons than unmyelinated 
axons because the electrical impulse leaps 
from gap to gap in the myelin sheath  
rather than traveling continuously down 
the axon.
•	 Drugs that block the reuptake of neu-
rotransmitters are considered agonists 
because they keep the neurotransmitters 
active in the synaptic gap (they keep carry-
ing their messages over and over again to 
the receiving neuron), which increases the 
activity of the neurotransmitters.
•	 L-dopa leads to side effects that resemble 
the thought disorder symptoms of schizo-
phrenia because L-dopa increases the 
activity of dopamine in the brain and the 
schizophrenic symptoms are the result of 
too much dopamine activity. Similarly, 
traditional antipsychotic drugs lead to side 
effects resembling Parkinson’s disease 
symptoms because these drugs globally 
reduce the activity of dopamine in the 
brain. Thus, dopamine activity in the move-
ment system involving the basal ganglia is 
reduced, leading to movement problems 
similar to those of Parkinson’s disease.
Concept Check | 2
•	 With respect to location, sensory neurons 
and motor neurons are only in the PNS, 
and interneurons are only in the CNS. With 
respect to function, sensory neurons carry 
information to the CNS from the sensory 
receptors and internal organs, muscles, and 
glands of the body. Motor neurons carry 
movement commands from the CNS out to 
the rest of the body. Interneurons integrate 
the information within the CNS.
•	 The sympathetic nervous system is referred 
to as the “fight-or-flight” system because 
it prepares us for these actions in an emer-
gency situation. The parasympathetic ner-
vous system is referred to as the “rest- 
and-digest” system because its actions  
(the opposite of those in the sympathetic ner-
vous system) allow us to rest and let func-
tions such as digestion go back to normal.
•	 Both hormones and neurotransmitters are 
chemical messengers, but the hormones 
are much slower because they carry their 
message through the bloodstream to their 
distant targets. Neurotransmitters are 
released within the nervous system directly 
to their targets.
•	 The pituitary gland is referred to as the 
“master gland” because it releases hor-
mones that direct the other endocrine glands 
to release their hormones. It functions like 
the master of the endocrine system.
•	 According to the James-Lange theory of 
emotion, we use the autonomic arousal 
and behavioral responses to determine 
the emotion. The emotional feeling occurs 
after and as a result of these responses. 

92  |  Chapter 2  |  Neuroscience
The specific emotion experienced 
depends upon the particular pattern of 
the arousal and behavioral responses. 
But, according to the Cannon-Bard theory, 
arousal patterns are too similar to be 
used to differentiate specific emotions. 
Cannon and Bard propose that arousal, 
behavioral response, and emotional 
feeling occur simultaneously and inde-
pendently. Thus, contrary to the James-
Lange theory, the arousal and behavioral 
responses and the emotional feeling 
happen at the same time.
Concept Check | 3
•	 To feel a slap on the left cheek of your face, 
the area devoted to the cheek in the lower 
half of the somatosensory cortical strip in 
the parietal lobe in the right hemisphere 
would be activated. Refer to Figure 2.9 to 
see the exact location of the cheek in the 
somatosensory homunculus and thus the 
activation. Remember that the activation 
would be at this location in the right 
hemisphere because your left cheek was 
slapped.
•	 When you shadow someone’s speech, the 
auditory sensory input from the person’s 
speech goes first to the primary audi-
tory cortex in the temporal lobes, next to 
Wernicke’s area to be understood, and then 
to Broca’s area to produce the appropriate 
motor programs, which are then sent to the 
motor cortex, which then executes the pro-
grams to activate your speech muscles to 
produce the speech.
•	 A person who suffered damage to her cer-
ebellum would have problems in motor 
coordination and balance. Her movements 
would be jerky and uncoordinated, and she 
would have great difficulty maintaining her 
balance.
•	 You would ask him to identify the object 
by the sense of touch with his left hand. He 
could identify it by matching the tactile input 
(the information gathered from touching the 
object) with his knowledge of what had been 
presented, both in the right hemisphere.
•	 If Vertumnus were flashed briefly in a split-
brain person’s left visual field, it would be 
processed in his right hemisphere. Hence 
he would use his left hand to respond 
because the right hemisphere’s motor cor-
tex controls that hand. Because the right 
hemisphere specializes in face recognition 
and engages in visual, holistic process-
ing, he would point to “face” because the 
overall global impression of the painting is 
a face. However, if the painting had been 
flashed briefly in his right visual field, 
he would use his right hand because the 
painting would be processed in the left 
hemisphere, which controls that hand. 
Because the left hemisphere engages in 
analytic processing of the elements of a 
stimulus, the painting would be analyzed 
into its component elements (fruits, flow-
ers, and vegetables) so he would point to 
“fruits,” one of the main elements of the 
face. Gazzaniga has actually conducted 
some experimental trials using some of 
Arcimboldo’s paintings with a split-brain 
participant and found these predicted 
results.
•	 REM sleep is sometimes referred to as 
paradoxical sleep because your bodily 
muscles are relaxed and immobilized, but 
many parts of your brain are active with 
both oxygen consumption and cerebral 
blood flow increasing. The brain appears 
to be awake, but you are behaviorally 
asleep.
Answers to Key Terms Exercise
  1.	 hormone 
  2.	 cerebellum 
  3.	 myelin sheath 
  4.	 PET scan 
  5.	 neurotransmitter 
  6.	 association cortex 
  7.	 antagonist
  8.	 somatic (skeletal) nervous system 
  9.	 corpus callosum
10.	 GABA

11.	 glial cells (glia)
12.	 selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs)
13.	 endorphins
14.	 medulla
15.	 parietal lobe
Answers to Practice Test Questions
  1.	 a; dendrites 
  2.	 d; amphetamine 
  3.	 b; serotonin
  4.	 b; motor neuron
  5.	 b; stimulation of digestion 
  6.	 c; hypothalamus
  7.	 c; amygdala, hypothalamus, and 
hippocampus
  8.	 d; left; left
  9.	 c; right; right
10.	 d; REM sleep
11.	 b; Cannon-Bard
12.	 c; somatic; autonomic
13.	 b; recognize faces
14.	 a; acetylcholine; acetylcholine
15.	 b; proportional to the complexity and  
precision of motor movement of which 
that part of the body is capable
Study Guide  |  93

Sensation and Perception
 HOW THE PHYSICAL 
WORLD RELATES TO THE 
PSYCHOLOGICAL WORLD
The detection Question
The difference Question
The Scaling Question
 HOW WE SEE AND HOW  
WE HEAR
how the Eye Works
how We See Color
how the Ear Works
how We distinguish Pitch
 HOW WE MAKE SENSE  
OF WHAT WE SEE
Bottom-up Processing and  
Top-down Processing
Perceptual Organization and 
Perceptual Constancy
depth Perception
3

95
I
magine what you would be like if you 
couldn’t see, hear, taste, smell, or feel. 
You could be described as alive only 
in the narrowest sense of the word. You 
would have no perceptions, memories, 
thoughts, or feelings. We understand the 
world through our senses, our “windows” 
to the world. Our reality is dependent 
upon the two basic processes of sensation 
and perception. To understand this reality, 
we must first understand how we gather 
(sense) and interpret (perceive) the infor-
mation that forms the foundation for our 
behavior and mental processing. Sensation 
and perception provide us with the infor-
mation that allows us both to understand 
the world around us and to live in that 
world. Without them, there would be no 
world; there would be no “you.”
Perception does not exactly replicate 
the world outside. As Martinez-Conde and 
Macknik (2010, p. 4) point out, “It is a fact of 
neuroscience that everything we experience is actually a figment of our imagina-
tion. Although our sensations feel accurate and truthful, they do not necessarily 
reproduce the physical reality of the outside world.” Our “view” of the world is a 
subjective one that the brain constructs by using assumptions and principles, both 
built-in and developed from our past perceptual experiences (Hoffman, 1998). We 
perceive what the brain tells us we perceive. This means that sometimes our view 
of the world is inaccurate. Consider the tops of the two tables depicted in Figure 3.1.  
Do they appear to be the same shape and size? They don’t appear to be identi-
cal, but they are! If we trace one of the tabletops and then place the tracing on 
the other one, it will fit perfectly. As pointed out by Lilienfeld, Lynn, Ruscio, and 
Beyerstein (2010), “Seeing is believing, but seeing isn’t always believing correctly” 
(p. 7). We will revisit this illusion and its explanation later in the chapter; but, in 
general, this illusion is the result of the brain’s misinterpretation of perspective 
information about the two tables (Shepard, 1990). The important point for us is 
that the brain is misperceiving reality and that even with the knowledge that these 
two tabletops are identical, you will not be able to suppress the misperception 
your brain produces. What we perceive is generated by parts of the brain to which 
we do not have access. Your brain, not you, controls your perception of the world. 
The brain doesn’t work like a photocopy machine during perception. The brain 
interprets during perception; our perception is its interpretation. Beauty is not  
in the eye of the beholder, but rather in the brain of the beholder.
To understand how sensation and perception work, we must first look at how 
the physical world outside and the psychological world within relate to each 
other. This pursuit will take us back to the experimental roots of psychology and 
the work of nineteenth-century German researchers in psychophysics. These 
researchers were not psychologists but rather physiologists and physicists. They 
used experimental methods to measure the relationship between the physical 
m Figure 3.1 | Turning the Tables, An 
Example of a Misperception | The two table-
tops appear to have different dimensions and 
shapes. Surprisingly, however, they are identi-
cal. To convince yourself, measure one and then 
compare it to the other. Even knowing this, you  
cannot make your brain see them as identical.  
(Adapted from Shepard, 1990.)

96  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
How the Physical World Relates  
to the Psychological World
Just as the name implies, psychophysical research focuses on the relationship 
between the physical world and the psychological world. Early psychophysical 
researchers attempted to answer basic questions concerning how we process the 
intensities of physical energy forms such as light waves and sound waves. We will 
discuss three questions that they addressed in their research—the detection ques-
tion, the difference question, and the scaling question.
The detection and difference questions examine limits on our sensory process-
ing. The detection question is concerned with the limits on our ability to detect very 
faint signals. How intense does a light have to be for us to see it? How intense does 
a sound have to be for us to hear it? Similarly, the difference question is concerned 
with limits on our detection abilities, but in this case with our ability to detect very 
small differences between stimuli. What is the smallest difference in brightness 
between two lights that we can see? What is the smallest difference in loudness 
between two sounds that we can hear? The scaling question is not concerned with 
sensory processing limits, but rather with how we perceive the magnitudes (intensi-
ties) of clearly detectable stimuli. What is the relationship between the actual physi-
cal intensities of stimuli and our psychological perceptions of these intensities? 
For example, if we double the physical intensity of a light, do we see it as twice as 
bright? If we double the intensity of a sound, do we hear it as twice as loud? The 
answer to both of these questions is, surprisingly, “no.” If our perception does not 
reflect the actual changes in intensities, then how are the perceived changes related 
to the actual changes? The scaling question asks how our perceptual scaling of 
stimulus intensities is related to the actual physical scaling of stimulus intensities.
The Detection Question
What’s the dimmest light we can see or the softest sound we can hear? To answer 
such questions about the limits of our detection abilities, early psychophysicists  
varied the amount of energy in a sensory stimulus (for example, the intensity of 
a light or sound) and asked a person to answer “yes” or “no” as to whether the 
stimulus (the light or the sound) was detected. They attempted to measure the 
minimum amount of energy necessary for detection, what they called the absolute 
properties of stimuli and a person’s psychological perception of those stimuli 
(hence the term psychophysics). Psychophysical researchers (psychophysicists) 
demonstrated that our mental activity could be measured quantitatively. Following 
a discussion of some of their major findings, we will take a look at how our two 
primary senses, vision and hearing, gather and process information from the envi-
ronment, specifically focusing on how we see color and how we distinguish the 
pitch of a sound. Last, we will detail the general process of visual perception by 
examining how the brain organizes and recognizes incoming visual information, 
makes distance judgments to enable depth perception, and sometimes constructs 
misperceptions (illusions) as in Figure 3.1.

how the PhysicaL WorLd ReLates to the PsychoLoGicaL WorLd   |  97
threshold. They reasoned that a person would always detect a stimulus that con-
tained at least this threshold amount of energy. In other words, the person would 
say “no” to all stimuli with less than this amount of energy and “yes” to all stimuli 
with this amount or more. Figure 3.2(a) depicts a plot of the result that psycho-
physical researchers thought they would observe.
Absolute threshold.  The experimental results, however, did not fit this prediction. 
There was no abrupt transition point from responding “no” to responding “yes.” 
Instead, the percentage of the time that a person said “yes” increased gradually as the 
amount of energy in the stimulus increased. This pattern of responding is depicted in 
Figure 3.2(b). Given this result, psychophysicists had to use a statistical definition to 
define the absolute threshold, the minimum amount of energy in a sensory stimulus 
detected 50 percent of the time. In other words, the absolute threshold is the amount 
of energy that has an equal probability of being detected or not detected. Using this 
definition, researchers have found that humans are pretty good detectors of weak 
stimuli. For example, we are able to see a candle flame on a mountain at a distance of 
30 miles on a dark clear night with no other lights present and hear the tick of a watch 
under quiet conditions at a distance of 20 feet (Galanter, 1962).
Defining the absolute threshold in this way creates a strange 
definition of subliminal (limen means threshold in Latin, so 
“subliminal” means below threshold) stimuli—stimuli detected 
➤	 absolute threshold  The minimum 
amount of energy in a sensory stimu-
lus detected 50 percent of the time.
100
75
50
25
0
Intensity of the stimulus
Percentage of
“Yes” responses
100
75
50
25
0
Intensity of the stimulus
Percentage of
“Yes” responses
Theoretical
absolute
threshold
(a)
(b)
Statistically
defined
absolute
threshold
m Figure 3.2 | Theoretical 
and Observed Absolute 
Thresholds | (a) This is a depic-
tion of the result that psychophysi-
cal researchers thought they would 
observe in their detection studies. 
Theoretically, the absolute thresh-
old is the minimum amount of 
physical energy in a stimulus (the 
minimum intensity of a stimulus) 
necessary to detect it. If a stimulus 
does not have this much energy, 
it should never be detected. If it 
has this much energy or more, it 
should always be detected.  
(b) This is a depiction of the result 
that psychophysical researchers 
actually obtained. There was no 
amount of physical energy in a 
stimulus that led to the kind of 
responding depicted in (a). Instead, 
the responding looked more like a 
flattened S shape. Thus, the abso-
lute threshold was defined statisti-
cally as the minimum amount of 
energy in a stimulus detected  
50 percent of the time.

98  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
less than 50 percent of the time. This 
means that subliminal stimuli are 
ones detected up to 49 percent of the 
time. Such a definition clearly does not 
match what people commonly take 
subliminal to mean: not consciously  
detected. Based on this everyday  
definition, however, some interest-
ing questions about subliminal pro-
cessing arise. Is there any empirical  
evidence for subliminal perception 
(perception without conscious aware-
ness)? Is there any empirical evidence 
for subliminal persuasion (advertisers  
influencing consumer behavior with 
subliminal stimuli)? The answer to  
this last question is a clear “no” (Moore, 
1988, 1992; Pratkanis, 1992; Pratkanis 
& Greenwald, 1988; Trappey, 1996).  
There is no need to worry that televi-
sion, music, and other media are sub-
liminally manipulating us. But what 
about those claims that subliminal 
tapes can improve your memory, help 
you to lose weight, and so on? Research 
has also shown that the tapes don’t have the effects claimed (Greenwald, Spangenberg, 
Pratkanis, & Eskenazi, 1991).
Research in well-controlled laboratory settings (Bar & Biederman, 1998; Marcel, 
1983), however, has demonstrated, with respect to subliminal perception, that sensory 
input can definitely be registered without our conscious awareness. Such perception 
is short-lived, though, and doesn’t seem to have any consequential, long-term impact 
on our behavior (Greenwald, Draine, & Abrams, 1996; Greenwald, Klinger, & Schuh, 
1995). Subliminal perception should not be confused with extrasensory perception 
(ESP), perception without using our known senses, such as mental telepathy (perceiv-
ing another person’s thoughts). Just as there is no reliable evidence for subliminal 
persuasion, neither is there any such evidence for ESP (Druckman & Swets, 1988; 
Milton & Wiseman, 1999; Galak, LeBoeuf, Nelson, & Simmons, 2012). After decades 
of research, no one has ever demonstrated a single, reproducible ESP finding. Over 
three decades ago, James Randi, a magician and master debunker of paranormal 
claims, offered $10,000 to anyone who could demonstrate ESP ability under con-
trolled conditions. Later his Educational Foundation upped it to $1 million. He still 
has his money. (For more information, go to the “One Million Dollar Paranormal 
Challenge” icon at Randi’s Web site, www.randi.org.)
Signal detection theory.  Contemporary psychophysical researchers believe 
that the detection of faint signals involves decision making, as well as sensory 
Betsy Streeter/Cartoonstock.com

how the PhysicaL WorLd ReLates to the PsychoLoGicaL WorLd   |  99
processing, so they use signal detection theory to examine a 
person’s detection of very faint sensory stimuli (Green & 
Swets, 1966; Swets, 1964). According to signal detection the-
ory, our ability to detect a faint sensory signal (stimulus) is a 
decision-making process that depends upon a person’s physi-
ological sensitivity to the signal and upon a person’s decision-
making criterion, which is based on nonsensory factors such as 
personality traits, expectations, alertness, and motivation. A 
person must make a decision about the sensory evidence that is available. Is there 
sufficient evidence to say a signal was present? This is like the decision a juror has 
to make in a trial. The juror has to decide, based upon the evidence presented, 
whether the defendant is guilty or not guilty. Based on their personalities and 
beliefs, jury members may use very different decision-making criteria (need varying 
amounts of evidence before deciding guilt). Similarly, people may have equal phys-
iological sensitivity to sensory signals, but come to different decisions about whether 
they detected them or not because they use different criteria for their decisions.
The task used by signal detection researchers is different from that used to 
measure the absolute threshold. Instead of presenting a faint signal of varying 
intensity on each trial, either a signal of constant faint intensity is presented on a 
trial or no signal is presented, and the observer decides that a signal was presented 
and responds “yes” or that no signal was presented and responds “no.” Thus, 
there are four possible events that could occur on a trial: detecting a signal when 
one was presented (a hit), saying a signal was presented when it was not (a false 
alarm), failing to detect a signal when one was presented (a miss), or correctly say-
ing a signal was not presented when it was not (a correct rejection). Two of these 
events (hit and correct rejection) are correct responses by the observer, and two 
(false alarm and miss) are errors. All four events are depicted in Table 3.1.
Using the data for these four outcomes over a large number of trials, a signal detec-
tion theoretical analysis provides two quantitative measures, one for a person’s physio-
logical sensitivity to faint sensory signals and one for his decision criterion (how much 
evidence is needed for a “yes” response). The importance of the former measure is 
obvious, but why is the latter measure of value? Consider a sample detection task in the 
real world—looking at an X-ray to determine whether a faint spot indicating cancer is 
present or not. Remember, there are two possible errors in a detection decision—saying 
a signal is present when it is not (a false alarm) 
and saying a signal is not present when it is (a 
miss). The costs of either of these errors could be 
great. In the X-ray example, a false alarm might 
lead to additional (and unnecessary) clinical 
tests and possibly unnecessary surgery; a miss 
might lead to no treatment and death.
The measurement of a person’s decision 
criterion tells us about these two error rates. 
For example, a person with a very lax decision 
criterion (a tendency to say “yes” with little 
Table 3.1   Four Possible Outcomes in 
a Signal Detection Study
Signal
Present
Absent
Hit
False Alarm
Miss
Correct Rejection
Observer’s 
response
“No” “Yes”
➤	 signal detection theory  A theory 
that assumes that the detection of 
faint sensory stimuli depends not 
only upon a person’s physiological 
sensitivity to a stimulus but also 
upon his decision criterion for 
detection, which is based on  
nonsensory factors.

100  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
evidence, a “yea” sayer) will make many false alarms but have few misses because 
he is saying “yes” most of the time. The opposite is true for a person with a very 
strict decision criterion (a tendency to only say “yes” when there is much evidence, a 
“nay” sayer). A strict criterion leads to many misses but few false alarms because the 
observer is saying “no” most of the time. So, depending upon the cost of each type 
of error, a person can change his decision criterion to lessen the cost. The bottom 
line is that our perception of even a faint signal is a subjective process impacted by 
nonsensory factors. With this understanding of limitations on our ability to detect 
faint sensory signals, let’s see what psychophysical researchers have found out about 
our ability to detect very small differences between signals—the difference question.
The Difference Question
What’s the smallest difference in brightness between two lights or in loudness 
between two sounds that we can detect? To answer such questions about how much 
difference there needs to be between stimuli to perceive them as different, psycho-
physicists vary the amount of difference in physical energy between two clearly 
detectable stimuli (for example, two lights or two sounds) and ask a person to 
answer “yes” or “no” as to whether the stimuli (lights or sounds) are different. With 
this procedure, these early psychophysical researchers thought that they could mea-
sure a person’s threshold for perceiving a difference in intensity between two stim-
uli. However, as with absolute threshold measurement, the results did not reveal a 
set threshold amount, so the difference threshold had to be defined statistically 
as the minimum difference between two stimuli detected 50 percent of the time. 
Another name for the difference threshold is the just noticeable difference, or jnd.
Weber’s law.  When measuring a person’s difference threshold, psychophysi-
cists presented two stimuli on each trial and varied the amount of difference 
between them across trials. It is important to understand how they manipulated 
the amount of difference across trials. To do this, they kept the intensity of one 
stimulus the same on every trial and changed the intensity of the other stimulus 
across trials. They called the stimulus whose intensity remained the same the 
standard stimulus, and the stimulus whose intensity changed 
across trials the comparison stimulus. For example, the stan-
dard stimulus for judging differences in lifted weights might 
be 20 pounds, and the comparison stimuli would be various 
weights less than or greater than 20 pounds. On one trial the 
comparison weight might be 19.5 pounds, 21 pounds on the 
next trial, and so forth.
Ernst Weber, a nineteenth-century German psychophysi-
cist, discovered that difference thresholds and the standard 
stimulus intensities used to measure them have a very lawful 
relationship. Simply put, Weber’s law says that for each type 
of sensory judgment that we can make, the measured differ-
ence threshold is a constant fraction of the standard stimulus 
➤	 difference threshold  The minimum 
difference between two sensory 
stimuli detected 50 percent of the 
time. The difference threshold is 
also sometimes referred to as the 
just noticeable difference, or jnd.
➤	 Weber’s law  For each type of  
sensory judgment that we can 
make, the measured difference 
threshold is a constant fraction 
of the standard stimulus value 
used to measure it. This constant 
fraction is different for each 
type of sensory judgment.

how the PhysicaL WorLd ReLates to the PsychoLoGicaL WorLd   |  101
value used to measure it. Psychophysicists have determined the constants for the 
various types of sensory judgment. For example, for judging brightness of lights 
the constant is .08, but it is .05 for loudness of tones (Teghtsoonian, 1971). A 
smaller constant means that smaller differences can be detected for that type 
of sensory judgment. To understand Weber’s law, let’s consider perceiving dif-
ferences in lifted weights. The constant for lifted weights is .02, or 1/50. If the 
standard stimulus used to determine the difference threshold were 100 pounds, 
the threshold would be 2 pounds. If the standard were 200 pounds, the thresh-
old would be 4 pounds. What would the difference threshold be for a standard 
stimulus of 1,000 pounds? It would be 20 pounds (1/50 of 1,000). Researchers 
have found that Weber’s law holds for most types of sensory judgments but not 
for very low-intensity or high-intensity stimuli (Gescheider, 1976).
In everyday life, Weber’s law means that our ability to perceive a difference is 
relative to the constant background intensity. For example, in a dimly lit room, 
a little bit of light will be noticed; but in a brightly lit room, it will take a much 
greater increase in light to be noticed. In both cases, however, the proportion of 
the background intensity necessary to see an increase in brightness will be the 
same. The bottom line is that we notice proportional differences and not absolute 
differences. But when we perceive differences between stimuli that are well above 
threshold level, are the perceived differences in magnitude the same as the actual 
differences in the physical intensities of the stimuli? This is the scaling question.
The Scaling Question
The detection question and the difference question were concerned with thresh-
olds and with the perception of very weak stimulus intensities or very small dif-
ferences between stimulus intensities. The events occurring in normal perception, 
however, are well above threshold levels; therefore, it is important to understand 
how we perceive the changing intensities of these everyday events that are well 
above our thresholds. To do so, we need to understand the scaling question—How 
do perceptual scales of measurement relate to physical scales of measurement? 
For almost all types of sensory judgment, the scales of measurement are not 
equivalent. They are lawfully related, however.
Stevens’s power law.  S. S. Stevens, a twentieth-century American researcher, 
conducted experiments in which he had people estimate the magnitudes of many 
types of sensory stimuli. Through these experiments, he discovered how the per-
ceived magnitude of a stimulus is related to its actual physical magnitude 
(Stevens, 1962, 1975). By relating the perceived magnitude 
judgments to the actual physical intensities, Stevens found 
that the perceived magnitude of a stimulus (for example, the 
perceived brightness of a light or loudness of a sound) is 
equal to its actual physical intensity raised to some constant 
power for each type of sensory judgment. This relationship is 
called Stevens’s power law.
➤	 Stevens’s power law  The perceived 
magnitude of a stimulus is equal to 
its actual physical intensity raised to 
some constant power. The constant 
power is different for each type of 
sensory judgment.

102  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
Now let’s try to figure out what this means by considering some different 
types of sensory judgment. First, if the constant power for a type of sensory 
judgment were 1, the perceived magnitude would actually equal the physical 
magnitude. However, this is seldom the case, though it does happen when we 
judge line lengths. If a line is doubled in length, we perceive its length as doubled. 
For almost all types of sensory judgments, however, the constant power that the 
physical intensity has to be raised to is either less than or greater than 1, which 
means that the perceived magnitude is less or greater, respectively, than the 
actual physical magnitude. Brightness and loudness magnitude judgments are 
good examples of when the perceived magnitude is less than the actual magni-
tude. To perceive a light as twice as bright, its actual intensity has to be increased 
eight- to ninefold. A good example of the perceived magnitude being greater than 
actual physical magnitude is the judgment of electric shock intensities. If shock 
intensity is doubled, we perceive the increase as much more than double, about 
10 times as great.
The bottom line for almost all types of sensory judgments is that our per-
ception of stimulus magnitude does not match the actual physical world. Our 
perception is a transformation that is created within us. But why would our per-
ceptions be rescaled? One explanation involves thinking about the adaptive value 
of such sensory processing (Goldstein, 2007). Lessening our perception of dra-
matic increases in sensory intensities such as light and sound serves a protective 
function for our eyes and ears. Increasing the perceived intensities of dangerous 
stimuli like electric shock would alert us to possible dangers before they seriously 
affected us. Both types of rescaling would tend to pay dividends in terms of our 
survival; hence, Stevens’s power law may be partially understandable as an adapta-
tion enhancing our survival.
Another phenomenon that helps us to understand how we process the 
intensity of stimuli is sensory adaptation—our sensitivity to unchanging and 
repetitious stimuli disappears over time. For example, when we first put our 
watch on our wrist, we are aware of it, but that sensitivity disappears quickly. 
Why? Our senses are set to detect changes in the environment, and therefore 
they adapt to continuous or repeated presentation of a stimulus with decreas-
ing responsiveness. Like Stevens’s power law, sensory adaptation makes sense 
from an evolutionary viewpoint. It is more important for our survival to detect 
environmental changes than things that don’t change. Changes are more likely 
to signal danger. There are some limits on sensory adaptation, though. We 
don’t adapt to extremely intense, especially painful stimuli, such as a severe 
toothache or incredibly loud noises. We also don’t usually adapt to unchanging 
visual stimuli; our eyes are constantly moving so their visual images continue 
to change.
To help you to integrate the information in this section, 
the three psychophysical questions along with the answers 
we have described are summarized in Table 3.2. If anything 
in this table is not clear to you, restudy the relevant mate-
rial before going on to the next section.
➤	 sensory adaptation  Our sensitivity  
to unchanging and repetitious 
stimuli disappears over time.

how the PhysicaL WorLd ReLates to the PsychoLoGicaL WorLd   |  103
Section Summary
In this section, we discussed some of the basic findings from psychophysical 
research. We considered three psychophysical questions—the detection, difference, 
and scaling questions. To answer the detection question, psychophysical researchers 
measured the absolute threshold, the minimum stimulus intensity that can be detect-
ed 50 percent of the time. Using this definition, researchers have found humans to be 
pretty good detectors of faint signals. However, because they view the detection task 
as a decision-making process involving a response criterion, contemporary sensory 
researchers prefer to use signal detection theory to describe our detection abilities. 
Using this type of analysis, both an observer’s decision criterion and her sensitivity 
to faint sensory stimuli can be identified. Thus, if the costs of a particular observer’s 
errors (false alarms or misses) are high, the observer’s criterion can be changed to 
reduce these rates. Regardless of the type of analysis, researchers have failed to find 
any reliable evidence for subliminal persuasion or extrasensory perception.
To answer the difference question, psychophysicists measured the difference 
threshold, the minimum difference in stimulus intensity between two stimuli that 
can be detected 50 percent of the time. It turns out that difference thresholds and 
the standard stimulus intensities used to measure them have a relationship called 
Weber’s law—the measured difference threshold is a constant proportion of the 
standard stimulus value used in its measurement. This constant is different for each 
type of sensory judgment, and a smaller constant indicates that smaller differences 
can be detected for that type of sensory judgment.
Table 3.2   Three Psychophysical Questions and Answers
Psychophysical Questions
Answers
Detection Question: What is the 
minimum amount of energy 
in a stimulus that humans can 
detect?
Absolute threshold: the minimum amount of 
energy in a stimulus that can be detected 50% 
of the time
Signal detection theory: detection of faint 
stimuli depends not only upon physiological 
sensitivity to a stimulus but also upon a  
person’s decision criterion for detection, 
which is based on nonsensory factors
Difference Question: What is the 
minimum difference in stimulus 
energy between two stimuli that 
humans can detect?
Difference threshold: the minimum difference 
in stimulus energy between two stimuli that 
can be detected 50% of the time
Weber’s law: the measured difference thresh-
old is a constant fraction of the standard 
stimulus used to measure it and this constant 
is different for each type of sensory judgment
Scaling Question: How are 
human perceptual scales of 
measurement related to physical 
scales of measurement?
Stevens’s power law: the perceived magnitude 
of a stimulus is equal to its actual physical 
intensity raised to some constant power for 
each type of sensory judgment

104  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
Surprisingly, research on the scaling question has indicated that the relation-
ship between perceived stimulus magnitudes and the actual physical magnitudes is 
almost always not an equivalent one. According to Stevens’s power law, to equal 
the perceived intensity, the actual physical intensity has to be raised to some con-
stant power, and this constant is different for each type of sensory judgment. When 
this constant power is 1, the perceived intensity equals the actual intensity. This, 
however, seldom occurs, but it is the case for line-length judgments. Almost all of 
the time the constant is less or greater than 1, which means that the perceived inten-
sity is less or greater, respectively, than the actual physical intensity. Brightness and 
loudness are examples of perceived magnitude judgments being less than the actual  
physical magnitudes, and electric shock is an example of magnitude judgments 
being greater. One explanation of Stevens’s power law involves its adaptive value 
with respect to our survival. Such an explanation can also account for sensory adap-
tation, our decreasing sensory responsiveness to constant, nonextreme stimuli.
ConceptCheck | 1
➤	 Why were absolute and difference thresholds given statistical definitions?
➤	 according to signal detection theory, what would happen to a person’s false 
alarm and miss rates if the person switched from a very lax to a very strict 
decision criterion?
➤	 What does a really large constant fraction in Weber’s law tell us about our 
ability to judge differences?
➤	 Why is it adaptive for the constant exponent in Stevens’s power law to be 
greater than 1 for physical energies that are dangerous to us at high intensities?
How We See and How We Hear
Our two most dominant senses are vision and hearing. This section will first 
discuss how our eyes and ears gather and process information from the environ-
ment. Visual and auditory stimuli are physical energies in the form of waves—light 
waves and sound waves. We need to understand the characteristics of these wave-
forms to understand how visual and auditory stimuli are processed, so we need to 
discuss them first. A typical waveform and its primary characteristics (wavelength, 
frequency, and amplitude) are illustrated in Figure 3.3.
Wavelength refers to the distance in one cycle of a wave, from one crest to 
the next. Different wavelengths of light lead to varying perceptions of color. 
Humans can perceive wavelengths roughly from 400 to 700 nano­meters (nm), 
or billionths of a meter. As the wavelengths decrease from 700 nm, the result-
ing hues go from red through the colors of the spectrum 
down to violet. One way to remember the order of these 
colors is by remembering the name ROY G. BIV, which 
stands for Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Indigo, and Violet.  
➤	 wavelength  The distance in one 
cycle of a wave, from one crest to 
the next.

how We See and how We hear  |  105
Amplitude refers to the amount of energy in a wave, its intensity, which is the height 
of the wave at its crest. For light waves, the amplitude determines the brightness of  
the light. Different amplitudes lead to different levels of brightness; the greater 
the amplitude, the brighter the light.
For auditory stimuli, the frequency of the waveform rather than its length is 
used. Frequency refers to the number of times the waveform cycles in one second. 
Longer wavelengths have lower frequencies, and shorter wavelengths have higher 
frequencies. The frequency of a sound wave determines its pitch, the quality of 
sound that we describe as high or low. For example, female voices usually have a 
higher pitch than male voices. Humans can perceive sound wave frequencies from 
about 20 to 20,000 hertz (Hz), the number of cycles of the sound wave in one  
second. This unit of measurement’s name, hertz, comes from a nineteenth-century  
German physicist named Heinrich Hertz, who studied sound. The amplitude of a 
sound wave corresponds to our perception of its loudness. As the amplitude of a 
wave increases, its perceived loudness increases.
The brain cannot process physical energies such as light waves and sound waves. 
There are receptor cells in our eyes and ears that specialize in transduction—
converting physical energy into neural signals that the brain can understand. This 
conversion is the first step in processing incoming sensory information. Following 
transduction, the incoming visual and auditory signals undergo further processing 
on their way to the brain, and within the brain before we see 
and hear the brain’s interpretations of these signals. Next, we 
will take a closer look at transduction and the initial informa-
tion processing in the eyes and ears, focusing on how we see 
color and how we distinguish the pitches of sounds.
How the Eye Works
The light-sensitive receptor cells are located in the retina at 
the very back of the eye; therefore, light waves have to travel 
➤	 amplitude  The amount of energy 
in a wave, its intensity, which is 
the height of the wave at its crest.
➤	 frequency  The number of times a 
wave cycles in one second.
➤	 transduction  The conversion of 
physical energy into neural signals 
that the brain can understand.
(a)
(b)
Short wavelength = high frequency
(bluish colors, high-pitched sounds)
Long wavelength = low frequency
(reddish colors, low-pitched sounds)
Great amplitude
(bright colors, loud sounds)
Small amplitude
(dull colors, soft sounds)
m Figure 3.3 | A Typical 
Waveform and Its 
Characteristics | 
Wavelength is the distance 
of one complete cycle of the 
wave, from one crest to the 
next. A wave’s frequency 
refers to the number of times 
it can cycle in one second—
the longer the wave, the 
lower the frequency. The 
amplitude of the wave refers 
to the amount of energy in 
the wave, which is the height 
of the wave at its crest.

106  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
through almost the entire eye before transduction occurs. Figure 3.4 shows the path 
of the light and each of the parts of the eye that we will discuss. The cornea is the 
clear, tough covering on the front of the eye that starts bending the light waves that 
will eventually have to be focused on the retina. The light waves pass through the 
cornea and the pupil, a tiny hole through which the light waves enter the eye. The iris 
is a colored muscle that both gives eyes their color and controls the size of the pupil, 
which determines how much light enters. To lessen the amount of entering light, the 
iris will constrict (lessen) the size of the pupil, and to increase the amount of entering 
light, it will dilate (increase) the pupil’s size. A completely dilated pupil lets in about 
16 times as much light as one that is completely constricted (Matlin & Foley, 1997).
Light
Light
Cross section
of retina below 
the fovea
Ganglion
cell
Bipolar cell
rod
Cone
to visual
cortex
3
2
1
retina
Fovea
Optic nerve
Blind spot
Cornea
Iris
pupil
Lens
Visual cortex in 
occipital lobe
1. Light waves (the white arrows) are transduced 
by the rods and cones at the back of the retina, 
generating neural impulses about the visual 
image.
2. The rods and cones send the information 
about the visual image to the bipolar cells, which 
then pass it on to the ganglion cells (indicated by 
the dark arrows).
3. The axons of the ganglion cells, bundled 
together, converge to form the optic nerve. The 
optic nerve carries the visual image information 
to the visual cortex in the occipital lobe, via the 
thalamus.
m Figure 3.4 | The Path of Light Through the Eye and the Structure of the Retina | 
The light travels through the cornea, enters through the pupil whose size is controlled by the iris, and 
is focused on the retina by the lens. Here, as explained in the figure, the light waves are (1) transduced 
into neural signals describing the visual image; and (2) these signals are sent to the bipolar cells, 
which forward them to the ganglion cells whose axons bundle together to form the optic nerve, which 
(3) carries the signals back to the occipital lobes in the brain, via the thalamus, to be interpreted.

how We See and how We hear  |  107
The light then passes through the transparent lens, which is responsible 
for accommodation—the focusing of the light waves from objects of different 
distances directly on the retina. This process is called accommodation because 
the lens changes its shape (accommodates) in order to focus objects at different 
distances. When looking at distant objects (at least 20 feet away), the lens is in 
its unaccommodated flattest state, which allows the light waves to be focused on 
the retina. When we look at objects that are nearer, the lens accommodates by 
becoming thicker in order to focus the light waves properly on the retina. Because 
light travels in straight lines, the retinal image will be inverted and reversed. The 
brain, however, rearranges this image to its correct orientation for our perception.
If the image is not properly focused on the retina because of defects in the 
lens or the shape of the eyeball, problems in vision arise. Nearsightedness occurs 
when the light waves from distant objects come into focus in front of the retina, 
which blurs the images of these objects. Farsightedness is created by the opposite 
focusing problem—light waves from nearby objects come into focus behind the 
retina, resulting in blurred images. So, in nearsightedness, we have difficulty view-
ing distant objects, but can see near objects well; in farsightedness, we have dif-
ficulty viewing near objects, but can see far objects well. Farsightedness is similar 
to what happens to our vision as we age; the lens loses its ability to accommodate 
for nearby objects. Older people find it difficult to focus on near objects, so they 
have to get reading glasses and hold objects at a distance to help in seeing them.
It is also important to realize that our brains do not process everything in the 
physical world but rather only a tiny bit of it. For example, the part of the light 
spectrum that is visible to us is less than a ten-trillionth of it (Eagleman, 2011). We 
have no awareness of the rest of the spectrum carrying X-rays, radio signals, gamma 
rays, and so on. No matter how hard you try, your senses are not equipped to tune 
into the rest of the spectrum. There is far more out there than meets the eye.
The structure of the retina. Except for the visual image 
being reversed and inverted, no visual processing occurs until 
the light waves reach the retina, which is only a mere half-
millimeter thick (Brynie, 2009). As shown in Figure 3.4, the 
retina, the light-sensitive layer of the eye, is composed of three 
layers of cells—ganglion, bipolar, and receptor (the rods and 
cones). The light waves pass through the ganglion and bipolar 
cells before reaching the rods and cones, where visual process-
ing begins. The light waves are absorbed by photopigments 
(light-sensitive chemicals) within these receptor cells, creating 
patterns of neural impulses that describe the visual image. 
This neural information is conveyed to the bipolar cells, which 
in turn send it along to the ganglion cells. The optic nerve, the 
axons of the ganglion cells bundled together, exits the eye car-
rying the information along the visual pathways to the brain. 
Where the optic nerve exits each eye, we have a blind spot—a 
retinal area with no receptor cells, preventing us from seeing 
➤	 accommodation  The focusing of 
light waves from objects of differ-
ent distances directly on the retina.
➤	 nearsightedness  A visual problem 
in which the light waves from 
distant objects come into focus 
in front of the retina, blurring the 
images of these objects.
➤	 farsightedness  A visual problem in 
which the light waves from nearby 
objects come into focus behind the 
retina, blurring the images of these 
objects.
➤	 retina  The light-sensitive layer of 
the eye that is composed of three 
layers of cells—ganglion, bipolar, 
and receptor (rods and cones).

108  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
anything there. To experience the blind spots in each of your eyes, follow the 
instructions in Figure 3.5. Why don’t we normally notice the blind spot in each eye? 
The brain fills them in by using top-down processing, which we will discuss in the 
next section (Churchland & Ramachandran, 1996).
The optic nerve carries the visual information to the thalamus, which is 
responsible for directing it to the primary visual cortex in our occipital lobes 
to be processed. But how does the visual cortex interpret this message from the  
retina? David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel’s innovative research in which they 
recorded patterns of electrical impulses in individual neurons in the visual cor-
tex of cats provided the answer. They were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology 
or Medicine in 1981 for their discoveries concerning information processing in 
the visual system. The story of their collaboration along with reprints of all 
of their key publications can be found in Hubel and Wiesel’s Brain and visual 
perception: The story of a 25-year collaboration (2004). Because this cortical pro-
cessing is very involved, we’ll 
just describe the general nature 
of this very counterintuitive 
processing.
Essentially, the brain recog-
nizes a visual object (a process 
called pattern recognition) by 
breaking it down into its ele-
mentary features, such as angles 
and diagonal lines. Cortical cells 
called feature detectors then 
recognize these elementary fea-
tures. Finally, the elementary 
features are put back together 
again, so that the whole object 
can be recognized. For example, 
m Figure 3.5 | Find Your Blind Spots |  
To find the blind spot in your left eye, hold the 
book at arm’s length in front of you, close your 
right eye and stare at the orange on the right 
with your left eye, and keep staring at the orange 
while you move the book slowly toward you. 
The apple should disappear when it falls on the 
blind spot in your left eye, somewhere between 
6 to 12 inches from your eye. To find the blind 
spot in your right eye, this time close the left eye 
and stare at the apple on the left with your right 
eye as you move the book slowly toward you. 
This time the orange should disappear when it 
falls upon the blind spot in your right eye. 
SergiyN/Fotolia.com
© April D/Fotolia.com
David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel
Ira Wyman/Sygma/Corbis

how We See and how We hear  |  109
to recognize n, it is broken down into its features (possibly, ⁄, —, and  ), which 
are recognized and then regrouped into the proper relationship. Strange isn’t 
it? To recognize an object, the object is broken down into its parts and then put 
back together again in order to identify it. Even stranger is that there are separate 
processing systems for form, color, distance, and motion information, which the 
brain somehow coordinates and unifies into our seamless perception of the world 
(Ratey, 2001).
But what if your primary visual cortex were severely damaged? You would be 
blind in the conventional sense, but you might possibly have what is called blind-
sight (seeing without knowing)—a condition in which a blind person has some 
spared visual capacities in the absence of any visual awareness (Weiskrantz, 2009). 
The oxymoron blindsight was coined by Lawrence Weiskrantz of Oxford University, 
who has studied this condition for more than 40 years (Weiskrantz, Warrington, 
Sanders, & Marshall, 1974). People with blindsight respond to a visual stimulus 
without consciously experiencing it. For example, they claim that they do not see 
an object, but when asked to reach out and touch it, they can do so far more often 
than what chance would predict. If you put a large object in their path, they will 
walk around it but insist that they do not see anything. The experimental evidence 
concerning blindsight has sometimes been controversial (Cowey, 2010), and the 
explanation for blindsight remains unsettled. Some researchers believe that the 
blindsight responses stem from the flow of visual information through neural 
pathways that bypass the damaged visual cortex (a kind of information detour) to 
brain areas that do not convey the conscious perception but enable the blindsight 
responses (Ptito & Leh, 2007; Schmid et al., 2010). An alternative explanation is 
that a small amount of healthy tissue remains within the damaged visual cortex, 
not enough to provide conscious perception but sufficient for blindsight respons-
es (Gazzaniga, Fendrich, & Wesainger, 1994). It is also possible that both hypoth-
eses are correct. Because there is much variability between those with blindsight, 
each hypothesis might explain different cases. One conclusion that can be made, 
however, is that normal visual perception requires a healthy visual cortex.
Rods and cones.  There are two types of visual receptor cells, rods and cones, 
in the retina. They are called rods and cones because of their actual physical 
shapes. Their functions are also very different. Rods are 
principally responsible for dim light and achromatic (color-
less) vision, and cones for bright light and color vision. Rods 
outnumber cones about 20 to 1 (Kalat, 2007). There are 
about 120 million rods and only 6 million or so cones in 
each eye. Cones are more centrally located in the retina than 
rods. They are located in the fovea, a tiny pit in the center of 
the retina, and in the periphery of the retina on each side of 
the fovea. Rods are only located in the periphery, and the 
proportion of rods to cones increases with increasing 
distance from the fovea. The major differences between rods 
and cones are summarized in Table 3.3.
⁄
➤	 blindsight  A condition in which 
a blind person has some spared 
visual capacities in the absence of 
any visual awareness.
➤	 rods  Receptor cells in the retina 
that are principally responsible for 
dim light and achromatic vision.
➤	 cones  Receptor cells in the retina 
that are principally responsible for 
bright light and color vision.
➤	 fovea  A tiny pit in the center of the 
retina filled with cones.

110  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
The difference in location of rods (peripheral) and cones (central) helps us to 
determine where we should focus an object for the best visual acuity (resolution 
of detail). In normal or brighter light when the cones are mainly responsible for 
our vision, the object should be focused on the fovea, which is packed with cones. 
Cones provide a clearer picture of an object. Why? Cones, especially foveal cones, 
tend to have more direct routes than the rods to the bipolar and ganglion cells for 
the retinal information that they pro-
cess. For example, typically one foveal 
cone communicates with one bipolar 
cell, but several rods communicate 
with one bipolar cell. This means that 
the information that the rods send 
forward has been averaged across sev-
eral retinal positions, leading to a 
less clear picture of the retinal image. 
Foveal cones do not have to do such 
averaging; therefore, the retinal image 
they send forward is more detailed 
and clearer. The cones in the periph-
ery just outside of the fovea do some 
averaging but far less than the rods.
But where should we focus an 
object in dim light conditions? The 
answer is in the periphery of the reti-
na rather than the fovea. Why? This is 
where the rods are more densely locat-
ed, and they are mainly responsible 
for our vision when not much light is 
available. We shouldn’t look directly 
Table 3.3   Differences Between Rods and Cones
Rods
Cones
120 million in each eye
6 million in each eye
Located mainly in periphery of retina
Located mainly in fovea and central 
retina
Primarily responsible for dim light 
vision
Primarily responsible for bright light 
vision
Responsible for achromatic (colorless) 
vision
Responsible for chromatic (color) vision
Lead to low visual acuity
Lead to high visual acuity
This is a highly magnified and colorized electromicrograph that 
clearly shows the difference between the rods and cones. The 
rods are the longer, thinner green receptors, and the cones are 
the shorter, more tapered blue receptors.
Science Source

how We See and how We hear  |  111
at the object when there isn’t much light, but rather focus a little to the side of it 
so that it will be projected onto the periphery of the retina. The image won’t be as 
clear as when we can use our cones, but it is the best we can do in dim light. The 
major role of the rods in dim light vision is also apparent in dark adaptation, the 
process by which the rods and cones through internal chemical changes become 
more and more sensitive to light in dim light conditions. The cones adapt quickly 
(in 5 to 10 minutes), but need more light to function, so they do not really help 
us to see in dim light. It takes longer for the rods to adapt (20 minutes or so), but 
they slowly help us to see in dim light. Normally, however, we have enough light 
for our cones to be working. That is why we see the world in vivid color. But how 
do the cones do this, and what else is involved in producing our perception of 
color? These are the questions we discuss next.
How We See Color
How many different colors can humans discriminate? Hundreds? Thousands? 
These estimates are not even close. It has been estimated that the human eye can 
discriminate about 7.5 million different colors (Fineman, 1996). How can we dif-
ferentiate so many colors? Actually our color vision can be explained by combin-
ing two rather simple theories of color vision, the trichromatic theory and the 
opponent-process theory. We will consider each one separately and then how the 
two work together to explain color vision.
Trichromatic theory of color vision.  Trichromatic theory, as the word 
trichromatic implies, proposes that there are three colors involved. Trichromatic 
theory assumes that there are three types of cones, activated best by short, medium, 
or long wavelengths of light, roughly corresponding to blue, 
green, and red. Indeed, research indicates that there are three 
types of cones, each containing a slightly different photopig-
ment that is maximally sensitive to blue, green, or red wave-
lengths of light (Wald, 1964). The trichromatic theory assumes 
that all of the many colors that we can perceive are mixtures of 
various proportions of these three cone activities. If all three 
types of cones are equally active, we see white (the sum of the 
three wavelengths of light). Trichromatic theory played a role 
in the creation of the television screen, which consists of 
microscopic red, green, and blue dots. The colors we see on the 
screen are the product of how these three types of dots are 
activated by the television broadcast and how the light-emit-
ting dots activate our three types of cones.
It is important to realize that the proposed mixtures of the 
primary colors are additive mixtures—different wavelengths 
of light are directly mixed together. In additive mixtures, all 
of the wavelengths of light reach the retina and are added 
together. The resulting colors are very different than those for 
➤	 dark adaptation  The process by 
which the rods and cones through 
internal chemical changes become 
more and more sensitive to light in 
dim light conditions.
➤	 trichromatic theory  A theory of 
color vision that assumes that 
there are three types of cones, 
each only activated by wavelength 
ranges of light corresponding 
roughly to blue, green, and red. 
It further assumes that all of the 
various colors that we can see are 
mixtures of various levels of acti-
vation of the three types of cones. 
If all three are equally activated, 
we see white.
➤	 additive mixtures  Direct mixtures 
of different wavelengths of light in 
which all of the wavelengths reach 
the retina and are added together.

112  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
subtractive mixtures, such as mixing paints. In subtractive mixtures, some wave-
lengths are absorbed (subtracted) and so do not get reflected from the mixture 
to the retina. For example, if we mix red, green, and blue paints together in equal 
amounts, the result is black (no light reflected). A mixture of equal proportions of 
red, green, and blue wavelengths of light, however, appears white. These subtrac-
tive and additive mixtures are shown in Figure 3.6.
There are color phenomena that trichromatic theory has difficulty explaining. 
We know that red-green and blue-yellow are pairs of complementary colors, 
wavelengths that when added together produce white. This means we cannot 
produce an additive mixture that is perceived to be reddish-green or a bluish-
yellow. Trichromatic theory can’t explain why such colors 
can’t be produced if every color is an additive mixture of the 
three primary colors. In addition, this theory has difficulty 
explaining how we see complementary-color afterimages. 
For example, if we stare at a solid red square for a while and 
then look at a white sheet of paper, we will see a solid green 
square. Why?
Opponent-process theory of color vision.  To explain 
such phenomena, researchers developed a second theory, the 
Subtractive color mixing
additive color mixing
GREEN
PAINT
BLUE
PAINT
RED
PAINT
m Figure 3.6 | Subtractive and Additive Mixtures | (a) In a subtractive mixture, some 
wavelengths are absorbed (subtracted) and so do not get reflected from the mixture. For 
example, mixing equal amounts of red, green, and blue paints is a subtractive mixture. The 
intersection of all three colors appears black. (b) Mixing equal amounts of red, green, and blue 
wavelengths of light, however, is an additive mixture in which all the wavelengths are directly 
mixed together, producing different different results than mixing paints of these three colors. 
For example, the intersection of all three wavelengths appears white. The binary additive mix-
tures are also counterintuitive. For example, the additive mixture of equal proportions of red 
and green wavelengths of light appears yellow. Fritz Goro/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images
➤	 subtractive mixtures  Mixtures 
of wavelengths of light in which 
some wavelengths are absorbed 
(subtracted) and so do not get 
reflected from the mixtures to the 
retina.
➤	 complementary colors 
Wavelengths of light that when 
added together produce white.
(a)
(b)

how We See and how We hear  |  113
opponent-process theory (Hurvich & Jameson, 1957). The 
opponent-process theory assumes that there are three 
opponent-process cell systems helping us to see color and 
that they are located at the post-receptor level of processing 
(after cone processing), which would mean along the visual 
pathways from the bipolar cells to the brain. The systems are 
the pairs, red-green and blue-yellow, plus a black-white (lev-
els-of-brightness) system. The colors within each system 
oppose each other—if one is stimulated, the other one is 
inhibited. For example, there are blue-yellow opponent-pro-
cess cells stimulated by blue light and inhibited by yellow light, and others that 
are stimulated by yellow and inhibited by blue. Researchers have found that 
some ganglion cells as well as some cells in the thalamus and visual cortex 
respond in accordance with opponent-process theory (DeValois & DeValois, 
1975; Engel, 1999; Gegenfurtner & Kiper, 2003). Thus, we know that such cell 
systems exist.
Opponent-process theory can easily explain why we can’t see a reddish-green 
or a bluish-yellow. The complementary colors involved in each case cannot both 
be simultaneously stimulated. They cancel each other out. The theory can also 
explain complementary color afterimages. When you stare at one of the two col-
ors in an opponent-process system for awhile, the part of that system responsible 
for processing this color gets fatigued and has to stop and recover. This is why we 
see the complementary color in the system when we look at a white surface—the 
other color is recovering and cannot oppose it. A good example is the American 
red, white, and blue flag. If we stare at a picture of this flag for a while and 
then switch our attention to a white sheet of paper, we see a complementary 
green, black, and yellow flag! If you stare at the green, black, and yellow flag in 
Figure  3.7 for about 40 seconds and then look at the white space next to it, what 
do you see?
➤	 opponent-process theory  A theory 
of color vision that assumes that 
there are three opponent-process 
cell systems (red-green, blue-
yellow, and black-white) that 
process color information after it 
has been processed by the cones. 
The colors in each system oppose 
one another in that if one color is 
stimulated, the other is inhibited.
m Figure 3.7 | Demonstration of Complementary 
Afterimage | Stare at the flag below for awhile and then 
look at the white space to its right. You should see the 
American flag.

114  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
There is research that supports both trichromatic theory and opponent-process 
theory, so the best explanation for how we see color involves both theories, but at 
different locations in the visual pathways (Boynton, 1988). Color information is 
processed by the cones according to trichromatic theory, but color information is 
processed at the post-receptor cell level (by bipolar, ganglion, thalamic, and corti-
cal cells) according to the opponent-process theory. This simple composite theory 
is a good example of competing theories becoming complementary theories. All 
three theories of color vision are summarized in Table 3.4.
This brief discussion of how we see color shows how visual input from the 
environment is processed, analyzed, and reconfigured, starting with its initial 
processing in the retina and as it continues along the visual pathways to the brain 
to be interpreted. Next, we will consider how such processing of auditory informa-
tion enables us to hear.
How the Ear Works
The auditory sensory system is a mechanical (vibratory) system with the receptor 
cells located in the inner portion of each ear. As you can see in Figure 3.8, the ear 
is divided into three sections—the outer ear, middle ear, and inner ear. The parts 
of each section are also shown in Figure 3.8. The pinna, the external part of the 
ear, collects sounds and funnels them through the auditory canal to the tympanic 
membrane (the eardrum), which marks the boundary between the outer ear and 
middle ear. The sound waves produce vibrations in the eardrum, and these vibra-
tions create a chain reaction that moves the malleus, incus, and stapes (more 
commonly referred to as the hammer, anvil, and stirrup given their shapes), the 
Table 3.4   Three Theories of Color Vision
Theory
Explanation of Color Vision
Trichromatic theory
There are three types of cones, each only activated 
by wavelength ranges of light corresponding 
roughly to blue, green, and red; all colors are mix-
tures of various levels of activation of these three 
types of cones
Opponent-process theory
There are three opponent-process cell systems 
(red-green, blue-yellow, and black-white) which 
process color information after it has been pro-
cessed by the cones; the colors in each system 
oppose one another (if one is stimulated, the other 
is inhibited)
Composite theory
Color information is processed by the cones 
according to trichromatic theory, but color infor-
mation is processed at the post-receptor cell level 
according to opponent-process theory

how We See and how We hear  |  115
three tiny bones in the middle ear (the three smallest bones in the human body). 
The movement of the stapes creates vibrations of the oval window, a membrane 
covering an opening into the inner ear.
The cochlea is a snail-shaped structure in the inner ear that contains the recep-
tor cells for hearing. Tiny hair cells that line the basilar membrane (a membrane 
that extends the length of the cochlea) are the receptors for hearing. There are not 
nearly as many hair cells in the ears as there are rods and cones in the eyes, only 
about 16,000 hair cells in each ear (Matlin & Foley, 1997). The 
vibrations of the oval window displace fluid within the cochlea, 
which causes movement of the basilar membrane and thus 
movement of the hair cells in the membrane. The auditory mes-
sage is coded according to how these tiny hair cells move. This 
Outer ear           Middle ear       Inner ear
Bones of the
middle ear
Bone
auditory
nerve
Cochlea
eardrum
Sound
waves
auditory
canal
pinna
Oval window
Malleus
(Hammer)
Incus
(Anvil)
Stapes
(Stirrup)
Cochlea,
partially uncoiled
Sound
waves
eardrum
Oval window
auditory nerve
Nerve fibers to auditory nerve
Basilar membrane containing hair cells
Motion of fluid in the cochlea
Enlargement of middle ear and inner ear
(note that the cochlea is uncoiled for
explanatory purposes, but not in reality)
auditory cortex
of temporal lobe
m Figure 3.8 | The Path of Sound Through the Ear | Sound is conducted through the ear 
by way of air pressure changes. After entering through the pinna, the sound waves create vibra-
tions in the eardrum that lead to movement of the three tiny bones in the middle ear. This move-
ment leads to vibration of the oval window that leads to movement of the fluid in the inner ear, 
displacement along the basilar membrane, and movement of the hair cells within the membrane. 
The movement of these hair cells creates the neural signals that are taken to the primary auditory  
cortex in the temporal lobes by the auditory nerve via the thalamus.
➤	 hair cells  The receptor cells for 
hearing. They line the basilar mem-
brane inside the cochlea.

116  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
motion of the hair 
cells gets translated 
into neural impulses 
that get passed on to 
the auditory nerve cells 
that carry the infor-
mation to the thala-
mus, which directs the 
information to the pri-
mary auditory cortex 
in the temporal lobes.
Hearing loss caused 
by damage to these hair 
cells or the auditory  
nerve fibers is called 
nerve deafness. The 
most common causes 
of such damage are 
aging and continued 
exposure to extremely 
loud noises. Nerve deafness is much more difficult to treat than conduction deaf-
ness, hearing loss caused by damage to the mechanical system carrying the audi-
tory information to the cochlea. For example, puncturing an eardrum can lead to 
conduction deafness. Hearing aids can often help to alleviate this type of deafness.
It is important to realize that just as we learned that we only process a small 
part of the light spectrum, parts of the auditory spectrum are outside the range 
of human hearing. We cannot process ultrasound stimuli, those above 20,000 Hz, 
and infrasound stimuli, those below 20 Hz. Other animals, however, have differ-
ent windows on the auditory world. For example, elephants, whales, and giraffes 
can hear infrasound stimuli; and dolphins and bats, ultrasound stimuli. Whales 
and elephants use infrasound to communicate over long distances, possibly up to 
hundreds of miles in the case of whales. Dolphins communicate using ultrasound 
frequencies, and bats use them to navigate and hunt in darkness. Dogs and cats 
can hear frequencies above 40,000 and 50,000 Hz, respectively; and the upper 
range for dolphins may extend to 150,000 Hz (Goldstein, 2007). Thus, the outside 
world is really noisy; we just lack the ability to process it.
Now, given our basic understanding of how the ear works 
and how auditory information gets coded and processed, 
we’ll consider an important aspect of this complex coding, 
how we distinguish different pitches.
How We Distinguish Pitch
Remember that pitch is the quality of sound that we describe 
as high or low and is determined by the frequency of a sound 
➤	 nerve deafness  Hearing loss cre-
ated by damage to the hair cells 
or the auditory nerve fibers in the 
inner ear.
➤	 conduction deafness  Hearing loss 
created by damage to one of the 
structures in the ear responsible for 
mechanically conducting the audi-
tory information to the inner ear.
This image of hair cells lining the cochlea has been greatly magni-
fied and colorized. The hair cells vibrate in response to sound, and 
this motion gets translated into neural impulses that get carried to 
the primary auditory cortex.
Susumu Nishinaga / Science Source

how We See and how We hear  |  117
wave. We can perceive sound wave frequencies from about 20 to 20,000 Hz. Each 
of the frequencies in this rather large range corresponds to a different pitch that 
we can perceive. The best explanation of how we perceive this range of pitches 
parallels the story of how we see different colors. We will find that to get the best 
explanation, two theories will need to be combined—place theory and frequency 
theory. First, we will consider each of the two theories, and then how they go 
together.
Place theory.  Place theory assumes that there is a specific place along the 
basilar membrane, starting from the oval window, which will respond maximally 
to a particular frequency. Thus, the brain will know the frequency by knowing the 
location of peak activity along the basilar membrane. In some ingenious experi-
ments on the cochleas from human cadavers, Georg von Békésy discovered that 
each frequency generates a traveling wave that moves along the basilar membrane 
and peaks at a particular location (Békésy, 1960). Starting at the oval window and 
20,000 Hz, the pitch goes down as the peak activity moves down the basilar mem-
brane. These peak locations tell the brain the frequencies of the incoming  
auditory stimuli.
Frequency theory.  Frequency theory assumes that the frequency of the sound 
wave is mimicked by the firing rate of the hair cells across the entire basilar mem-
brane. For example, if the frequency were 100 Hz, the firing rate for the membrane 
would be 100 impulses per second. The brain would know the frequency by the 
basilar membrane’s firing rate in reaction to the auditory stimulus.
Now let’s see why and how we put theories together to get a better explana-
tion of pitch perception. First, research has found that specific locations along 
the basilar membrane correlate well with the frequencies of sound waves, except 
for lower pitches (, 500 Hz). For these lower pitches, the firing rate of the basilar 
membrane mimics the frequency. This means that place theory can explain how 
we hear the entire range of pitches except for low pitches, but 
frequency theory can explain how we hear these low pitches.  
Is frequency theory only able to explain how we perceive pitch-
es below 500 Hz? No, the upper limit on firing rate is 5,000 
times per second. There is a maximum firing rate for nerve 
cells, about 1,000 times per second. However, with the addi-
tion of the volley principle, in which the cells take turns fir-
ing to increase the maximum firing rate for the group of cells, 
frequency theory could explain our perception of frequencies 
up to about 5,000 Hz (Zwislocki, 1981). Because 5,000 times 
per second is the upper limit for the firing rate using the vol-
ley principle, frequency theory would not be able to explain 
how we perceive higher frequencies of 5,000 to 20,000 Hz.
Combining the two theories gives us a composite theory 
that fits the research findings on pitch perception. Frequency 
theory explains the perception of lower frequencies (, 500 Hz),  
and place theory explains how we perceive higher frequencies 
➤	 place theory  A theory of pitch 
perception which assumes that 
there is a specific location along 
the basilar membrane that will 
maximally respond to a particular 
frequency, thereby indicating the 
pitch to the brain. As this location 
goes down the basilar membrane 
from the oval window, the pitch 
goes down from 20,000 Hz to 20 Hz.
➤	 frequency theory  A theory of pitch 
perception that assumes that the 
frequency of the sound wave is 
mimicked by the firing rate of the 
entire basilar membrane.
➤	 volley principle  Cells taking turns 
firing will increase the maximum 
firing rate for a group of cells.

118  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
(. 5,000 Hz). This means that the brain uses the firing rate to differentiate the 
low frequencies and the location of maximal hair cell activity along the basilar 
membrane to distinguish the high frequencies. For the range of frequencies in 
between (roughly 500 to 5,000 Hz), both sources of information work, giving us 
double coverage and better pitch perception. This is fortunate because this range 
of frequencies contains the sounds most important to us—for example, human 
speech. All three theories of pitch perception are summarized in Table 3.5.
Section Summary
In this section, we discussed our two most dominant senses—vision and hearing. 
Stimuli for both senses occur in the form of waves, light waves and sound waves, 
respectively. For light waves, different wavelengths lead to the perception of differ-
ent colors, and the amplitude of the wave determines the level of perceived bright-
ness. With respect to sound waves, wave frequency determines the pitch that we 
perceive, and wave amplitude determines our perception of loudness. The brain 
cannot process such physical energy forms, hence receptor cells (rods and cones 
in the retina and hair cells in the basilar membrane within the cochlea) transduce 
(convert) the physical energy into neural signals that the brain can understand.
Light waves pass through many parts of the eye before being transduced by the 
rods and cones at the back of the retina. Once transduced, the neural signals are 
carried by the optic nerve to the thalamus, which sends them to the primary visual 
cortex where they are interpreted. In this interpretation process, the object is broken 
down into its elemental features, which are recognized by feature detectors, and 
then the features are combined so that the whole object can be recognized. The 
cones and rods divide the initial visual processing. Cones are responsible for bright 
light and color vision; rods are responsible for dim light and achromatic vision.
There are two competing explanations for how we see color—trichromatic theory 
and opponent-process theory. Trichromatic theory proposes three types of cones, 
each responding to ranges of wavelengths corresponding to red, green, and blue. 
All other colors are derived from varying proportions of these three primaries. 
Table 3.5   Theories of Pitch Perception
Theory
Explanation of Pitch Perception
Place theory
There is a specific location along the basilar membrane that  
will maximally respond to a particular frequency, thereby 
indicating the pitch to the brain
Frequency theory
The frequency of the sound wave is mimicked by the firing 
rate of the entire basilar membrane, thereby indicating the 
pitch to the brain
Composite theory
Lower frequencies (< 500 Hz) are processed according 
to frequency theory, higher frequencies (> 5,000 Hz) are 
processed according to place theory, and for frequencies 
between from 500 to 5,000 Hz, both theories are working

how We MaKe Sense of What We See  |  119
Research indicates that we do have these three types of cones. Opponent-process 
theory assumes that there are three types of cell systems (red-green, blue-yellow, 
and black-white) at the post-receptor level that help us to see color. Being comple-
mentary pairs, the colors within each system oppose (cancel) each other. Opponent-
process theory can explain complementary color phenomena that the trichromatic 
theory cannot. The combination of these two theories provides the best explanation 
of color vision. The trichromatic theory explains how the cones operate, and the 
opponent-process theory explains how cells in the visual pathways operate after the 
cones have done their initial processing.
The auditory system is a mechanical vibratory system with the hair cell recep-
tors located within the basilar membrane in the cochlea. Incoming vibrations result 
in fluid displacement in the cochlea that causes movement of these hair cells. The 
nature of these hair cell movements creates the auditory message that gets carried 
by the auditory nerve, by way of the thalamus, to the primary auditory cortex for 
interpretation. Damage to these hair cells or the auditory nerve results in nerve 
deafness, which is very difficult to treat. Damage to one of the structures conduct-
ing the auditory information to the inner ear causes conduction deafness, which is 
easier to treat.
To explain how we perceive pitch, two theories are necessary. We can perceive a 
fairly large range of frequencies, 20 to 20,000 Hz. Place theory, which assumes that 
there are specific locations along the basilar membrane correlated with each fre-
quency, explains how we hear high pitches (frequencies above 5,000 Hz). Frequency 
theory, which assumes that the firing rate of the hair cells mimics the incoming fre-
quency information, explains how we hear low pitches (frequencies less than 500 Hz).  
Frequency theory (with the addition of the volley principle) and place theory both 
operate to give us better pitch perception for moderate pitches (frequencies from 
500 to 5,000 Hz).
ConceptCheck | 2
➤	 explain the difference between nearsightedness and farsightedness with 
respect to focusing problems.
➤	 explain what opponent-process theory would predict that you would see if 
you stared for a minute at a flag with alternating yellow and white stripes 
and a rectangular patch of green in the center and then looked at a white 
sheet of paper.
➤	 explain why longer sound waves lead to lower frequencies and shorter ones 
lead to higher frequencies.
➤	 explain why neither the place theory nor the frequency theory by itself can 
explain human perception of pitch from 20 to 20,000 hz.
How We Make Sense of What We See
So far we have learned that sensory structures such as the eyes and ears are 
designed to receive and begin processing various aspects of stimuli from our exter-
nal environment. These structures transduce the raw data from the environment  

120  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
into neural impulses that the brain can understand. This ini-
tial information gathering and recoding by the sensory struc-
tures is usually referred to as sensation, and the resulting 
interpretation by the brain, perception. These two processes, 
however, are not quite as distinct as their definitions make 
them sound. They work together in more of an interactive 
way. A consideration of bottom-up and top-down processing for visual percep-
tion should help you to understand this interaction. Following this discussion, 
we’ll consider perceptual organization and constancy, two processes essential for 
bringing order to incoming visual information. Last, we’ll discuss distance per-
ception, how the brain manages to give us the third dimension of depth in our 
perception of the world.
Bottom-up Processing and Top-down Processing
Perception is the product of bottom-up and top-down processing. Bottom-up 
processing refers to the processing of incoming sensory input as it travels up 
from the sensory structures to the brain. It is called bottom-up because it is 
coming from the senses up to the brain. Bottom-up processing starts with the 
transduction of the incoming sensory signals. You can think of bottom-up pro-
cessing as bringing the sensory input from the environment to the brain to be 
interpreted. However, the perceptual systems in the brain do not just randomly 
search through billions of possibilities to recognize the sensory input that is sent 
up. The search is greatly narrowed by top-down processing—the brain’s use of 
knowledge, beliefs, and expectations to interpret the sensory information. It is 
referred to as top-down because it is coming from the top (the brain) back down 
to the sensory structures. To understand the difference between these two types of 
processing, think about listening to someone speak in a language that is foreign 
to you. You have bottom-up processing in that you hear the sounds. You cannot 
interpret this sensory input, however, because you do not have top-down process-
ing (comprehension of the foreign language is not part of your knowledge base).
To further your understanding of these two types of processing, look at 
Figure 3.9. Do you see a meaningful pattern? If not, then your top-down process-
ing is letting you down. There is a cow staring directly at you. The head is on the 
left side of the image. To see it, your top-down processing has to organize various 
features in the figure successfully to fit your knowledge of 
what such a cow looks like. Once your brain does this, you 
won’t have trouble seeing it the next time you look at this 
figure. You’ll have the necessary top-down processing. In fact, 
using similar stimuli, Tovee, Rolls, and Ramachandran (1996) 
found that neurons in the temporal lobes permanently altered 
their connections once the meaningful pattern (such as the 
cow in our example) has been seen. In addition, using a jum-
ble of black and white splotches from which you eventually  
➤	 bottom-up processing  The pro-
cessing of incoming sensory infor-
mation as it travels up from the 
sensory structures to the brain.
➤	 top-down processing  The brain’s 
use of knowledge, beliefs, and 
expectations to interpret sensory 
information.
➤	 sensation  The initial information 
gathering and recoding by the sen-
sory structures.
➤	 perception  The interpretation by 
the brain of sensory information.

how We MaKe Sense of What We See  |  121
see a dog, Ramachandran, Armel, and Foster (as reported in Ramachandran & 
Blakeslee, 1998, p. 297) found that if two completely different views of this dog 
are presented in rapid succession, naive subjects can see only incoherent motion 
of the blue and white splotches; but if they have already seen the dog, it is seen 
to jump or turn in the appropriate manner, demonstrating the role of top-down 
object knowledge in motion perception. If you are still having trouble locating the 
cow, the dark splotches at the bottom of the figure, just to the left of center, repre-
sent her nose and mouth. Up higher are other dark areas that are her eyes and ears.
The subjective nature of perception is due to this top-down processing. Our 
past experiences, beliefs, and expectations bias our interpretations of sensory 
input. As the French novelist Anais Nin observed, “We do not see things as they 
are, we see things as we are” (Tammet, 2009). Perceptual set and the use of contex-
tual information in perception are two good examples of this biasing effect of top-
down processing. Perceptual set occurs when we interpret an ambiguous stimulus 
in terms of how our past experiences have “set” us to perceive it. Our top-down 
processing biases our interpretation so that we’re not even aware of the ambiguity. 
Let’s consider how we perceive close plays in sporting events. 
Don’t we usually see them in favor of “our” team? We are set 
by past experiences to see them in this biased way. This means 
that past experiences guide our perception with top-down 
processing. In other words, we see it “our way.”
➤	 perceptual set  The interpretation 
of ambiguous sensory information 
in terms of how our past experi-
ences have set us to perceive it.
m Figure 3.9 | Perceptual 
Organization and Top-
down Processing | Do 
you see a meaningful object 
in this figure? There is one. 
It is a cow staring directly 
at you. Can you find it? To 
do so, your perceptual top-
down processing mecha-
nisms will have to organize 
some of the features of the 
figure to match your knowl-
edge of what a cow looks 
like. If you are having trouble 
locating the cow, its head 
occupies most of the left half 
of the figure, and its body, 
the right half. Once you see 
it, you won’t have any diffi-
culty seeing it the next time. 
Your top-down processing 
mechanisms will know how 
to organize the features so 
you perceive it. (Adapted 
from Dallenbach, 1951.)
From American Journal of Psychology. Copyright 1951 by the Board of Trustees of the 
University of Illinois. Used with permission of the University of Illinois Press.

122  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
Contextual effects are even stronger examples of top-down processing guiding 
perception. A contextual effect on perception occurs when we use the present 
context of sensory input to determine its meaning. Figure 3.10 shows a simple 
example of such contextual effects. Most people see the top line of characters 
as the alphabetic sequence A, B, C, D, E, F, and the second line as the numeric 
sequence 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. But if we now look at the characters creating the B and 
the 13, they are the same in each case. The context created by each line (alphabetic 
versus numeric) determined our interpretation. If surrounded by letters, the char-
acters were interpreted as the letter B; if surrounded by numbers, the characters 
were interpreted as the number 13.
Context is a crucial contributor to perception. Without contextual informa-
tion, the brain may not be able to decide upon an interpretation. What about 
the following characters: IV? They could be alphabetical (the letters I and V) or 
numeric (the Roman numeral for 4). Inserted into a sentence with other words, 
such as “Jim was in the hospital and hooked up to an IV,” we would perceive 
them as letters. However, if they were inserted into the sentence, “Edward IV was 
the King of England in the fifteenth century,” we would perceive their numerical 
meaning. The addition of contextual information provides top-down processing 
that allows the brain to resolve such ambiguities in normal perception.
Perceptual Organization and Perceptual Constancy
Perceptual organization and constancy are essential processes for bringing order 
to the incoming sensory input. Let’s consider perceptual organization first. To be 
interpreted, the bits of incoming sensory data must be organized into meaningful 
wholes—shapes and forms. Some German psychologists working in the early part 
of the twentieth century developed many principles that explain how the brain 
automatically organizes visual input into meaningful holistic objects. Because the 
German word gestalt translates as “organized whole,” these 
psychologists became known as Gestalt psychologists. To 
the Gestalt psychologists, these organized wholes are more 
than just the sum of their parts. A good example of this is  
m Figure 3.10 | A Context Effect on 
Perception | The interpretations of the ambiguous 
characters composing the second item in the first 
series and the fourth item in the second series are 
determined by the context created by the items on 
each side of them. In the first series, these items are 
letters so the interpretation of the ambiguous char-
acters is a letter, B. In the second series, the items 
are numbers so the interpretation is a number, 13. 
(Adapted from Coren, Ward, & Enns, 2004, used by 
permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)
➤	 contextual effect  The use of the 
present context of sensory infor-
mation to determine its meaning.

how We MaKe Sense of What We See  |  123
stroboscopic movement, the perceptual creation of motion from a rapidly pre-
sented series of slightly varying images. For example, we see smooth motion when 
watching a movie, but in actuality there are only still picture frames being shown 
rapidly in succession. The motion we perceive emerges from the parts, the still 
frames, but is not present in them. You have already experienced another example 
of the whole being greater than the sum of its parts in the last question in Concept 
Check 3, Chapter 2. The whole (a portrait of Rudolf II of Prague) is greater  
than the sum of its parts (fruits, flowers, and vegetables).
To explain how we organize our visual input into holistic 
objects, Gestalt psychologists proposed many different orga-
nizational principles. We will consider two major ones—the 
figure-and-ground principle and the principle of closure.
Gestalt psychologists developed a basic rule for perceptual 
organization, the figure-and-ground principle—the brain 
organizes the sensory input into 
a figure or figures (the center of 
attention) and ground (the less dis-
tinct background). To get a better 
understanding of this principle, let 
us examine the image in Figure 3.11.  
This reversible figure-ground pat-
tern was introduced by Danish 
Gestalt psychologist Edgar Rubin 
in 1915 (Rubin, 1921/2001). What 
is the figure and what is the ground? 
These keep changing. We see a vase 
as a white object on a colored back-
ground, but then we see two faces 
in silhouette facing each other on 
a white background. What you see 
is determined by which side of the 
wavy lines extending down either 
m Figure 3.11 | An Example of Figure-
Ground Ambiguity | Do you see a white 
vase or two blue facial silhouettes looking at 
each other? You can see both, but only one 
at a time. When you switch your perception 
from one to the other, your brain is switching 
how the input is organized with respect to 
figure and ground. When you see a vase, the 
vase is the object, but when you see the two 
faces, the vase becomes the background.
➤	 figure-and-ground principle  The 
Gestalt perceptual organizational 
principle that the brain organizes 
sensory information into a figure 
or figures (the center of attention) 
and ground (the less distinct  
background).
John O’Brien/The New Yorker Collection/www.cartoonbank.com

124  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
side of the image your brain focuses on to form the figure (Restak & Kim, 2010). If 
you concentrate laterally (outwardly), then you’ll see the faces. If you concentrate 
medially (inwardly), then you’ll see the vase. This is what is called border owner-
ship (Rubin, 2001). When you perceive the faces, you see the blue region as own-
ing the border (the wavy lines); but when you perceive the vase, you see the white 
region as owning the border. With each switch in perspective, the brain keeps 
switching its figure and ground organization for these sensory data. This is called 
a reversible pattern because the figure and ground reverse in the two possible 
interpretations. What is figure in one interpretation becomes the background in 
the other. Without any context, top-down processing cannot determine which 
interpretation is the correct one. This is an example of a bistable perception—an 
unchanging visual stimulus leads to repeated alternation between two different 
perceptions (Yantis, 2014).
The ambiguous vase-silhouettes illustration helps us to understand the figure-
and-ground principle, but ambiguity can also be due to the possibility of more than 
one object on the same background. The features of the object may allow more than 
one interpretation. A classic example of such an ambiguity is given in Figure 3.12. 
Do you see an old woman or a young woman? The young woman is looking back 
over her right shoulder, and the old woman’s chin is down on her chest. The young 
woman’s ear is the left eye of the old woman. Actually, depending upon how you 
organize the features, you can see both, but not simultaneously. If you are able to see 
both, your top-down processing will keep switching your perception because there is 
no contextual information to determine which interpretation is correct.
This young/old woman organizational ambiguity is often credited to British 
cartoonist W. E. Hill who published it in a humor magazine in 1915, but it 
m Figure 3.12 | An  
Example of an 
Organizational 
Perceptual Ambiguity |  
Do you see the head and 
shoulders of an old woman 
or a young woman? If you’re 
having trouble seeing the 
old woman, she has a large 
nose, which is located below 
and to the left of the cen-
ter of the figure. The old 
woman’s large nose is the 
chin and jaw of the younger 
woman. Now can you see 
both of them? Because there 
is no contextual information 
to determine a correct inter-
pretation, your perception 
will keep switching from one 
interpretation to the other. 
W.E. Hill, 1915

how We MaKe Sense of What We See  |  125
appears that Hill adapted it from an origi-
nal concept that was popular throughout 
the world on postcards and trading cards in 
the nineteenth century. The earliest known 
depiction of the young/old woman ambigu-
ity is on an anonymous German postcard 
from 1888 shown on the left in Figure 3.13 
(Weisstein, 2009). Can you perceive both the 
young woman and the old woman? Having 
identified them in Hill’s illustration should 
have facilitated their perception on this card. 
As in Hill’s illustration, the old woman’s  
large nose is the chin and lower jaw of the 
younger woman. Botwinick (1961) created 
the male version of this figure (shown on 
the right in Figure 3.13) and entitled it 
“Husband and Father-in-Law” because the 
title of Hill’s female ambiguous figure was 
“Wife and Mother-in-Law.” If you’re having 
trouble perceiving the two men, the older 
man’s big nose (like the older woman’s 
big nose) is the chin and lower jaw of the 
younger man; but the two men are facing in 
the opposite direction of the two women in 
Hill’s illustration.
Another important Gestalt perceptual 
organizational principle is closure, which refers to the tendency to complete 
(close) incomplete figures to form meaningful objects. You’ve already seen 
some examples of closure in Figures 3.9 and 3.10. Closure was used to perceive 
the cow in Figure 3.9 (page 121) and to perceive the ambiguous characters in  
Figure 3.10 (page 122) as the letter B in the alphabetic context. The French artist 
Paul Cézanne used the principle of closure in his paintings by leaving bare patches 
of canvas in them for the viewer to fill in the blanks (Lehrer, 2007; Sweeney, 2011). 
Significantly, he worked at about the same time as the Gestalt psychologists 
developed their principles of perceptual organization. In order to close a figure, 
we use top-down knowledge. Sometimes, however, the brain goes too far in using 
closure and creates figures where none exist. Such figures are 
called subjective contours—lines or shapes that are perceived 
to be present but do not really exist (Kanizsa, 1976). The 
white triangle that seems to be overlying three black circles 
and another triangle in Figure 3.14 (page 126) is a subjective 
contour. Only three 45° angles and three black circles with 
a chunk missing are present. In perceiving these stimuli, the 
brain creates an additional object, the second triangle, by fill-
ing in the missing parts of the sides of this triangle; but this 
m Figure 3.13 | Two More Organizational 
Perceptual Ambiguities | On the left is a young/old 
woman ambiguity taken from a German postcard from 
1888. The ambiguity on this puzzle card is like the one 
in Figure 3.12. Can you see both the young woman and 
the old woman? Their head positions are just like those 
in Figure 3.12. The old woman’s big nose is the chin and 
jaw of the younger woman. On the right is a similar per-
ceptual ambiguity but that allows the perception of both 
a young man and an old man. If you’re having difficulty 
seeing both men, the old man’s big nose is the chin 
and jaw of the younger man just like in the ambiguous 
women’s version. The two men, however, are facing to 
the right and not to the left like the two women. Science 
Source: Drawn by Mr. George P. Marsden Medical Arts Section, DRS, NIH
➤	 closure  The Gestalt perceptual 
organizational principle that the 
brain completes (closes) incom-
plete figures to form meaningful 
objects.
➤	 subjective contour  A line or shape 
that is perceived to be present but 
does not really exist. The brain 
creates it during perception.

126  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
triangle doesn’t really exist. The caption for Figure 3.14 explains how to demon-
strate that the overlying triangle is really not there. Because 4-month-old infants 
also see such subjective contours (Ghim, 1990), it appears that our brains are 
hardwired to make sense of missing information by using top-down processing to 
fill in what should be there (Hood, 2009). The visual cortex also responds to the 
illusory contours as if they are real. Von der Heydt, Peterhans, and Baumgartner 
(1984) found that illusory contours evoked responses in cells in the visual cortex 
that responded as if the contours were real lines and edges.
Not only does the brain create subjective contours, but it also creates ones that 
are ambiguous. An example of an ambiguous subjective contour is the Necker 
cube in Figure 3.15 (from Bradley, Dumais, & Petry, 1976). In perceiving a Necker 
cube, you have filled in the nonexistent lines that connect its corners. The cube 
m Figure 3.14 | An Example of a Subjective 
Contour | Does there appear to be a very bright 
triangle overlying three black circles and another 
triangle? This brighter-appearing triangle isn’t  
really there. It is a subjective contour created by 
your brain in its perception of the three black 
circles with a chunk missing (the three Pac Man–
like characters). To demonstrate that this overlying 
brighter triangle is truly not there, cover up every-
thing in the display but the horizontal blank center. 
When you do this, you will not see any difference 
in level of brightness across the horizontal center 
of the display. If the whiter triangle were really 
there, you would see differences in brightness.
m Figure 3.15 | Another Example of an Ambiguous 
Subjective Contour | This phantom Necker cube is an 
example of an ambiguous subjective contour. Instead of 
seeing green circles with white lines inside them, you see a 
cube, seemingly floating above the page. The lines between 
the circles that connect the corners of the cube are nonexis-
tent. The cube also reverses orientation. Focus on the “x,” 
and it will move from the front edge of the cube to the back. 
You can also make the subjective segments of the cube van-
ish by viewing the circles as holes in the page and imagin-
ing that you are looking through the holes to see the cube 
suspended below. The cube below also reverses orientation 
so there are four different possible interpretations of this 
seemingly simple stimulus. (Adapted from Bradley, Dumais, 
& Petry, 1976.)

how We MaKe Sense of What We See  |  127
seems to float in front of the page, with green 
circles behind it. All that is really there are green 
circles with white lines in them. Your brain con-
structs the cube’s subjective edges and its three-
dimensional shape. You can show that this is a 
subjective contour by placing your finger over a 
green circle. The lines emanating from that circle 
will vanish. You can also reverse the orientation 
of this phantom cube just as you can for a true 
Necker cube (another example of a bistable per-
ception). Focus on the “x.” It will move from the 
front edge of the cube to the back edge when the 
cube reverses orientation. This phantom cube not  
only illustrates an ambiguous subjective con-
tour, but it also allows you to remove the sub-
jective edges of the cube from your perception. 
Imagine that the green circles are holes and 
that you are looking at the cube through these 
holes. The cube is actually suspended behind the 
page. This perception may take a little longer to 
achieve, but be patient. Once you are able to perceive this interpretation, the illu-
sory contour lines vanish, but the cube continues to reverse. Thus, there are four 
perceptions possible for this seemingly simple visual display, demonstrating that 
perception is a process of active construction. This display also demonstrates that 
the brain constructs our three-dimensional view of the world from the visual cues 
available in a visual stimulus, in this case a two-dimensional one (Hoffman, 1998). 
We will discuss how we perceive depth in the next section.
In addition to being able to organize and group sensory input to form meaningful 
objects, the brain must be able to maintain some type of constancy in its perception 
of the outside world, and it does. Perceptual constancy refers to the perceptual 
stability of the size, shape, brightness, and color for familiar objects seen at varying 
distances, different angles, and under different lighting conditions. These various 
types of constancy are referred to as size, shape, brightness, and color constancy, 
respectively. The retinal images for familiar objects change under different visual 
conditions such as different viewing angles or distances. For example, the size of a 
car doesn’t shrink in our perception as it drives away. The size of its retinal image 
shrinks, but its size in our perception doesn’t change. The brain adjusts our percep-
tions in accordance with what we have learned about the outside world. We know 
that the car’s size doesn’t change and realize that it is just 
farther away from us. Perceptual constancy must override this 
changing sensory input to maintain an object’s normal size, 
shape, brightness, and color in our perception of the object. 
Perceptual constancy is a very adaptive aspect of visual percep-
tion. It brings order and consistency to our view of the world.
➤	 perceptual constancy  The per-
ceptual stability of the size, shape, 
brightness, and color for familiar 
objects seen at varying distances, 
different angles, and under differ-
ent lighting conditions.
Dan Piraro, reprinted with permission of King Features Syndicate.

128  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
Perceptual organization and perceptual constancy are essential processes in 
perception. Without them, our perceptions would be meaningless fragments in a 
constant state of flux. Constancy and organization bring meaning and order to 
them. However, neither of these aspects explains another crucial part of visual 
perceptual processing—how we perceive the third dimension: depth.
Depth Perception
Depth perception involves the judgment of the distance of objects from us. The 
brain uses many different sources of relevant information or cues to make judg-
ments of distance. These cues may require both eyes (binocular cues) or only one 
eye (monocular cues).
The major binocular cue is retinal disparity. To understand retinal disparity, 
first consider that our two eyes are not in the same place on our face. Each eye 
(retina) takes in a slightly different view of the world. The difference (disparity) 
between these two views of each retina provides information about the distance 
of an object from us. It allows the brain to triangulate the distance from us. The 
retinal disparity cue refers to the fact that as the disparity (difference) between 
the two retinal images increases, the distance from us decreases.
To understand this, hold up your right hand in front of you and form a fist 
but extend your index finger upward. If you hold it stationary and focus on it, and 
now close one eye, and then rapidly open it and close the other one a few times, 
your finger will appear to move. If you now move the finger closer to you and 
repeat the rapid closing and opening of the eyes one at a time, again, the finger 
appears to move, but now much more because the retinal 
views of the finger are more disparate. When right in front of 
your eyes, you see maximal movement because the disparity 
between the two retinal images is at its maximum.
There are several monocular cues, but we will discuss only 
a couple of them so that you have some understanding of 
how such cues work. Linear perspective (sometimes called 
perspective convergence) refers to the fact that as parallel lines 
recede away from us, they appear to converge— the greater the 
distance, the more they converge. For example, think about 
looking down a set of railroad tracks or a highway. The tracks 
and the two sides of the road appear to converge as they 
recede away from us. Because convergence is involved, this cue 
is sometimes referred to as perspective convergence. Another 
monocular cue that is easy to understand is interposition—if 
one object partially blocks our view of another, we perceive it 
as closer. Near objects partially overlap farther ones.
Monocular cues, binocular cues, and various distance-
judging principles the brain uses are normally valid distance 
indicators. However, sometimes these cues and principles 
➤	 depth perception  Our ability to 
perceive the distance of objects 
from us.
➤	 retinal disparity  A binocular depth 
cue referring to the fact that as 
the disparity (difference) between 
the two retinal images of an object 
increases, the distance of the 
object from us decreases.
➤	 linear perspective  A monocular 
depth cue referring to the fact that 
as parallel lines recede away from 
us, they appear to converge—the 
greater the distance, the more 
they seem to converge. Sometimes 
referred to as perspective  
convergence.
➤	 interposition  A monocular depth 
cue referring to the fact that if one 
object partially blocks our view of 
another, we perceive it as closer 
to us.

how We MaKe Sense of What We See  |  129
lead the brain to create misperceptions. We refer to such misperceptions as  
illusions—misperceptions of reality. Two illusions are illustrated in Figure 3.16. 
The first is called the Ponzo illusion because it was first demonstrated by the 
Italian psychologist Mario Ponzo in 1913. The two horizontal bars are identical in 
size, but the top one appears larger. The other illusion in Figure 3.16 is an example 
of the corridor illusion in which images of equal size placed within a visual depic-
tion of a receding corridor appear larger the farther away that they seem to be. The 
silhouettes seem to get larger in size as you go from the one at the bottom to the 
one at the top of the figure. However, all three silhouettes are identical in size. How 
are distance cues involved in these misperceptions of size in these two illusions?
To see how distance cues are involved in these illusions, we must first consider 
how the brain relates the retinal image size of an object to the object’s distance 
from us. As an object gets farther away from us, its size on the retina decreases. 
This is simple geometry, and the brain uses this geometric principle in creating 
our perception of the object. Now consider the situation in which two objects 
have equal retinal image sizes, but distance cues indicate to the brain that one of 
the objects is farther away. What would the brain conclude from this information?  
Using the principle relating retinal image size to distance, it would conclude that 
m Figure 3.16 | The Ponzo and Corridor Illusions | (a) The two red bars in the Ponzo 
illusion are identical in size. However, the top bar appears to be larger. (b) The three silhou-
ettes appear to increase in size from the one at the bottom of the figure to the one at the 
top, but all three are identical in size. To convince yourself that the two bars and the three 
silhouettes are identical, trace one of the bars (silhouettes) on a thin sheet of paper and then 
slide the tracing over the other bar (two silhouettes). Both illusions seem to be caused by the 
brain’s misinterpretation of the relative distance from us of the two bars in (a) and the three 
silhouettes in (b). See page 130 for the complete explanations. Sorapop Udomsri/Shutterstock
(a)
(b)

130  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
the object farther away must be larger. This is the only way that its retinal image 
size could be equal to that of the object closer to us. Thus, the brain enlarges 
the size of the more distant object in our perception of the objects. However, 
if the cues provided incorrect distance information and the objects were really 
equidistant from us, then we would see a misperception, an illusion. The brain 
incorrectly enlarged the object that it had mistakenly judged to be farther away. 
This is comparable to something we have experienced in working math problems: 
plug an incorrect value into an equation and get the problem wrong. This is essen-
tially what the brain is doing when it uses incorrect information about distance, 
leading to a mistake in perception. It is important to realize that our brain’s 
computing of the retinal image size and distance from us of objects is done at the 
unconscious level of processing. We are privy only at a conscious perceptual level 
to the product of our brain’s calculations.
Now let’s apply this explanation to our sample illusions. Think about the 
Ponzo illusion shown in Figure 3.16a. If this illusion is due to the brain’s using 
incorrect distance information about the two horizontal lines, which cue that we 
described is responsible? That’s right—linear perspective. The convergence of the 
railroad tracks normally indicates increasing distance. Given this cue information,  
the brain incorrectly assumes that the top bar is farther away. Because the two 
horizontal bars are the same size and truly equidistant from us, they are the same 
size on our retinas. Because their retinal images are of equal size but the brain 
thinks that the bars are at varying distances from us, it incorrectly distorts the 
top bar (the one assumed to be farther away) to be larger in our perception, or, 
should I say, misperception.
The corridor illusion shown in Figure 3.16b can be explained in the same way. 
Monocular depth cues, mainly linear perspective, lead the brain to judge the three 
silhouettes as increasing distances from us with the top silhouette being the far-
thest away. Given that the retinal image sizes of the three silhouettes are equal 
because the three silhouettes are identical and equidistant from us and that the 
three silhouettes are incorrectly judged to be varying distances from us, the brain 
enlarges the middle and top silhouettes in our conscious perception, resulting in 
the illusion. As in the Ponzo illusion, the brain applies the valid principle relating 
retinal image size to the distance of objects from us, but uses incorrect distance 
information and thus creates a misperception.
The Müller-Lyer illusion depicted in Figure 3.17(a and b) is another example of 
an illusion created by the brain misapplying the geometry relating retinal image 
size to distance from us (Gregory, 1968). As in the other two illusions, the brain 
mistakenly thinks that the line on the right with arrow feather endings is farther 
away than the line on the left with arrowhead endings. Why? In this case, the 
brain is using a relationship between distance and different types of corners that 
it has learned from its past perceptual experience. The line with arrow feather 
endings has the appearance of a corner that is receding away from us (like the 
corners where two walls meet in a room), while the line with arrowhead endings 
has the appearance of a corner that is jutting out toward us (like the corners 
where two sides of a building meet). These two types of corners are illustrated in  

how We MaKe Sense of What We See  |  131
Figure 3.17(c and d). Thus, based on its past experience with such corners, the 
brain believes that the line with arrow feather endings is farther away.
However, in reality, the line with the arrow feather endings is not farther away. 
The two vertical lines are identical in length and equidistant from us; therefore, 
their two retinal images are identical. Given the identical retinal images and the 
incorrect judgment about relative distance, the brain incorrectly enlarges the line 
with arrow feather endings so that we perceive it as being longer. In support of this 
explanation, cross-cultural researchers have found that people who live in physical 
environments without such distance-indicating corners are far less susceptible to 
seeing the illusion (Segall, Campbell, & Herskovits, 1963, 1966; Stewart, 1973).
The Turning the Tables illusion in Figure 3.1 (page 95) also arises because our 
brain gives us a three-dimensional interpretation of a two-dimensional drawing 
(Shepard, 1990). Perspective cues indicate that the long side of the table on the 
left goes back in depth whereas the long side of the table on the right is more 
nearly at right angles to our line of sight. Thus, if the table on the left goes back 
m Figure 3.17 | The 
Müller-Lyer Illusion | 
(a and b) The two vertical 
line segments are equal in 
length. However, the one 
with the arrow feather end-
ings on the right appears 
longer than the one with 
the arrowhead endings 
on the left. (c and d) Like 
the illusions in Figure 3.16 
(page 129), this illusion 
is created by the brain 
misapplying the geometry 
relating the retinal image 
size of objects and their 
distance from us. Based 
on its experiences with 
receding and projecting 
corners as illustrated here, 
our brain mistakenly thinks 
that the line with arrow 
feather endings is a reced-
ing corner and thus farther 
from us than the line with 
arrowhead endings, which 
our brain thinks is a pro-
jecting corner. Because the 
retinal images of the two 
lines are identical, the brain 
incorrectly lengthens the 
arrow feather line in our 
conscious perception.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

132  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
in depth, the brain will think that its retinal image must be foreshortened (appear 
shorter than it really is) because this is what happens in true three-dimensional 
viewing. The fact that the retinal images of the two tabletops, however, are iden-
tical in length thus implies that the real length of the table on the left must be 
greater than the real length of the table on the right (and vice versa for the short 
sides of the two tables given their depth interpretations by the brain). Because 
these inferences about orientation, depth, and length are made automatically  
by the brain, we remain powerless to eliminate the illusion even though we know 
that the tabletops are identical. The drawing of the tables automatically triggers 
the brain to make a three-dimensional interpretation, and we cannot choose to 
see the drawing as what it is, a pattern of lines on a flat piece of paper.
The moon illusion can also be explained in a similar way (Restle, 1970). The 
illusion is that the moon appears to be larger on the horizon than when it is over-
head at its zenith. But the moon is the same size and at the same distance from us 
whether it is on the horizon or overhead. This means that the moon’s larger size 
on the horizon has to be an illusion. The objects near the horizon lead the brain 
to think that the moon is farther away when it is near the horizon than when it 
is overhead. Because the retinal images of the moon at these two locations are 
the same and the brain mistakenly thinks that the horizon moon is farther away, 
it distorts the moon’s size to appear much larger in our perception than when it 
is overhead, and this increase in apparent size makes it appear nearer (Gregory, 
2009). It really isn’t, and it is easy to see that this is the case. To make the moon 
on the horizon shrink, we can 
roll up a sheet of cardboard 
into a viewer and look at the 
moon through this viewer so 
that we only see the moon 
and not any of the objects on 
the horizon. The moon will 
appear to shrink dramatically 
in size because the brain will 
no longer be led astray in its 
judgment of distance for the 
horizon moon.
Linear perspective (paral-
lel lines converging as they 
recede away from us) plays a 
major role in many illusions, 
but what would the brain do if 
it were led to believe that par-
allel lines weren’t converging 
as they receded away from us? 
Look at Figure 3.18, the lean-
ing tower illusion (Kingdom, 
The Moon Illusion | The moon on the horizon appears much larger than 
it does when it is overhead, higher up in the sky, but this is an illusion. The 
moon is the same size and remains the same distance from us regardless of 
where it is in the sky. Objects near the horizon lead the brain to think that the 
horizon moon is farther away than when it is overhead, so the brain mistak-
enly enlarges its size in our perception because the retinal images of the hori-
zon and overhead moons are the same size. Paul Souders/The Image Bank/Getty Images

how We MaKe Sense of What We See  |  133
Yoonessi, & Gheorghiu, 2007). The same exact photo of the Leaning Tower of Pisa 
is shown in both panels. Yet the tower on the right appears to be leaning more. 
Why? Our visual system treats the two images as if they are part of a single scene, 
rather than as two separate images of the same tower. Normally, if two adjacent 
towers rise at the same angle, they appear to converge as the tops of the towers 
recede from view; but because these are identical photos, the projections of the 
towers on the retina are parallel and do not converge in the distance (increasing 
height in this case). Thus, the brain decides that they are diverging. It employs its 
rule that lines receding away from us must diverge if their projections are parallel. 
Even knowing that these are identical photographs, you will not be able to over-
ride your brain’s misinterpretation and see them as such. They will remain the 
“Twin Towers of Pisa,” with one tower leaning more than the other.
In creating the visual illusions that we have discussed, the brain is using valid prin-
ciples, but faulty information about such factors as relative distance or perspective. 
The overall result (our perception) is incorrect. In summary, the distance cues and 
principles the brain uses to give us an accurate view of the external world work almost 
all of the time, but these same cues and principles sometimes cause misperceptions.
m Figure 3.18 | The Leaning Tower Illusion | These are duplicate pictures of the Leaning Tower of Pisa, but 
the one on the right seems to be leaning more. It isn’t, but you cannot override your brain’s interpretation to see 
these pictures as the same. To convince yourself that they are identical, photocopy the figure and then cut out one 
of the panels and compare it to the other panel. (Taken from Kingdom, Yoonessi, & Gheorghiu, 2007.) Fred Kingdom

134  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
Section Summary
In this section, we looked at visual perception in more detail. Bottom-up and top-
down processing are both necessary for smooth and efficient perception. While 
top-down processing is adaptive, as illustrated by perceptual constancy, it is also 
responsible for the subjective nature of perception. Perceptual bias and contextual 
perceptual effects are good examples of how our past experiences, beliefs, and 
expectations guide our interpretation of the world.
Perceptual organization and perceptual constancy are essential processes for 
giving order to incoming sensory input. Gestalt psychologists proposed many prin-
ciples that guide the organization of sensory input into meaningful holistic objects, 
such as the figure-and-ground and closure principles. In addition to organizing the 
sensory input into meaningful objects, the brain must maintain constancy in its 
perception of the world. To achieve perceptual constancy, the brain uses top-down 
processing to change sensory input to maintain an object’s normal size, shape, 
brightness, and color in our perception of the object.
Depth perception (the judgment of the distance of objects from us) is a crucial 
part of visual perception. To judge depth, the brain uses information from binocu-
lar cues, such as retinal disparity, and monocular cues, such as linear perspective 
and interposition. The brain’s perception of object size is related to its distance 
from us. As an object gets farther away from us, its size on our retina decreases. 
However, sometimes the brain applies this geometric principle relating retinal 
image size to distance and creates a misperception (an illusion). The Ponzo, cor-
ridor, Müller-Lyer, Turning the Tables, and moon illusions are good examples of 
such misapplication. In each case, the brain incorrectly judges that the two objects 
involved in the illusion, which have equal retinal image sizes, are at varying dis-
tances, and so it mistakenly makes the object judged to be farther away larger in 
our perception.
ConceptCheck | 3
➤	 explain why perceptual processing requires both bottom-up and top-down 
processing.
➤	 explain how the top-down processing involved in context effects on percep-
tion is similar to that involved in using the Gestalt organizational principle 
of closure.
➤	 explain why seeing one of your professors in a local grocery store makes it 
more difficult to recognize her.
➤	 explain why the brain’s application of the geometric relationship between 
retinal image size of an object and its distance from us leads the brain to 
create the ponzo, Müller-Lyer, and moon illusions.

Study Guide
135
Chapter Key Terms
You should know the definitions of the following key terms from the chapter. 
they are listed in the order in which they appear in the chapter. For those you do 
not know, return to the relevant section of the chapter to learn them. When you 
think that you know all of the terms, complete the matching exercise based on 
these key terms.
absolute threshold
signal detection theory
difference threshold
Weber’s law
Stevens’s power law
sensory adaptation
wavelength
amplitude
frequency
transduction
accommodation
nearsightedness
farsightedness
retina
blindsight
rods
cones
fovea
dark adaptation
trichromatic theory
additive mixtures
subtractive mixtures
complementary colors
opponent-process theory
hair cells
nerve deafness
conduction deafness
place theory
frequency theory
volley principle
sensation
perception
bottom-up processing
top-down processing
perceptual set
contextual effect
figure-and-ground principle
closure
subjective contour
perceptual constancy
depth perception
retinal disparity
linear perspective
interposition
Key Terms Exercise
Identify the correct key term for each of the 
following definitions. the answers to this 
exercise follow the answers to the Concept 
Checks at the end of the chapter.
  1.	 The focusing of light waves from objects 
of different distances directly on the retina.
	 	
 
  2.	 A visual problem in which the light waves 
from nearby objects are focused behind the 
retina, blurring the images of these objects.
	 	
 
  3.	 A theory of color vision which assumes 
that there are three types of cones, each 
activated only by wavelength ranges 
of light corresponding roughly to blue, 
green, and red.
	 	
 
  4.	 The brain’s use of knowledge, beliefs, 
and expectations to interpret sensory 
information.
	 	
 
  5.	 The Gestalt perceptual organizational 
principle that the brain completes 
incomplete figures to form meaningful 
objects.
	 	
 
  6.	 Our sensitivity to unchanging and repeti-
tious stimuli disappears over time.
	 	
 

136  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
  7.	 Hearing loss created by damage to one of 
the structures in the ear responsible for 
carrying the auditory information to the 
inner ear.
	 	
 
  8.	 The number of times a waveform cycles 
in 1 second.
	 	
 
  9.	 The perceived magnitude of a stimulus 
is equal to its actual physical intensity 
raised to a constant power, and this con-
stant power is different for each type of 
sensory judgment.
	 	
 
10.	 The minimum difference between two 
sensory stimuli detected 50 percent of  
the time.
	 	
 
11.	 Wavelengths of light that when added 
together produce white.
	 	
 
12.	 A theory of pitch perception which 
assumes that the frequency of the sound 
wave is mimicked by the firing rate of the 
entire basilar membrane.
	 	
 
13.	 A line or shape that is perceived to be 
present but does not really exist. The 
brain creates it during perception.
	 	
 
14.	 The perceptual stability of the size, shape, 
brightness, and color for familiar objects 
seen at varying distances, different 
angles, and under different lighting  
conditions.
	 	
 
15.	 The process by which the rods and cones, 
through internal chemical changes, 
become more and more sensitive to light 
in dim light conditions.
	 	
 
Practice Test Questions
the following are practice multiple-choice 
test questions on some of the chapter 
content. the answers are given after the 
Key terms exercise answers at the end of 
the chapter. If you guessed or incorrectly 
answered a question, restudy the relevant 
section of the chapter.
  1.	 The amount of energy in a sensory stimu-
lus detected 50 percent of the time is 
called the ______.
a.	 difference threshold
b.	absolute threshold
c.	 false alarm rate
d.	miss rate
  2.	 If a person is using a very strict criterion 
for a signal detection task, the false alarm 
rate will be ______, and the miss rate will 
be ______.
a.	 high; high
b.	high; low
c.	 low; high
d.	low; low
  3.	 According to Weber’s law, if c = 1/50, then 
the difference threshold for a standard 
stimulus of 100 units would be ______.
a.	 1
b.	2
c.	 5
d.	10
  4.	 Red wavelengths of light are ______, and 
violet wavelengths of light are ______.
a.	 long; long
b.	long; short
c.	 short; long
d.	short; short
  5.	 The rods in the retina are responsible for 
______ vision, and the cones are respon-
sible for ______ vision.
a.	 color; dim light
b.	bright light; dim light
c.	 color; bright light
d.	dim light; color

Study Guide  |  137
  6.	 According to the opponent-process 
theory of color vision, if you stared at a 
blue circle for a while and then looked at 
a white surface, you would see a circular 
______ afterimage.
a.	 blue
b.	green
c.	 yellow
d.	black
  7.	 Transduction of sound waves into neural 
impulses is performed by the ______.
a.	 eardrum
b.	oval window
c.	 malleus, incus, and stapes
d.	hair cells in the basilar membrane
  8.	 The best explanation for how we perceive 
low pitches (< 500 Hz) is the ______ theo-
ry, and the best explanation for how we 
perceive high pitches (> 5,000 Hz) is the 
______ theory.
a.	 place; place
b.	place; frequency
c.	 frequency; place
d.	frequency; frequency
  9.	 Perceptual set is a good example of ______.
a.	 the figure-ground principle
b.	perceptual constancy
c.	 bottom-up processing
d.	top-down processing
10.	 Which of the following is a binocular 
depth cue?
a.	 linear perspective
b.	interposition
c.	 retinal disparity
d.	all of the above
11.	 What is the purpose of transduction?
a.	 increasing the intensity of a stimulus 
so it is easier for the brain to detect
b.	translating physical energy into neural 
signals that the brain can understand
c.	 determining whether or not a stimulus 
is detectable
d.	integrating visual signals with auditory 
signals
12.	 Damage to the hair cells in the cochlea 
causes ______ deafness, and ______ occurs 
when light waves from distant objects 
come into focus in front of the retina.
a.	 nerve; nearsightedness
b.	conduction; nearsightedness
c.	 nerve; farsightedness
d.	conduction; farsightedness
13.	 Even though the image of your dog on 
your retina changes as your dog runs to 
fetch a stick, you do not perceive your 
dog as getting smaller. Which process of 
perception explains this phenomenon?
a.	 perceptual set
b.	perceptual constancy
c.	 dark adaptation
d.	accommodation
14.	 Perceiving either a vase or two facial 
silhouettes looking at each other was 
used to illustrate the Gestalt principle of 
______; perceiving two ambiguous charac-
ters numerically as 13 or alphabetically as 
the letter B was used to illustrate ______.
a.	 closure; subjective contours
b.	figure and ground; contextual effects
c.	 closure; contextual effects
d.	figure and ground; subjective contours
15.	 Although Henry’s watchband was bother-
ing him when he first put it on, a short 
while later he did not even notice he was 
wearing it. This illustrates ______.
a.	 accommodation
b.	sensory adaptation
c.	 subliminal perception
d.	perceptual constancy
Chapter Concept Check Answers
Concept Check | 1
• The two types of threshold were given sta-
tistical definitions because the experimental 
data did not permit an absolute definition. 

138  |  Chapter 3  |  SENSATION ANd PERCEPTION
There was no none-to-all point of change in 
the results that were observed when psy-
chophysical researchers attempted to mea-
sure the absolute and difference thresholds.
• In switching from a very lax to a very strict 
decision criterion, a person’s false alarm 
rate would go down and the miss rate 
would go up. These changes would be due 
to the person’s changing from saying “yes” 
most of the time to saying “no” most of  
the time.
• A really large constant fraction in Weber’s 
law would indicate that difference judg-
ments for that type of sensory judgment 
are not very good; a larger proportion of 
the standard stimulus is necessary for a  
difference to be perceived.
• It is adaptive for the exponent to be greater 
than 1 for dangerous physical energy forms 
because we would then perceive weak 
input of that type to be much more intense 
than it really is. This would possibly allow 
us to escape before being exposed to more 
intense energy of that type.
Concept Check | 2
• In nearsightedness, we have difficulty view-
ing distant objects because their images 
come into focus in front of the retina; in 
farsightedness, we have difficulty viewing 
near objects because their images come 
into focus behind the retina. The focusing 
problems could be due to defects in the 
lens or the shape of the eyeball.
• After staring at the flag with alternating 
yellow and white stripes and a block of 
green in the middle, the yellow, white, and 
green parts of the three opponent-process 
systems would be fatigued and thus unable 
to oppose the blue, black, and red parts 
of these systems when you stared at the 
white sheet of paper. Thus, instead of see-
ing white, you would see an afterimage of a 
flag with alternating blue and black stripes 
and a block of red in the middle. Once the 
opposing parts of the three systems recov-
ered, the flag afterimage would disappear, 
and you would see the white surface.
• Longer wavelengths lead to lower frequen-
cies because such wavelengths can only 
cycle a small number of times per second. 
Similarly, shorter wavelengths lead to  
higher frequencies because they can cycle 
more times per second.
• Neither theory by itself can explain how 
we hear the entire range of pitches, 20 to 
20,000 Hz, because each theory is unable 
to explain pitch perception for a particu-
lar part of this range. Place theory cannot 
explain how we perceive low pitches  
(< 500 Hz) because there are no places of 
maximal firing along the basilar membrane 
for these frequencies. The firing rate of the 
entire membrane mimicks these frequen-
cies. Similarly, frequency theory cannot 
explain how we perceive high pitches, 
those greater than 5,000 Hz, because there 
is a physiological limit on the firing rate 
for cells. Even if the volley principle is 
employed, this limit is about 5,000 times 
per second. This means that the hair cells 
could not generate firing rates to match 
the high frequencies.
Concept Check | 3
• Perceptual processing requires both types 
of processing because without bottom-up 
processing you would have nothing to per-
ceive and without top-down processing you 
would have no knowledge to use to inter-
pret the bottom-up input.
• The similarity is that, in both cases, the 
brain uses top-down processing to com-
plete the perception. In context effects, the 
brain uses the present context to complete 
the perception by determining what would 
be meaningful in that particular context. In 
closure, the brain uses the incomplete part 
of an object to determine what the remain-
ing part should be in order for it to be a 
meaningful object.
• It is more difficult to recognize your profes-
sor because she is in a very different con-
text. Your brain is thrown for a “perceptual 
loop” because she doesn’t fit in this context 
(outside the classroom). This is why it takes 

Study Guide  |  139
your brain longer to find the relevant  
top-down knowledge.
• The retinal image sizes of the two objects 
in each case are equal because the two 
objects are actually equal in size and are 
equidistant from us. Available distance 
cues, however, lead the brain to believe 
mistakenly that one of the two objects in 
each case is farther away. Therefore, the 
brain enlarges the size of the object that it 
thinks is more distant because this would 
have to be the case in order for the geo-
metric relationship between retinal image 
size and distance from us to hold. For 
example, in the Ponzo illusion, the linear 
perspective distance cue leads the brain to 
think that the top horizontal bar is farther 
away. Because the two horizontal bars have 
identical retinal image sizes, the brain then 
uses the geometric relationship and mistak-
enly creates an illusion by making the top 
bar larger in our perception.
Answers to Key Terms Exercise
  1.	 accommodation
  2.	 farsightedness
  3.	 trichromatic theory
  4.	 top-down processing
  5.	 closure
  6.	 sensory adaptation
  7.	 conduction deafness
  8.	 frequency
  9.	 Stevens’s power law
10.	 difference threshold
11.	 complementary colors
12.	 frequency theory
13.	 subjective contour
14.	 perceptual constancy
15.	 dark adaptation
Answers to Practice Test Questions
  1.	 b; absolute threshold
  2.	 c; low; high
  3.	 b; 2
  4.	 b; long; short
  5.	 d; dim light; color
  6.	 c; yellow
  7.	 d; hair cells in the basilar membrane
  8.	 c; frequency; place
  9.	 d; top-down processing
10.	 c; retinal disparity
11.	 b; translating physical energy into neural 
signals that the brain can understand
12.	 a; nerve; nearsightedness
13.	 b; perceptual constancy
14.	 b; figure and ground; contextual effects
15.	 b; sensory adaptation

Learning
 LEARNING THROUGH 
CLASSICAL CONDITIONING
The Elements and Procedures 
of Classical Conditioning
General Learning Processes in 
Classical Conditioning
 LEARNING THROUGH 
OPERANT CONDITIONING
Learning Through 
Reinforcement and 
Punishment
General Learning Processes in 
Operant Conditioning
Partial-Reinforcement 
Schedules in Operant 
Conditioning
Motivation, Behavior, and 
Reinforcement
 BIOLOGICAL AND COGNITIVE 
ASPECTS OF LEARNING
Biological Preparedness in Learning
Latent Learning and Observational 
Learning
4

141
o
ur ability to learn seems boundless. We continue to learn new things every 
day, and we continually use the products of our past learning. Our learn-
ing affects how we perceive, remember, think, and behave. In this chapter, 
we will focus on what psychologists have learned about how we learn.
In general, two types of psychologists—behavioral psychologists and cognitive 
psychologists—have studied learning, and they have gone about their research 
in very different ways. Behavioral psychologists have focused on the learning of 
associations through classical conditioning and operant conditioning. Classical 
conditioning involves learning associations between events in our environment, 
such as that the smell of the turkey roasting in the oven signals that a delicious 
meal will follow. Operant conditioning focuses on learning associations between 
our behavior and its environmental consequences, such as that additional study-
ing usually leads to better grades. Cognitive psychologists studying learning are 
interested in the more complex type of learning involved in human memory—how 
we encode information into our memory system, store it over time, and later 
retrieve it for use. A cognitive psychologist would be interested in how you learn 
the information in this textbook and what type of study technique would lead to 
the best memory for this information.
In this chapter, we will first focus on what behavioral psychologists have 
discovered about learning associations through classical conditioning and oper-
ant conditioning. Then we will consider some of the biological constraints upon 
such learning and also begin a discussion of the cognitive approach to learning  
(covered in detail in the next chapter, on how we remember).
Learning Through Classical Conditioning
Does the name “Pavlov” ring a bell? If you understand this really bad joke, then you 
are already somewhat familiar with classical conditioning—learning that one 
stimulus signals the arrival of another stimulus. A stimulus (plural: stimuli) is any 
sight, sound, smell, taste, or body sensation that a human or animal can perceive. 
You know from Chapter 1 that Pavlov’s dogs salivated to the sound of a tone (the 
first stimulus) because they learned to expect food in their mouth (the second 
stimulus) after hearing the tone. This may not sound like the research of a Nobel 
Prize–winning scientist, but it was important work that had a great impact on 
our understanding of how we learn. Classical conditioning is sometimes referred 
to as Pavlovian conditioning because Pavlov was the first researcher to study this 
type of learning systematically. So, let’s take a closer look at Pavlov’s research to 
gain an understanding of classical conditioning and its importance in learning.
The Elements and Procedures  
of Classical Conditioning
Ivan Pavlov was a Russian physiologist who won a Nobel Prize 
in 1904 for his earlier work on the physiology of digestion. 
Pavlov studied the digestive processes of dogs. During these 
➤	 classical conditioning  Acquiring 
a new response (the conditioned 
response) to a previously neutral 
stimulus (the conditioned stimulus) 
that reliably signals the arrival of 
an unconditioned stimulus.

142  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
experiments, the dogs were strapped into har-
nesses and had tubes inserted in their cheeks to 
measure salivation, the initial step in the diges-
tive process. Pavlov had cleverly found a way to 
divert the saliva so that it was excreted through 
the dogs’ cheeks. As part of this research, the 
dogs were given food (meat powder), and then 
the amount of saliva excreted was measured. 
During this research, Pavlov made an acciden-
tal discovery. He noticed that the dogs started 
to salivate before the meat powder was even 
put in their mouths. For example, the dogs 
salivated when they heard the footsteps of his 
assistants bringing the meat powder. Pavlov 
wanted to know why, and this became the focus 
of his research for the remainder of his career. 
So what exactly did he do?
Unconditioned stimulus (UCS) and unconditioned response (UCR).  
First, let’s consider why the dogs salivated when the meat powder was put in their 
mouths. This is a reflexive response—when food is put in your mouth, you sali-
vate. Dogs do it, I do it, you do it. This is called a reflex—a stimulus-response pair 
(food in the mouth and salivation) in which the stimulus automatically elicits the 
response. The reflexive stimulus (food in the mouth) that elicits the automatic 
response (salivation) is referred to as the unconditioned stimulus (UCS), and 
the response automatically elicited by the UCS is referred to as the uncondi-
tioned response (UCR). The key word is “unconditioned.” This means that no 
learning was necessary for this stimulus (the food, in our example) to elicit the 
response (salivation, in our example). It’s a naturally occurring reflex. Now let’s 
examine how such reflexes are used to achieve conditioning.
Conditioned stimulus (CS) and conditioned response (CR). Pavlov began 
with a neutral stimulus, a stimulus that does not naturally elicit the to-be-conditioned  
response. Pavlov used various neutral stimuli, such as a tone generated by a tuning 
fork, a light, and a touch on the leg, in his conditioning research on dogs (Pavlov, 
1927/1960). Before conditioning, his dogs did not auto-
matically salivate to these stimuli. They had to learn (be 
conditioned) to do this. To achieve such conditioning, 
the neutral stimulus (for example, a tone) is presented 
just before the UCS (the food). What does “just before” 
mean? This can mean a few seconds, but the optimal 
time interval between the onsets of the two stimuli is 
usually very brief, only a half-second to a full second 
(Mazur, 1998). In addition, the two stimuli usually need 
to be paired together for several trials. Nevertheless, there 
➤	 reflex  A stimulus-response pair in 
which the stimulus (the unconditioned 
stimulus) automatically elicits the 
response (the unconditioned response).
➤	 unconditioned stimulus (UCS)  The 
stimulus in a reflex that automatically 
elicits an unconditioned response.
➤	 unconditioned response (UCR)  The 
response in a reflex that is automatically 
elicited by the unconditioned stimulus.
Science Source
This is a photograph of Pavlov’s experimental labora-
tory. Look at the dog’s left cheek. Pavlov devised a 
surgical insert that diverted the dog’s saliva to exit its 
cheek so the saliva could be measured accurately.

Learning Through Classical Conditioning  |  143
are some exceptions in which classical 
conditioning can be obtained without 
a close temporal pairing of the CS and 
UCS and in only a small number of 
trials, sometimes only one. The pri-
mary exception is taste aversion, which 
we will discuss in the last section of 
this chapter when we discuss biologi-
cal constraints on learning.
Once the conditioning occurs 
(signaled in Pavlov’s research by the 
dog salivating to the sound of the 
tone before the meat powder is put 
into its mouth), the neutral stimu-
lus is referred to as the conditioned  
stimulus (CS). This previously neu-
tral stimulus (the tone) comes to elicit a new response (salivating) after repeated 
pairings with the unconditioned stimulus (meat powder in the dog’s mouth). The 
learned response (salivating) to the conditioned stimulus (the tone) is called the 
conditioned response (CR). The conditioned response (salivating) is a prepara-
tory response for the impending UCS (meat powder in the dog’s mouth).
To firm up your understanding of the elements of classical conditioning, let’s 
consider another example, conditioning of the eyeblink response, which is often 
used in classical conditioning research with humans. A neutral stimulus, such as a 
tone, is presented just before a mild puff of air to a person’s eye (the UCS). Initially, 
an eyeblink (the UCR) occurs reflexively in response to the air puff (the UCS), but 
with repeated pairings of the tone followed shortly thereafter by the air puff, the 
previously neutral stimulus (the tone) becomes the conditioned stimulus (the CS) 
and now elicits a new response, an eyeblink (the CR), in advance of the air puff. 
In this case, the eyeblink serves as an adaptive, defensive response to the air puff. 
Instead of an air puff to a person’s eye as the UCS, Clark Hull, a major behavioral 
psychologist in the first half of the twentieth century, used a slap to the face as the 
UCS and his graduate students at Yale University as his subjects (Gluck, Mercado, 
& Myers, 2011). Thus, Hull trained his students to blink in anticipation of a slap 
to the face. For obvious ethical reasons, researchers have not followed in Hull’s 
footsteps and do not use the face slap as the UCS in human classical conditioning.
Delayed and trace conditioning. The timing of the 
relationship of the CS and UCS is a critical factor in classi-
cal conditioning. The conditioned stimulus (the tone) is 
presented just before the UCS (the meat powder in Pavlov’s 
experiments) because the conditioning involves learning 
that this stimulus is a reliable predictor for the arrival  
of the UCS (Rescorla, 1988). Thus, presenting the UCS 
before the CS (called backward conditioning) or presenting  
➤	 conditioned stimulus (CS)  The stimulus 
that comes to elicit a new response (the 
conditioned response) in classical  
conditioning.
➤	 conditioned response (CR)  The 
response that is elicited by the condi-
tioned stimulus in classical  
conditioning.
Mark Stivers

144  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
the UCS and CS at the same time (called simultaneous conditioning) typically leads 
to no conditioning or poor conditioning because the CS in these two cases would 
not be a good predictor of the UCS (Powell, Symbaluk, & MacDonald, 2002). The CS 
has to clearly predict the UCS by being presented first or conditioning usually will 
not occur. There are two ways to present the CS first: delayed and trace conditioning.
In delayed conditioning, the CS remains on until after the UCS is presented, so 
that the two stimuli occur at the same time. The tone would be turned on and not 
turned off until after the meat powder was placed in the dog’s mouth. This proce-
dure is called “delayed” because turning off (taking away) the CS is delayed until after 
the UCS starts. In trace conditioning, there is a period of 
time between turning off the CS and the onset of the UCS 
(called the trace interval), when neither stimulus is present. 
In Pavlov’s case, this would mean turning the tone on and 
then off, waiting a brief period of time, and then putting 
the meat powder in the dog’s mouth. For the association 
between stimuli to be learned, the animal or human (dog 
in Pavlov’s case) must maintain a “memory trace” of the CS 
(the tone) to pair with the later-occurring UCS (the meat 
powder). This is why it is called trace conditioning.
Delayed conditioning is the most effective procedure 
for classical conditioning, but trace conditioning can be 
almost as effective if the trace interval between stimuli is 
➤	 delayed conditioning  A classical  
conditioning procedure in which the 
conditioned stimulus precedes the 
unconditioned stimulus and remains 
present until after the unconditioned 
stimulus is presented so that the two 
stimuli occur together.
➤	 trace conditioning  A classical  
conditioning procedure in which the 
conditioned stimulus precedes the 
unconditioned stimulus but is removed 
before the unconditioned stimulus is 
presented so that the two stimuli do 
not occur together.
Clark Hull (standing with visor) supervising a classical conditioning experiment at Yale 
University in the 1920s. The seated graduate student is being conditioned to blink at the sound 
of a tone in anticipation of a slap to the face. Given that there is a brief interval between the 
tone and the slap to the face, this is an example of trace conditioning. Actually this particular 
graduate student, Ernest Hilgard, went on to become one of the most famous psychologists of 
the twentieth century.
Courtesy of Elizabeth Jecker (daughter of Ernest Hilgard)

Learning Through Classical Conditioning  |  145
very short (Powell, Symbaluk, & MacDonald, 2002). It also appears that for trace 
conditioning, processing by both the cerebellum and hippocampus is essential for 
successful conditioning whereas for delayed conditioning, only processing by the 
cerebellum is necessary (Clark & Squire, 1998). In trace conditioning, processing 
by the hippocampus is necessary to establish a memory trace of the CS so that it 
can be associated with the UCS following the trace interval (Bangasser, Waxler, 
Santollo, & Shors, 2006). In addition, it appears that delayed conditioning can be 
accomplished without conscious awareness of the temporal relationship between 
the CS and UCS, but trace conditioning cannot (Clark & Squire, 1998).
The entire classical conditioning process is diagrammed in Figure 4.1. Study 
the diagram to make sure you understand the four elements that are involved in 
classical conditioning—the UCS, UCR, CS (the former neutral stimulus), and CR. 
To ensure that you understand, next we’ll consider another famous example of 
classical conditioning, the Little Albert study.
The Little Albert study.  John Broadus Watson, an American psychologist in 
the early part of the twentieth century, was the founder of behavioral psychology 
(Watson, 1913, 1919). He was very impressed with classical conditioning and its 
potential use to make psychology an objective science of behavior. To examine the 
possible role of such conditioning in human emotional responses such as fear, 
Watson and his research assistant, Rosalie Rayner, conducted a study on an infant 
named Albert (Watson & Rayner, 1920). When the conditioning phase of the 
study began, Albert was 11 months old.
Let’s think about the Little Albert study in terms of the four elements of clas-
sical conditioning—UCS, UCR, CS, and CR. As a neutral stimulus, the researchers 
m Figure 4.1 | The Elements of Classical Conditioning | In classical condition-
ing, you start with a reflex—an unconditioned stimulus (UCS) that automatically elicits 
an unconditioned response (UCR). To condition a new response to a neutral stimulus, 
the neutral stimulus is presented just before the unconditioned stimulus. After several 
pairings, the neutral stimulus elicits a new response called the conditioned response 
(CR). The neutral stimulus is now referred to as the conditioned stimulus (CS).
Before Conditioning
During Conditioning trials
Present 
(which automatically elicits UCR) 
just before
Conditioned Stimulus (CS; former NS)
Conditioned Response (CR)
after Conditioning 
Unconditioned Stimulus (UCS)
Unconditioned Stimulus (UCS)
elicits
elicits
Unconditioned Response (UCR)
Neutral Stimulus (NS)
Neutral Stimulus (NS)
Does not elicit to-be-conditioned response

146  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
used a white laboratory rat. Albert was not afraid of the rat. In fact, when he saw 
the rat before the conditioning, he moved toward it and touched it. What was the 
reflex that Watson and Rayner used? While Albert was looking at the white rat, 
Watson quietly sneaked behind him with an iron bar and a hammer and clanged 
them together. Albert’s reflexive response, the UCR, was the fear-avoidance 
response (crying and trying to crawl away) to this unexpected loud noise, the 
UCS. Watson and Rayner paired the sight of the white rat (the neutral stimulus 
that became the CS) with the unexpected loud noise (the UCS) several times until 
the sight of the white rat started eliciting the fear-avoidance response (crying  
and trying to crawl away from the rat). It took only seven pairings.
This study was unethical, of course. Psychologists would not be allowed to con-
duct such a study today. Ironically, however, at that time Watson was criticized 
more by animal rights activists for his research with rats than he was for the Little 
Albert study (Buckley, 1989). Are you wondering what became of Albert? Sadly, no 
one knows (Harris, 1979). We do know that Watson and Rayner did not decondi-
tion Little Albert’s fear-avoidance response.
One of Watson’s former students, Mary Cover Jones, demonstrated that such 
a fear could be deconditioned (Jones, 1924). She deconditioned a preexisting 
fear of rabbits in a 3-year-old boy named Peter. In Chapter 10, we will discuss a 
behavioral therapy for treating fear disorders (called phobias) that is based upon 
Jones’s work. In addition, Elsie Bregman in 1934 showed that there could be lim-
its to conditioning such fear responses. In her study, she was unable to condition 
infants to fear inanimate objects such as wooden blocks and cloth curtains. These 
results suggest possible biological predispositions to learn certain fears more eas-
ily than others. We will return to this idea in the last section of this chapter in our 
discussion of biological constraints on learning.
It is important to realize that classical conditioning is not only involved in con-
ditioning negative emotional responses such as fear, but can also be used to develop 
In the photograph on the left, Little Albert did not display any fear of the white rat before the 
classical conditioning trials but rather attempted to play with it. However, following the condi-
tioning trials in which the sight of the white rat was paired with an unexpected loud noise, he 
acquired a fear response to the rat. In the second photograph, he is generalizing this conditioned 
fear response to a rabbit.
Archives of the History of American Psychology
Courtesy of Professor Benjamin Harris, 
University of New Hampshire

Learning Through Classical Conditioning  |  147
positive emotional responses to stimuli. For example, classical conditioning is used 
in advertising in order to condition positive attitudes and feelings toward products 
(Allen & Shimp, 1990; Grossman & Till, 1998; Olson & Fazio, 2001). Think about 
advertisements that pair celebrities with products. Pairing popular professional bas-
ketball players like Michael Jordan and LeBron James with Nike products in adver-
tisements is a good example. Both of these athletes were paid millions of dollars for 
their Nike endorsements. Why? The advertisers attempt to use our positive feelings 
about these celebrities to condition positive responses to their products. The celeb-
rity serves as the UCS, and the product as the CS. Advertising campaigns using this 
evaluative classical conditioning technique have proved very effective (Hofmann, De 
Houwer, Perugini, Baeyens, & Crombez, 2010). John Watson pioneered this type of 
advertising when he worked as a psychology consultant for the J. Walter Thompson 
advertising agency in New York following his dismissal from academics (Buckley, 
1989). Watson was forced to leave the academic life after he had an extramarital 
affair with his research assistant on the Little Albert study, Rosalie Rayner.
General Learning Processes  
in Classical Conditioning
We have seen how classical conditioning works: A new, learned response (the CR) 
is elicited by the CS in preparation for the arrival of the UCS. This response learn-
ing is also referred to as acquisition, acquiring a new response—the CR to the CS. 
But what happens after acquisition? Will this new response (fear-avoidance in the 
Little Albert study) be generalized to other stimuli (say, white rabbits) that are sim-
ilar to the CS (a white rat)? If so, can we learn to discriminate and respond this way 
only to specific stimuli (white rats)? Will this response (fear-avoidance) continue to 
occur when the CS (a white rat) is no longer paired with the UCS (the unexpected 
loud noise)? To answer such questions, we now turn to a discussion of the other 
general learning processes that follow acquisition in classical conditioning.
Extinction and spontaneous recovery.  What do you think would happen 
to the CR if the UCS no longer followed the CS? Would the CR now be 
“unlearned”? Remember that in classical conditioning the CS reliably signals that 
the UCS is coming. If the CS no longer serves this function, then the CR is no 
longer necessary so it is no longer made. No preparation is needed because the 
UCS is no longer presented. For example, in Pavlov’s work the dog would eventu-
ally stop salivating to the tone when the tone no longer signaled that the meat 
powder was coming. In the Little Albert study, Albert’s 
fear of a white rat would have diminished after it no lon-
ger signaled that the loud, unexpected noise was coming. 
This unlearning process is called extinction, the dimin-
ishing of the CR when the UCS no longer follows the CS.
A visual comparison of the acquisition and extinction 
processes is given in Figure 4.2 (a and b, page 148). The 
strength of the CR increases during acquisition, but it 
decreases during extinction. Note, however, that during  
➤	 acquisition (in classical conditioning)   
Acquiring a new response (the con-
ditioned response) to the conditioned 
stimulus.
➤	 extinction (in classical conditioning)   
The diminishing of the conditioned 
response when the unconditioned stimu-
lus no longer follows the conditioned 
stimulus.

148  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
the extinction process, the CR mysteriously increases somewhat in strength fol-
lowing a rest interval. This is called spontaneous recovery, a partial recovery in 
strength of the CR following a break during extinction trials (see Figure 4.2c). As 
extinction continues, however, the recovery observed following the rest intervals 
continues to decrease until it is minimized. For example, the dog would salivate 
very little or not at all to the tone, and Albert would show little or no fear of the 
white rat. The spontaneous recovery that occurs during the extinction process 
indicates, as Pavlov had concluded, that the CR may not be totally lost during 
extinction, but only greatly weakened or inhibited. Research since Pavlov’s time 
has demonstrated that this is indeed the case (Bouton, 1994; Rescorla, 1996).
Stimulus generalization and discrimination.  In 
addition to acquisition, extinction, and spontaneous recov-
ery, there are two other general learning processes involving 
the CR—stimulus generalization and discrimination. Let’s 
consider generalization first. After acquisition of a CR (sali-
vating) to a CS (a tone), we observe generalization. In stim-
ulus generalization, stimuli similar to the CS elicit the CR. 
The more similar the stimulus is to the CS, the stronger the 
response will be. Generalization is an adaptive process. 
Classical conditioning would not be a very useful type of 
learning if it only allowed us to learn relationships between 
m Figure 4.2 | Acquisition, Extinction, and Spontaneous Recovery | Panel 
(a) depicts the acquisition of the CR. Note that during acquisition, the UCS follows the 
CS on each trial. Acquisition of the CR is reflected in the increase in its strength across 
conditioning trials. Extinction is depicted in panel (b). On extinction trials, the UCS 
never follows the CS. This process is reflected in the decrease of the strength of the 
CR across extinction trials. Note, however, that when a break is taken during extinc-
tion training, there is a temporary partial recovery in strength of the CR following the 
break, depicted in panel (c). This partial recovery is called spontaneous recovery.  
The amount of recovery lessens as extinction training continues.
Acquisition trials
(CS followed
by UCS)
Extinction trials
(CS only)
Extinction trials
(CS only)
continued
Spontaneous
recovery of CR
Break
(a)
(b)
(c)
Weak
Strong
Strength of CR
Time
➤	 spontaneous recovery (in classical  
conditioning)  A partial recovery in 
strength of the conditioned response  
following a break during extinction  
training.
➤	 stimulus generalization (in classical 
conditioning)  The elicitation of the 
conditioned response to stimuli that 
are similar to the conditioned stimulus. 
The more similar the stimulus is to the 
conditioned stimulus, the stronger the 
response.

Learning Through Classical Conditioning  |  149
specific stimuli. If a dog bites you, isn’t it more adaptive to generalize the fear- 
avoidance response to other dogs (especially dogs similar to the one that bit you)?
To understand generalization, let’s consider Pavlov’s research with dogs. Assume 
Pavlov classically conditioned a dog to give the salivary response to a tone with a 
pitch of 1,000 Hz. (Remember from Chapter 3 that this represents a sound wave that 
cycles 1,000 times per second.) To test for generalization, the CS (the 1,000 Hz tone)  
and the other stimuli (tones with higher and lower frequencies) are presented, but 
the UCS (the meat powder) does not follow any of them. The strength of the CR 
(the amount of salivation) to each of these stimuli is measured. So what would 
happen if a 1,025 Hz or a 975 Hz tone were presented? The dog would probably 
give a fairly strong salivary response to these tones because they are very similar to 
the original CS of 1,000 Hz. But the strength of the CR (the amount of salivation) 
would go down as the generalization test tones get farther away from the original 
CS of 1,000 Hz. This generalization function is illustrated in Figure 4.3. Ignore the 
discrimination function in the figure for now. We will discuss it shortly.
Notice how symmetric the generalization test results are around the original CS 
value (1,000 Hz) in Figure 4.3. This is because the generalization test tones could 
be varied symmetrically in frequency above and below the original CS tone. But 
think about the Little Albert study by Watson and Rayner. Their original CS was 
m Figure 4.3 | Stimulus Generalization and Discrimination | These are idealized 
stimulus generalization and discrimination results following classical conditioning of the 
salivary response (CR) in dogs to a tone of 1,000 Hz (CS). The strength of the CR to gener-
alization test stimuli (all tones except the 1,000 Hz tone) decreases as the similarity of the 
test stimulus to the original CS decreases. These generalization responses, however, can 
be extinguished through discrimination training in which the UCS (food) only follows the 
1,000 Hz tone. The CR to each of the other tones will be extinguished except for the tones 
so similar to the 1,000 Hz tone (975 Hz and 1,025 Hz) that the dog does not perceive them 
as different.
500
600
700
900
975
1100
1300
1500
1200
1000
1025
1400
800
Frequency of tone (in Hz)
Strength of CR
Strong
Weak
Discrimination
Generalization

150  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
a white rat. What do you think they used to test for gen-
eralization? They used other animals—a rabbit, as we’ve 
seen, and a dog (neither was white)—but they also used 
some less similar inanimate objects, including a bearded 
Santa Claus mask, a sealskin coat, human hair, a package 
of white cotton, and some wooden blocks. The generaliza-
tion stimuli did not vary symmetrically around the white rat, but the same pattern 
of generalization results were observed. As the generalization test stimuli became 
less similar to the CS (the white rat), the strength of the CR (the fear-avoidance 
response) decreased. The response to the other animals and the coat was stronger 
than the responses to the mask and hair. Similarly, the response to the white cotton 
was even less, and it was nonexistent for the toy blocks.
Sometimes we overgeneralize and need to narrow our responding to a specific 
stimulus or smaller set of stimuli. In the case of the dog bite, we might overgen-
eralize and fear any dog. This wouldn’t be rational, so we would need to learn to 
discriminate dogs who might bite us from those who would not. Such discrimina-
tion learning can be thought of as the opposite of generalization. Generalization 
leads to the CR being given to a broader set of stimuli; discrimination leads to the 
CR being given to a narrower set of stimuli. In classical conditioning, stimulus 
discrimination is the elicitation of the CR only by the CS or only by a small set 
of highly similar stimuli that includes the CS. In the dog bite example, this would 
be learning only to fear potentially dangerous dogs.
Discrimination training is used to teach stimulus discrimination. We will dis-
cuss the simplest case—learning to give the CR only to the original CS. This is the 
same procedure used to determine the sensory abilities of animals. In this type of 
discrimination training, the UCS follows only the original CS, the one stimulus to 
which you want the animal or human to respond (give the CR). None of the other 
stimuli used in the training are followed by the UCS. During discrimination train-
ing, you present many different stimuli numerous times, but the UCS only follows 
the original CS. What do you think happens? What normally happens to the CR 
when the UCS is removed in classical conditioning? It is extinguished. This is what 
discrimination training does; it diminishes the responding to the other stimuli.
Idealized results of stimulus discrimination training for a CS tone of 1,000 Hz  
in our Pavlovian classical conditioning example are shown in Figure 4.3 (page 149).  
As you can see, responding is centered at 1,000 Hz, as it is for the stimulus gen-
eralization results. However, unlike the generalization results, the responding 
following discrimination training is to a much narrower range of stimulus fre-
quencies. The animal has learned only to salivate to the 1,000 Hz tone and tones 
very similar to it (975 Hz and 1,025 Hz). Why does the animal salivate at all to any 
stimulus other than the 1,000 Hz tone? It wouldn’t if it had perfect pitch percep-
tion and could discriminate all frequencies, but it can’t. Thus, the animal salivates 
to this narrow range of frequencies because it has difficulty differentiating them. 
This is why discrimination training can be used to learn what nonverbal animals 
(and human infants) can discriminate. If they respond to stimuli the same way, 
then it is assumed that they cannot differentiate between the stimuli.
➤	 stimulus discrimination (in classical 
conditioning)  The elicitation of the 
conditioned response only by the con-
ditioned stimulus or only by a small set 
of highly similar stimuli that includes the 
conditioned stimulus.

Learning Through Classical Conditioning  |  151
Table 4.1    G eneral Learning Processes in Classical Conditioning
Learning Process
Explanation of Process
Acquisition
Acquiring a new response (the conditioned response) 
to the conditioned stimulus
Extinction
Diminishing of the conditioned response when the 
unconditioned stimulus no longer follows the condi-
tioned stimulus
Spontaneous recovery
Partial recovery in strength of the conditioned 
response following a break during extinction training
Stimulus generalization
Elicitation of the conditioned response by stimuli that 
are similar to the conditioned stimulus (the more simi-
lar, the stronger the response)
Stimulus discrimination
Elicitation of the conditioned response only by the 
conditioned stimulus or only by a small set of highly 
similar stimuli that includes the conditioned stimulus
All five of the general learning processes for classical conditioning are sum-
marized in Table 4.1. If any of these processes are not clear to you, restudy the 
discussions of those processes in the text and their visual depictions in Figures 4.2 
(page 148) and 4.3 (page 149) to solidify your understanding. You want to ensure 
that you understand these learning processes for classical conditioning, because 
they will be redefined for operant conditioning in the next section.
Section Summary
In this section, we discovered that one way we learn about the world is by noting 
associations between various stimuli in our environment. This is called classi-
cal conditioning. Classical conditioning occurs when a conditioned stimulus (CS) 
reliably predicts the arrival of an unconditioned stimulus (UCS), which reflexively 
elicits an unconditioned response (UCR). In Pavlov’s research, for example, a tone 
(CS) predicted the arrival of meat powder (UCS) that automatically elicited a sali-
vary response (UCR). The optimal way to pair the two stimuli together in classical 
conditioning is called delayed conditioning. The CS is presented shortly before the 
UCS, but the CS continues so that the two stimuli occur together (the tone is turned 
on and left on until the meat powder is put in the dog’s mouth). The learning is the 
acquisition of a new response, the conditioned response (CR) to the CS (the dog 
starts salivating to the sound of the tone).
Once this new response is acquired, it will be generalized to stimuli similar to the 
CS (tones similar in frequency to the particular tone used as the CS in conditioning). 
Although this generalization of the CR is an adaptive process, we can learn to dis-
criminate the CS (the particular tone used in conditioning) from other stimuli (tones) 
except those highly similar to the CS. In discrimination learning, we learn that the 
CS is the only stimulus that is followed by the UCS. When the UCS no longer fol-
lows a stimulus, the CR (salivation) is extinguished (no longer given). However, the 

152  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
CR temporarily increases in strength following breaks during the extinction process. 
This is known as spontaneous recovery and indicates that the CR may still be avail-
able in a weakened or inhibited form.
Learning Through Operant Conditioning
In the previous section, we described classical conditioning—learning about associa-
tions between stimuli in our environment. In this section, we will consider another 
important type of conditioning, operant conditioning—learning to associate 
behaviors with their consequences. Behaviors that are reinforced (lead to satisfy-
ing consequences) will be strengthened, and behaviors that are punished (lead to 
unsatisfying consequences) will be weakened. The behavior that is reinforced or 
punished is referred to as the operant response because it “operates” on the envi-
ronment by bringing about certain consequences. We are constantly “operating” on 
our environment and learning from the consequences of our behavior. For example, 
in meeting someone whom you like and want to date, 
your behavior (what you say and how you act) will either 
lead to satisfying consequences (a date) or unsatisfying 
consequences (no date). Satisfying consequences will lead  
you to act that way again in the future; unsatisfying  
consequences will lead you to change your behavior.
Research on how we learn associations between behav-
iors and their consequences started around the beginning 
➤	 operant conditioning  Learning to 
associate behaviors with their conse-
quences. Behaviors that are reinforced 
(lead to satisfying consequences) will 
be strengthened, and behaviors that are 
punished (lead to unsatisfying conse-
quences) will be weakened.
ConceptCheck | 1
➤	 at about the same time that pavlov accidentally discovered classical con-
ditioning and began studying it, an american graduate student at the 
University of pennsylvania, edwin twitmyer, was conducting his doctoral 
research (see twitmyer, 1974). twitmyer was examining the strength of the 
knee-jerk reflex and how this reflex might be affected by other physiological 
factors, such as clenching one’s fists. During some of his trials, a bell would 
ring to signal to the participant to clench his fists, then a hammer would 
strike the participant’s knee, the knee would jerk, and the amount of knee 
jerk would be measured. after many of these trials, twitmyer noticed that a 
participant’s knee might jerk before the hammer hit it. It jerked in response 
to the bell! Like pavlov, he had accidentally discovered a case of classical 
conditioning. Identify the UCS, UCr, CS, and Cr in this strange case of  
classical conditioning.
➤	 explain why Watson and rayner’s Little albert study is an example of the 
delayed conditioning procedure, not the trace conditioning procedure.
➤	 explain why generalization and discrimination can be thought of as 
opposites.
➤	 explain which other general learning process is used in discrimination training.

Learning Through Operant Conditioning  |  153
of the twentieth century. American psychologist Edward Thorndike studied the 
ability of cats and other animals to learn to escape from puzzle boxes (Thorndike, 
1898, 1911). In these puzzle boxes, there was usually only one way to get out (for 
example, pressing a lever would open the door). Thorndike would put a hungry 
animal in the box, place food outside the box (but in sight of the animal), and 
then record the animal’s behavior. If the animal pressed the lever, as a result of its 
behavior it would manage to escape the box and get the food (satisfying effects). 
The animal would tend to repeat such successful behaviors in the future when put 
back into the box. However, other behaviors (for example, pushing the door) that 
did not lead to escaping and getting the food would not be repeated.
Based on the results of these puzzle box experiments, Thorndike developed what 
he termed the law of effect—any behavior that results in satisfying consequences 
tends to be repeated, and any behavior that results in unsatisfying consequences 
tends not to be repeated. In the 1930s, B. F. (Burrhus Frederic) Skinner, the most 
influential of all behaviorists, redefined the law in more objective terms and 
started the scientific examination of how we learn through operant conditioning 
(Skinner, 1938). Let’s move on to Skinner’s redefinition and a description of how 
operant conditioning works.
Learning Through Reinforcement 
and Punishment
To understand how operant conditioning works, we  
first need to learn Skinner’s redefinitions of Thorndike’s 
subjective terms, “satisfying” and “unsatisfying” con-
sequences. A reinforcer is defined as a stimulus that 
➤	 law of effect  A principle developed by 
Edward Thorndike that says that any 
behavior that results in satisfying conse-
quences tends to be repeated and that 
any behavior that results in unsatisfying 
consequences tends not to be repeated.
➤	 reinforcer  A stimulus that increases the 
probability of a prior response.
Science Source
Edward Thorndike used puzzle boxes like the functional representation shown here in his clas-
sic learning studies with cats. The boxes varied in how difficult they were for the cats to escape 
from. The illustration shows one of the easier boxes—pulling on a looped string raised the bolt 
to open the door. More difficult boxes required the cat to make more than one response. The 
results of these puzzle box experiments led Thorndike to develop the law of effect.

154  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
increases the probability of a prior response, and a 
punisher as a stimulus that decreases the probability of 
a prior response. Therefore, reinforcement is defined 
as the process by which the probability of a response 
is increased by the presentation of a reinforcer follow-
ing the response, and punishment as the process by 
which the probability of a response is decreased by 
the presentation of a punisher following the response. 
“Reinforcement” and “punishment” are terms that refer 
to the process by which certain stimuli (consequences) change the probability of 
a behavior; “reinforcer” and “punisher” are terms that refer to the specific stimuli 
(consequences) that are used to strengthen or weaken the behavior.
Let’s consider an example. If you operantly conditioned your pet dog to sit by 
giving her a food treat each time she sat, the food treat would be the reinforcer, 
and the process of increasing the dog’s sitting behavior by using this reinforcer 
would be called reinforcement. Similarly, if you conditioned your dog to stop 
jumping on you by spraying her in the face with water each time she did so, the 
spraying would be the punisher, and the process of decreasing your dog’s jumping 
behavior by using this punisher would be called punishment.
Just as classical conditioning is best when the CS is presented just before the 
UCS, immediate consequences normally produce the best operant conditioning 
(Gluck, Mercado, & Myers, 2011). Timing affects learning. If there is a significant 
delay between a behavior and its consequences, conditioning is very difficult. 
This is true for both reinforcing and punishing consequences. The learner tends 
to associate reinforcement or punishment with recent behavior; and if there is 
a delay, the learner will have engaged in many other behaviors during the delay. 
Thus, a more recent behavior is more likely to be associated with the consequences,  
hindering the conditioning process. For instance, think about the examples we 
described of operantly conditioning your pet dog to sit or to stop jumping on you. 
What if you waited 5 or 10 minutes after she sat before giving her the food treat, 
or after she jumped on you before spraying her. Do you think your dog would 
learn to sit or stop jumping on you very easily? No, the reinforcer or punisher 
should be presented right after the dog’s behavior for successful conditioning.
Normally then, immediate consequences produce the best learning. However, 
there are exceptions. For example, think about studying now for a psychology 
exam in two weeks. The consequences (your grade on the exam) do not imme-
diately follow your present study behavior. They come two weeks later. Or think 
about any job that you have had. You likely didn’t get paid immediately. Typically, 
you are paid weekly or biweekly. What is necessary to overcome the need for 
immediate consequences in operant conditioning is for the learner to have the 
cognitive capacity to link the relevant behavior to the consequences regardless of 
the delay interval between them. If the learner can make such causal links, then 
conditioning can occur over time lags between behaviors and their consequences.
Positive and negative reinforcement and punishment.  Both reinforce-
ment and punishment can be either positive or negative, creating four new terms. 
➤	 punisher  A stimulus that decreases the 
probability of a prior response.
➤	 reinforcement  The process by which 
the probability of a response is 
increased by the presentation of a  
reinforcer. 
➤	 punishment  The process by which the 
probability of a response is decreased 
by the presentation of a punisher. 

Learning Through Operant Conditioning  |  155
Let’s see what is meant by each of these four new terms—
positive reinforcement, negative reinforcement, positive 
punishment, and negative punishment. To understand 
these terms, we first have to understand that positive and 
negative do not have their normal meanings in this con-
text. The word “positive” means that a stimulus is pre-
sented; the word “negative” means that a stimulus is 
removed. In both positive reinforcement and positive pun-
ishment, a stimulus is presented; in both negative rein-
forcement and negative punishment, a stimulus is 
removed. Next, we need to understand that there are two 
types of stimuli that could be presented or removed: appe-
titive and aversive stimuli. An appetitive stimulus is a 
stimulus that the animal or human finds pleasant (has an 
appetite for). An aversive stimulus is a stimulus that the 
animal or human finds unpleasant, the opposite of appetitive. Food, money, and 
good grades are examples of appetitive stimuli for most of us, and strong electric 
shock, bad grades, and sickness are examples of aversive stimuli for most people.
Now that we know what positive and negative mean, and the difference 
between appetitive and aversive stimuli, we can understand the meanings of 
positive and negative reinforcement and punishment. General explanations for 
each type of reinforcement and punishment are given in Figure 4.4. In positive 
reinforcement, an appetitive stimulus is presented, but in positive punishment, 
an aversive stimulus is presented. An example of positive reinforcement would be 
praising a child for doing the chores. An example of positive punishment would 
be spanking a child for not obeying the rules.
Similarly, in negative reinforcement and negative punishment, a stimulus 
is taken away. In negative reinforcement, an aversive stimulus is removed; in 
negative punishment, an appetitive stimulus is removed. An example of nega-
tive reinforcement would be taking Advil to get rid of a headache. The removal of 
the headache (an aversive stimulus) leads to continued Advil-taking behavior. An 
Positive
Negative
Reinforcement
Appetitive stimulus presented
Aversive stimulus removed
Punishment
Aversive stimulus presented
Appetitive stimulus removed
m Figure 4.4 | Positive and Negative Reinforcement and Punishment | “Positive” 
means that something is presented, and “negative” means that something is taken away. 
Reinforcement means that the behavior is strengthened, and punishment means that the behav-
ior is weakened. In positive reinforcement, an appetitive (pleasant) stimulus is presented, and in 
positive punishment, an aversive (unpleasant) stimulus is presented. In negative reinforcement, 
an aversive stimulus is removed, and in negative punishment, an appetitive stimulus is removed.
➤	 appetitive stimulus  A stimulus that is 
pleasant.
➤	 aversive stimulus  A stimulus that is 
unpleasant.
➤	 positive reinforcement  Reinforcement 
in which an appetitive stimulus is  
presented.
➤	 positive punishment  Punishment in 
which an aversive stimulus is presented. 
➤	 negative reinforcement  Reinforcement 
in which an aversive stimulus is 
removed.
➤	 negative punishment  Punishment in 
which an appetitive stimulus is removed.

156  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
example of negative punishment 
would be taking away a teenager’s 
driving privileges after she breaks 
curfew. The removal of the driving 
privileges (an appetitive stimulus) 
leads to better adherence to the 
curfew in the future.
In all of these examples, how-
ever, we only know if a stimulus 
has served as a reinforcer or a pun-
isher and led to reinforcement or 
punishment if the target behavior 
keeps occurring (reinforcement) or stops occurring (punishment). For example, 
the spanking would be punishment if the disobedient behavior stopped, and the 
praise reinforcement if the chores continued to be done. However, if the disobe-
dient behavior continued, the spanking would have to be considered reinforce-
ment; and if the chores did not continue to be done, the praise would have to be 
considered punishment. This is an important point. What serves as reinforcement 
or punishment is relative to each individual, in a particular context, and at a 
particular point in time. While it is certainly possible to say that certain stimuli 
usually serve as reinforcers or punishers, they do not inevitably do so. Think 
about money. For most people, $100 would serve as a reinforcer, but it might 
not for Bill Gates (of Microsoft), whose net worth is in the billions. Remember, 
whether the behavior is strengthened or weakened is the only thing that tells you 
whether the consequences were reinforcing or punishing, respectively.
Given the relative nature of reinforcement, it would be nice to have a way to 
determine whether a certain event would function as a reinforcer. The Premack 
principle provides us with a way to make this determination (Premack, 1959, 
1965). According to David Premack, you should view reinforcers as behaviors 
rather than stimuli (e.g., eating food rather than food). This enables the con-
ceptualization of reinforcement as a sequence of two behaviors—the behavior 
that is being reinforced followed by the behavior that is the reinforcer. But what 
is the principle? The principle is that the opportunity to perform a highly fre-
quent behavior can reinforce performing a less frequent behavior. For example, 
children typically spend more time watching television than doing homework. 
Thus, watching television could be used as a reinforcer for doing homework. In 
sum, the Premack principle allows us to identify potential reinforcers by focus-
ing on the relative probabilities of behaviors. To determine these probabilities, 
you observe how often the person or animal engages in various behaviors. The 
Premack principle has proved to be a very useful tool 
in applied work with clinical populations, situations in 
which normal reinforcers seem to have little effect, by 
enabling the identification of which behaviors will serve 
as reinforcers.
➤	 Premack principle  The principle that 
the opportunity to perform a highly 
frequent behavior can reinforce a less 
frequent behavior.
What type of operant conditioning is going on here? Be careful. Think 
about it from the perspectives of both the child and the parents. 
For the child, it’s positive reinforcement. The child is crying to get 
something pleasant (sleeping with the parents). For the parents, it’s 
negative reinforcement. They let the child sleep with them in order to 
remove something they find unpleasant, the crying.
© King Features Syndicate, Inc.

Learning Through Operant Conditioning  |  157
Primary and secondary reinforcers.  Behavioral psy-
chologists make a distinction between primary and sec-
ondary reinforcers. A primary reinforcer is innately 
reinforcing, reinforcing since birth. Food and water are 
good examples of primary reinforcers. Note that “innate-
ly reinforcing” does not mean “always reinforcing.” For 
example, food would probably not serve as a reinforcer 
for someone who has just finished eating a five-course 
meal. Innately reinforcing only means that the reinforc-
ing property of the stimulus does not have to be learned. 
In contrast, a secondary reinforcer is not innately reinforcing, but gains its rein-
forcing property through learning. Most reinforcers fall into this category. 
Examples of secondary reinforcers are money, good grades, and applause. Money 
would not be reinforcing to an infant, would it? Its reinforcing nature has to be 
learned through experience.
Behaviorists have employed secondary reinforcers in token economies in a 
variety of institutional settings, from schools to institutions for the mentally chal-
lenged (Allyon & Azrin, 1968). Physical objects, such as plastic or wooden tokens, 
are used as secondary reinforcers. Desired behaviors are reinforced with these 
tokens, which then can be exchanged for other reinforcers, such as treats or privi-
leges. Thus, the tokens function like money in the institutional setting, creating a 
token economy. A token economy is an example of behavior modification—the 
application of conditioning principles, especially operant principles, to eliminate 
undesirable behavior and to teach more desirable behavior. Like token economies, 
other behavior modification techniques have been used successfully for many other 
tasks, from toilet training to teaching children who have autism (Kazdin, 2001).
Reinforcement without awareness.  According to behavioral psychologists, 
reinforcement should strengthen operant responding even when people are 
unaware of the contingency between their responding and the reinforcement. 
Evidence that this is the case comes from a clever experiment by Hefferline, 
Keenan, and Harford (1959). Participants were told that the purpose of the study 
was to examine the effects of stress on body tension and that muscular tension 
would be evaluated during randomly alternating periods of harsh noise and 
soothing music. Electrodes were attached to different areas of the participants’ 
bodies to measure muscular tension. The duration of the harsh noise, however, 
was not really random. Whenever a participant contracted a very small muscle  
in their left thumb, the noise was terminated. This muscular response was imper-
ceptible and could only be detected by the electrode mounted at the muscle. Thus, 
the participants did not even realize when they contracted this muscle.
There was a dramatic increase in the contraction of this muscle over the course 
of the experimental session. The participants, however, did not realize this, and 
none had any idea that they were actually in control of the termination of the 
harsh noise. This study clearly showed that operant conditioning can occur with-
out a person’s awareness. It demonstrated this using negative reinforcement (an 
➤	 primary reinforcer  A stimulus that is 
innately reinforcing. 
➤	 secondary reinforcer  A stimulus that 
gains its reinforcing property through 
learning. 
➤	 behavior modification  The application 
of classical and operant conditioning 
principles to eliminate undesirable 
behavior and to teach more desirable 
behavior.

158  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
increase in the probability of a response that leads to the removal of an aversive 
stimulus). The response rate of contracting the small muscle in the left thumb 
increased and the aversive harsh noise was removed when the response was made. 
Such conditioning plays a big role in the development of motor skills, such as 
learning to ride a bicycle or to play a musical instrument. Muscle movements 
below our conscious level of awareness but key to skill development are positively 
reinforced by our improvement in the skill.
Pessiglione et al. (2008) provide a more recent demonstration of operant con-
ditioning without awareness for a decision-making task. In brief, participants 
learned to choose contextual cues predicting monetary reinforcement (winning 
money) relative to those predicting punishment (loss of money) without con-
scious perception of these cues. Thus, they learned cue-outcome associations 
without consciously perceiving the cues. The procedure involved visual masking. 
When a visual stimulus is masked, it is exposed briefly (for maybe 50 millisec-
onds) and followed immediately by another visual stimulus that completely over-
rides it, thereby masking (preventing conscious perception) of the first stimulus.
In this experiment, after being exposed to a masked contextual cue (an abstract 
novel symbol masked by a scrambled mixture of other cues) flashed briefly on 
a computer screen, a participant had to decide if he wanted to take the risky 
response or the safe response. The participant was told that the outcome of the 
risky response on each trial depended upon the cue hidden in the masked image. 
A cue could either lead to winning £1 (British currency), losing £1, or not winning 
or losing any money. If the participant took the safe response, it was a neutral out-
come (no win or loss). Participants were also told that if they never took the risky 
response or always took it, their winnings would be nil and that because they could 
not consciously perceive the cues, they should follow their intuition in making their 
response decisions. All of the necessary precautions and assessments to ensure that 
participants did not perceive the masked cues were taken. Overall, participants won 
money in the task, indicating that the risky response was more frequently chosen 
following reinforcement predictive cues relative to punishment predictive cues.
In addition to this recent demonstration of operant conditioning without 
awareness, there have been several demonstrations of classical conditioning with-
out awareness (Clark & Squire, 1998; Knight, Nguyen, & Bandetti, 2003; Morris, 
Öhman, & Dolan, 1998; Olsson & Phelps, 2004). Using delayed conditioning, Clark 
and Squire, for example, successfully conditioned the eyeblink response in both 
normal and amnesic participants who were not aware of the tone–air puff relation-
ship. Participants watched a movie during the conditioning trials, and postcondi-
tioning testing indicated that they had no knowledge of the CS-UCS association.
General Learning Processes  
in Operant Conditioning
Now that we have a better understanding of how we learn through reinforcement 
and punishment, let’s consider the five general learning processes in operant  

Learning Through Operant Conditioning  |  159
conditioning that we discussed in the context of classical 
conditioning—acquisition, extinction, spontaneous recovery, 
generalization, and discrimination. Because some of the exam-
ples of these processes are concerned with operant conditioning 
of animals, it’s important to know how such animal research is 
conducted. It’s also important to learn how to read cumulative 
records because they are used to measure and depict operant 
responding in the general learning processes.
For control purposes, behavioral psychologists conduct 
much of their laboratory research on nonhuman animals. In 
conducting their experiments with animals, operant condi-
tioning researchers use operant chambers, which resemble 
large plastic boxes. These chambers are far from simple boxes, 
though. Each chamber has a response device (such as a lever 
for rats to press or a key for pigeons to peck), a variety 
of stimulus sources (such as lamps behind the keys to 
allow varying colors to be presented on them), and food 
dispensers. Here, “key” refers to a piece of transpar-
ent plastic behind a hole in the chamber wall. The key 
or other response device is connected to a switch that 
records each time the animal responds. Computers record the 
animal’s behavior, control the delivery of food, and maintain 
other aspects of the chamber. Thus, the operant chamber is 
a very controlled environment for studying the impact of the 
animal’s behavior on its environment. Operant chambers are 
sometimes referred to as “Skinner boxes” because B. F. Skinner 
originally designed this type of chamber.
What if the animal in the chamber does not make the 
response that the researcher wants to condition (for example, 
what if the pigeon doesn’t peck the key)? This does happen, 
but behavioral researchers can easily deal with this situation. 
They use what they call shaping; they train the animal 
to make the response they want by reinforcing successive 
approximations of the desired response. For example, consider 
the key-peck response for a pigeon. The researcher would 
watch the behavior of the pigeon and would begin the shaping 
by reinforcing the pigeon for going in the general area of  
the key. This would get the pigeon near the key. The researcher 
would then reinforce the pigeon any time its head was in  
the area of the key. The pigeon would keep its head near the 
key and would probably occasionally touch the key. Then the 
researcher would reinforce the pigeon for touching the key. 
As you can see, by reinforcing such successive approximations 
of the desired behavior, the animal can be shaped to make 
➤	 shaping  Training a human or animal to 
make an operant response by reinforc-
ing successive approximations of the 
desired response.
B. F. Skinner and one of his operant 
conditioning chambers, a “Skinner 
box.” When the rat presses the 
lever, an electrical relay system is 
activated and reinforcement (such 
as a food pellet) is delivered. In 
addition to a lever, operant cham-
bers may contain other response 
mechanisms, such as a key for a 
pigeon to peck.
Craig Swanson perspicuity.com
Nina Leen/Time-Life Pictures/Getty Images

160  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
the desired response. This training by successive 
approximations is just as successful with humans and is 
also used to shape human operant responding.
Responding in an operant conditioning experiment 
is depicted in a cumulative record. A cumulative record 
is a record of the total number of responses over time. 
As such, it provides a visual depiction of the rate of 
responding. Figure 4.5 shows how to read a cumulative 
record. The slope of the record indicates the response 
rate. Remember that the record visually shows how the responses cumulate over  
time. If the animal is making a large number of responses per unit of time  
(a fast response rate), the slope of the record will be steep. The cumulative total 
is increasing quickly. When there is no responding (the cumulative total remains 
the same), the record is flat (no slope). As the slope of the record increases, the 
response rate gets faster. Now let’s see what cumulative records look like for some 
of the general learning processes.
Acquisition, extinction, and spontaneous recovery.  The first general 
process, acquisition, refers to the strengthening of the reinforced operant 
response. What would this look like on the cumulative record? Figure 4.6(a) 
shows that the response rate increases over time. This looks very similar to the 
shape of the acquisition figure for classical conditioning (see Figure 4.2,  
page 148), but remember the cumulative record is reporting cumulative respond-
ing as a function of time, not the strength of the response. Thus, extinction, the 
diminishing of the operant response when it is no longer reinforced, will look dif-
ferent than it did for classical conditioning. Look at Figure 4.6(b). The decreasing 
slope of the record indicates that the response is being extinguished; there are 
fewer and fewer responses over time. The response rate is diminishing. When the 
➤	 cumulative record  A record of the total 
number of operant responses over time 
that visually depicts the rate of responding. 
➤	 acquisition (in operant conditioning)   
The strengthening of a reinforced  
operant response.
➤	 extinction (in operant conditioning)  The 
diminishing of the operant response 
when it is no longer reinforced.
 Figure 4.5 | How to Understand a 
Cumulative Record | By measuring how 
responses cumulate over time, a cumulative  
record shows the rate of responding. When 
no responses occur, the record is flat (has 
no slope). As the number of responses 
increases per unit of time, the cumulative 
total rises more quickly. The response rate is 
reflected in the slope of the record. The faster 
the response rate, the steeper the slope of 
the record.
Slow rate
Fast rate
Cumulative responses
Time

Learning Through Operant Conditioning  |  161
record goes to flat, extinction has occurred. However, as in classical conditioning, 
there will be spontaneous recovery, the temporary recovery of the operant 
response following a break during extinction training. This would be indicated in 
the record by a brief period of increased responding following a break in extinc-
tion training. However, the record would go back to flat (no responding) as extinc-
tion training continued. This is shown in Figure 4.6(c).
Let’s think about acquisition, extinction, and spontaneous recovery with an 
example that is familiar to all of us—vending machines. We learn that by put-
ting money into a certain vending machine, we can get a candy bar. We acquire 
the response of inserting money into this particular machine. One day, we put in 
money, but no candy comes out. This is the case the next few times we visit the 
machine. Soon, we stop putting our money in the machine. Our responding is 
being extinguished. However, after a few more days (a break), we go back and try 
again. This is comparable to spontaneous recovery. We hope the machine has been 
repaired, and we’ll get that candy bar. If so, our response rate will return to its previ-
ous level; if not, our response rate will continue along the extinction trail.
Discrimination and generalization.  Now let’s consider discrimination and 
generalization. To understand discrimination in operant conditioning, we need 
first to consider the discriminative stimulus—the stimulus that has to be present 
for the operant response to be reinforced or punished. The discriminative stimu-
lus “sets the occasion” for the response to be reinforced 
or punished (rather than elicits the response as in classi-
cal conditioning). Here’s an example. Imagine a rat in an 
experimental operant chamber. When a light goes on 
and the rat presses the lever, food is delivered. When the 
light is not on, pressing the lever does not lead to food 
delivery. In brief, the rat learns the conditions under 
which pressing the lever will be reinforced with food. 
➤	 spontaneous recovery (in operant con-
ditioning)  The temporary recovery of 
the operant response following a break 
during extinction training. 
➤	 discriminative stimulus (in operant con-
ditioning)  The stimulus that has to be 
present for the operant response to be 
reinforced.
Cumulative responses
Acquisition
Extinction
Extinction trials
Acquisition trials
(a)
(b)
Break
(c)
Time
Spontaneous
recovery
 Figure 4.6 | Cumulative Record 
Illustrations of Acquisition, 
Extinction, and Spontaneous 
Recovery | (a) This is an acquisition cumu-
lative record; the responding rate increases 
as learning occurs so the cumulative record 
has a fairly steep slope reflecting this 
increase. (b) This is an extinction cumulative 
record; the responding rate has essentially 
fallen to zero. A flat cumulative record indi-
cates extinction. (c) This is an example of 
spontaneous recovery—a burst of respond-
ing following a break in extinction training. 
As the extinction training continues, the 
record will return to flat (no responding).

162  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
This is stimulus discrimination—learning to give the 
operant response (pressing the lever) only in the pres-
ence of the discriminative stimulus (the light). A high 
response rate in the presence of the discriminative stimu-
lus (the light) and a near-zero rate in its absence would 
indicate that the discrimination was learned.
Now we can consider stimulus generalization, giving 
the operant response in the presence of stimuli similar to 
the discriminative stimulus. Let’s return to the example 
of the rat learning to press the lever in the presence of a 
light. Let’s make the light a shade of green and say that 
the rat learned to press the lever only in the presence of that particular shade of 
green light. What if the light were another shade of green, or a different color, 
such as yellow? Presenting similar stimuli (different-colored lights) following 
acquisition constitutes a test for generalization. The extent of responding to a 
generalization stimulus reflects the amount of generalization to that stimulus. As 
with classical conditioning (see Figure 4.3, page 149), there is a gradient of general-
ization in operant conditioning—as the generalization test stimulus becomes less 
similar to the discriminative stimulus, the response rate for the operant response 
goes down. A stimulus discrimination function similar to the one observed for 
classical conditioning would also be observed after additional discrimination 
training that involved teaching discrimination of the discriminative stimulus (the 
light) from other stimuli of the same class (lights of different colors).
Stimulus discrimination and generalization in operant conditioning are not 
confined to using simple visual and auditory stimuli such as colored lights and 
varying tones, even for animals other than humans. For example, Watanabe, 
Sakamoto, and Wakita (1995) showed that pigeons could successfully learn to 
discriminate paintings by Monet, an impressionist, and Picasso, a cubist; and 
that following this training, they could discriminate paintings by Monet and 
Picasso that had never been presented. Furthermore, the pigeons showed gener-
alization from Monet’s paintings to paintings by other impressionists (Cezanne 
and Renoir) or from Picasso’s paintings to paintings by other cubists (Braque 
and Matisse). In addition, Porter and Neuringer (1984) have reported successful 
learning of musical discrimination between selections by Bach versus Stravinsky 
by pigeons followed by generalization to music by similar composers. Otsuka, 
Yanagi, and Watanabe (2009) similarly showed that even rats could learn this 
musical discrimination between selections by Bach versus those by Stravinsky. 
Thus, like humans, other animals can clearly learn to discriminate complex visual 
and auditory stimuli and then generalize their learning to similar stimuli.
All five of the general learning processes for operant conditioning are summa-
rized in Table 4.2. If any of these processes are not clear to you, restudy the dis-
cussions of those processes in the text to solidify your understanding. Also make 
sure that you understand how these learning processes in operant conditioning 
differ from those in classical conditioning (summarized in Table 4.1, page 151).
➤	 stimulus discrimination (in operant 
conditioning)  Learning to give the oper-
ant response only in the presence of the 
discriminative stimulus. 
➤	 stimulus generalization (in operant con-
ditioning)  Giving the operant response 
in the presence of stimuli similar to the 
discriminative stimulus. The more similar 
the stimulus is to the discriminative  
stimulus, the higher the operant 
response rate. 

Learning Through Operant Conditioning  |  163
Now that we understand the general processes involved in operant condition-
ing, we need to consider the question of how operant responding is maintained 
following acquisition. Will the responding be maintained if it is reinforced only 
part of the time? If so, what’s the best way to do this? Such questions require an 
understanding of what are called reinforcement schedules.
Partial-Reinforcement Schedules  
in Operant Conditioning
The reinforcement of every response is called a continuous schedule of rein-
forcement. But we aren’t reinforced for every response in everyday life. In real 
life, we experience partial schedules of reinforcement, in which a response 
is only reinforced part of the time. Partial-reinforcement schedules lead to the 
partial-reinforcement effect. Responses that are reinforced according to a par-
tial schedule rather than a continuous schedule are more resistant to extinction. 
Incidentally, Skinner accidentally discovered the partial-reinforcement effect 
when he was short of food reinforcement for his experi-
mental work and was forced to use partial reinforcement 
instead of continuous reinforcement (Skinner, 1956). To 
understand this effect, we first need to consider the four 
major aspects of partial-reinforcement schedules—ratio, 
interval, fixed, and variable.
Partial-reinforcement schedules can be based on either 
the number of responses made or on the amount of time 
that has elapsed. A ratio schedule is based on the number 
of responses made, and an interval schedule is based on 
the amount of time that has elapsed. In addition, the 
➤	 continuous schedule of reinforcement   
Reinforcing the desired operant 
response each time it is made. 
➤	 partial schedule of reinforcement   
Reinforcing the desired operant 
response only part of the time.
➤	 partial-reinforcement effect  The finding 
that operant responses that are rein-
forced on partial schedules are more 
resistant to extinction than those rein-
forced on a continuous schedule.
Table 4.2    G eneral Learning Processes in Operant Conditioning
Learning Process
Explanation of Process
Acquisition
Strengthening of a reinforced operant response
Extinction
Diminishing of the operant response when it is no  
longer reinforced
Spontaneous recovery
Temporary recovery in the operant response rate  
following a break during extinction training
Stimulus generalization
Giving the operant response in the presence of stimuli 
similar to the discriminative stimulus (the more simi-
lar, the higher the response rate)
Stimulus discrimination
Learning to give the operant response only in the 
presence of the discriminative stimulus

164  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
number of responses or the amount of 
elapsed time can be fixed or variable. In a 
fixed schedule, the number of responses  
required for a ratio schedule or the 
amount of time needed for an interval 
schedule is fixed. Similarly, for a vari-
able schedule, the number of responses 
required for a ratio schedule and amount 
of time for an interval schedule varies 
on each trial. In summary, there are four 
types of partial schedules—fixed ratio, 
variable ratio, fixed interval, and variable 
interval. Let’s look first at ratio schedules.
Ratio schedules.  In a fixed-ratio 
schedule, a reinforcer is delivered after a 
fixed number of responses are made. The 
number of responses must be greater 
than one. (A fixed-ratio schedule that only 
required one response to get a reinforcer 
would be a continuous schedule of rein-
forcement). In a laboratory experiment, 
for example, a rat might have to press the 
lever 10 times (the fixed ratio) before the 
delivery of a reinforcer (usually food). To 
get another reinforcer, 10 more presses 
would be necessary, and so on. A good example from everyday life is piecework in a 
factory in which a worker has to make a certain number of items (say two wallets) 
before receiving any pay. The worker makes two wallets and then receives a certain 
amount of money. Then he or she must make two more to be paid that amount of 
money again. Just as the rat has to make responses (press the lever), the worker has 
to make responses (in this case, make actual products) to get reinforced.
In a variable-ratio schedule, the number of responses it takes to obtain a rein-
forcer varies on each trial but averages to be a certain number across trials. The 
human, rat, or other animal never knows exactly how many responses will be nec-
essary to get the next reinforcer. A rat might have to press a lever 10 times to get 
a reinforcer, then 21 times, then 6 times, and so on. The 
exact number of responses necessary to get a reinforcer 
varies. A good example in everyday life is the way a slot 
machine is programmed. The person playing the slot 
machine knows that it will eventually pay off but does 
not know how many responses (insertions of money into 
the slot machine) are necessary to get that payoff.
Ratio schedules lead to high rates of responding 
because the number of responses determines reinforce-
ment; the more they respond, the more they are reinforced.  
➤	 fixed-ratio schedule  A partial schedule 
of reinforcement in which a reinforcer 
is delivered each time a fixed number 
of responses is made. The fixed number 
can be any number greater than one. 
➤	 variable-ratio schedule  A partial 
schedule of reinforcement in which the 
number of responses it takes to obtain a 
reinforcer varies on each trial but aver-
ages to a set number across trials.
John McPherson/Universal Press UClick

Learning Through Operant Conditioning  |  165
Cumulative records for the two ratio schedules are given in Figure 4.7. The slopes 
for the two ratio schedules are steep, which indicates a high rate of responding. 
Look closely after each reinforcement presentation (indicated by a tick mark), 
and you will see very brief pauses after reinforcement, especially for the fixed-ratio 
record. These pauses indicate that the animal took a short break from responding 
following the reinforcement. These pauses occur more often for the fixed-ratio 
schedule because the number of responses that must be made to get another rein-
forcer is known. Thus, the animal or human can rest before starting to respond 
again. These pauses get longer as the fixed number of responses gets larger.
Interval schedules.  Now let’s consider interval schedules. Do you think the 
cumulative records for the two interval schedules will have steep slopes like the two 
ratio schedules? Will there be any flat sections in the record indicating no 
responding? Let’s see. In a fixed-interval schedule, a reinforcer is delivered 
following the first response after a set interval of time has elapsed. Please note that 
the reinforcement does not automatically appear after the fixed interval of time has 
elapsed; the reinforcement merely becomes obtainable after the fixed interval. A 
response must be made in order to get the reinforcement. Let’s consider an example. 
We could fix the time interval at one minute for our example of a rat pressing a lever 
in an operant chamber. This means that a food pellet would be delivered following 
the first lever press after one minute had elapsed. After another minute elapsed 
following the response and another lever press was made, another reinforcer would 
be delivered. This pattern would continue—one minute elapses, a response is made, 
a reinforcer is given. Before predicting what the cumulative 
record for this type of schedule should look like, let’s think 
about a fixed-interval schedule example with students.
In most of your classes, you are given periodic scheduled 
exams (for example, an exam every four weeks). To under-
stand how such periodic exams represent a fixed-interval 
 Figure 4.7 | Cumulative 
Records for Fixed-Ratio and 
Variable-Ratio Schedules of 
Partial Reinforcement | Both 
ratio schedules lead to high rates of 
responding as indicated by the steep 
slopes of the two cumulative records. 
Each tick mark indicates when a rein-
forcer was delivered. As you can see, 
the tick marks appear regularly in the 
record for the fixed-ratio schedule, 
but irregularly in the record for the 
variable-ratio schedule. A fixed-ratio 
schedule leads to short pauses after 
reinforcement, but these pauses don’t 
occur as often for a variable-ratio 
schedule.
Cumulative responses
Variable ratio
Reinforcer given
Time
Fixed ratio
➤	 fixed-interval schedule  A partial sched-
ule of reinforcement in which a reinforcer 
is delivered after the first response is 
given once a set interval of time has 
elapsed.

166  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
schedule, think of studying as the targeted response, and 
an acceptable grade on the exam as the reinforcer. Think 
about how much you would study during each of the four-
week intervals before each test. Think about the average 
study behavior across students in the class for each day 
during that four-week interval. There probably wouldn’t 
be much studying during the first week or two, and the 
amount of study would increase dramatically (cramming) right before each exam. 
Think about what the cumulative record for this sort of responding would look like. 
There would be long periods with little responding (essentially flat sections) right 
after each exam, and then there would be a dramatic burst of responding (a steep 
slope) right before each exam. Now look at the record for the fixed-interval schedule 
in Figure 4.8. It looks just like this. This is also what the record would look like for 
a rat pressing a lever on this type of schedule for a food reinforcer.
Now imagine that you are the teacher of a class in which students had this 
pattern of study behavior. How could you change the students’ study behavior 
to be more regular? The answer is to use a variable-interval schedule in which a 
reinforcer is delivered following a response after a different time interval on each 
trial (in our example, each exam), but the time intervals across trials average to be 
a set time. This would translate in our example to unscheduled surprise exams. 
Think about how students’ study behavior would have to change to do well on 
the exams with this new schedule. Students would have to study more regularly 
because a test could be given at any time. Their studying would be steadier over 
each interval. They wouldn’t have long periods of little or no studying. Now look 
at the cumulative record for the variable-interval schedule in Figure 4.8. The flat 
sections appearing in the fixed-interval schedule are gone. The slope of the record 
indicates a steady rate of responding (studying). Why? The answer is simple—the 
length of the interval varies across trials (between exams in the example). It might 
be very brief or very long. The students don’t know. This is why the responding 
(studying) becomes steady.
Fixed interval
Reinforcer given
Variable interval
Cumulative responses
Time
 Figure 4.8 | Cumulative 
Records for Fixed-Interval and 
Variable-Interval Schedules of 
Partial Reinforcement | As in 
Figure 4.7 (page 165), the tick marks 
indicate when reinforcers were deliv-
ered for each of the two schedules. 
The flat sections following reinforce-
ments for the fixed-interval schedule 
indicate periods when little or no 
responding occurred. Such pauses 
do not occur for a variable-interval 
schedule. A variable-interval schedule 
leads to steady responding.
➤	 variable-interval schedule  A partial 
schedule of reinforcement in which 
the time that must elapse on each trial 
before a response will lead to the deliv-
ery of a reinforcer varies from trial to 
trial but averages to a set time across 
trials.

Learning Through Operant Conditioning  |  167
The four types of partial-reinforcement schedules and their respective effects 
on response rate are summarized in Table 4.3. As you review the information in 
this table for each type of schedule, also review the cumulative record for the 
schedule in either Figure 4.7 (page 165) or 4.8 to see visually the impact of that 
type of schedule upon responding.
Let’s compare the cumulative records for the four types of partial-reinforcement 
schedules given in Figures 4.7 (page 165) and 4.8. What conclusions can we draw? 
First, ratio schedules lead to higher rates of responding than interval schedules. 
Their slopes are much steeper. This is because ratio schedules depend on respond-
ing, and interval schedules depend on time elapsing. Second, variable schedules lead 
to fewer breaks (periods during which no responding occurs) after reinforcements 
than fixed schedules. This is because with variable schedules it is not known how 
many responses will have to be made or how much time will have to elapse before 
the next reinforcement.
Now let’s think about partial-reinforcement schedules in terms of a general 
learning process—extinction. Remember the partial-reinforcement effect that we 
described at the beginning of this section—partial schedules of reinforcement 
are more resistant to extinction than are continuous schedules. This means that 
responding will not be extinguished as quickly after using one of the partial 
schedules as it would be with a continuous schedule. Obviously, it is easier to 
extinguish the response if the reinforcement had been given continuously for 
every response in the past. If a response is made and doesn’t get reinforced, the 
responder knows immediately something is wrong because they have always 
been reinforced after each response. With partial schedules, if a response is made 
and doesn’t get reinforced, the responder doesn’t know that anything is wrong 
Table 4.3   Four Partial-Reinforcement Schedules and Their Effects 
on Response Rate
Schedule
Effect on Response Rate
Fixed-ratio (reinforcer is delivered 
after a fixed number of responses are 
made)
High rate of responding with pauses after 
receiving reinforcement
Variable-ratio (reinforcer is delivered 
after a variable number of responses 
are made)
High rate of responding with fewer 
pauses after receiving reinforcement 
than for a fixed-ratio schedule
Fixed-interval (reinforcer is delivered 
after the first response is given once a 
fixed interval of time has elapsed)
Little or no responding followed by a 
high rate of responding as the end of 
the interval nears
Variable-interval (reinforcer is deliv-
ered after the first response is given 
once a variable interval of time has 
elapsed)
Steady rate of responding during the 
interval

168  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
because they have not been reinforced for every response. Thus, it will take longer 
before extinction occurs for the partial schedules because it will take longer to 
realize that something is wrong.
Do you think there are any differences in this resistance to extinction between 
the various partial schedules of reinforcement? Think about the fixed schedules 
versus the variable schedules. Wouldn’t it be much more difficult to realize that 
something is wrong on a variable schedule? On a fixed schedule, it would be easy 
to notice that the reinforcement didn’t appear following the fixed number of 
responses or fixed time interval. On a variable schedule, however, the disappear-
ance of reinforcement would be very difficult to detect because it’s not known 
how many responses will have to be made or how much time has to elapse. 
Think about the example of a variable-ratio schedule with the rat pressing a 
lever. Because there is no fixed number of responses that have to be made, the 
rat wouldn’t realize that its responding was being extinguished. It could be that 
the number of lever presses necessary to get the next reinforcement is very large. 
Because of such uncertainty, the variable schedules are much more resistant to 
extinction than the fixed schedules.
Motivation, Behavior, and Reinforcement
We have just learned about how reinforcement works and that partial- 
reinforcement schedules are powerful. But what initiates our behavior and 
guides it toward obtaining reinforcement? The answer is motivation, the set of 
internal and external factors that energize our behavior and direct it toward goals. 
Its origin is the Latin word movere, meaning to set in motion. Motivation moves 
us toward reinforcement by initiating and guiding our goal-directed behavior. 
There are several explanations of how motivation works. We will first consider a 
few general theories of motivated behavior and then a distinction between two 
types of motivation and reinforcement, extrinsic versus intrinsic.
Theories of motivation.  One explanation of motivation, drive-reduction  
theory, proposes that first, a bodily need (such as hunger) creates a state of bodily 
tension called a drive; then, motivated behavior (seeking food) works to reduce this 
drive by obtaining reinforcement (food) to eliminate this need and return the body 
to a balanced internal state. Drives are disruptions of this balanced bodily state. We 
are “pushed” into action by these unpleasant drive states. They motivate our behav-
ior to reduce the drive. Drive-reduction theory does a 
good job of explaining some of our motivated behaviors, 
especially those concerned with biological needs, such as 
hunger and thirst; but it cannot explain all motivated 
behavior. Our behaviors are clearly motivated by factors 
other than drive reduction. Even eating and drinking 
aren’t always cases of drive-reduction motivation. What if 
you accidentally run into someone that you really want to 
date and she/he asks you to lunch, but you had eaten a 
➤	 motivation  The set of internal and exter-
nal factors that energize our behavior 
and direct it toward goals.
➤	 drive-reduction theory  A theory of moti-
vation that proposes that our behavior 
is motivated to reduce drives (bodily 
tension states) created by unsatisfied 
bodily needs to return the body to a  
balanced internal state.

Learning Through Operant Conditioning  |  169
full lunch 15 minutes earlier? You would probably eat another lunch, wouldn’t 
you? We eat for reasons other than hunger. Similarly, I’m sure that you often drink 
beverages without being truly thirsty. And is it really a “thirst” for knowledge that 
motivates your study behavior? A complementary theory, the incentive theory of 
motivation, has been proposed to account for such behavior.
In contrast to being “pushed” into action by internal drive states, the incen-
tive theory of motivation proposes that we are “pulled” into action by incentives, 
external environmental stimuli that do not involve drive reduction. The source 
of the motivation, according to incentive theory, is outside the person. Money 
is an incentive for almost all of us. Good grades and esteem are incentives that 
likely motivate much of your behavior to study and work hard. Incentive theory 
is much like operant conditioning. Your behavior is directed toward obtaining 
reinforcement.
Another explanation of motivation, arousal theory, extends the importance 
of a balanced internal environment in drive-reduction theory to include our 
level of physiological arousal and its regulation. According to arousal theory, 
our behavior is motivated to maintain an optimal level of arousal, which var-
ies within individuals (Zuckerman, 1979). When below the optimal level, our 
behavior is motivated to raise our arousal to that level. We seek stimulation. We 
might, for example, go see an action movie. If overaroused, then our behavior is 
motivated to lower the arousal level. We seek relaxation, so we might take a nap 
or a quiet walk. So in arousal theory, motivation does not always reduce arousal 
as in drive-reduction theory, but rather regulates the amount of arousal (not too 
much, not too little).
In addition, arousal theory argues that our level of 
arousal affects our performance level, with a certain 
level being optimal. Usually referred to as the Yerkes-
Dodson law because Robert Yerkes and James Dodson 
(1908) originally proposed it, this relationship between 
level of arousal and performance quality is rather simple. 
Shown in Figure 4.9, it is an inverted U–shaped relation-
ship. Increased arousal will aid performance to a point 
(the optimal amount of arousal), after which further 
arousal impairs performance. Think about exams. You 
need to be aroused to do well on them; but if you are too 
aroused, your performance will be negatively affected.
To solidify your understanding of these three theories 
of motivation, they are summarized in Table 4.4.
Extrinsic motivation versus intrinsic motivation.  
Motivation researchers make a distinction between 
extrinsic motivation, the desire to perform behavior to 
obtain an external reinforcer or to avoid an external aver-
sive stimulus, and intrinsic motivation, the desire to 
perform a behavior for its own sake. In cases of extrinsic 
➤	 incentive theory  A theory of motiva-
tion that proposes that our behavior is 
motivated by incentives, external stimuli 
that we have learned to associate with 
reinforcement.
➤	 arousal theory  A theory of motivation 
that proposes that our behavior is moti-
vated to maintain an optimal level of 
physiological arousal
➤	 Yerkes-Dodson law  A law describing 
the relationship between the amount of 
arousal and the performance quality on 
a task—increasing arousal up to some 
optimal level increases performance 
quality on a task, but increasing arousal 
past this point is detrimental to  
performance. 
➤	 extrinsic motivation  The desire to  
perform a behavior for external  
reinforcement.
➤	 intrinsic motivation  The desire to  
perform a behavior for its own sake

170  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
Low
high
Arousal level
Performance quality
high
Low
Point of optimal
arousal
 Figure 4.9 | The Yerkes-Dodson Law | 
The Yerkes-Dodson law is very straightforward. 
As arousal increases, the quality of performance 
increases—up to the point of optimal arousal. 
Further increases in arousal are detrimental to 
performance.
motivation, reinforcement is not obtained from the behavior, but is a result of the 
behavior. In intrinsic motivation, the reinforcement is provided by the activity 
itself. Think about what you are doing right now. What is your motivation for 
studying this material? Like most students, you want to do well in your psychol-
ogy class. You are studying for an external reinforcer (a good grade in the class), 
so your behavior is extrinsically motivated. If you enjoy reading about psychology 
and studying it for its own sake and not to earn a grade (and I hope that you do), 
then your studying would be intrinsically motivated. It is not an either-or situa-
tion. Both types of motivation are probably involved in your study behavior, but 
the contribution of each type varies greatly for each student.
The reinforcers in cases of 
extrinsic motivation—such as 
food, money, and awards—are 
called extrinsic reinforcers. They 
do not originate within the task 
itself, but come from an external 
source. In the case of intrinsic  
motivation, the enjoyment of 
the behavior and the sense of 
accomplishment from it are 
labeled intrinsic reinforcers. 
Paradoxically, researchers have 
found that extrinsic reinforce-
ment will sometimes undermine 
intrinsically motivated behavior 
Table 4.4   Theories of Motivation
Theory
Explanation
Drive-reduction 
theory
Our behavior is motivated to reduce 
drives (bodily tension states) created by 
unsatisfied bodily needs to return the 
body to a balanced internal state
Incentive theory
Our behavior is motivated by incentives 
(external stimuli that we have learned to 
associate with reinforcement)
Arousal theory
Our behavior is motivated to maintain an 
optimal level of physiological arousal

Learning Through Operant Conditioning  |  171
(Deci, Koestner, & Ryan, 1999; Lepper & Henderlong, 
2000; Tang & Hall, 1995). This is referred to as the 
overjustification effect, a decrease in an intrinsically 
motivated behavior after the behavior is extrinsically 
reinforced and then the reinforcement is discontinued.
The overjustification effect has been demonstrated for 
people of all ages, but let’s consider an example from a study with nursery-school 
children (Lepper, Greene, & Nisbett, 1973). The children liked drawing with 
felt-tip pens and did so during play periods (they were intrinsically motivated to 
engage in such drawing). Once this was established, some of the children were 
given extrinsic reinforcement—“Good Player” awards—for their drawing, under 
the guise that someone was coming to look at the children’s drawings. Other 
children were not given this extrinsic reinforcement for drawing. A week later, 
when no certificates were being offered for the felt-tip drawings, the children who 
had not been extrinsically reinforced continued to draw with the felt-tip pens, but 
those who had been reinforced spent much less time drawing, illustrating the 
overjustification effect. What leads to this effect?
In our example, extrinsic reinforcement (the awards for the children) provides 
unnecessary justification for engaging in the intrinsically motivated behavior 
(drawing with the felt-tip pens). A person’s intrinsic enjoyment of an activity pro-
vides sufficient justification for their behavior. With the addition of the extrinsic 
reinforcement, the person may perceive the task as overjustified and then attempt 
to understand their true motivation (extrinsic versus intrinsic) for engaging in 
the activity. It is this cognitive analysis of motivation that leads to the decrease 
in engaging in the activity. In this cognitive analysis, the person overemphasizes 
the importance of the extrinsic motivation to their behavior. For example, the 
person may perceive the extrinsic reinforcement as an attempt at controlling 
their behavior, which may lead them to stop engaging in the activity to maintain 
their sense of choice. A person might also think that the reinforcement makes the  
activity more like work (something one does for extrinsic reinforcement) than 
play (something one does for its own sake), lessening their enjoyment of the activ-
ity and leading them to cease engaging in it.
The overjustification effect indicates that a person’s cognitive processing 
influences their behavior and that such processing may lessen the effectiveness 
of extrinsic reinforcers. Don’t worry, though, about the overjustification effect 
influencing your study habits (assuming that you enjoy studying). Research has 
shown that performance-contingent extrinsic reinforcers (such as your grades, 
which are contingent upon your performance) are not likely to undermine study-
ing (Eisenberger & Cameron, 1996; Tang & Hall, 1995). This means that the 
extrinsic reinforcement is not likely to impact intrinsic motivation if the extrinsic 
reinforcement is dependent upon doing something well versus just doing it.
The overjustification effect imposes a limitation on operant conditioning and 
its effectiveness in applied settings. It tells us that we need to be careful in our 
use of extrinsic motivation so that we do not undermine intrinsic motivation. It 
➤	 overjustification effect  A decrease in 
an intrinsically motivated behavior after 
the behavior is extrinsically reinforced 
and then the reinforcement is  
discontinued.

172  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
also tells us that we must consider the possible cognitive consequences of using 
extrinsic reinforcement. In the next section, we continue this limitation theme by 
first considering some biological constraints on learning and then some cognitive 
research that shows that reinforcement is not always necessary for learning.
Section Summary
In this section, we learned about operant conditioning, in which the rate of a particular  
response depends on its consequences, or how it operates on the environment. 
Immediate consequences normally produce the best operant conditioning, but there are 
exceptions to this rule. If a particular response leads to reinforcement (satisfying con-
sequences), the response rate increases; if a particular response leads to punishment 
(unsatisfying consequences), the rate decreases. In positive reinforcement, an appetitive 
(pleasant) stimulus is presented, and in negative reinforcement, an aversive (unpleas-
ant) stimulus is removed. In positive punishment, an aversive (unpleasant) stimulus is 
presented; in negative punishment, an appetitive (pleasant) stimulus is removed.
In operant conditioning, cumulative records (visual depictions of the rate of 
responding) are used to report behavior. Reinforcement is indicated by an increased 
response rate on the cumulative record, and extinction (when reinforcement is no 
longer presented) is indicated by a diminished response rate leading to no respond-
ing (flat) on the cumulative record. As in classical conditioning, spontaneous 
recovery of the response (a temporary increase in response rate on the cumula-
tive record) is observed following breaks in extinction training. Discrimination and 
generalization involve the discriminative stimulus, the stimulus in whose presence 
the response will be reinforced. Thus, discrimination involves learning when the 
response will be reinforced. Generalization involves responding in the presence of 
stimuli similar to the discriminative stimulus—the more similar the stimulus, the 
greater the responding.
We learned about four different schedules of partial reinforcement—fixed ratio, 
variable ratio, fixed interval, and variable interval. All of these partial-reinforcement 
schedules, especially the variable ones, lead to greater resistance to extinction than 
does a continuous reinforcement schedule. This is the partial-reinforcement effect. 
In addition, we learned that ratio schedules lead to faster rates of responding than 
interval schedules and that variable schedules lead to fewer pauses in responding.
We also learned about motivation, which moves us toward reinforcement by initi-
ating and guiding our goal-directed behavior. We considered three theories of moti-
vation. First, drive-reduction theory proposes that drives—unpleasant internal states 
of tension—guide our behavior toward reinforcement so that the tension is reduced. 
Second, incentive theory asserts that our behavior is motivated by incentives— 
environmental stimuli that are associated with reinforcement. Third, arousal theory 
emphasizes the importance of physiological arousal and its regulation to motiva-
tion. Our behavior is motivated to maintain an optimal level of arousal. In addi-
tion, our level of arousal affects how well we perform tasks and solve problems. 
According to the Yerkes-Dodson law, increased arousal up to some optimal amount 
aids performance, but additional arousal is detrimental.
We also learned about the overjustification effect, in which extrinsic (external) 
reinforcement sometimes undermines intrinsic motivation, the desire to perform 
a behavior for its own sake. In the overjustification effect, there is a substantial 

Biological and Cognitive Aspects of Learning  |  173
decrease in an intrinsically motivated behavior after this behavior is extrinsically 
reinforced and then the reinforcement is discontinued. This effect seems to be the 
result of the cognitive analysis that a person conducts to determine the true moti-
vation for their behavior. The importance of the extrinsic reinforcement is over-
emphasized in this cognitive analysis, leading the person to stop engaging in the 
behavior. Thus, the overjustification effect imposes a cognitive limitation on operant 
conditioning and its effectiveness.
ConceptCheck | 2
➤	 explain what “positive” means in positive reinforcement and positive pun-
ishment and what “negative” means in negative reinforcement and nega-
tive punishment.
➤	 explain why it is said that the operant response comes under the control of 
the discriminative stimulus.
➤	 explain why a cumulative record goes to flat when a response is being 
extinguished.
➤	 explain why the partial-reinforcement effect is greater for variable schedules 
than fixed schedules of reinforcement.
➤	 explain why the overjustification effect is a cognitive limitation on operant 
conditioning.
Biological and Cognitive Aspects of Learning
In our discussion of the classical conditioning of emotional responses, we men-
tioned biological predispositions to learning certain fears. Humans seem pre-
pared to learn fears of animals or heights much easier than fears of toy blocks or 
curtains. Animals (snakes or spiders) are more dangerous to us than toy blocks, 
so such predispositions make evolutionary sense (Seligman, 1971). Are there 
any other predispositions that affect classical conditioning and are there any 
biological constraints on operant conditioning? In addition to addressing these 
questions about the biological aspects of learning, we will also discuss cognitive 
research on latent learning and learning through modeling that questions whether  
reinforcement is necessary for learning. Let’s start with the biological research.
Biological Preparedness in Learning
Do you have any taste aversions? Have you stopped eating a certain food or drink-
ing a certain liquid because you once got miserably sick after doing so? If you have 
a really strong aversion, you may feel ill even when you think about that food or 
drink. If the illness involved a specific food from a particular restaurant, you may 
have even generalized the aversion to the restaurant. Just as we are biologically 

174  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
prepared to learn certain fears more than others (Öhman & Mineka, 2001), we are 
also prepared to learn taste aversions. Our preparedness to learn to fear objects 
and situations dangerous to us (animals and heights) and to avoid foods and 
drinks that make us sick has adaptive significance. Such learning enhances our 
chances of survival. It makes biological sense then that we should be predisposed 
to such learning. To see how psychologists have studied such predispositions, let’s 
take a closer look at some of the early research on taste aversion.
Taste aversion.  John Garcia and his colleagues conducted some of the most 
important early research on taste aversion in the 1960s. Their research challenged 
the prevailing behaviorist argument that an animal’s capacity for conditioning is 
not limited by its biology (Garcia, 2003). Garcia benefited from an accidental dis-
covery while studying the effects of radiation on rats (Garcia, Kimeldorf, Hunt, & 
Davies, 1956). The rats would be moved from their home cages to experimental 
chambers for the radiation experiments. The radiation made the rats nauseous, 
and they would get very sick later back in their home cages. The rats, however, 
would still go back into the experimental chambers where they had been radiated, 
but they would no longer drink the water in these chambers. Why? The water 
bottles in the chambers were made of a different substance than those in the home 
cages—plastic versus glass. So, the water the rats drank in the experimental cham-
bers had a different taste than that in their home cages, and the rats had quickly 
learned an aversion to it. They paired the different taste with their later sickness. 
Rats do not have the cognitive capacity to realize that they were radiated and that 
it was the radiation that made them sick. Note that the rats did not get sick imme-
diately following the drinking or the radiation. The nausea came hours later. This 
means that learning a taste aversion is a dramatic counterexample to the rule that 
the UCS (sickness) in classical conditioning must immediately follow the CS (the 
different-tasting water) for learning to occur (Etscorn & Stephens, 1973). In fact, 
if the CS-UCS interval is less than a few minutes, a taste aversion will not be 
learned (Schafe, Sollars, & Bernstein, 1995). This makes sense because spoiled or 
poisoned food typically does not make an animal sick until a longer time period 
has elapsed.
So how did Garcia and his colleagues use these taste aversion results for rats 
to demonstrate biological preparedness in learning? Garcia and Koelling (1966) 
showed that the rats would not learn such aversions for just any pairing of cue 
and consequences. Those that seemed to make more biological sense (different-
tasting water paired with later sickness) were easily learned, but other pairings 
that didn’t make biological sense did not even seem learnable. For example, 
they examined two cues that were both paired with sickness through radiation:  
(1) sweet-tasting water, or (2) normal-tasting water accompanied by clicking 
noises and flashing lights when the rats drank. The rats who drank the sweet-
tasting water easily learned the aversion to the water, but the rats who drank 
normal-tasting water with the accompanying clicking noises and flashing lights 
did not. The rats just couldn’t learn to pair these environmental auditory and 

Biological and Cognitive Aspects of Learning  |  175
visual cues with their later sickness; this pairing didn’t make any biological sense 
to the rats. It’s important for rats to learn to avoid food and water that will make 
them sick, but in a natural environment, noises and lights don’t typically cause 
sickness for rats.
This doesn’t mean that other animals might not be predisposed to learn audi-
tory or visual aversions. For example, many birds, such as quail, seem to learn 
visual aversions rather easily. A clever study demonstrated this difference among 
animals in types of learning predispositions. In this study, both quail and rats 
drank dark blue, sour-tasting water prior to being made ill (Wilcoxon, Dragoin, 
& Kral, 1971). Later, the animals were given a choice between dark blue water 
that tasted normal and sour-tasting water that visually appeared normal. The 
birds only avoided the dark blue water, and the rats only avoided the sour-tasting 
water. In general, an animal is biologically predisposed to learn more easily those 
associations that are relevant to its environment and important to its survival 
(Staddon & Ettinger, 1989). Rats are scavengers, so they eat whatever is available. 
They encounter many novel foods, so it makes biological sense that they should 
be prepared to learn taste aversions easily to enhance their survival. Birds hunt by 
sight, so visual aversions are more relevant to their survival. There are also biologi-
cal preparedness effects on operant conditioning. We’ll take a look at one of the 
most important—instinctual drift.
Instinctual drift.  Keller and Marian Breland, two of Skinner’s former students, 
discovered an important biological preparedness effect on operant conditioning 
(Breland & Breland, 1961). The Brelands, who became animal trainers, employed 
operant conditioning to train thousands of animals to do all sorts of tricks. In 
As shown in these photos, pigs are biologically predisposed to root out their food, and raccoons are 
biologically predisposed to wash their food. Thus, when the Brelands operantly conditioned pigs and 
raccoons to pick up oversized coins and put them in a bank using food reinforcement, the animals  
sometimes “misbehaved” (reverted back to these instinctual responses that were part of their food 
gathering behaviors). The pigs pushed the coins with their snouts, and the raccoons rubbed the coins 
together in their forepaws. Reverting back to an innate, instinctual response from a learned operant 
response is called instinctual drift.
John Wilkinson; Ecoscene/Corbis.
tbkmedia.de/Alamy

176  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
doing this training, they discovered what has become 
known as instinctual drift—the tendency of an animal to 
drift back from a learned operant response to an object to 
an innate, instinctual response. For example, the Brelands 
used food reinforcement to train some animals to pick up 
oversized coins and put them in a bank. The Brelands did 
this with both pigs and raccoons. However, they observed 
that once the coins became associated with the food reinforcement, both types of 
animal drifted back to instinctual responses that were part of their respective food-
gathering behaviors. The pigs began to push the coins with their snouts, and the 
raccoons started to rub the coins together in their forepaws. These more natural 
responses interfered with the Brelands’ operant training.
The important point of these findings is that biologically instinctual responses 
sometimes limit or hinder our ability to condition other, less natural responses. The 
Brelands’ work demonstrates a biological preparedness effect upon operant condi-
tioning. Biological predispositions show that animals will learn certain associations 
(those consistent with their natural behavior) more easily than others (those less 
consistent with their natural behavior). Also note that this “misbehavior” of the pigs 
and the raccoons (their instinctual responses) continued without reinforcement 
from the trainers. In fact, it prevented the animals from getting reinforcement. This 
aspect of the Brelands’ work relates to the more general question of whether we can 
learn without reinforcement, which we will discuss in the next section.
Latent Learning and Observational Learning
Cognitively oriented learning researchers are interested in the mental processes 
involved in learning. These researchers have examined the question of whether we 
can learn without reinforcement in their studies of latent learning and observational 
learning. We’ll consider some of the classic research on these two types of learning.
Latent learning.  Think about studying for an exam in one of your courses. 
What you have learned is not openly demonstrated until you are tested on it by 
the exam. You learn, but you do not demonstrate the learning until 
reinforcement for demonstrating it (a good grade on the exam) is 
available. This is an example of what psychologists call latent learn-
ing, learning that occurs but is not demonstrated until there is 
incentive to do so. This is what Edward Tolman was examining in his 
pioneering latent-learning research with rats.
In this research, food-deprived rats had to negotiate a maze, and 
the number of wrong turns (errors) that a rat made was counted 
(Tolman & Honzik, 1930a, b, and c). In one study, there were three 
different groups of rats and about three weeks (one trial per day) 
of maze running. Food (reinforcement) was always available in the 
goal box at the maze’s end for one group but never available for 
another group. For the third group, there was no food available 
Edward Tolman
Archives of the History of American Psychology
➤	 instinctual drift  The tendency for an 
animal to drift back from a learned oper-
ant response to an innate, instinctual 
response to an object.
➤	 latent learning  Learning that occurs but 
is not demonstrated until there is incen-
tive to do so.

Biological and Cognitive Aspects of Learning  |  177
until the eleventh day. What happened? First, the 
number of wrong turns decreased over trials, but 
it decreased much more rapidly for the group who 
always got food reinforcement through the first 
10 trials. Second, the performance for the group 
that only started getting food reinforcement on 
the eleventh day improved immediately on the 
next day (and thereafter), equaling that of the 
group that had always gotten food reinforcement 
(see Figure 4.10). It appears that the third group 
of rats had been learning the maze all along, but 
did not demonstrate their learning until the food 
reinforcement was made available. The rats’ learn-
ing had been latent. They had learned a cognitive 
map (a mental representation) of the maze, and when they needed to use it (when 
reinforcement became available), they did. This explanation was tested further 
by blocking the optimal route to the goal box to see if the rats would use their  
cognitive map to take the next best route. The rats did.
 Figure 4.10 | Latent Learning | There were three different groups of rats, and each 
rat received one trial per day in a maze. Latent learning is evident for the rats who did not 
receive reinforcement until Day 11. Once reinforcement (a food reward in the goal box at 
the end of the maze) was given, these rats demonstrated their prior learning of the maze on 
the first 11 days by immediately (on Day 12) doing as well as the rats that had been regu-
larly reinforced. They had learned a cognitive map of the maze, and when reinforcement 
became available, they used it. This learning remained latent (present but not evident) until 
their maze-running behavior was reinforced. (From Tolman & Honzik, 1930c.)
32
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
Average errors
in maze
Days of training in maze
No reinforcement
Received reinforcement
every day
No reinforcement until
the 11th day
Pat Byrnes/The New Yorker Collection/www.
cartoonbank.com.
“Bathroom? Sure, it’s just down the hall to the left, 
jog right, left, another left, straight past two more 
lefts, then right, and it’s at the end of the third  
corridor on your right.”

178  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
Observational learning.  If such cognitive maps are 
within the abilities of rats, then it shouldn’t be surpris-
ing that much learning by humans doesn’t involve  
conditioning through direct experience. Observational 
learning (modeling)—learning by observing others and imitating their behavior— 
plays a major role in human learning (Bandura, 1973). For example, observational  
learning helps us learn how to play sports, write the letters of the alphabet, and 
drive a car. We observe others and then do our best to imitate their behavior. We 
also often learn our attitudes and appropriate ways to act out our feelings by 
observing good and bad models. Today’s sports and movie stars are powerful 
models for such learning.
Albert Bandura’s famous experiments on learning through 
modeling involved a Bobo doll, a large inflated clown doll, 
and kindergarten-age children as participants (Bandura, 1965; 
Bandura, Ross, & Ross, 1961, 1963a, 1963b). In one experiment, 
some of the children in the study were exposed to an adult 
who beat, kicked, and yelled at the Bobo doll. After observing 
this behavior, each child was taken to a room filled with many 
appealing toys, but the experimenter upset the child by saying 
that these toys were being saved for other children. The child 
was then taken to a room that contained a few other toys, 
including the Bobo doll. Can you guess what happened? The 
child started beating on the Bobo doll just as the adult model 
had done. The children even repeated the same words that they 
heard the model use earlier while beating the doll. Children who had not observed 
the abusive adult were much less likely to engage in such behavior.
But what would happen if a child were exposed to a model that acted gently 
toward the Bobo doll? In another experiment, Bandura had children observe 
either an aggressive model, a gentle model, or no model. When allowed to play 
These photographs of the children in the Bobo doll experiments imitating the violent behavior 
of the adult model show the powerful influence of observational learning.
Courtesy of Albert Bandura, Stanford University
Albert Bandura
Courtesy of Albert Bandura
➤	 observational learning (modeling)   
Learning by observing others and  
imitating their behavior.

Biological and Cognitive Aspects of Learning  |  179
in a toy room that included a Bobo doll, what happened? The children exposed 
to the aggressive model acted more aggressively toward the doll than the chil-
dren with no model, and the children with the gentle model acted more gently 
toward the doll than the children with no model. In general, the children’s 
behavior with the doll was guided by their model’s behavior. But the models in 
these experiments were not reinforced or punished for their behavior. Would 
this make a difference?
Bandura examined this question in another experiment. The young children 
watched a film of an adult acting aggressively toward the Bobo doll, but there 
were three different versions of the film. In one version, the adult’s behavior was 
reinforced; in another, the behavior was punished; and in the third, there were 
no consequences. Each child’s interactions with the Bobo doll varied depending 
upon which film the child had seen. The children who had watched the adult 
get reinforced for aggressive behavior acted more aggressively toward the Bobo 
doll than those who had seen the model act with no consequences. In addition, 
the children who had watched the adult get punished were less likely to act 
aggressively toward the doll than the children who had not been exposed to any 
consequences for acting aggressively toward the doll. The children’s behavior 
was affected by the consequences witnessed in the film. Then Bandura cleverly 
asked the children if they could imitate the behavior in the film for reinforce-
ment (snacks). Essentially, all of the children could do so. This is an important 
point. It means that the children all learned the behavior through observation 
regardless of whether the behavior was reinforced, punished, or neither.
Much of the research on observational learning since Bandura’s pioneering 
studies has focused on the question of whether exposure to violence in media 
leads people to behave more aggressively. There is clearly an abundance of vio-
lence on television and in other media. It has been estimated that the average 
child has viewed 8,000 murders and 100,000 other acts of violence on televi-
sion alone by the time he finishes elementary school (Huston et al., 1992), and 
more recent research indicates that the amount of violence on television and in 
other media has increased since Huston et al.’s study. For example, the Parents 
Television Council (2007) found that violence in prime-time television increased 
75 percent between 1998 and 2006, and the National Television Violence Study 
evaluated almost 10,000 hours of broadcast programming from 1995 through 
1997 and found that 61 percent of the programming portrayed interpersonal vio-
lence, much of it in an entertaining or glamorized manner, and that the highest 
proportion of violence was in children’s shows (American Academy of Pediatrics, 
2009). But do we learn to be more aggressive from observing all of this violence 
on television and in other media?
Literally hundreds of studies have addressed this question, and as you 
would expect, the findings are both complicated and controversial. Leading 
scientists reviewing this literature, however, came to the following general 
conclusion: “Research on violent television and films, video games, and music 
reveals unequivocal evidence that media violence increases the likelihood of 
aggressive and violent behavior in both immediate and long-term contexts” 

180  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
(Anderson et al., 2003). Similarly, the authors of a recent meta-analysis of over 
130 studies of video game play with 130,296 participants across Eastern and 
Western cultures concluded that exposure to violent video games is a causal 
risk factor for increased aggressive behavior, aggressive cognition, and aggres-
sive affect and for decreased empathy and prosocial behavior (Anderson et al., 
2010). Huesmann (2010, p. 179) argues that this meta-analysis “proves beyond 
a reasonable doubt that exposure to video game violence increases the risk 
that the observer will behave more aggressively and violently in the future” (cf. 
Ferguson & Kilburn, 2010). Finally, based on a review of research findings on 
the exposure to violence in television, movies, video games, cell phones, and 
on the Internet since the 1960s, Huesmann (2007) concluded that such expo-
sure significantly increases the risk of violent behavior on the viewer’s or game 
player’s part, and that the size of this effect is large enough to be considered a 
public health threat (cf. Ferguson & Kilburn, 2009). Per the effect sizes for many 
common threats to public health given in Bushman & Huesmann (2001), there 
is only one greater than exposure to media violence and aggression and that is 
smoking and lung cancer. 
The empirical evidence linking exposure to media violence to increased risk 
of aggressive behavior seems clear-cut (e.g., Murray, 2008; cf. Grimes, Anderson, 
& Bergen, 2008). However, as with other learned behaviors, many factors at the 
individual, family, and broader community levels contribute to the development 
of aggression. We must also remember that media exposure is not a necessary 
and sufficient cause of violence—not all viewers will be led to violence, with some 
more susceptible than others; but this is also true for other public health threats, 
such as exposure to cigarette smoke and the increased risk of lung cancer. It is 
also very difficult to determine whether cumulative exposure leads to increased 
aggression over the long term (cf. Hasan, Bègue, Scharkow, & Bushman, 2013). 
Regardless, it seems clear that exposure to media violence is a risk factor for 
aggression. In this vein, the American Academy of Pediatrics (2009, p. 1222) 
concluded that “exposure to violence in media, including television, movies, 
music, and video games, represents a significant risk to the health of children 
and adolescents. Extensive research evidence indicates that media violence can 
contribute to aggressive behavior, desensitization to violence, nightmares, and 
fear of being harmed.”
Recent research has also identified neurons that provide a neural basis for 
observational learning. These mirror neurons are neurons that fire both when 
performing an action and when observing another person perform that same 
action. When you observe someone engaging in an action, similar mirror neu-
rons are firing in both your brain and in the other person’s brain. Thus, these 
neurons in your brain are “mirroring” the behavior of 
the person you are observing. Mirror neurons were first 
discovered in macaque monkeys via electrode record-
ing by Giacomo Rizzolatti and his colleagues at the 
University of Parma in the mid-1990s (Iacoboni, 2009b), 
➤	 mirror neurons  Neurons that fire both 
when performing an action and when 
observing another person perform that 
same action.

Biological and Cognitive Aspects of Learning  |  181
but it is not normally possible to study single neurons in humans because that 
would entail attaching neurons directly to the brain; therefore, most evidence 
is indirect. For example, using fMRI and other scanning techniques, neurosci-
entists have observed that the same cortical areas in humans are involved when 
performing an action and observing that action (Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004). 
These areas are referred to as mirror neuron systems because groups of neurons 
firing together rather than single neurons firing separately were observed in 
these studies. Recent research, however, has provided the first direct evidence 
for mirror neurons in humans by recording the activity of individual neurons 
(Mukamel, Ekstrom, Kaplan, Iacoboni, & Fried, 2010). Mukamel et al. recorded 
from the brains of 21 patients who were being treated for intractable epilepsy. 
The patients had been implanted with electrodes to identify seizure locations 
for surgical treatment. With the patients’ consent, the researchers used the same 
electrodes for their study. They found neurons that behaved as mirror neurons, 
showing their greatest activity both when the patients performed a task and 
when they observed a task. We now know for sure that humans have mirror 
neurons (Keysers & Gazzola, 2010).
Because both human and nonhuman primates learn much through obser-
vation and imitation, the mirror neuron systems provide a way through 
which observation can be translated into action (Cattaneo & Rizzolatti, 2009; 
Iacoboni, 2005, 2009b). In addition to providing a neural basis for observational  
learning, researchers speculate that mirror neuron systems may also play a 
major role in empathy and understanding the intentions and emotions of  
others (Iacoboni, 2009a) and represent the basic neural mechanism from which 
language evolved (Rizzolatti & Arbib, 1998; Rizzolatti & Craighero, 2004). 
Some researchers even think that there may be a link between mirror neuron 
deficiency and social disorders, namely autism, in which individuals have dif-
ficulty in social interactions (Dapretto et al., 2006). Lastly, mirror neurons 
have proved useful in the rehabilitation of motor deficits in people who have 
had strokes (Ertelt et al., 2007). For example, patients who watch videos of 
people demonstrating various arm and hand movements (action observation) 
improved faster than those who did not watch the videos (Binkofski & Buccino, 
2007). Mirror neurons are also likely involved in observation inflation— 
observing someone performing an action induces false memories of having 
actually performed the action yourself (Lindner, Echterhoff, Davidson, & 
Brand, 2010).
Observational learning, like latent learning, emphasizes the role of cognitive 
processes in learning. As demonstrated by our examples, just as Tolman’s rats 
seemed to have a cognitive map of the maze, Bandura’s children seemed to have 
a cognitive model of the actions of the adult models and their consequences. 
Cognitive psychologists have studied the development of such mental representa-
tions and their storage in memory and subsequent retrieval from memory in their 
attempts to understand how the human memory system works. We will take a 
detailed look at the human memory system in Chapter 5.

182  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
ConceptCheck | 3
➤	 explain why the ease of learning taste aversions is biologically adaptive for 
humans.
➤	 Given Garcia and Koelling’s (1966) findings (discussed in this section) for 
rats’ pairing the cues of sweet-tasting water and normal-tasting water 
accompanied by clicking noises and flashing lights when the rats drank with 
a sickness consequence, what do you think they observed when they paired 
these two cues with an immediate electric shock consequence instead of a 
sickness consequence? Justify your answer in terms of biological prepared-
ness in learning.
➤	 explain why it would be easier to operantly condition a behavior that is 
“natural” for an animal than one that isn’t natural.
➤	 explain the relationship between latent learning and reinforcement.
➤	 explain how reinforcing and punishing models influenced observers in 
Bandura’s research.
Section Summary
In this section, we learned about some of the effects of biological preparedness 
on learning and about latent learning and observational learning in which direct 
reinforcement is not necessary. Research on taste aversion indicated that rats could 
easily learn aversion to different-tasting water when it was paired with later sick-
ness, but could not learn to pair auditory and visual cues with such sickness. This 
finding indicates that animals may be biologically predisposed to learn those asso-
ciations that are important to their survival more easily than arbitrary associations. 
Similarly, the Brelands found in their animal training work that animals drift back to 
their instinctual responses from conditioned arbitrary ones, a phenomenon called 
instinctual drift. Findings such as these highlight the impact of biological predisposi-
tions upon learning.
Research has shown that reinforcement is not necessary for learning to occur. 
Tolman’s research with rats running mazes showed that without reinforcement, rats 
could learn a cognitive map of the maze that they could then use very efficiently 
when reinforcement became available at the end of the maze. This was an instance 
of latent learning, learning that is not demonstrated until there is an incentive to do 
so. Albert Bandura’s pioneering research on observational learning showed that 
much of human learning also doesn’t involve direct experience. The children in his 
study all learned a model’s behavior through observation, regardless of whether 
the behavior was reinforced, punished, or neither. Research in observational learn-
ing since Bandura’s studies has extended his findings by linking exposure to media 
violence to an increased likelihood of aggression in viewers. Other recent research 
by neuroscientists has led to the discovery of mirror neuron systems that provide a 
neural basis for observational learning.

Study Guide
183
Chapter Key Terms
You should know the definitions of the following key terms from the chapter. they 
are listed in the order in which they appear in the chapter. For those you do not know, 
return to the relevant section of the chapter to learn them. When you think that you 
know all of the terms, complete the matching exercise based on these key terms.
classical conditioning
reflex
unconditioned stimulus (UCS)
unconditioned response (UCR)
conditioned stimulus (CS)
conditioned response (CR)
delayed conditioning
trace conditioning
acquisition (in classical 
conditioning)
extinction (in classical 
conditioning)
spontaneous recovery (in 
classical conditioning)
stimulus generalization (in 
classical conditioning)
stimulus discrimination (in 
classical conditioning)
operant conditioning
law of effect
reinforcer
punisher
reinforcement
punishment
appetitive stimulus
aversive stimulus
positive reinforcement
positive punishment
negative reinforcement
negative punishment
Premack principle
primary reinforcer
secondary reinforcer
behavior modification
shaping
cumulative record
acquisition (in operant 
conditioning)
extinction (in operant 
conditioning)
spontaneous recovery  
(in operant conditioning)
discriminative stimulus  
(in operant conditioning)
stimulus discrimination (in 
operant conditioning)
stimulus generalization  
(in operant conditioning)
continuous schedule of 
reinforcement
partial schedule of 
reinforcement
partial-reinforcement effect
fixed-ratio schedule
variable-ratio schedule
fixed-interval schedule
variable-interval schedule
motivation
drive-reduction theory
incentive theory
arousal theory
Yerkes-Dodson law
extrinsic motivation
intrinsic motivation
overjustification effect
instinctual drift
latent learning
observational learning 
(modeling)
mirror neurons
Key Terms Exercise
Identify the correct term for each of the 
following definitions. the answers to this 
exercise follow the answers to the Concept 
Checks at the end of the chapter.
	  1.	 A classical conditioning procedure in 
which the conditioned stimulus precedes 
the unconditioned stimulus but the two 
stimuli do not occur together.
	 	
 
	  2.	 A stimulus that gains its reinforcing prop-
erty through learning.
	 	
 
	  3.	 In operant conditioning, giving the 
operant response in the presence of 
stimuli similar to the discriminative 
stimulus.
	 	
 

184  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
	  4.	 The stimulus that comes to elicit a new 
response in classical conditioning.
	 	
 
	  5.	 The finding that operant responses rein-
forced on partial schedules are more 
resistant to extinction than those rein-
forced on a continuous schedule.
	 	
 
	  6.	 A stimulus that is unpleasant.
	 	
 
	  7.	 Training an animal or human to make an 
operant response by reinforcing successive 
approximations to the desired response.
	 	
 
	  8.	 A partial schedule of reinforcement in 
which the number of responses it takes to 
obtain a reinforcer varies on each trial but 
averages to a set number across trials.
	 	
 
	  9.	 A partial schedule of reinforcement in 
which the time that must elapse on each 
trial before a response will lead to the 
delivery of a reinforcer varies from trial to 
trial but averages to a set time across trials.
	 	
 
	10.	 The application of classical and operant 
conditioning principles to eliminate unde-
sirable behavior and to teach more desir-
able behavior.
	 	
 
	11.	 The desire to perform a behavior for 
external reinforcement.
	 	
 
	12.	 Punishment in which an aversive stimu-
lus is presented.
	 	
 
	13.	 A principle developed by Edward 
Thorndike that says that any behavior 
that results in satisfying consequences 
tends to be repeated and that any 
behavior that results in unsatisfying con-
sequences tends not to be repeated.
	 	
 
	14.	 A partial recovery in strength of the con-
ditioned response following a break  
during extinction training.
	 	
 
	15.	 The diminishing of the operant response 
when it is no longer reinforced.
	 	
 
Practice Test Questions
the following are practice multiple-choice 
test questions on some of the chapter 
content. the answers are given after the 
Key terms exercise answers at the end of 
the chapter. If you guessed or incorrectly 
answered a question, restudy the relevant 
section of the chapter.
	  1. 	In Pavlov’s classical conditioning 
research, a tone was used as the ______, 
and food inserted in the mouth served as 
the ______.
	a.	 UCS; CS
	b.	CS; UCS
	c.	 UCR; CR
	d.	CR; UCR
	  2.	 In classical conditioning, the diminishing 
of the CR following removal of the UCS is 
called ______.
	a.	 acquisition
	b.	discrimination
	c. extinction
	d. generalization
	  3. 	In stimulus generalization in classical 
conditioning, the strength of the CR 
______, as the similarity of the generaliza-
tion stimulus to the ______ increases.
	a. 	increases; CS
	b. 	decreases; CS
	c. 	increases; UCS
	d. 	decreases; UCS

Study Guide  |  185
	  4. 	In reinforcement, the probability of a 
behavior ______; in punishment the prob-
ability of a behavior ______.
	a.	 increases; increases
	b.	increases; decreases
	c. 	decreases; increases
	d. 	decreases; decreases
	  5. 	Negative reinforcement occurs when an 
______ stimulus is ______.
	a. 	appetitive; presented
	b. 	appetitive; removed
	c. 	aversive; presented
	d. 	aversive; removed
	  6. 	Which of the following is the best exam-
ple of a primary reinforcer?
	a. 	a cheeseburger
	b. a grade of “A” on an exam
	c. 	praise from your teacher
	d. 	winning the lottery
	  7. 	The stimulus in whose presence a 
response will be reinforced is called the 
stimulus ______ in operant conditioning.
	a.	 generalization
	b.	discriminative
	c.	 acquisition
	d.	extinction
	  8. 	Piecework in a factory is an example of a 
______ schedule of reinforcement; a slot 
machine is an example of a ______  
schedule of reinforcement.
	a. 	variable-ratio; fixed-interval
	b. 	fixed-interval; variable-ratio
	c. 	fixed-ratio; variable-ratio
	d. 	variable-ratio; fixed-ratio
	  9. 	The Brelands’ difficulties in training ani-
mals were the result of ______.
	a.	 the partial-reinforcement effect
	b. 	instinctual drift
	c. 	a token economy
	d. 	latent learning
10.	 Tolman’s research with rats in mazes 
indicated the occurrence of ______.
	a.	 observational learning
	b.	latent learning
	c.	 the partial-reinforcement effect
	d.	instinctual drift
11.	 Which of the following is an example of a 
secondary reinforcer?
	a.	 money
	b.	a money order
	c.	 a check
	d.	all of the above
12.	 The ______ effect is a decrease in an 
intrinsically motivated behavior after the 
behavior is extrinsically reinforced and 
the reinforcement discontinued.
	a.	 overjustification
	b.	partial reinforcement
	c.	 shaping
	d.	instinctual drift
13.	 A steep cumulative record in operant 
conditioning indicates ______, and a flat 
cumulative record indicates ______.
	a.	 a slow rate of responding; no responding
	b.	a slow rate of responding; a fast rate 
of responding
	c.	 a fast rate of responding; no responding
	d.	a fast rate of responding; a slow rate 
of responding
14.	 The results of Bandura’s Bobo doll 
studies illustrate ______, and Tolman 
and Honzik’s studies of latent learning 
indicate the importance of ______ in maze 
learning by rats.
	a.	 observational learning; the overjustifi-
cation effect
	b.	observational learning; cognitive maps
	c.	 the partial-reinforcement effect; the 
overjustification effect
	d.	the partial-reinforcement effect; cogni-
tive maps
15.	 Continuing to take Advil because it allevi-
ates headaches is an example of ______, 
and no longer parking in “No Parking” 
zones because you lost money in fines 
for doing so is an example of ______.
	a.	 positive punishment; positive 
reinforcement

186  |  Chapter 4  |  LEARNING
	b.	positive reinforcement; positive  
punishment
	c.	 negative punishment; negative rein-
forcement
	d.	negative reinforcement; negative  
punishment
Chapter Concept Check Answers
Concept Check | 1
•	 The UCS was the hammer striking the 
participant’s knee, and the UCR was the 
participant’s knee jerk in response to the 
hammer strike. The CS was the bell ringing, 
and the CR was the participant’s knee jerk 
in response to this bell.
•	 The Little Albert study is an example of using 
the delayed classical conditioning procedure 
because the CS (the white rat) was presented 
before the UCS (the loud, unexpected noise) 
and remained there until the UCS was pre-
sented. If the white rat had been taken away 
before the unexpected loud noise, then the 
study would have been an example of using 
the trace conditioning procedure.
•	 Generalization and discrimination can be 
thought of as opposites because generaliza-
tion is the broadening of the conditioned 
response to other stimuli, whereas discrimi-
nation is the narrowing of the response to 
only the stimulus followed by the UCS and 
those stimuli so similar to this stimulus that 
they cannot be discriminated from it.
•	 Extinction is used during discrimination 
training. The responses to all stimuli except 
the original CS are diminished because the 
UCS does not follow any of them. However, 
if a stimulus cannot be discriminated from 
the CS, the response to it is not extinguished.
Concept Check | 2 
•	 “Positive” refers to the presentation of 
a stimulus. In positive reinforcement, an 
appetitive stimulus is presented; in posi-
tive punishment, an aversive stimulus is 
presented. “Negative” refers to the removal 
of a stimulus. In negative reinforcement, an 
aversive stimulus is removed; in negative 
punishment, an appetitive stimulus is 
removed.
•	 The operant response comes under the con-
trol of the discriminative stimulus because it 
is only given in the presence of the discrimi-
native stimulus. The animal or human learns 
that the reinforcement is only available in 
the presence of the discriminative stimulus.
•	 A cumulative record goes flat when 
a response is extinguished because no more 
responses are made; the cumulative total of 
responses remains the same over time. Thus, 
the record is flat because this total is not 
increasing at all. Remember that the cumula-
tive record can never decrease because the 
total number of responses can only increase.
• The partial-reinforcement effect is greater 
for variable schedules than fixed schedules 
because there is no way for the person or 
animal to know how many responses are 
necessary (on a ratio schedule) or how much 
time has to elapse (on an interval schedule) 
to obtain a reinforcer. Thus, it is very dif-
ficult to realize that reinforcement has been 
withdrawn and so the responding is more 
resistant to extinction. On fixed schedules, 
however, you know how many responses 
have to be made or how much time has to 
elapse because these are set numbers or 
amounts of time. Thus, it is easier to detect 
that the reinforcement has been withdrawn, 
so fixed schedules are less resistant to 
extinction.
•	 The overjustification effect is a cognitive 
limitation on operant conditioning because 
it is the result of a person’s cognitive analy-
sis of their true motivation (extrinsic versus 
intrinsic) for engaging in an activity. In this 
analysis, the person overemphasizes the 
importance of the extrinsic reinforcement. 
For example, the person might now view 
the extrinsic reinforcement as an attempt 
at controlling their behavior and stop the 
behavior to maintain their sense of choice.
Concept Check | 3
• Learning taste aversions quickly and easily 
is adaptive because it increases our chances 

Study Guide  |  187
of survival. If we eat or drink something that 
makes us terribly sick, it is adaptive to no 
longer ingest that food or drink because we 
might die. We have a greater probability of 
surviving if we learn such aversions easily.
• The rats easily learned (stopped drinking 
the water) when the normal-tasting water 
accompanied by clicking noises and flashing 
lights was paired with immediate electric 
shock, but they did not when the sweet-tast-
ing water cue was paired with this conse-
quence. In terms of biological preparedness, 
the former pairing makes biological sense 
to the rats whereas the latter pairing does 
not. In a natural environment, audiovisual 
changes typically signal possible external 
dangers, but sweet-tasting water typically 
does not. External cues (noises and flashing 
lights) paired with an external dangerous 
consequence (shock) makes more biologi-
cal sense than an internal cue (taste) paired 
with an external consequence (shock). For 
learning to occur, external cues should be 
paired with external consequences, and 
internal cues with internal consequences.
• It would be easier to operantly condition a 
“natural” response because it would lower 
the probability that instinctual drift will 
interfere with the conditioning. Because an 
animal would already be making its natural 
response to the object, there would be no 
other response to drift back to. In addition, 
the natural response to the object would  
be easier to shape because it would be 
given sooner and more frequently than  
an unnatural response.
• Latent learning occurs without direct rein-
forcement, but such learning is not demon-
strated until reinforcement is made available 
for the learned behavior.
• In Bandura’s work, reinforcing the model 
increased the probability that the observed 
behavior would be displayed, and punish-
ing the model decreased the probability 
that the observed behavior would be  
displayed. But Bandura demonstrated in 
both cases that the behavior was learned. 
The reinforcement or punishment only 
affected whether it was displayed.
Answers to Key Terms Exercise
	  1.	 trace conditioning
	  2.	 secondary reinforcer
	  3.	 stimulus generalization
	  4.	 conditioned stimulus
	  5.	 partial-reinforcement effect
	  6.	 aversive stimulus
	  7.	 shaping
	  8.	 variable-ratio schedule
	  9.	 variable-interval schedule
10.	 behavior modification
11.	 extrinsic motivation
12.	 positive punishment
13.	 law of effect
14.	 spontaneous recovery (in classical  
conditioning)
15.	 extinction (in operant conditioning)
Answers to Practice Test Questions
	  1.	 b; CS; UCS
	  2.	 c; extinction
	  3.	 a; increases; CS
	  4.	 b; increases; decreases
	  5.	 d; aversive; removed
	  6.	 a; a cheeseburger
	  7.	 b; discriminative
	  8.	 c; fixed-ratio; variable-ratio
	  9.	 b; instinctual drift
	10.	 b; latent learning
	11.	 d; all of the above
	12.	 a; overjustification
	13.	 c; a fast rate of responding; no responding
	14.	 b; observational learning; cognitive maps
	15.	 d; negative reinforcement; negative  
punishment

Memory
 THREE-STAGE MODEL  
OF MEMORY
Sensory Memory
Short-Term Memory
Long-Term Memory
 ENCODING INFORMATION 
INTO MEMORY
how We Encode Information
how to Improve Encoding
 RETRIEVING INFORMATION 
FROM MEMORY
how to Measure Retrieval
Why We forget
The Reconstructive Nature  
of Retrieval
5

189
I
magine what life would be like without memory. Everything would be con-
stantly new. There would be no past experiences. We would have no top-down 
processing. Even the present would be a state of massive confusion because 
we couldn’t use what we know, our memory, to interpret the world. Everything 
would be new and unfamiliar. So, instead of being critical of memory when we 
forget things, we should be thankful that we have it. Our memories may fail us 
sometimes, but they are essential for life as we currently experience it. Without 
memory, we would be lost in the present.
The study of memory is not only an extension of the study of sensation and 
perception discussed in Chapter 3 (top-down processing using stored memo-
ries enables current perceptions, and new memories are formed from these 
perceptions), but it is also an extension of the discussion of the learning pro-
cesses in Chapter 4 (the learning involved in human memory is more complex 
than the associational learning involved in conditioning). In this chapter, we 
will focus on the memory processes essential to learning as we normally think 
about it—learning from books and other media. The material in this chapter 
will have a practical use—by finding out how memory works, you will be able 
to improve yours.
To help understand how your memory works, we begin with a discussion of 
the most influential model of our memory system—the three-stage model. Then, 
the focus will turn to how we get information into our memory system—a process 
called encoding. In this section, we will examine ways to improve memory through 
better encoding. Next, we will consider encoding’s companion process—retrieval, 
the process of getting information out of memory. In this section on retrieval, we 
will learn that memory is a constructive process and can be manipulated. We will 
also consider the question of whether information stored in memory is ever lost. 
Is the information truly no longer available or is it just not accessible at a particular 
point in time? Here we will also discuss false memories and the controversial topic 
of repressed memories of childhood abuse. But before considering these more 
complex issues in memory, let’s get a basic overview of how our memory system 
works by considering the classic three-stage model.
Three-Stage Model of Memory
The three-stage model of our memory system has guided much of the research on 
memory since the late 1960s (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968). Diagrams depicting this 
memory model typically use a series of boxes to indicate the stages of informa-
tion processing, and arrows connecting the boxes to show the flow of informa-
tion within the system. Figure 5.1 (page 190) is an informational flow chart for 
the three-stage memory model. In general, information enters from the physical 
environment through our senses into sensory memory and flows from sensory 
memory to short-term memory to long-term memory and then back to short-
term memory when we need to use it. In this section, we will discuss each of these 
three stages of information processing and how the stages interact to provide  

190  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
us with memory. The initial stage of processing, sensory memory, is roughly 
comparable to what we called sensation in Chapter 3. Information in this stage 
is bottom-up sensory input that hasn’t been recognized yet. So let’s begin by dis-
cussing how memory researchers have demonstrated that a sensory-memory stage 
exists and how information is processed in this stage.
Sensory Memory
Sensory memory (SM) consists of a set of registers, where we temporarily store 
incoming sensory information from the physical environment until we can attend 
to it, interpret it, and move it to the next stage of memory processing (short-term 
memory). We have a register for each of our senses—vision, hearing, taste, smell, 
and touch. The sensory information stored temporarily in 
these registers has not yet been recognized. Once it is recog-
nized and we are consciously aware of it, it has moved into 
the next memory stage, short-term memory. Vision is our 
dominant sense, so we’ll focus on the visual sensory register, 
commonly referred to as iconic memory, to help you under-
stand how these registers work.
➤	 sensory memory (SM)  The set of 
sensory registers, one for each 
of our senses, that serve as hold-
ing places for incoming sensory 
information until it can be attended 
to, interpreted, and encoded into 
short-term memory.
Sensory
input
Sensory
memory
(registers)
Forgetting
Forgetting
Forgetting
(Attention
and
recognition)
Short-term
(working)
memory
Retrieval
Encoding
Encoding
Long-term
memory
m Figure 5.1 | Three-Stage Model of Memory | Information from the physical environ-
ment enters the sensory registers through each of our senses (vision, hearing, taste, smell, 
and touch). This set of registers is referred to collectively as sensory memory. These registers 
are temporary storage places for sensory information until it can be attended to, recognized, 
and moved further along in the memory system. Sensory information that is not attended to is 
quickly forgotten. The information in each register that we attend to goes on to be recognized 
and enters the second stage of memory, short-term memory, which is comparable to our pres-
ent awareness. Top-down processing (using information stored in long-term memory) guides 
this encoding of sensory input from sensory memory into short-term memory. If attended to 
and studied, information in short-term memory will be encoded into long-term memory where 
it is stored for later use. If not attended to, the information will be forgotten. To use the infor-
mation stored in long-term memory, we bring it back into short-term memory (a process called 
retrieval). If we cannot retrieve such information, it is said to be forgotten. Later in the chapter 
we will consider explanations for such forgetting.

Three-StAGe Model of Memory  |  191
A good way to think about iconic memory is that it is 
photographic memory but for less than 1 second. An exact 
copy of the visual information exists in iconic memory, but 
only for a very brief period of time. We cannot attend to 
everything we see; therefore, the visual information in the 
register that we attend to gets recognized and goes on to 
short-term memory, and the unattended information in the 
register fades away and is quickly forgotten. We said that 
iconic memory lasts less than a second. This means that its 
duration (how long information can remain in a memory 
stage if not attended to) is less than a second. How do we 
know this? We will examine how research psychologists have 
answered this duration question and a similar capacity question (how much 
information can be held in a memory stage at one time) for each of the three 
memory stages. We’ll start with a discussion of how the capacity and duration 
answers for iconic memory were found. Two different experimental procedures, 
one direct and one inferential, were used. We’ll consider the direct one, the  
temporal integration procedure, first, because it is easier to understand.
The temporal integration procedure.  In the temporal integration procedure, 
two random meaningless dot patterns are presented sequentially at the same 
visual location with a brief time delay between them. When these two meaningless 
patterns are integrated, a meaningful pattern is produced. So, if the meaningful 
pattern is seen, this means that the two patterns must have been integrated in our 
memory system (since the two patterns were not presented simultaneously).
To see how this works, let’s consider an example. Look at the first two dot pat-
terns (a and b) in Figure 5.2. Neither has any meaning by itself. Each is just a ran-
dom dot pattern. However, if you integrate the two patterns (as shown in c), you 
see a meaningful pattern—the letters V O H. If the first two patterns were shown 
simultaneously in the same visual location on a screen so that they were integrated, 
you would see V O H; but if they were presented sequentially, the only way you 
➤	 iconic memory  The visual sensory 
register that holds an exact copy 
of the incoming visual input but 
only for a brief period of time, less 
than 1 second. 
➤	 temporal integration procedure   
An experimental procedure in 
which two meaningless visual  
patterns that produce a meaningful 
pattern if integrated are presented 
sequentially with the time delay 
between their presentations  
varied. 
m Figure 5.2 | An Example of the Temporal Integration Procedure | In this experi-
mental procedure, two meaningless patterns (such as a and b) are shown sequentially at 
the same visual location. If the time interval between the two patterns is less than a second, 
a meaningful pattern (in this example, the letters V O H) is seen. The meaningful pattern 
can only be perceived when the two other patterns are integrated, so this integration must 
be taking place within our memory system, in what we call the visual sensory register or 
iconic memory.
(a)
(b)
(c)

192  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
could see the three letters is if the two meaningless dot pat-
terns are integrated somewhere within your memory system. 
This is exactly what happens. The two patterns are integrated 
in iconic memory. However, this is only the case if the inter-
val between the two patterns is very brief, less than a second 
(Eriksen & Collins, 1967). Participants in experiments such as 
this do not see the meaningful pattern when the two dot pat-
terns are separated by more than a second. The first pattern has already faded from 
the visual register, and the two patterns cannot be integrated in iconic memory.
This pattern of results using the temporal integration procedure is also 
observed for larger, more complex dot patterns (Hogben & Di Lollo, 1974). People 
see the meaningful integrated pattern if the interval between these larger pat-
terns is less than a second. Hence the capacity of the visual sensory register must 
be fairly large or these more complex patterns couldn’t be integrated in iconic 
memory. Thus, the capacity of iconic memory is large, but its duration is very 
brief, less than a second.
Sperling’s full- and partial-report procedures.  We find the same results 
when we use a very different experimental procedure devised by George Sperling 
(1960). On each trial in Sperling’s research, participants were presented with a dif-
ferent matrix of unrelated consonants for 50 milliseconds, a very brief interval but 
long enough to process visual information. Different size matrices were used, but 
in our explanation we will consider 3 3 3, nine-letter matrices (as illustrated in 
Figure 5.3). The task was to report the letters in the matrix briefly flashed on each 
trial, but Sperling used two different report procedures. In Sperling’s full-report 
procedure, the participant had to try to report the entire matrix of letters. Over 
trials, participants recalled 4.5 letters on average, usually those letters in the top 
row and the left section of the second row. However, participants also reported 
(subjectively) that they sensed the entire matrix, but that it had faded from 
➤	 Sperling’s full-report procedure   
An experimental procedure in 
which, following the brief pre-
sentation of a matrix of unrelated 
consonants, the participant has to 
attempt to recall all of the letters  
in the matrix.
m Figure 5.3 | A 3 3 3 Letter Matrix Like 
Those Used in Sperling’s Iconic Memory 
Research | On each trial, a different letter matrix  
is shown for 50 milliseconds. In the full-report pro-
cedure, participants attempt to recall all of the letters 
in the matrix. In the partial-report procedure, partici-
pants get an auditory cue following the matrix that 
tells them which row to report—high-pitched tone, 
recall top row; medium-pitched tone, recall middle 
row; and low-pitched tone, recall bottom row. The 
row that is cued is varied randomly across trials, so 
the participant has no way of knowing which row will 
be cued on any particular trial. In addition, the time 
between the letter matrix presentation and the  
auditory cue is varied.
L
R
S
K
B
Z
Q
P
N

Three-StAGe Model of Memory  |  193
memory by the time they reported the 4 or 5 letters. This 
sounds like iconic memory, doesn’t it? Let’s see how Sperling 
indirectly demonstrated through inference that the remain-
ing unreported letters were indeed in iconic memory by using 
his partial-report procedure.
In Sperling’s partial-report procedure, the participant 
only had to report a small part of the presented letter matrix, 
a row indicated by an auditory cue on each trial. A high-pitched tone indicated 
that the top row was to be recalled, a medium-pitched tone the middle row, and 
a low-pitched tone the bottom row. These tones were easy to discriminate, so the 
participant had no difficulty in determining which row was indicated for recall. 
The letter matrix was different on every trial; therefore, the participant could not 
learn the matrix. In addition, the cued row was varied randomly across trials;  
therefore, the participant had no way of knowing which row would be cued on 
any particular trial. Regardless, when the auditory cue was given immediately 
after the brief presentation of the letter matrix, participants recalled the indi-
cated row 100 percent of the time. From this result, we can infer that all of the 
rows must have been present in iconic memory; that is, an exact copy of the letter 
matrix must have been in iconic memory.
Based on the experimental results for the temporal integration procedure, what 
do you think would happen when Sperling inserted a time delay between the let-
ter matrix and the auditory cue? Remember, the duration of iconic memory was 
estimated to be less than a second. Sperling found that as this time delay increased 
(up to 1 second), participants’ recall of the cued row worsened. This meant that 
the matrix was fading quickly from memory. We can conclude, then, based on 
two very different experimental procedures, that there is a visual sensory register 
and that it seems to hold an exact copy of the visual stimulus (indicating a large 
capacity), but only for a very brief time, less than a second (a very brief duration).
To get a feel for how iconic memory works in nonlaboratory situations, let’s 
think about seeing a bolt of lightning. It’s not really a singular, continuous bolt. 
It is actually three or more bolts that over-
lap in our iconic memory and lead to the 
perception of the single flash of lightning. 
If you turn off the lights and have a friend 
quickly move a flashlight in a circular 
motion, you see a circle of light. Why? 
Again, iconic memory is at work; it isn’t 
a continuous stream of light, but that’s 
what you see. This has larger implications. 
It is iconic memory that allows us to see 
the world as continuous and not as a series 
of unconnected snapshots.
All of our senses have sensory registers 
that have large capacities with very brief 
➤	 Sperling’s partial-report procedure 
An experimental procedure in 
which, following the brief presen-
tation of a matrix of unrelated  
consonants, the participant is 
given an auditory cue about which 
row of the matrix to recall. 
Three or four bolts of lightning overlap in our iconic memory, 
leading to the perception of one continuous bolt.
NOAA.

194  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
durations. For example, the auditory sensory register, called echoic memory, that 
processes sounds has a duration of 4–5 seconds, slightly longer than the dura-
tion of iconic memory (Darwin, Turvey, & Crowder, 1972; Glucksberg & Cowen, 
1970). These sensory registers are what enable continuous perception of the 
physical environment. Collectively, these registers make up sensory memory, the 
first step of information processing in the three-stage memory model. However, 
when we think about memory, we aren’t usually thinking about sensory memory. 
We’re thinking about memory with a much longer duration. So let’s take a look 
at the next major stage of processing in the memory system—short-term memory, 
which has a little greater duration.
Short-Term Memory
Short-term memory (STM) is the memory stage in which the recognized infor-
mation from sensory memory enters consciousness. We rehearse the information 
in short-term memory so we can transfer it into more permanent storage (long-
term memory) and remember it at some later time. We also bring information 
from long-term memory back into short-term memory to use it to facilitate 
rehearsal, solve problems, reason, and make decisions; thus short-term memory 
is thought of as working memory (Baddeley, 1992, 2001, 2003; Engle, 2002). It 
is the workbench of the memory system. It is where you are doing your present 
conscious cognitive processing. What you’re thinking about right now as you 
read this sentence is in your short-term memory. As you work to understand and 
remember what you are reading, you are using your short-term working memory. 
The capacity of this type of memory is rather small. Humans just can’t process 
that many pieces of information simultaneously in consciousness. In addition, the  
information in this stage is in a rather fragile state and will be quickly lost from 
memory (in less than 30 seconds) if we do not concentrate on it. This is why it 
is called short-term memory. Now that we have a general understanding of the 
nature of this stage of memory, let’s see how researchers have 
learned about its capacity and duration.
The capacity of short-term memory.  To assess the capac-
ity of short-term memory, researchers have used the memory 
span task. In this task, the participant is presented a series of 
items one at a time and has to remember the items in the 
order that they were presented. The list items could be any of 
several types of stimuli such as unrelated letters or words. On 
each trial, the specific list items change. For example, if words 
are used, then it is a different list of words on each trial. What 
have researchers found? George Miller provided the answer in 
his classic 1956 paper, “The Magical Number Seven, Plus or 
Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Ability to Process 
Information.” Your memory span is defined as the average 
number of items you can remember across a series of memory 
➤	 short-term memory (STM)  The 
memory stage with a small capac-
ity (7 6 2 chunks) and brief dura-
tion (, 30 seconds) that we are 
consciously aware of and in which 
we do our problem solving, reason-
ing, and decision making.
➤	 memory span task  A memory  
task in which the participant is 
given a series of items one at a 
time and then has to recall the 
items in the order in which they 
were presented.
➤	 memory span  The average number 
of items an individual can remem-
ber across a series of memory 
span trials.

Three-StAGe Model of Memory  |  195
span trials. Humans remember 7 6 2 (5 to 9) chunks of infor-
mation on memory span tasks. To see what Miller meant by 
the term “chunk,” let’s consider the memory span task.
In the memory span task, different types of items can be 
used. If the items were unrelated letters, most participants 
would remember 5 to 9 unrelated letters. But if the items 
were three-letter acronyms (meaningful abbreviations like 
ABC or USA) or words (like dog or boy), participants would 
remember 5 to 9 three-letter acronyms or words (15 to  
27 letters). In this latter case, participants remember more 
letters than in the first case, but they remember the same number of meaningful 
units. This is what is meant by the term “chunk.” A chunk is a meaningful unit 
in memory. The capacity limit in short-term memory is in terms of chunks, 7 6 2  
chunks. So if the chunks are larger for a particular type of material (words vs.  
letters), we remember more information but not more chunks. Experts in a partic-
ular area, such as chess masters, have larger chunks for information in their area 
of expertise (Chase & Simon, 1973). In the case of a chess master, for example, 
several chess pieces on the board form a chunk whereas for chess novices, each 
piece is a separate chunk.
The duration of short-term memory.  Now let’s consider the duration of 
short-term memory, less than 30 seconds. Why is the duration of short-term 
memory said to be less than 30 seconds if this type of memory is equivalent to our 
conscious workspace? If we choose to do so, we could keep information in our 
consciousness for as long as we want, clearly longer than 30 seconds. The dura-
tion estimate refers to how long information can stay in short-term memory if we 
cannot attend to it. To measure this duration, researchers developed the distrac-
tor task (Brown, 1958; Peterson & Peterson, 1959). In the distractor task, a small 
amount of information (three unrelated consonants such as CWZ) is presented, 
the participant is immediately distracted from concentrating on the information 
for a brief interval of time, and then the information must be recalled. How is the 
participant distracted? A number is immediately presented, and the participant 
has to count rapidly aloud backward by 3s (or by some other interval). Counting 
backward rapidly occupies the short-term work space and prevents the partici-
pant from attending to the three letters. The experimenter varies the length of the 
distraction period. When the distraction period is over, the participant must try 
to recall the letters. What happens? Some typical data are presented in Figure 5.4.
As you can see in Figure 5.4 (page 196) the estimated duration for information 
in short-term memory is rather brief, less than 30 seconds. To relate this to every-
day life, think about looking up a new phone number. You find the number in the 
phone book. It goes into your iconic memory, and you attend to it and recognize 
it. It enters your conscious short-term memory. You start to concentrate on it so 
you can dial the number. Now what would happen to that number if you heard 
someone screaming outside and you ran to see what had happened? Chances 
are that you would forget the phone number (just like participants forget the 
➤	 chunk  A meaningful unit in a per-
son’s memory.
➤	 distractor task  A memory task in 
which a small amount of informa-
tion is briefly presented and then 
the participant is distracted from 
rehearsing the information for a 
variable period of time, after which 
the participant has to recall the 
information.

196  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
three consonants in studies using the distractor task), and then have to look it 
up again. Information in short-term memory is in a temporary storage state, and 
we need to concentrate on it to prevent it from being lost. Usually we use main-
tenance rehearsal to accomplish this. Maintenance rehearsal is repeating the 
information in short-term memory over and over again in order to maintain it. 
For example, in the case of the phone number, we rehearse it over and over again 
to ourselves until we dial it.
Maintaining information in short-term memory is usually not our goal, cer-
tainly not when we are trying to learn. Our goal is to put that information into 
long-term storage so that we can retrieve and use it in the future. In the last two 
major sections of this chapter, we will look at the process of encoding informa-
tion from short-term memory into long-term memory and of retrieving that 
information from long-term memory at some later time. But first we need to get 
an overview of long-term memory, the last memory stage in the three-stage model.
Long-Term Memory
When we use the word “memory,” we normally mean what 
psychologists call long-term memory. Long-term memory 
(LTM) allows storage of information for a long period of 
time (perhaps permanently), and its capacity is essentially 
unlimited. Remember the trillions of possible synaptic con-
nections in the brain that we discussed in Chapter 2? They 
represent the capacity of long-term memory. The brain’s 
memory storage capacity has been estimated to be around 
m Figure 5.4 | Results for 
the Short-Term Memory 
Distractor Task | This figure 
shows how forgetting in short-term 
memory occurs over time. As the 
length of the distractor interval 
increases, forgetting increases very 
rapidly. In less than 30 seconds, 
recall is essentially zero. (From 
Peterson & Peterson, 1959.)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percent
correct recall
3
Time in seconds between presentation
of consonants and recall request
(no rehearsal allowed)
6
9
12
18
15
Rapid decay
with no
rehearsal
➤	 maintenance rehearsal  A type of 
rehearsal in short-term memory in 
which the information is repeated 
over and over again in order to 
maintain it.
➤	 long-term memory (LTM)  The 
memory stage in which information 
is stored for a long period of time 
(perhaps permanently) and whose 
capacity is essentially unlimited.

Three-StAGe Model of Memory  |  197
Table 5.1   Durations and Capacities of the Three Memory Stages
Memory Stage
Duration
Capacity
Sensory memory
, 1 sec for iconic mem-
ory; 4–5 secs for echoic 
memory
Large
Short-term memory
Up to 30 secs without 
rehearsal
7 6 2 chunks
Long-term memory
A long time (perhaps 
permanently)
Essentially unlimited
2.5 petabytes (a million gigabytes), which would be enough 
to hold three million hours of television shows if your 
brain worked like a video recorder (Reber, 2010). You would 
have to leave the television running continuously for more 
than 300 years to use up all that storage. We will consider 
the duration or permanence of information in long-term 
memory in more detail later in this chapter when we consider 
theories of forgetting.
The durations and capacities for all three stages of memory  
are summarized in Table 5.1. Review these so that you have a 
better understanding of how these three stages differ. Next, 
let’s consider different types of long-term memories.
Types of long-term memories.  Memory researchers make many distinctions 
between various types of long-term memories (Squire, 2004). The first distinction 
is between memories that we have to recall consciously and make declarative 
statements about and those that don’t require conscious recall or declarative 
statements (see Figure 5.5, page 198). What if someone asked you, “Who was the 
first president of the United States?” You would retrieve the answer from your 
long-term memory and consciously declare, “George Washington.” This is an 
example of what is called explicit (declarative) memory—long-term memory for 
factual knowledge and personal experiences. Explicit memory requires a conscious 
explicit effort to remember.
A further distinction is made in explicit memory between semantic memory, 
memory for factual knowledge, and episodic memory, memory of personal life 
experiences (Tulving, 1972). Remembering that George Washington was the 
first president of the United States (semantic memory) is very different than 
remembering your first kiss (episodic memory). Semantic and episodic memo-
ries blend together in autobiographical memory (Williams, Conway, & Cohen, 
2008). Autobiographical memories obviously include episodic memories of your 
past personal experiences but they can also be about factual, semantic aspects of 
➤	 explicit (declarative) memory   
Long-term memory for factual 
knowledge and personal experi-
ences. This type of memory 
requires a conscious effort to 
remember and entails making 
declarations about the information 
remembered.
➤	 semantic memory  Explicit memory 
for factual knowledge.
➤	 episodic memory  Explicit memory 
for personal experiences.

198  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
your personal history, such as remembering your birth date or what high school  
you attended. 
Explicit memory is contrasted with implicit (nondeclarative) memory. 
Implicit memory is long-term memory that influences our behavior, but does not 
require conscious awareness or declarative statements. Implicit memory happens 
automatically, without deliberate conscious effort. For example, you remember 
how to drive a car and you do so without consciously recalling and describing 
what you are doing as you drive. Some implicit memories (like driving a car,  
typing, or hitting a tennis ball) are referred to as procedural  
memories because they have a physical procedural aspect 
(the execution of an ordered set of movements) to them. 
In contrast with declarative explicit memories, procedural 
implicit memories are like knowing “how” versus knowing 
“what.” Not all implicit memories, however, are procedural 
memories (see Figure 5.5). We learned about another type 
of implicit memory, classical conditioning, in Chapter 4. 
Classically conditioned responses elicited automatically by 
conditioned stimuli are also implicit memories.
Another type of nonprocedural implicit memory is prim-
ing. In priming, an earlier stimulus influences the response 
to a later stimulus. Priming is classed as implicit memory 
because it occurs independent of a person’s conscious mem-
ory for the priming stimulus. There are several experimental  
priming procedures, but let’s consider one called repetition 
priming so that you can gain a better understanding of how 
Long-term Memory
explicit Memory
(Declarative Memory)
Memory that requires
conscious recall
episodic Memory
Personal experiences
Semantic Memory
Factual knowledge
procedural
Memory
Motor and
cognitive
skills
involving
procedures
priming
Influence of
an earlier
presented
stimulus
on the
response 
to a later 
stimulus
Classical
Conditioning
Conditioned
responses
automatically
elicited by 
conditioned
stimuli
Implicit Memory
(Nondeclarative Memory)
Memory that does not
require conscious recall
m Figure 5.5 | Types of Long-Term Memory
➤	 implicit (nondeclarative) memory   
Long-term memory for procedural 
tasks, classical conditioning, and 
primary effects. This type of mem-
ory does not require conscious 
awareness or the need to make 
declarations about the information 
remembered.
➤	 procedural memory  Implicit mem-
ory for cognitive and motor tasks 
that have a physical procedural 
aspect to them.
➤	 priming  The implicit influence of 
an earlier presented stimulus on 
the response to a later stimulus. 
This influence is independent of 
conscious memory for the earlier 
stimulus.

Three-StAGe Model of Memory  |  199
priming works. In repetition priming, a person first studies a 
list of words and then at some later time is asked to complete 
a list of word fragments with the first word that comes to 
mind for each fragment. For example, the fragment s _ c _ _ _ 
might be presented. The likelihood that the person answers  
s o c i a l (the primed word because the word social was on the 
earlier word list) is much higher than for unprimed words, 
such as s o c c e r or s o c k e t, that fit the fragment but were 
not on the list. Such priming occurs even when people had 
not recognized the list word on an earlier recognition test (Tulving, Schacter, & 
Stark, 1982). Thus, priming occurs when explicit memory for the word does not, 
which means that priming is an involuntary, nonconscious implicit process. Graf, 
Squire, and Mandler (1984) provided further evidence that priming is an implic-
it, nonconscious type of memory. They found that amnesics who had no explicit 
memory for new information could perform as well as normal adults on a repeti-
tion priming word fragment task even though the amnesics had no conscious  
memory of having seen the words before.
Next we’ll see how other memory research with amnesics has allowed us to 
further differentiate explicit and implicit memory and even discover what parts 
of the brain seem to be involved in each type of memory.
Amnesia, the loss of long-term memories.  There is some evidence from 
the studies of amnesics, people with severe memory deficits following brain sur-
gery or injury, that explicit and implicit memories are processed in different parts 
of the brain. We will focus our discussion of amnesics on the most studied amne-
sic in psychological research, H. M., whom we discussed briefly in Chapter 1. 
When H. M. was 7 years old, he was hit by a bicyclist and suffered a brain injury 
that later led to severe epileptic seizures in his teens (Hilts, 1995). In 1953 at the 
age of 27, H. M. had his hippocampus and surrounding temporal lobe areas 
removed with the hope of reducing his epileptic seizures (Corkin, Amaral, 
Gonzalez, Johnson, & Hyman, 1997). The seizures were reduced, but the opera-
tion drastically affected his long-term memory. Before the operation, he had nor-
mal short-term memory and long-term memory. After the operation, he had  
normal short-term memory, above-average intelligence, and no perceptual or lan-
guage deficits, but he didn’t seem able to store any new information in long-term 
memory (Scoville & Milner, 1957). For example, H. M. could read the same maga-
zine over and over again and think it was a new magazine each time. He could no 
longer follow the plot of a television show because the commercials would inter-
fere with his memory of the story line. If he did not know someone before his 
operation and that person introduced herself to him and then left the room for a 
few minutes, he would not know the person when she returned. Even Brenda 
Milner and Suzanne Corkin, the two neuroscientists who studied H. M. for 
decades, had to introduce themselves anew each time they met with him.
H. M. had anterograde amnesia—the inability to form new explicit long-term 
memories following surgery or trauma to the brain. Anterograde amnesia is  
➤	 amnesic  A person with severe 
memory deficits following brain 
surgery or injury.
➤	 anterograde amnesia  The inability 
to form new explicit long-term 
memories for events following sur-
gery or trauma to the brain. Explicit 
memories formed before the  
surgery or trauma are left intact

200  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
contrasted with retrograde amnesia—the disruption of 
memory for the past, especially episodic information for 
events before, especially just before, brain surgery or trauma. 
Such amnesia is typical in cases of brain concussions. H. M. 
had some retrograde amnesia, especially for the several days 
preceding the surgery, but this was mild compared to his severe, pervasive antero-
grade amnesia.
Remember, as we just learned, amnesics have shown implicit repetition priming  
effects. So what about H. M.? Although he didn’t form any new explicit long-
term memories (but see O’Kane, Kensinger, & Corkin, 2004, and Skotko et al., 
2004), did he too form new implicit memories? The answer is a resounding “yes” 
(Corkin, 2002). Let’s briefly consider some of the experiments demonstrating this. 
H. M. demonstrated implicit procedural memory on a mirror-tracing task. In this 
task, you have to trace a pattern that can be seen only in its mirror image, which 
also shows your tracing hand moving in the direction opposite to its actual move-
ment. This is a difficult motor task, but there is a practice effect in that the num-
ber of errors decreases across practice sessions. H. M.’s performance on this task 
showed a normal practice effect even when months elapsed between the sessions 
(Gabrieli, Corkin, Mickel, & Growdon, 1993). However, he did not remember ever 
having done this task and had to have the instructions repeated for each session. 
Corkin (1968) also found that H. M. improved with practice on another manual 
skill learning task, one in which he had to keep a stylus on a small dot that was 
spinning around on a turntable. H. M. got better at this task with practice, but 
he had no conscious memory of his earlier experiences that led to his improved 
performance.
➤	 retrograde amnesia  The disruption 
of memory for the past, especially 
episodic information for events 
before, especially just before,  
surgery or trauma to the brain.
The Mirror-Tracing Task | The task is to trace the 
outline of a star (or some other shape) with a metal 
stylus when the star and your hand can be seen only 
in the mirror. Thus, the tracing movements have to be 
made in the direction opposite from the way in which 
they appear in the mirror. When the stylus moves off 
of the star outline (each red section in the illustrated 
tracing), it makes electrical contact with the underly-
ing aluminum plate and a tracing error is recorded. 
There is nonconducting tape on the star outline so as 
long as the stylus stays on the outline, no electrical 
contact is made. Just like we would, H. M. improved 
from session to session (the number of errors he made 
decreased) as he gained more experience in this task. 
However, unlike us, he could not remember ever hav-
ing performed the task before and had to have the task 
explained to him each session. As explained in the 
text, this means that he formed new implicit procedural 
memories for how to do the task, but he did not form 
new explicit episodic memories of having performed 
the task.

Three-StAGe Model of Memory  |  201
H. M. also demonstrated implicit repetition priming effects on a word frag-
ment completion task without conscious awareness of the earlier presented 
priming words (Corkin, 2002) and implicit memory for a classically conditioned 
eyeblink response (Woodruff-Pak, 1993). In the latter case, after he was classi-
cally conditioned to give an eyeblink response to a tone, he could not consciously 
remember the conditioning episodes; however, he stored an implicit memory of 
the conditioned association between the tone and eyeblink response. Thus, he 
blinked when he was exposed to the tone but had no idea why he did so. LeDoux 
(1996) tells the story of a similar finding with a female amnesic with memory 
deficits like those of H. M. She was unable to recognize her doctor (Edouard 
Claparède), so each day Dr. Claparède shook her hand and introduced himself. 
One day, however, the doctor concealed a tack in his hand so that when shaking 
hands, the tack pricked her. The next time the doctor tried to introduce himself 
and shake hands, she refused to do so but didn’t know why. She had been condi-
tioned without any explicit awareness of it.
How is it possible that H. M. and other amnesics like him can form new 
implicit but not explicit memories? Research indicates that other parts of the 
brain, such as the cerebellum and basal ganglia, and not the hippocampus are 
important for implicit memory formation and storage (Green & Woodruff-
Pak, 2000; Knowlton et al., 1996; Krebs, Hogan, Hening, Adamovich, & 
Poizner, 2001; Krupa, Thompson, & Thompson, 1993; Squire, 2004). Implicit 
memory formation is functional in these amnesics because the cerebellum, 
basal ganglia, and the other parts of the brain necessary for such memories 
are intact, but explicit memory formation isn’t because the hippocampus has 
been removed. This explanation is also one of those proposed for infantile/
child amnesia, our inability as adults to remember events that occurred in 
our lives before about 3 years of age. According to this explanation, we cannot 
remember our experiences during this period because the hippocampus, which 
is crucial to the formation of episodic explicit long-term memories, is not yet 
fully developed. It is also important to realize that although the hippocampus 
is critical to the formation of such memories, it is not the final repository for 
these memories, but more like a holding zone for them. As explicit memories 
age, the hippocampus’s participation wanes (Smith & Squire, 2009). These 
memories are distributed throughout many areas in the cortex, but how this 
happens and how these memories are represented remain questions to be 
answered (Miller, 2005).
Evidence for short-term versus long-term memory distinction.  The 
memory findings for amnesics like H. M. also indicate that short-term memory 
and long-term memory are different stages of memory. H. M.’s short-term 
memory did not suffer any substantial deficits after the 
operation. For example, his memory span was within the 
normal range. He could repeat a telephone number with no 
difficulty. Researchers examining the free recall task have 
found additional evidence that long-term memory and 
➤	 infantile/child amnesia  Our inabil-
ity as adults to remember events 
that occurred in our lives before 
about 3 years of age.

202  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
short-term memory are different stages. In the free recall 
task, participants are given a list of words one at a time and 
then asked to recall them in any order they wish. Kirkpatrick 
(1894) introduced the free recall task, noting that some 
word positions are recalled much better than others. If 
recall performance for the words is plotted in terms of the 
order the words were presented (their position in the list—
first, second, . . . , last), the figure has a very distinctive 
shape (Figure 5.6). The ends of the list are recalled much 
more often than the middle of the list. The superior recall 
of the early portion of the list is called the primacy effect. 
The superior recall of the latter portion of the list is called 
the recency effect.
How do the primacy effect and recency effect relate to the distinction between 
short-term and long-term memory? The recency effect is caused by recall from 
short-term memory. Items at the end of the list, the most recent items, have 
a high probability of still being in short-term memory, so they can be recalled 
immediately and very well. The primacy effect, however, is the result of superior 
recall from long-term memory of the first few words in the list versus those in 
the middle (Rundus & Atkinson, 1970). Let’s think about the task. The words 
are presented one at a time. The first word comes into your empty short-term 
memory to be rehearsed. It gets 100 percent of your attention. Then the second 
word appears and is rehearsed with the first word (each gets 50 percent of your 
attention). This goes on until short-term memory capacity is reached and each 
new word causes a word already in short-term memory to be bumped out. This 
➤	 free recall task  A memory task in 
which a list of items is presented 
one at a time and then the partici-
pant is free to recall them in any 
order.
➤	 primacy effect  The superior recall 
of the early portion of a list relative 
to the middle of the list in a one-
trial free recall task.
➤	 recency effect  The superior recall 
of the latter portion of a list relative 
to the middle of the list in a one-
trial free recall task.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percent
correct recall
Serial position (position of item in list)
1st
5th
10th
15th
20th
Primacy
effect
Recency
effect
m Figure 5.6 | Serial Position 
Effects for a One-Trial Free 
Recall Task | The superior recall of 
the first few items presented relative  
to those in the middle of the list is 
called the primacy effect. This effect is 
due to the fact that the primary items in 
the list are studied more and so have a 
higher probability of being in long-term 
memory for later recall. The recency 
effect refers to the superior recall of the 
last few items presented versus those 
in the middle of the list. This effect is 
due to the easy immediate recall of the 
items presently in short-term memory 
(those recently presented).

Three-StAGe Model of Memory  |  203
results in the first few items on the list being rehearsed more than the later words 
in the middle and thus having a higher probability of being stored in long-term 
memory and recalled better. The items in the middle of the list come into a filled 
short-term memory, get little rehearsal, and thus have a low probability of being 
stored in long-term memory and recalled later. This is similar to what sometimes 
happens to students on exams. They study one topic more than another, and this 
translates to better test performance on the more-studied topic.
How do we know that this is so? Researchers have demonstrated that the 
primacy effect and the recency effect can be manipulated independently, indicat-
ing that different memory stages are involved. For example, if recall is delayed 
by having the participants count rapidly backward by 3s for 30 seconds, the 
recency effect is eliminated, but the primacy effect remains (Glanzer & Cunitz, 
1966). Thus, the distractor period only disturbed recall from short-term memory. 
Similarly, we can eliminate the primacy effect but still observe a recency effect if 
we force participants to rehearse each of the list items equally by having them 
only rehearse each word aloud after it is presented. With equal rehearsal, the pri-
mary and middle items are recalled equally well so there is no primacy effect; and 
because amount of rehearsal is not critical to recall from short-term memory, a 
recency effect (although smaller) remains. In addition, recent fMRI neuroimaging 
data indicate that both short-term memory and long-term memory are involved 
in these serial position effects (Talmi, Grady, Goshen-Gottstein, & Moscovitch, 
2005). Recognition of early items in the word list uniquely activated brain areas 
traditionally associated with long-term memory, but none of these areas were 
activated for retrieval of late items in the list.
We learned that more rehearsal leads to better long-term memory, but is better 
memory just a matter of more rehearsal (more study)? This question is addressed 
in the next section where we discuss moving information from short-term to long-
term memory (what you try to do when you study). You will learn that the type 
of rehearsal (study method) you use is important. Thus, the information in the 
next section can help you to develop better study strategies and better memory.
Section Summary
In this section, we discussed the three-stage model that describes the processing 
of information entering from the physical environment through our senses into our 
memory system. In general, sensory information enters the sensory registers that 
comprise the first stage of processing—sensory memory. These temporary storage 
registers have large capacities and hold essentially exact copies of the information 
until we can attend to it and process it further. The duration of these registers is very 
brief, however. In the case of the visual sensory register, the duration is less than a 
second. We can only attend to part of the information in each register to process it 
farther into the memory system. The rest of the information fades quickly from the 
register and is forgotten.

204  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
The information that we attend to gets recognized and moves into our short-term 
memory, the second stage in the three-stage memory model. Short-term memory 
is like our conscious workspace. It has a small capacity (7 ± 2 chunks of informa-
tion) and a brief duration (less than 30 seconds). Short-term memory is sometimes 
referred to as working memory, because it is here that we do the work necessary to 
encode new information into long-term memory and to accomplish all of our other 
conscious activities, such as problem solving and decision making.
The third stage of processing, long-term memory, is what we normally mean 
when we use the word “memory.” It is our long-term (perhaps permanent) reposi-
tory for information. In addition, the capacity of long-term memory is essentially 
limitless. There are different types of long-term memories. The major distinction is 
between explicit memories (those that require conscious recall and declaration) and 
implicit memories (those that do not require conscious recall and declaration). There 
are two types of explicit memories—semantic memories (our factual knowledge 
base) and episodic memories (our personal life experiences). There are three types 
of implicit memories— procedural memories that involve some type of physical 
or cognitive procedure, classical conditioning memories, and memories leading to 
priming effects.
Research findings with amnesics who have suffered hippocampal damage 
indicate that the hippocampus is important for explicit memory formation but not 
implicit memory formation. These findings also support the distinctiveness of short-
term and long-term memories because these amnesics have relatively normal short-
term memory. Further evidence for these two stages is provided by the primacy 
effect and the recency effect for free recall. The independent manipulation of these 
effects indicates that they are the products of recall from different memory stages.
ConceptCheck | 1
➤	 explain why you can think of the information in sensory memory as bottom-
up input and the information in long-term memory as top-down input.
➤	 explain why the very brief duration of iconic memory is necessary for nor-
mal visual perception.
➤	 explain what is meant by the term “chunk” with respect to the capacity of 
short-term memory, 7 6 2 chunks.
➤	 explain how the studies of h. M. indicate that he could not form any new  
explicit long-term memories, but could form new implicit long-term memories.
Encoding Information into Memory
There are three essential processes in our memory system—encoding, storage, and 
retrieval. Encoding is the process of transferring information from one memory 
stage to the next (from sensory into short-term memory and from short-term into 
long-term memory). Storage refers to the process of maintaining information  

EnCodinG InformAtion into Memory  |  205
in a particular stage. Storage is temporary except for in 
long-term memory. Retrieval is the process of bringing 
information stored in long-term memory to the conscious 
level in short-term memory. Let’s go back to the flow chart 
of the three-stage model of memory in Figure 5.1 (page 190). 
Encoding and retrieval determine the flow of information 
within the three-stage system. Information is first encoded 
from sensory memory to short-term memory where it can be 
stored temporarily. Information is then encoded from short-
term to long-term memory where it is stored more perma-
nently, but can be retrieved and brought back into short-term 
memory when we need to use it.
In this section, we will cover encoding and its role in mov-
ing information from short-term into long-term memory. 
Our focus will be on the best ways to achieve this transfer. 
We begin with a consideration of general encoding strategies.
How We Encode Information
The first distinction to consider is automatic versus effort-
ful processing (Hasher & Zacks, 1979). Automatic pro-
cessing is processing that occurs subconsciously and does 
not require attention. In contrast, effortful processing 
is processing that occurs consciously and requires attention. For a particular 
type of processing to become automatic, much practice is needed. A good example 
is reading. At first, learning to read is very effortful, but after years of practice 
it becomes easier and more automatic. Wouldn’t it be nice if encoding to learn 
(studying) were an automatic process? It is unlikely that studying can become as 
automatic as reading, but we can get better at it by using better encoding strate-
gies and practicing these strategies. In this section, we’ll discuss some better ways 
to encode. If you practice them, your encoding (and your memory) will improve.
Levels-of-processing theory.  Remember that encoding is the process of 
transferring information from one memory stage into another. Here we are inter-
ested in encoding from short-term to long-term memory. Encoding information 
into long-term memory is related to retrieving information from long-term mem-
ory. Some types of encoding lead to better retrieval. The levels-of-processing 
theory describes what types of encoding lead to better retrieval (Craik & Lockhart, 
1972). This theory assumes that incoming information can be processed at differ-
ent levels, from the simplistic physical level to the semantic level, and that seman-
tic processing, especially elaborative semantic processing, leads to better memory. 
According to this theory, there are three general levels of processing—physical, 
acoustic, and semantic. To understand the differences among these three levels, 
consider processing the word “brain.” We can process it as a string of lowercase 
letters. This would be the physical level. Next we could process “brain” by how it 
➤	 encoding  The process of mov-
ing information from one memory 
stage to the next (from sensory 
memory into short-term memory or 
from short-term memory to long-
term memory).
➤	 storage  The process of maintain-
ing information in a memory stage.
➤	 retrieval  The process of bringing 
information stored in long-term 
memory into short-term memory. 
➤	 automatic processing  Memory 
processing that occurs subcon-
sciously and does not require 
attention.
➤	 effortful processing  Memory pro-
cessing that occurs consciously 
and requires attention.
➤	 levels-of-processing theory  A 
theory of information processing in 
memory that assumes that seman-
tic processing, especially elabora-
tive semantic processing, leads to 
better long-term memory.

206  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
sounds, the acoustic level, which is a little deeper than the 
physical level. Third, we can process what “brain” means and 
then elaborate upon that meaning by relating it to what we 
know about parts of the brain and brain chemistry.
Let’s consider an experiment to see how these three 
levels may lead to different levels of memory performance. 
Researchers presented participants with a long list of words one at a time, but 
manipulated the level of processing of the words by manipulating the task to 
be performed on each word (Craik & Tulving, 1975; Experiment 2). For each 
word, one of three types of questions had to be answered. One type of question 
required processing the word at a physical level (for example, “Is this word in 
capital letters?”). A second type of question required acoustic processing (for 
example, “Does the word rhyme with bear?”). The third type of question required 
semantic processing (for example, “Will the word fit in the sentence, The man 
placed the______on the table?”). Participants did not know that they would 
be tested for their memory of the words. They only thought that they had to 
answer a question about each word. However, the experimenter later surprised 
the participants with a memory test for the words. Levels-
of-processing theory predicts that memory for the words 
that had to be processed semantically should be best, those 
processed acoustically next best, and those only processed 
physically worst. This is exactly what was found (see  
Figure 5.7). Long-term recognition memory was the best for 
the words encoded semantically, next best for those encoded 
acoustically, and worst for those only encoded physically.
Elaborative rehearsal. Maintenance rehearsal, the repeti-
tive cycling of information in short-term memory, was dis-
cussed earlier in the chapter. This type of rehearsal serves to 
maintain information in short-term memory. Levels-of-
processing theory, however, views this type of rehearsal as shal-
low, acoustic rehearsal. It is not very effective in producing good 
long-term memory for information. Semantic processing is 
much better. Once at the semantic level of processing, though, 
we should engage in elaborative rehearsal—rehearsing by 
relating the new material to information already in long-term 
memory. The memory organization created by the integration 
of the new information with existing information leads to more 
successful retrieval of the information than shallower process-
ing. This organization provides more retrieval cues (links with 
other information in long-term memory) for the new informa-
tion, thereby facilitating its retrieval. For example, to elabo-
rately encode the concept of elaborative rehearsal, you could 
relate it to other concepts that you learned recently by thinking 
➤	 elaborative rehearsal  A type of 
rehearsal in short-term memory 
in which incoming information is 
related to information from long-
term memory to encode it into 
long-term memory.
Physical
Acoustic
Semantic
0
20
40
60
80
Words recognized (percent)
Level of processing
m Figure 5.7 | Differences 
in Recognition Memory for 
Words Processed at Different 
Levels | Participants were presented 
a long list of words one at a time and 
had to answer a question about each 
word as it was presented. The nature 
of the questions led to different lev-
els of processing—physical (how it 
was printed), acoustic (how it sound-
ed), or semantic (what it meant). 
The level of processing dramatically 
affected the participants’ later ability 
to recognize the word as one that 
had been on this list. (Adapted from 
Craik & Tulving, 1975; Experiment 2.)

EnCodinG InformAtion into Memory  |  207
about such things as how elaborative rehearsal is different from maintenance 
rehearsal, how it relates to levels-of-processing theory, and how it is an example of 
effortful processing. Such elaboration enables much better long-term memory.
In elaborative rehearsal, you should try to relate the new information to infor-
mation you know well. Because you know yourself so well, you should elaborate 
by tying the new information to yourself. To learn new concepts, you should 
personalize them by thinking of examples of these concepts in your own experi-
ences. It is easier to remember information that you have related to yourself. This 
is called the self-reference effect, and it is a well-established research finding 
(Symons & Johnson, 1997). For example, researchers have found that people can 
remember more words from a list if they related the words to themselves (Rogers, 
Kuiper, & Kirker, 1977). Participants were asked whether list words such as  
“generous” applied to them. Later recall of such words was very good, even better 
than for words processed at the semantic level (as in the Craik and Tulving study). 
Think about how this might work. What if the word were “honest”? You would 
start thinking about incidents in your life in which you were honest and in which 
you were not. The word would then be linked to all of these incidents, facilitating 
its later recall. So when you are studying a new concept, try to find examples of it 
in your own life. For some concepts this is easy to do; for others it isn’t. However, 
it’s worth the effort because such connections will help you to remember the  
concept through the self-reference effect.
Environmental effects on encoding.  The fact that elaborative rehearsal 
improves memory stems from a larger principle—the encoding specificity princi-
ple (Tulving, 1983). In simple terms, the encoding specificity principle proposes 
that the cues present during encoding serve as the best cues for retrieval. This is 
why the various concepts and examples that you relate to a new concept during 
elaborative rehearsal help you remember the concept. They were present during 
encoding so they serve as good retrieval cues. Such cues are internal environmen-
tal cues; they refer to internal cognitive processing, what you were thinking about 
during rehearsal. Encoding specificity also applies to the external environmental 
cues present during encoding. Many research studies have shown that long-term 
memory is better when the physical study and test environments are as similar as 
possible. For example, in one rather dramatic demonstration 
of this, participants learned and were tested either underwa-
ter or on land (Godden & Baddeley, 1975). The two groups 
that had the same study and test environments (both were 
underwater or both were on land) remembered significantly 
better than the two groups that had their study and test envi-
ronments reversed (one underwater and the other on land, or 
vice versa). However, you need not rush to classrooms to 
study. Classroom environmental effects on college exam per-
formance are not very strong (Saufley, Otaka, & Bavaresco, 
1985). Why? External environmental effects on learning 
➤	 self-reference effect  The superior 
long-term memory for information 
related to oneself at time of encod-
ing into long-term memory.
➤	 encoding specificity principle  The 
principle that the environmental 
cues (both internal and external) 
present at the time information is 
encoded into long-term memory 
serve as the best retrieval cues for 
the information.

208  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
diminish when the learning has taken place in 
several environments (Smith, Glenberg, & 
Bjork, 1978). In the case of exams, students 
have successfully learned the relevant infor-
mation in a variety of environments ranging 
from the classroom to nonclassroom environ-
ments such as the library and dormitory 
rooms, thereby overriding the classroom envi-
ronmental effect.
We have limited our discussion so far  
to a rather narrow definition of internal 
environment—a person’s mental activities at 
the time of encoding. Broader internal envi-
ronmental factors, such as a person’s physi-
ological state or mood, also impact encoding 
and retrieval. These effects lead to a phenom-
enon known as state-dependent memory, 
memory that depends upon the relationship 
of one’s physiological state at time of encoding and retrieval. The best memory 
occurs when people are in the same state at retrieval as they were at encoding, 
and memory is hindered by state differences. For example, people under the 
influence of alcohol at time of encoding would recall best if under the influence 
at the time of retrieval. Please note, however, that memory under the influence 
of alcohol, regardless of the state at the time of retrieval, is very poor. It is best 
to encode and retrieve in a nonalcoholically influenced state.
There are similar effects on memory that depend on the relationship between 
a person’s emotional states, such as being happy or sad, at time of encoding 
and retrieval. Because one’s mood is involved, these effects are referred to as 
mood-dependent memory, the retrieval of a particular memory is better when 
a person’s mood at retrieval is the same as it was during encoding. Like state-
dependency effects, mood-dependency effects furnish support for the encoding 
specificity principle—context is important for successful 
memory retrieval. There is also a related phenomenon 
called the mood-congruence effect— the tendency to recall 
memories that are congruent with a person’s current mood. 
A particular mood cues memories that are consistent with 
that mood (Eich, 1995). We tend to remember more positive 
events when we are feeling good and more negative events 
when we are feeling down. These events have been associated 
with the accompanying emotions. Thus, the emotions serve 
as retrieval cues for the events. This congruence effect may 
hinder recovery in depressed people because they will tend 
to remember negative events and not positive ones. In fact, 
this is the case. Depressed patients report more memories 
➤	 state-dependent memory  Long-
term memory retrieval is best when 
a person’s physiological state at 
the time of encoding and retrieval 
of the information is the same.
➤	 mood-dependent memory  Long-
term memory retrieval is best when 
a person’s mood state at the time 
of encoding and retrieval of the 
information is the same.
➤	 mood-congruence effect   
Tendency to retrieve experiences 
and information that are congruent 
with a person’s current mood.
Callahan. Courtesy of Levin Represents.
“I wonder if you’d mind giving me directions. I’ve 
never been sober in this part of town before.”
Callahan

EnCodinG InformAtion into Memory  |  209
related to illness, injury, and death than nondepressed people 
(Schacter, 2000). Think positively, and the mood-congruence 
effect will help maintain that positive attitude.
In summary, elaborative rehearsal is the most effective 
strategy for encoding. Research has found that actors working 
to learn their lines use elaborative rehearsal including encod-
ing specificity, mood-congruence effects, and the self-reference 
effect (Noice & Noice, 1997). They do not use shallow process-
ing and just memorize their lines. (Neither should students try 
this in their courses!) Elaborative rehearsal is the key to more 
effective learning. It is important to practice this type of rehearsal. You should 
integrate information that you are trying to learn with as much other information 
in your knowledge base as you can, especially relating it to yourself. You will get 
better at this elaboration strategy as you practice it, and learning will become easier.
How to Improve Encoding
In this section, we will discuss a few more specific ways to improve memory. We’ll 
start with some techniques to improve memory for lists and more organized sets 
of concepts. These techniques use a mnemonic, a memory aid. Mnemonics are 
useful for remembering lists of items, especially ordered lists, speeches, and long 
passages of text. We’ll start with a mnemonic that was used by ancient Greek 
orators to remember speeches.
The Greek orators used a mnemonic called the method of loci (Yates, 1966). 
“Loci” is the plural of “locus,” which means place or location. In the method 
of loci, the sequential pieces of information to be remembered are first associ-
ated with sequential locations in a 
very familiar room or place. Then, 
when retrieving the information, one 
would merely mentally go around the 
room (or place) and retrieve the item 
stored at each sequential location. 
The Greek orators would mentally 
store the major points of a speech 
at sequential locations in the room 
where they were speaking. Then, dur-
ing the speech an orator would go 
from location to location within the 
room to retrieve the key points of his 
speech. If you were trying to remem-
ber an ordered list of items for an 
exam, you could pair the items sys-
tematically with locations within the 
classroom and then during the exam 
➤	 mnemonic  A memory aid.
➤	 method of loci  A mnemonic in 
which sequential pieces of informa-
tion to be remembered are encoded 
by associating them with sequential 
locations in a very familiar room or 
place and then the pieces of infor-
mation are retrieved by mentally 
going around the room (place) and 
retrieving the piece at each location.
© 1994 by Sidney Harris.
“You simply associate each number with a word, such as 'table' 
and 3,476,029.”

210  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
mentally go from location to location within the classroom 
to retrieve them. The method of loci is a type of elaborative 
rehearsal using mental imagery. You elaborate upon items 
that you want to remember by visually associating them with 
a series of locations that you already know well or that will be 
available at the time of recall.
All mnemonics work by using some type of elaboration. In 
another mnemonic, the peg-word system, you visually asso-
ciate the items in a list with a jingle that you first memorize. 
The jingle is “One is a bun, two is a shoe, three is a tree, four 
is a door, five is a hive, six is sticks, seven is heaven, eight is a 
gate, nine is swine, and ten is a hen.” You then associate each successive item in 
the list with the object for each successive number. For example, the first item on 
the list would be associated visually in a mental image with bun. If the word to 
be remembered were “dog”, then you might construct an image of a big bun with 
a dog in it. Then, as you go through the peg words, you retrieve the associated 
image, so you can retrieve the list.
One might think that these mnemonic techniques require much more effort than 
just memorizing the information that we want to remember. But researchers have 
found that people using mnemonics demonstrate much better memory than those 
who have just attempted to memorize a list. Why? As we discussed earlier, elabora-
tive rehearsal is better for encoding into long-term memory. Professional memory 
experts do not have exceptional intelligence or structural brain differences but 
rather have their own unique mnemonic techniques and are superior at using them 
(Maguire, Valentine, Wilding, & Kapur, 2003). Their techniques, like the ones that 
we have described, are all essentially based on elaborative encoding, the key to supe-
rior memory. For a fascinating journey into the world of these memory experts, you 
should read Joshua Foer’s engaging book, Moonwalking with Einstein: The art and science 
of remembering everything (2011). Under the tutelage of some of these experts, Foer 
went from being a journalist with an average memory to winning the U.S. Memory 
Championship in 2006, testifying to the effectiveness of mnemonic techniques.
Mnemonics that involve little elaboration have not been found to be very effec-
tive. A good example is the first-letter technique (Gruneberg & Herrmann, 1997). 
In the first-letter technique, you compose a word, acronym, or sentence from the 
first letters of the words you want to remember. This is the mnemonic that we 
suggested in Chapter 3 to use to remember the colors of the spectrum (the name 
ROY G. BIV—Red, Orange, Yellow, Green, Blue, Indigo, Violet). This mnemonic 
helps, but it is not as effective as the other, more elaborative mnemonics, 
especially for more complex information.
So what else—in addition to elaborative rehearsal and the use of mnemonics— 
improves encoding and retrieval? There are three concepts that will help:  
(1) distributed study is better than cramming, (2) practice makes perfect, and  
(3) testing enhances memory. The superior memory for spaced study versus 
cramming is called the spacing (distributed study) effect. Your memory will 
➤	 peg-word system  A mnemonic 
in which the items in a list to be 
remembered are associated with 
the sequential items in a memorized 
jingle and then the list is retrieved 
by going through the jingle and 
retrieving the associated items.
➤	 spacing (distributed study) effect   
Superior long-term memory for 
spaced study versus massed study 
(cramming).

EnCodinG InformAtion into Memory  |  211
improve if you distribute your studying for an exam over the entire preparation  
interval and not just the few days before the exam (Payne & Wenger, 1996). 
Hundreds of experiments have shown the benefits of distributed study (Cepeda, 
Pashler, Vul, Wixted, & Rohrer, 2006) In fact, for best results, distribute study 
and cram. The more you study, the more you learn. Overlearning, continuing 
to study material past the point of initial learning, improves memory (Rohrer 
& Taylor, 2006). Remember what we said about practice and automatic process-
ing. Continued practice will make retrieval more automatic. Such practice may 
not make you “perfect,” but you’ll definitely do better. Lastly, don’t just study. 
Incorporate repeated self-testing during your distributed study periods. Such 
testing will enhance your memory by allowing you to practice retrieval, which is 
what exams require (Roediger & Karpicke, 2006). Don’t wait for an exam to test 
your retrieval; test it regularly during study. It will not only help you to practice 
retrieval but also help to guide your study by pointing out what you have learned 
and what you have not learned.
Section Summary
In this section, we discussed the most effective encoding strategy, elaborative 
rehearsal, which is relating new information to well-known information in long-
term memory. Elaboration is most effective when we relate the new information to 
ourselves, the self-reference effect. Elaborative rehearsal leads to better memory 
because we create good retrieval cues when we integrate the new information 
with older, well-known information. This relates to the encoding specificity prin-
ciple, which states that the best retrieval cues are those present during encoding. 
We learned that state-dependent memory, mood-dependent memory, and mood- 
congruent memory are special cases of this principle. In these cases, the physiologi-
cal state and the emotional mood provide strong retrieval cues.
We also discussed how mnemonic devices, memory aid techniques, are espe-
cially effective for remembering ordered information in a list, speech, or text. The 
method of loci, which originated in ancient Greece, and the peg-word system 
are both very effective because of their use of elaboration and visual imagery. In  
addition, to improve memory we should engage in spaced study—distributing our 
elaborative study over time rather than cramming. Overlearning and self-testing are 
also beneficial.
ConceptCheck | 2
➤	 explain why elaborative encoding is more effective than just memorizing.
➤	 explain how state-dependent memory and mood-dependent memory stem 
from the encoding specificity principle.
➤	 explain what the method-of-loci mnemonic and the peg-word system  
mnemonic have in common.

212  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
Retrieving Information  
from Memory
In the last section, we focused on how to encode information 
into long-term memory. In this section, we will examine how 
we retrieve encoded information. First, we will consider the 
various ways that retrieval is measured. This will be followed 
by a discussion of forgetting, the failure to retrieve. Here 
we will discuss the major theories of why our memories fail 
us. Then, we will examine the reconstructive nature of the 
retrieval process by considering the role of schemas, source 
misattribution, and the misinformation effect. Finally, we 
will discuss the problem of “false” memories.
How to Measure Retrieval
The three main methods for measuring our ability to retrieve information from 
long-term memory are recall, recognition, and relearning. Recall is a measure of 
retrieval that requires the reproduction of the information with essentially no 
retrieval cues. Common recall measures would be short-answer and essay test 
questions. Recognition is a measure of retrieval that only requires the identi-
fication of the information in the presence of retrieval cues. In a recognition 
test you do not have to reproduce the information, you only have to identify it. 
Multiple-choice and matching test questions are examples of recognition test 
questions. Usually such questions are easier because retrieval cues (the answers 
themselves) are present to help you remember the information. The third 
method, relearning, is sometimes called the savings method because 
it is a measure of the amount of time saved when learning informa-
tion for the second time. The most relevant example of relearning 
for students is studying for a comprehensive final examination 
in a course. You must relearn the material. It will take you less 
time to relearn it, but how much less depends upon how well 
you learned it the first time.
Hermann Ebbinghaus conducted the first experimental stud-
ies on human memory over a hundred years ago in Germany 
using the relearning method (Ebbinghaus, 1885/1964). His stimu-
lus materials were lists of nonsense syllables, groupings of three let-
ters (consonant-vowel-consonant such as BAV) that are not words 
or acronyms. He used meaningless nonsense syllables because 
he wanted to study pure memory for the list items. His famil-
iarity with and knowledge of words and acronyms would have 
affected his ability to learn and remember the lists. His experi-
mental procedure was very straightforward. He would study a list 
of nonsense syllables until he could correctly recite the complete list 
➤	 recall  A measure of long-term 
memory retrieval that requires the 
reproduction of the information 
with essentially no retrieval cues.
➤	 recognition  A measure of long-
term memory retrieval that only 
requires the identification of the 
information in the presence of 
retrieval cues.
➤	 relearning  The savings method 
of measuring long-term memory 
retrieval in which the measure is 
the amount of time saved when 
learning information for the  
second time.
Hermann Ebbinghaus

RetrievinG InformAtion from Memory   |  213
without any hesitations. He then put the list aside and waited some period of time 
(from 20 minutes up to 31 days) and then relearned the list to the same criterion 
(one complete recitation without any hesitations).
To get a measure of relearning, Ebbinghaus computed what he called a savings 
score—the reduction in the number of trials it took him to reach criterion. For example, 
if it took him 10 trials to learn a list initially and only 5 to relearn it, he saved 50 percent  
(5 vs. 10 trials). He used many different lists of nonsense syllables and many differ-
ent retention intervals (the different amounts of time between initial learning and 
relearning). The results were like those shown in Figure 5.8. The forgetting curve 
in this figure shows that the greatest amount of forgetting occurs rather quickly 
and then tapers off. In Ebbinghaus’s case, after about 2 days, little more forgetting 
occurred. This type of forgetting curve for long-term memory has been obtained 
over and over again in memory research (Bahrick, 1984). What causes this forget-
ting? Let’s consider some possible explanations.
Why We Forget
There is no question that we forget. Our memories clearly fail us. This is espe-
cially problematic for exams. Haven’t we all taken an exam and forgotten some 
m Figure 5.8 | Forgetting Curve for Long-Term Memory | The course of long-
term forgetting usually takes on the shape of this figure—a rapid steep decrease that then 
levels off. In Ebbinghaus’s memory research with nonsense syllables, the amount of time 
he saved relearning the material decreased dramatically for the first 2 days following initial 
learning and then leveled off after that. (Adapted from Ebbinghaus, 1885/1964.)
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percentage of list
retained when relearning
Time in days since learning list
2
30
15
1
3 4 5
10
20
25
Retention
drops,
then levels off

214  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
information and then retrieved it after the exam was over? 
To understand forgetting, we must confront two questions. 
First, why do we forget? Second, do we really ever truly forget 
or do we just fail to retrieve information at a particular point 
in time? To answer these questions, we’ll take a look at four 
theories of forgetting—encoding failure theory, storage decay 
theory, interference theory, and cue-dependent theory.
Encoding failure theory states that sometimes forgetting is not really forget-
ting but rather encoding failure (sometimes called pseudoforgetting). The infor-
mation in question never entered long-term memory. We can’t forget information 
that never entered long-term memory (that we never encoded into long-term 
memory). This would be like trying to locate a particular book in a library when 
the library never purchased it. For a good example of encoding failure, take the  
common penny. How well do you remember its features? Take a few minutes and 
try to draw the front and back of a penny. If you’re like the participants in Nickerson 
and Adams’s (1979) study, you’ll find this difficult to do. There are eight critical 
features on a penny, and Nickerson and Adams found the median number recalled 
and located correctly to be just three. As a second exercise, consider Figure 5.9.  
➤	 encoding failure theory  A theory 
of forgetting that proposes that 
forgetting is due to the failure to 
encode the information into long-
term memory.
m Figure 5.9 | An Example of Encoding Failure | Can you identify the real penny? 
Most Americans cannot. Why? The answer is likely encoding failure. Most of us are not 
that interested in coins and have never bothered to encode the exact features of a penny 
into long-term memory, so we have difficulty in choosing the real penny. This may be 
referred to as forgetting, but it is more appropriately called encoding failure. You can’t 
really forget something that you did not put into long-term memory. The first penny (a) is 
the real penny. (From Nickerson & Adams, 1979.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)

RetrievinG InformAtion from Memory   |  215
Which one of these pennies is the real penny? Nickerson and 
Adams found that most Americans do not know. Why? They 
probably never encoded the details of the penny, so just as 
they cannot draw a penny correctly, they cannot pick out 
the real one from fake ones. If we do not encode informa-
tion into long-term memory, we obviously will not be able to 
remember it.
The other three theories of forgetting deal with informa-
tion that was encoded into long-term memory, but that 
we cannot retrieve. The storage decay theory suggests that 
forgetting occurs because of a problem in the storage of the 
information. The storage decay theory assumes that the 
biological representation of the memory gradually decays 
over time and that periodic usage of the information will 
help to maintain it in storage. This latter assumption reflects 
the “use it or lose it” principle. This theory proposes that 
we forget because the information is no longer available in 
long-term memory. We forget because we cannot possibly 
remember it. The memory trace has decayed away. This would be like trying to 
get a particular book from a library, but finding that its pages had rotted away.
The other two theories of forgetting propose that there are retrieval prob-
lems and not a problem with storage. Both assume that the forgotten infor-
mation is still available in long-term memory, but cannot be retrieved. Each 
of the theories proposes a different reason for why the information cannot be 
retrieved. Interference theory proposes that other information interferes and 
makes the forgotten information inaccessible. In our library book example, 
this would be comparable to boxes of books blocking access to the location 
where the book is located. This theory proposes two types of such interference:  
(1) proactive interference—the disruptive effect of prior learning on the retrieval  
of new information, and (2) retroactive interference—the disruptive effect of 
new learning on the retrieval of old information. To help you understand the  
difference between these two types of interference, remember that proactive is 
forward acting and retroactive is backward acting interference. Let’s consider a 
couple of examples. Think about changing phone numbers after having a particu-
lar number for many years. When asked for your phone number, remembering the 
old one interferes with retrieving the new one. This would be proactive interfer-
ence. The disruptive effect is from prior learning (your old phone number). For 
an example of retroactive interference, think about being at a party with many 
people you do not know. You meet someone that you want to talk to later, but 
after meeting her, you are introduced to several other people. Now you cannot 
remember her name. The names of the people that you met after her are interfer-
ing with your retrieval of her name. This is retroactive interference because it is a 
case of the disruptive effect of new learning on the retrieval of old information. An 
additional example of each type of interference is given in Figure 5.10 (page 216).
➤	 storage decay theory  A theory 
of forgetting that proposes that 
forgetting is due to the decay of 
the biological representation of 
the information and that periodic 
usage of the information will help 
to maintain it in storage.
➤	 interference theory  A theory of 
forgetting that proposes that for-
getting is due to other information 
in memory interfering and thereby 
making the to-be-remembered 
information inaccessible.
➤	 proactive interference  The disrup-
tive effect of prior learning on the 
retrieval of new information.
➤	 retroactive interference  The dis-
ruptive effect of new learning on 
the retrieval of old information.

216  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
Study
French
Study
Spanish
Time
Time
Proactive
interference
Retroactive
interference
Take
Spanish
test
Study
French
Study
Spanish
Take
French
test
m Figure 5.10 | Proactive and 
Retroactive Interference |  
In the proactive interference 
example, prior learning (French) 
disrupts memory for newly 
learned information (Spanish). 
In the retroactive interference 
example, new learning (Spanish) 
disrupts memory for information 
learned earlier (French).
Cue-dependent theory also assumes that forgetting stems from not gaining 
access to the desired information (Tulving, 1974). According to cue-dependent  
theory, we forget because the cues necessary for retrieval are not available. The 
information is available, but we cannot access it because we cannot find it. This 
is like trying to find a particular book in a library without its call number and a 
map of the library stacks. We wouldn’t have the cues necessary to locate it, so it 
is likely we would not be able to do so. 
Successful retrieval is dependent upon 
the availability of the retrieval cues. An 
example of forgetting involving inac-
cessibility due to insufficient cues that 
all of us have experienced is the tip-of- 
the-tongue (TOT) phenomenon in 
which we can almost recall something, 
but the memory eludes us (Brown & 
McNeill, 1966). The phenomenon’s 
name comes from the colloquial saying, 
“It’s on the tip of my tongue.” You feel 
like you know the inaccessible informa-
tion and are on the brink of retrieving 
it. Diary research indicates that college 
students experience roughly one or two 
TOT states per week, compared to two to 
four per week for elderly adults; middle-
aged adults fall somewhere in between 
(Schacter, 2000). TOT experiences occur 
most often for names of people. You may 
remember what letter begins a person’s  
Dave Coverly

RetrievinG InformAtion from Memory   |  217
name, but you still cannot retrieve the name. You are confi-
dent that you know it, but you just don’t seem able to pull 
it out of your memory. Partial information about the name 
often helps to resolve the TOT state by providing cues that 
lead to successful recall.
So, there are many reasons why we forget. The four major 
theories are summarized in Table 5.2, but how can you apply 
this knowledge to enhance your learning? First, sometimes 
we forget because we do not encode the information into 
long-term memory. You should be especially wary of this rea-
son when you are preparing for your class exams. You need 
to study thoroughly to avoid encoding failure on exams. Second, we may forget 
if information that is encoded and stored in long-term memory isn’t periodically 
recalled and refreshed. The information can fade away over time. Think about 
what you have learned in the various courses that you have taken so far in col-
lege. After a course is over, you may sometimes feel like you retained little of that 
information for very long. If you want to retain more of it for a longer period of 
time, you need to regularly recall and use it. Third, the information that we are 
trying to retrieve may still be there, but we forget because other information may 
interfere with our retrieval of it or we may not have the necessary retrieval cues 
available to find it. Both elaboration during encoding and overlearning will help 
to reduce these retrieval problems.
The next section concerns the information that we do retrieve. Is it accurate 
or is it distorted? The answer is that it is often distorted. How does this occur? It 
occurs because retrieval is reconstructive and not exact. Let’s take at look at the 
retrieval process to see how its reconstructive nature may distort our memories.
➤	 cue-dependent theory  A theory of 
forgetting that proposes that for-
getting is due to the unavailability 
of the retrieval cues necessary to 
locate the information in long-term 
memory.
➤	 tip-of-the-tongue (TOT) phenom-
enon  The failure to recall specific 
information from memory com-
bined with partial recall and the 
feeling that recall is imminent.
Table 5.2   Four Theories of Forgetting
Theory
Explanation of Forgetting
Encoding failure theory
Forgetting is due to the failure to encode the infor-
mation into long-term memory
Storage decay theory
Forgetting is due to the decay of the biological 
representation of the information in long-term 
memory
Interference theory
Forgetting is due to the interference of other infor-
mation in long-term memory, making the forgotten 
information inaccessible
Cue-dependent theory
Forgetting is due to the unavailability of the 
retrieval cues necessary to locate the information 
in long-term memory

218  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
The Reconstructive Nature of Retrieval
The act of remembering is an act of reconstruction. Memory 
does not work like a tape recorder or a video recorder. 
Retrieval is not like playback. Our memories are far from 
exact replicas of past events. If you read a newspaper this 
morning, do you remember the stories that you read in the 
paper word for word? We usually encode the gist or main 
theme of the story along with some of the story’s highlights.  
Then, when we retrieve the information from our memory, we reconstruct a 
memory of the story using the theme and the highlights.
Our retrieval reconstruction is guided by what are called schemas—frame-
works for our knowledge about people, objects, events, and actions. These sche-
mas allow us to organize our world. For example, what happens when you enter 
a dentist’s office or what happens when you go to a restaurant to eat? You have 
schemas in your memory for these events. The schemas tell us what normally hap-
pens. For example, consider the schema for eating out in a restaurant (Schank & 
Abelson, 1977). First, a host or hostess seats you and gives you a menu. Then the 
waitperson gets your drink order, brings your drinks, and then takes your meal 
order. Your food arrives, you eat it, the waitperson brings the bill. You pay it, leave 
a tip, and go. These schemas allow us to encode and retrieve information about 
the world in a more organized, efficient manner.
The first experimental work on schemas and their effects on memory was con-
ducted by Sir Frederick Bartlett in the first half of the twentieth century (Bartlett, 
1932). Bartlett had his participants study some stories that were rather unusual. 
He then tested their memory for these stories at varying time intervals. When the 
participants recalled the stories, they made them more consistent with their own 
schemas about the world. For example, one story did not say anyone was wounded  
in the battle described, but participants recalled that many men were wounded, 
fitting their schemas for battles. Unusual details were normalized. For example, 
participants recalled incorrectly that the men in another story were fishing rather 
than hunting seals. In addition, the stories were greatly shortened in length when 
recalled. Strangely, the participants did not even realize that they were changing 
many of the details of the stories. In fact, the parts that they changed were those 
that they were most confident about remembering.
Bartlett’s participants had reconstructed the stories using their schemas and 
did not even realize it. The main point to remember is that they distorted the 
stories in line with their schemas. Why? Schemas allow us to encode and retrieve 
information more efficiently. It would be impossible to encode and retrieve the 
exact details of every event in our lives. That’s why we need organizing schemas to 
guide us in this task, even though they do not provide an exact copy of what hap-
pened. This seems a small cost given the benefits provided by organizing memory 
in terms of schemas.
Memory can be further distorted in reconstruction by source misattribution 
and the misinformation effect. Source misattribution occurs when we do not 
➤	 schemas  Frameworks for our 
knowledge about people, objects, 
events, and actions that allow us 
to organize and interpret informa-
tion about our world.
➤	 source misattribution  Attributing 
a memory to the wrong source, 
resulting in a false memory.

RetrievinG InformAtion from Memory   |  219
remember the true source of a memory and attribute the 
memory to the wrong source. Maybe you dream something 
and then later misremember that it actually happened. You 
misattribute the source to actual occurrence rather than 
occurrence in a dream. Source information for memories is not very good. You 
need to beware of this when writing papers. You may unintentionally use another 
person’s ideas and think they are yours. You have forgotten their source. Even if 
source misattribution is unintentional, it is still plagiarism.
A famous case of source misattribution involved noted developmental psychol-
ogist Jean Piaget (Loftus & Ketcham, 1991). For much of his life, Piaget believed 
that when he was a child, his nursemaid had thwarted an attempt to kidnap him. 
He remembered the attempt, even remembered the details of the event. When 
the nursemaid finally admitted to making up the story, Piaget couldn’t believe it.  
He had reconstructed the event from the many times the nursemaid recounted 
the incident and misattributed the source to actual occurrence. This is like think-
ing that something we dreamed really occurred. The source of the memory is 
misattributed. Source misattribution results in what is called a false memory, an 
inaccurate memory that feels as real as an accurate memory. False memories can 
also be the result of imagination and observation inflation and the misinforma-
tion effect.
Imagination inflation is increased confidence in a false memory of an event 
caused by repeatedly imagining the event. For example, imagining performing 
an action often induces a false memory of having actually performed it (Garry, 
Manning, Loftus, & Sherman, 1996; Goff & Roediger, 1998). Repeated imagining 
inflates the confidence the person has that he actually performed the action, the 
imagination inflation effect. What might cause this disconcerting memory failure?  
Several factors likely contribute to the formation of these false memories. For 
example, actually perceiving something and imagining it activate the same brain 
areas, leading to similar neural events that when tested might cause confusion 
as to whether the event was imagined or real (Gonsalves et al., 2004). Secondly, 
repeatedly imagining an event makes it seem increasingly familiar. This sense of 
familiarity can then be misinterpreted as evidence that the event actually occurred 
(Sharman, Garry, & Beuke, 2004). Lastly, the more vividly we are able to imagine 
events, the more likely it is that the imagined events feel like real events (Loftus, 
2001; Thomas, Bulevich, & Loftus, 2003).
There is now evidence for a similar false memory effect in which a false memory 
of self-performance of an action is induced by merely observing another person’s 
actions (Lindner, Echterhoff, Davidson, & Brand, 2010). It has been named the 
observation inflation effect because of its similarity to the imagination inflation 
effect. What could account for this effect? The mirror neuron systems that we 
discussed in Chapter 4 may be involved. Research on mirroring suggests that 
observation of another person’s action may trigger a covert simulation of the 
action and thus activate motor representations similar to those produced during 
actual self-performance of the action (Iacoboni, 2009b). Other evidence suggests 
➤	 false memory  An inaccurate 
memory that feels as real as an 
accurate memory.

220  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
that the neural correlates for such mirrored 
motor representations are similar to those for  
self-performed actions (Senfor, Van Petten, & 
Kutas, 2002). Thus, when a person is tested 
about actually performing the observed action, 
the mirrored action representations could erro-
neously be reactivated, leading to the observation 
inflation effect (Lindner et al., 2010).
The misinformation effect occurs when a 
memory is distorted by subsequent exposure to 
misleading information (Loftus, 2005). Elizabeth 
Loftus and her colleagues have provided numer-
ous demonstrations of the misinformation 
effect, involving thousands of subjects, over the 
past four decades (Frenda, Nichols, & Loftus, 
2011). These studies usually involve witnessing 
an event and then being tested for memory of the event but being given mislead-
ing information at the time of the test. Let’s consider an example. Loftus and 
John Palmer (1974) showed participants a film of a traffic accident and then 
later tested their memory for the accident. 
The test included misleading information 
for some of the participants. For example, 
some participants were asked, “How fast 
were the cars going when they smashed into 
each other?” and others were asked, “How 
fast were the cars going when they hit each 
other?” Participants who were asked the 
question with the word “smashed” estimat-
ed the speed to be much higher than those 
who were asked the question with the word 
“hit.” In addition, when brought back a 
week later, those participants who had been 
questioned with the word “smashed” more 
often thought that they had seen broken 
glass in the accident when in fact there was 
none. The key theme of this line of research 
is that our memories for events are distorted 
by exposure to misinformation. The result-
ing false memories seem like real memories.
False memories have important implica-
tions for use of eyewitness testimony in 
criminal cases and for the controversy over 
memories of childhood sexual abuse that 
have supposedly been repressed but then are 
Dr. Elizabeth Loftus has conducted research on eye-
witness testimony and the inaccuracies in memory 
retrieval for over 30 years. Given her expertise in this 
area, she has testified as an expert witness in over 200 
court cases, including many high-profile cases such as 
the trial of serial killer Ted Bundy (Neimark, 1996).
AP Photo/Jodi Hilton.
Lee Lorenz/The New Yorker Collection/www.cartoonbank.com.

RetrievinG InformAtion from Memory   |  221
“recovered” in adulthood. The Loftus and Palmer research 
example shows us that eyewitness testimony is subject to 
error and manipulation by misleading information. Between 
1989 and 2007, for example, 201 prisoners in the United 
States were freed because of DNA evidence; and 77 percent of these prisoners 
had been mistakenly identified by eyewitnesses (Hallinan, 2009). Many of these 
overturned cases rested on the testimony of two or more mistaken eyewitnesses. 
Eyewitnesses not only often misidentify innocent people as criminals but they 
also often do so with the utmost confidence, and jurors tend to heavily weigh an 
eyewitness’s confidence when judging their believability.
Clearly, certain types of interrogation, including the way questions are worded, 
could lead to false memories. With respect to the repressed memory controversy, 
many memory researchers are skeptical and think that these “recovered” memo-
ries may describe events that never occurred (like the kidnapping attempt on 
Piaget as a child). Instead, they may be false memories that have been constructed 
and may even have been inadvertently implanted by therapists during treatment 
sessions. In fact, researchers have demonstrated that such implanting is possible 
(Loftus, Coan, & Pickrell, 1996; Loftus & Ketchum, 1994). We must remember, 
however, that demonstrating the possibility of an event does not demonstrate 
that it actually happened. So, are all memories of childhood sexual abuse false? 
Absolutely not. Sexual abuse of all kinds is unfortunately all too real. The impor-
tant point for us is that the research on false memory has provided empirical evi-
dence to support an alternative explanation to the claims for recovered memories, 
and this will help to sort out the true cases from the false.
Section Summary
In this section, we considered the three ways to measure retrieval—recall, recognition,  
and relearning. In recall, the information has to be reproduced, but in recognition it 
only has to be identified. In relearning, the time one saves in relearning information 
is the measure of memory. For all three retrieval measures, forgetting from long-
term memory levels off after a rapid initial burst of forgetting.
There are four major theories that address the question of why we forget. 
Encoding failure theory assumes that the information is never encoded into long-
term memory, so it is not there to be retrieved. The storage decay theory assumes 
that the information is encoded but that it decays during storage so that it is no 
longer available to be retrieved. The other two theories assume that the informa-
tion is still available in long-term memory, but cannot be accessed. Interference 
theory assumes that the retrieval failure is due to other information blocking our 
retrieval. This interfering information could be older information interfering with 
the retrieval of new information (proactive interference) or new information inter-
fering with the retrieval of older information (retroactive interference). The other 
theory, cue-dependent theory, assumes that the cues necessary to retrieve the 
information are not available, meaning that the information cannot be located in 
long-term memory.
➤	 misinformation effect  The distor-
tion of a memory by exposure to 
misleading information.

222  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
Memory is a reconstructive process guided by our schemas—organized frame-
works of our knowledge about the world. The use of schemas along with source misat-
tribution problems, imagination and observation inflation, and the misinformation 
effect can lead to false memories, inaccurate memories that feel as real as accurate  
memories. Such false memories create questions about the accuracy of eyewitness 
testimony and the validity of supposed repressed memories of childhood abuse.
ConceptCheck | 3
➤	 explain the difference between recall and recognition as methods to measure 
retrieval.
➤	 explain how the four major theories of forgetting differ with respect to the 
availability versus accessibility of the forgotten information.
➤	 explain how schemas help to create false memories.
➤	 explain how source misattribution and the misinformation effect lead to false 
memories.

Study Guide
223
Chapter Key Terms
You should know the definitions of the following key terms from the chapter. they 
are listed in the order in which they appear in the chapter. For those you do not know, 
return to the relevant section of the chapter to learn them. When you think that you 
know all of the terms, complete the matching exercise based on these key terms.
sensory memory (SM)
iconic memory
temporal integration 
procedure
Sperling’s full-report 
procedure
Sperling’s partial-report 
procedure
short-term memory (STM)
memory span task
memory span
chunk
distractor task
maintenance rehearsal
long-term memory (LTM)
explicit (declarative) memory
semantic memory
episodic memory
implicit (nondeclarative) 
memory
procedural memory
priming
amnesic
anterograde amnesia
retrograde amnesia
infantile/child amnesia
free recall task
primacy effect
recency effect
encoding
storage
retrieval
automatic processing
effortful processing
levels-of-processing theory
elaborative rehearsal
self-reference effect
encoding specificity principle
state-dependent memory
mood-dependent memory
mood-congruence effect
mnemonic
method of loci
peg-word system
spacing (distributed study) 
effect
recall
recognition
relearning
encoding failure theory
storage decay theory
interference theory
proactive interference
retroactive interference
cue-dependent theory
tip-of-the-tongue (TOT) 
phenomenon
schemas
source misattribution
false memory
misinformation effect
Key Terms Exercise
Identify the correct key term for each of the 
following definitions. the answers to this 
exercise follow the answers to the Concept 
Checks at the end of the chapter.
  1.	 The principle that states that the cues 
(both internal and external) present at the 
time information is encoded into long-
term memory serve as the best retrieval 
cues for the information.
	 	
 
  2.	 A measure of long-term memory retrieval 
that requires the reproduction of the 
information with essentially no retrieval 
cues.
	 	
 
  3.	 The disruptive effect of new learning on 
the retrieval of old information.
	 	
 
  4.	 The visual sensory register that holds an 
exact copy of the incoming visual input 

224  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
but only for a very brief period of time—
less than a second.
	 	
 
	  5.	 A meaningful unit in memory.
	 	
 
	  6.	 Long-term memory for factual knowledge 
and personal experiences that requires 
a conscious effort to remember and that 
entails making declarations about the 
information remembered.
	 	
 
	  7.	 The inability to form new explicit long-
term memories for events following sur-
gery or trauma to the brain.
	 	
 
	  8.	 A type of rehearsal in short-term memory 
in which incoming information is related 
to information from long-term memory to 
encode it into long-term memory.
	 	
 
	  9.	 Superior long-term memory for spaced 
study versus massed study (cramming).
	 	
 
10.  Frameworks of knowledge about people, 
objects, events, and actions that allow 
us to organize and interpret information 
about our world.
	 	
 
11.	 Explicit memory for personal experiences.
	 	
 
12.	 A theory of forgetting that proposes that 
forgetting is due to the unavailability of 
the retrieval cues necessary to locate the 
information in long-term memory.
	 	
 
13.	 An experimental procedure in which, fol-
lowing the brief presentation of a matrix 
of unrelated consonants, the participant 
is given an auditory cue about which row 
of the matrix to recall.
	 	
 
14.	 Our inability as adults to remember 
events that occurred in our lives before 
about 3 years of age.
	 	
 
15.	 A memory task in which the participant is 
given a series of items one at a time and 
then has to recall the items in the order in 
which they were presented.
	 	
 
Practice Test Questions
the following are practice multiple-choice 
test questions on some of the chapter 
content. the answers are given after the 
Key terms exercise answers at the end of 
the chapter. If you guessed or incorrectly 
answered a question, restudy the relevant 
section of the chapter.
	  1.	 Which of the following types of memory 
holds sensory input until we can attend 
to and recognize it?
a.	 short-term memory
b.	sensory memory
c.	 semantic memory
d.	episodic memory
	  2.	 Our short-term memory capacity is ______ 
6 2 chunks.
a.	 3
b.	5
c.	 7
d.	9
	  3.	 Which of the following types of memory 
has the shortest duration?
a.	 sensory memory
b.	short-term memory
c.	 semantic memory
d.	episodic memory

Study Guide  |  225
	  4.	 Procedural memories are ______ memories  
and thus are probably processed in the 
______ .
a.	 explicit; hippocampus
b.	explicit; cerebellum
c.	 implicit; hippocampus
d.	implicit; cerebellum
	  5.	 Which of the following leads to the best 
long-term memory?
a.	 maintenance rehearsal
b.	elaborative rehearsal
c.	 physical processing
d.	acoustic processing
	  6.	 The primacy and recency effects in free 
recall demonstrate that we have the 
greatest difficulty recalling the words 
______ of a list.
a.	 at the beginning
b.	at the end
c.	 in the middle
d.	at the beginning and end
	  7.	 Which of the following is not a 
mnemonic aid?
a.	 method of loci
b.	peg-word system
c.	 temporal integration procedure
d.	first-letter technique
	  8.	 An essay test measures ______, and a 
multiple-choice test measures ______.
a.	 recall; recall
b.	recall; recognition
c.	 recognition; recall
d.	recognition; recognition
	  9.	 Which of the following theories of forget-
ting argues that the forgotten information 
was in long-term memory but is no lon-
ger available?
a.	 encoding failure theory
b.	storage decay theory
c.	 interference theory
d.	cue-dependent theory
10.	 Piaget’s false memory of a kidnapping 
attempt when he was a child was the 
result of ______.
a.	 infantile amnesia
b.	source misattribution
c.	 encoding failure
d.	storage decay
11.	 After learning the phone number for Five 
Star Pizza, Bob cannot remember the 
phone number he learned last week for 
the Donut Connection. After living in  
Los Angeles for three years, Jim is unable 
to remember his way around his home-
town in which he had lived the previous 
10 years prior to moving to Los Angeles. 
Bob is experiencing the effects of ______ 
interference, and Jim is experiencing the 
effects of ______ interference.
a.	 proactive; proactive
b.	proactive; retroactive
c.	 retroactive; proactive
d.	retroactive; retroactive
12.	 Per the levels-of-processing theory, which 
of the following questions about the word 
“depressed” would best prepare you to 
correctly remember tomorrow that you 
had seen the word in this practice test 
question today?
a.	 How well does the word describe you?
b.	Does the word consist of 10 letters?
c.	 Is the word typed in capital letters?
d.	Does the word rhyme with obsessed?
13.	 The forgetting curve for long-term memory 
in Ebbinghaus’s relearning studies with 
nonsense syllables indicates that ______ .
a.	 the greatest amount of forgetting 
occurs rather quickly and then it  
levels off
b.	little forgetting occurs very quickly and 
the greatest amount occurs later after 
a lengthy period of memory storage
c.	 forgetting occurs at a uniform rate 
after learning
d.	little forgetting ever occurs

226  |  Chapter 5  |  MEMORy
14.	 In the Loftus and Palmer experiment, 
participants were shown a film of a traf-
fic accident and then later tested for their 
memory of it. The finding that memory 
differed based upon the specific words 
used in the test questions illustrated 
______.
a.	 state-dependent memory
b.	source misattribution
c.	 the self-reference effect
d.	the misinformation effect
15.	 The results for the experiment in which 
word lists were studied either on land or 
underwater and then recalled either on 
land or underwater provide evidence for 
______.
a.	 source misattribution
b.	encoding specificity
c.	 proactive interference
d.	retroactive interference
Chapter Concept Check Answers
Concept Check | 1
• As pointed out in Chapter 3, bottom-up pro-
cessing is the processing of incoming sensory  
information from the physical environment. 
This is what occupies sensory memory so it 
is bottom-up input. Also, as pointed out in 
Chapter 3, top-down processing uses the 
information in our long-term knowledge 
base to interpret the bottom-up input. Thus, 
long-term memory can be thought of as 
providing top-down input because it is the 
repository of our knowledge base and past 
experiences.
• The duration of iconic memory must 
be very brief because if it were not, our 
visual sensory register would get over-
loaded quickly, leading to successive visual 
images overlapping in the register. Thus, 
we wouldn’t perceive the world normally 
because it would be a constant mix of  
conflicting overlapping images.
• A “chunk” is a meaningful unit in our mem-
ory; for example, a single letter, an acronym,  
and a word each comprise one chunk. We 
have a memory span of 7 6 2 unrelated  
letters, acronyms, or words.
• H. M. demonstrated a practice effect on the 
mirror-tracing task and the manual skill learn-
ing task in which he had to keep a stylus 
on a small dot that was spinning around 
on a turntable, but he did not consciously 
remember ever having done either task. This 
shows that he formed new implicit long-term 
memories for how to do these tasks because 
his performance on the tasks improved as he 
gained experience on them but that he did 
not form new explicit long-term memories 
for actually having done the tasks because he 
could not remember ever doing these tasks. 
H. M. also demonstrated repetition priming 
effects on a word fragment completion task 
without conscious awareness of the earlier 
presented priming words. Thus, he demon-
strated implicit long-term memory for the 
words on the word fragment completion task 
but he had no explicit long-term memory for 
having seen them before. In another study, 
he was classically conditioned to give an eye-
blink response to a tone. After the condition-
ing, whenever he was exposed to the tone, 
he gave the eyeblink response; but he did not 
consciously remember ever having been con-
ditioned. This finding shows that he formed 
new implicit long-term memories of the 
association between the tone and eyeblink 
but did not form any new explicit long-term 
memories for the conditioning episodes.
Concept Check | 2
• Elaborative encoding is more effective than 
memorizing because the process of elabo-
ration ties the new information to older, 
well-known information. This older infor-
mation provides many good retrieval cues 
for the new information. Thus, elaborative 
encoding provides both more retrieval cues 
and better ones than memorizing.
• State-dependent memory and mood-
dependent memory are both instances of 
the encoding specificity principle operating 
because in each case, maximal similarity 
in study-test physiological states or moods 
leads to the best long-term memory.

Study Guide  |  227
• Both mnemonics relate the new information 
to a well-known sequence. In each mne-
monic you step through the sequence and 
retrieve the list item tied to that step. In the 
case of the method of loci, sequential loca-
tions within a well-known room or place  
are used whereas in the peg-word system, 
the steps are part of a well-learned jingle 
(one is a bun, two is a shoe, . . .). Thus, 
both mnemonics use elaborative rehearsal.
Concept Check | 3
• In recall, the information has to be repro-
duced. In recognition, the information only 
has to be identified.
• Encoding failure theory and storage decay 
theory assume the forgotten information 
is not available in long-term memory. Both 
the interference and cue-dependent theo-
ries of forgetting assume it is still available 
but not accessible.
• Schemas help to create false memories 
because in using them, we tend to replace 
the actual details of what happened with 
what typically happens in the event that 
the schema depicts. As Bartlett found in his 
schema research, this is especially true for 
unusual details. This means that schemas 
tend to normalize our memories and lead 
us to remember what usually happens and 
not exactly what did happen.
• Source misattribution leads to false memo-
ries because we don’t really know the 
source of a memory. The event may never 
have occurred, but we think that it did 
because we misattributed the source of the 
memory. The misinformation effect leads to 
false memories through the effect of mis-
leading information being given at the time 
of retrieval. We incorporate this misleading 
information for an event into our memory 
and thus create a false memory for it.
Answers to Key Terms Exercise
	  1.	 encoding specificity principle
	  2.	 recall
	  3.	 retroactive interference
	  4.	 iconic memory
	  5.	 chunk
	  6.	 explicit memory
	  7.	 anterograde amnesia
	  8.	 elaborative rehearsal
	  9.	 spacing (distributed study) effect
10.	 schemas
11.	 episodic memory
12.	 cue-dependent theory
13.	 Sperling’s partial-report procedure
14.	 infantile/child amnesia
15.	 memory span task
Answers to Practice Test Questions
	  1.	 b; sensory memory
	  2.	 c; 7
	  3.	 a; sensory memory
	  4.	 d; implicit; cerebellum
	  5.	 b; elaborative rehearsal
	  6.	 c; in the middle
	  7.	 c; temporal integration procedure
	  8.	 b; recall; recognition
	  9.	 b; storage decay theory
10.	 b; source misattribution
11.	 d; retroactive; retroactive
12.	 a; How well does the word describe you?
13.	 a; the greatest amount of forgetting 
occurs rather quickly and then it levels off
14.	 d; the misinformation effect
15.	 b; encoding specificity 

Thinking and Intelligence
 PROBLEM SOLVING
Blocks to Problem Solving
Solution Strategies
 THINKING UNDER 
UNCERTAINTY
Judging Probability
hypothesis Testing
 INTELLIGENT THINKING
Intelligence Tests
Controversies About 
Intelligence
6

229
I
n this chapter, we will consider how we use the information in our memories 
to think. thinking is the processing of information to solve problems and make 
judgments and decisions. Because these processes are important aspects of  
intelligent thinking, we will also consider intelligence testing and some of the 
controversies surrounding the concept of intelligence. We will start our discussion 
with the most basic, higher-level cognitive process—problem solving. You will be 
asked to solve several problems. You will learn more from these exercises if you 
try to solve each problem before reading about its solution.
Problem Solving
A problem is a situation in which there is a goal, but it is not clear how to reach 
the goal. There are well-defined and ill-defined problems (Gilhooly, 1996). A well-
defined problem is a problem with clear specifications of the start state (where 
you are), goal state (where you want to be), and the processes for reaching the goal 
state (how to get there). An ill-defined problem is a problem lacking clear speci-
fication of the start state, goal state, or the processes for reaching the goal state. 
Board games such as Monopoly and Scrabble represent well-defined problems. 
Their start states and goal states, along with the processes of moving from one 
to the other (the rules of the game), are all clearly specified. 
Getting your roommate to help clean the apartment would 
be an ill-defined problem. The start state and goal state are 
fairly well-defined, but the processes for moving between 
them are not. Most problems we confront are ill-defined, and 
to solve them we need to define the missing parts. We’ll see 
that blocks to solving problems may arise in this definition 
process.
Before learning about some of these obstacles to problem 
solving, I would like you to attempt to solve the following 
problems. You may recognize one of the series problems 
from Chapter 1. Don’t worry if you find these problems dif-
ficult; most people do. I will explain why.
(a) Instructions: For each of these two series problems, your goal is 
to predict the next alphabetic character in each of the series. The 
answer to the first series is not “O.”
 O T T F F S S ?
 E O E R E X N ?
➤	 thinking  The processing of  
information to solve problems and 
make judgments and decisions.
➤	 well-defined problem  A problem 
with clear specifications of the start 
state, goal state, and the processes 
for reaching the goal state.
➤	 ill-defined problem  A problem 
lacking clear specification of  
either the start state, goal state, 
or the processes for reaching 
the goal state.

230  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
(b) Instructions: Connect the nine circles using four straight lines 
without lifting your pen or pencil from the paper or retracing any 
of your lines. You should attempt this problem on a separate sheet 
of paper so that you can keep a record of your attempts. Once you 
have a four-straight­-­line solution, the next goal is to connect the 
nine circles with three straight lines using the same constraints as in 
the four-straight-line version.
Blocks to Problem Solving
Problem solving can be divided into two general steps: (1) interpreting the prob-
lem and (2) trying to solve the problem. For many problems, the path to a solution 
is blocked in the first step by incorrectly interpreting the problem. This is like 
answering a test question too quickly, only to find out later that you misinterpreted  
the question. If you are working with such a misinterpretation, you will probably 
fail to solve the problem. The two nine-circle problems are good examples of prob-
lems that often lead to misinterpretations. Let’s see how.
Interpreting the problem.  Look at your failed attempts at solving the nine-
circle problem involving four straight lines. Did you try to keep your lines within 
the mental square created by the circles? Most people do, and you cannot solve 
the problem this way (Wickelgren, 1974). Not 
only do most people create this misinterpreta-
tion, but they also continue to use it even 
though they make no progress toward solving 
the problem. This inability to “think outside the 
box” and create a new interpretation of a prob-
lem is called fixation. Reread the instructions. 
You were not required to keep your lines within 
this mental square. Any or all of the four lines 
can extend outside this space. The lines only 
have to be straight and connect all nine circles. 
Knowing this, try again to solve the problem. 
Draw a straight line that goes down through the 
first column of circles and continues on outside 
of the mental square. When you bring your next line back up, 
also continue it outside of the mental square. This should 
start you on your way to a solution, though it may still be 
elusive (Weisberg & Alba, 1981).
➤ fixation  The inability to create a 
new interpretation of a problem.
“Thinking outside of the box is difficult for some 
people. Keep trying.”
Randy Glasbergen/glasbergen.com.

PRObleM SOlving  |  231
What about the second nine-circle problem—connecting 
all nine circles with three straight lines? If you didn’t solve 
it, think about the assumptions that you made when you 
interpreted the problem. This problem is even more difficult, 
because you may have made two mistakes in your interpreta-
tion and fixated on them, making the problem impossible to 
solve. First, as in the four-straight-line problem, you might 
have assumed that you need to keep your lines within the 
mental square created by the circles. Second, you might 
have assumed that the lines need to go through the centers 
of the circles. Neither assumption is valid. Now try to solve this problem know-
ing that both of these assumptions are misinterpretations. Try drawing three 
straight lines that do not go through the centers of the circles and that travel 
outside the mental square. It might help to imagine using a very long ruler to 
draw your lines. If you’re still stumped on either one of these problems, look  
at the sample solutions at the end of the chapter.
Another obstacle to problem solving is functional fixedness—the inability to 
see that an object can have a function other than its typical one. This type of fixa-
tion also occurs during the problem definition stage. Functional fixedness limits 
our ability to solve problems that require using an object in a novel way (Duncker, 
1945). This often happens to us in our everyday life. Maybe we need a screwdriver, 
but one isn’t available. We have other things such as coins that could function as a 
screwdriver, but we may not think about using them in this novel way. Or, what if 
you just did some grocery shopping, and as you are about to walk out of the store 
it starts raining hard. You have no umbrella. How can you avoid getting soaked? 
You bought some large trash bags, but you may not think about using one as a 
raincoat to protect you from the rain. To combat functional fixedness, we should 
systematically think about the possible, novel uses of all the various objects in the 
problem environment. This is bound to increase our ability to solve the continual 
problems that come up in our daily lives.
Solving the problem.  Problem misinterpretation and functional fixedness are 
good examples of the negative impact that our past experiences can have on our abil-
ity to solve current problems. Our past experience with problem solving can also 
lead to a phenomenon known as mental set—the tendency to use previously success-
ful solution strategies without considering others that are more appropriate for the 
current problem. Mental set is especially common for strategies that have been used 
recently. Consider the two letter-series problems on page 229. If you had difficulty 
solving them, mental set may be what hindered you (Griggs, 2003). You probably 
attempted to solve these two problems with strategies that you have used success-
fully in the past with series problems. You may have viewed the letters in the series 
as single entities and looked for relationships between them. This strategy does not 
include viewing each of the letters as part of some larger entity. You cannot solve the 
series unless you do so. For the first series problem, you should think of the letters 
as the first letters in the words of a well-known ordering. It’s as easy as 1-2-3.
➤ functional fixedness  The inability 
to see that an object can have a 
function other than its typical one 
in solving a problem.
➤ mental set  The tendency to use 
previously successful problem- 
solving strategies without  
considering others that are more 
appropriate for the current  
problem.

232  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
The solution: These are the first letters in the sequence of 
number words—One, Two, Three, Four, Five, Six, Seven—so 
the answer is E for Eight. This should help you to solve the 
second series problem, but don’t fall prey to mental set and 
try to find another well-known ordering in which these are the first letters of the 
words in the sequence. You need to look for another solution strategy. Because 
of mental set, you probably don’t see the strategy, but it’s directly related to the 
solution to the first series. The letters in the second series are the last letters in  
the number words—onE, twO, threE, up to seveN. The answer is T for eighT. 
What’s the lesson to be learned? Don’t cling to solution strategies that have 
worked in the past, but which are not presently working. Try new approaches.
Sometimes when searching for new approaches to a problem, we may experi-
ence what has been called insight—a new way to interpret a problem that imme-
diately gives the solution. This rapid understanding is the key to the solution. 
Insight is sometimes referred to as an “Aha!” or “Eureka!” experience. Try the fol-
lowing problem from Knoblich and Oellinger (2006). You may experience insight 
in solving it. The solution is given at the end of the chapter.
Instructions: The equation shown is not correct. To create a correct 
equation, you can move only one matchstick (but not remove it). Only 
Roman numerals and the three operators, 1, 2, and 5 are allowed.
➤ insight  A new way to interpret a 
problem that immediately yields 
the solution.
For insight problem solving tasks such as matchstick problems, the frontal 
cortex (home to executive processes such as planning, judging, evaluating, and 
deciding) may actually hinder insight rather than facilitate it (Restak & Kim, 
2010). Reverberi, Toraldo, D’Agostini, and Skrap (2005) found that patients with 
damage to their lateral frontal cortex actually outperformed healthy participants 
on insight problems. While only 43 percent of healthy participants could solve 
some very difficult matchstick problems, 82 percent of  patients with frontal lobe 
damage did so. Thus, our intact frontal lobes may lock us into less than optimal 
solution strategies (a mental set effect) for insight problems. In the Reverberi et al. 
study, the patients with frontal lobe damage were freed from this constraint and 
were more successful in solving the problems, indicating that other brain regions 
may be more critical to solving insight problems.
Recent research indicates that the right anterior temporal lobe (directly above 
the right ear) may be such a region. Chi and Snyder (2011) found that noninvasive 
transcranial direct current stimulation of the anterior temporal lobes (inhibiting 
© W.H.Freeman/Worth

PRObleM SOlving  |  233
the left anterior temporal lobe and activating the right anterior temporal lobe) 
facilitated the solution of insight problems. The stimulation led to a threefold 
increase in solving difficult matchstick problems. Hence, maybe the advice to 
“think outside the box” should be amended to be “think outside the frontal 
lobes.” Chi and Snyder (2012) also found that this same transcranial stimula-
tion of the anterior temporal lobes will facilitate the solution of the nine-circle 
problem. None of the participants solved the problem before stimulation; 14 of 
33 broke fixation and solved it as a result of receiving the stimulation. Chi and 
Snyder calculated that the probability that this fraction of the participants could 
solve it by chance is less than one in a billion.
You might wonder if there is any validity to prescriptive advice such as to 
“think outside the box.” Metaphors such as this (and others such as to consider a 
problem “on one hand and then on the other”) suggest a connection between con-
crete bodily experiences and creative problem solving in which physically enacting 
the metaphor would enhance creative problem solving. Leung et al. (2012) have 
provided the first evidence that such embodiment might activate cognitive pro-
cesses that facilitate creativity. For example, subjects trying to solve an innovative 
verbal thinking task performed much better if they sat and thought outside rather  
than inside a 125-cubic-foot box made of plastic pipe and cardboard. Similar 
results were observed for another creativity task for subjects solving the task while 
walking freely outside a fixed rectangular path indicated by duct tape on the floor 
(marking out a box of about 48 square feet in area) versus walking along the path. 
Obviously much more research is needed on this experimental question, but these 
initial findings indicate that thinking “outside the box” may not be a cliché; you 
might just need to use an actual box.
We have discussed many potential blocks to problem solving, and it takes a 
very conscious, concerted effort to overcome them. What can you do? Ask yourself 
questions such as the following: Is my interpretation of the problem unnecessarily 
constraining? Can I use any of the objects in the problem in novel ways to solve the 
problem? Do I need a new type of solution strategy? If we do not make this effort, 
we are engaged in what is called mindless behavior—rigid, habitual behavior in 
which we fail to attend carefully to the details of the present situation (Langer, 1989, 
1997). To be good problem solvers, we will need to be open to new interpretations of 
problems and to new ways of using objects to solve problems. We will also need to 
develop a broader, more effective set of solution strategies, which is our next topic.
Solution Strategies
Just as problem solving can be divided into two steps, solution strategies can be 
divided into two types—algorithms and heuristics. An algorithm is a step-by-step 
procedure that guarantees a correct answer to a problem. For example, when we 
solve a math problem with long division, we are using an algo-
rithm. If we execute the steps correctly, we will get the correct 
answer. For many problems, however, we may not know the 
algorithm or an algorithm for the problem may not exist. To 
➤ algorithm  A step-by-step problem-
solving procedure that guarantees 
a correct answer to a problem.

234  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
solve the problem in such cases, we have to use a heuristic, a 
solution strategy that seems reasonable given our past expe-
riences with solving problems, especially similar problems. 
Think of a heuristic as an educated guess.
Sometimes you may even know the algorithm for a prob-
lem, but you don’t use it because its execution would be too 
time-consuming. Instead you may try some heuristics, and they might pay off 
with a quicker answer, or they may lead to no answer or an incorrect one. This 
is the crucial difference between an algorithm and a heuristic. An algorithm 
guarantees a correct answer (if it’s the correct algorithm for the problem and you 
execute it correctly), but a heuristic makes no guarantees. Let’s consider some 
problems (anagram word puzzles) for which you likely know the algorithm, but 
because it would usually be too difficult to execute, you use heuristics instead. In 
an anagram puzzle, the letters of a word are presented in a scrambled order, and 
the problem is to rearrange them to determine the word. Now, what’s the algo-
rithm for such puzzles? Generate each possible sequence of the letters and check 
to see if each sequence is a word. This sounds simple, but it isn’t. For example, 
there are over 5,000 possible sequences of the letters for a seven-letter anagram! 
So unless there are only a few letters in the anagram, we use heuristics based upon 
our knowledge of the English language. For example, we know that the letter U 
usually follows the letter Q and that certain letters such as B and C don’t follow 
one another in words. We attempt to create words with the letters following such 
principles. To understand this strategy, let’s work a couple of anagram puzzles. As 
you try to solve them, think about the strategy you are using.
Instructions: Rearrange the letters in each anagram puzzle to form a 
meaningful word in the English language.
1. L O S O G C Y H Y P	
2. T E R A L B A Y
The first puzzle is rather easy. The answer is especially relevant to this text. 
It’s PSYCHOLOGY. Your use of heuristics was probably successful and led to a 
quick answer. The second puzzle is more difficult. Your use of heuristics may have 
failed and didn’t yield a solution. Even so, you probably didn’t switch to using 
the algorithm. You probably kept trying to find a solution by using heuristics. As 
you can see, heuristics might pay off with quick answers, but they may lead to no 
answer as in the second anagram puzzle. Now think about the algorithmic strat-
egy. There are over 40,000 sequences for the eight letters in the second anagram 
puzzle; therefore, generating each of them to check if it’s a word would take far 
more time and effort than we are willing to spend. However, if you did so, you 
would find that the answer is BETRAYAL.
Now let’s consider three particular heuristics that are used fairly often in prob-
lem solving—the anchoring and adjustment, working backward, and means–end 
analysis heuristics. We’ll start with the anchoring and adjustment heuristic.
Anchoring and adjustment.  To help you to understand this heuristic, let’s 
try an estimation problem taken from Plous (1993). The task involved in this 
➤ heuristic  A problem-solving  
strategy that seems reasonable 
given one’s past experience with 
solving problems, especially similar 
problems, but does not guarantee 
a correct answer to a problem.

PRObleM SOlving  |  235
problem would be impossible to execute. It is only a hypothetical problem that 
examines how we make estimates.
Estimate how thick a sheet of paper that is 0.1 millimeter thick would 
be if it were folded in on itself 100 times.
Most people estimate the thickness to be only a few yards or so, which is not 
even close to the correct answer: 0.1 millimeter 3 2100, which equals 800 trillion 
times the distance between the earth and the sun (Plous, 1993)! Why do we under-
estimate this thickness by so much? We are most likely using the anchoring  
and adjustment heuristic in which an initial estimate is used as an anchor and 
then this anchor is adjusted up or down. The difficulty in using the anchoring 
and adjustment heuristic is that we tend to attach too much importance to the 
starting anchor amount and do not adjust it sufficiently (Tversky & Kahneman, 
1974). The folding problem is a good illustration of this bias. If you double the 
thickness of the sheet of paper a few times, you still have a rather small thick-
ness. Using this small thickness as an anchor for making your estimate, you do 
not adjust the estimate sufficiently and usually guess only a few yards. In this 
case, the anchoring and adjustment heuristic leads us to ignore the fact that 
the powers of 2 grow exponentially as we double them and become very large  
very quickly.
This estimation problem was only a hypothetical exercise, but it shows how 
we fail to adjust the anchor enough when using the anchoring and adjustment 
heuristic. Anchoring is a very robust psychological phenomenon and has even 
been shown to hold when the anchors represent the same physical quantity,  
7.3 kilometers and 7,300 meters (Wong & Kwong, 2000). Estimates for the  
7.3 km group were much lower than those for the 7,300 m group. Anchoring 
has been shown to influence judgments in a variety of domains such as making  
judgments in personal injury cases (Chapman & Bornstein, 1996), negotiating 
(Ritov, 1996), and playing the stock market (Paulos, 2003). In the real world, 
anchoring may have costs attached to it. A good example that you may have 
experienced is the inclusion of minimum payment information on credit card 
statements. These minimum payment amounts can act as psychological anchors 
(Stewart, 2009; Thaler & Sunstein, 2008). In a hypothetical bill-paying experi-
ment manipulating the inclusion of minimum payment information, Stewart 
(2009) found that the inclusion of this information led to significant reductions 
in partial payment amounts, which in the real world would lead to increased 
interest charges. We should also beware of using this heuristic when meeting 
people. Our first impression of a person is similar to form-
ing an anchor. We must be sure to process subsequent infor-
mation about the person carefully and adjust our impres-
sion (anchor) sufficiently. Remember, the anchoring and 
adjustment heuristic leads us to fail to adjust the anchor 
enough. So do not become too attached to an anchor when 
making judgments and decisions.
➤ anchoring and adjustment 
heuristic  A heuristic for estima-
tion problems in which one uses 
his or her initial estimate as an 
anchor estimate and then adjusts 
the anchor up or down (often 
insufficiently).

236  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
Working backward.  Working backward is a heuristic that 
you may have learned to use in your math classes. The work-
ing backward heuristic is attempting to solve a problem by 
working from the goal state backward to the start state 
(Wickelgren, 1974). In math problems, this translates to 
working backward from the answer to the given information 
in the problem. To see how this heuristic would work, con-
sider the following problem (Sternberg & Davidson, 1982):
Water lilies growing in a pond double in area every 24 
hours. On the first day of spring, only one lily pad is on 
the surface of the pond. Sixty days later, the pond is 
entirely covered. On what day is the pond half covered?
Did you solve it? It is impossible to solve this problem working in a forward 
direction. However, if you work backward by starting with the fact that the pond 
is entirely covered on the sixtieth day, you can solve it rather easily. Just ask your-
self how much of the pond would be covered on the fifty-ninth day if the pond 
were entirely covered on the sixtieth day. The answer is half. The working back-
ward heuristic is ideal for problems that have many possible paths from the start 
state, but only one path (or a few) going backward from the goal state.
Means–end analysis.  A good heuristic for working forward on a problem is 
means–ends analysis. In the means–end analysis heuristic, the problem is bro-
ken down into subgoals and we work toward decreasing the distance to the goal 
state by achieving these subgoals. Consider the following Tower of Hanoi prob-
lem. It is a well-defined problem. The start state, the goal state, and the rules for 
moving from the start state to the goal state are all clearly specified.
Instructions: The problem is to create the same configuration of disks 
on Peg C as is on Peg A in the starting state. Rules, however, govern 
your moves. You can only move one disk at a time, and you cannot 
place a larger disk on top of a smaller disk. Try to solve this problem 
efficiently by minimizing the number of moves that have to be made. 
The most efficient solution involves seven moves.
➤ working backward heuristic  A 
problem-solving heuristic in which 
one attempts to solve a problem by 
working from the goal state back 
to the start state.
➤ means–end analysis heuristic   
A problem-solving heuristic in 
which the distance to the goal 
state is decreased systematically 
by breaking the problem down 
into subgoals and achieving 
these subgoals.
aa
11
22
33
BB
CC
Let’s try to use means–end analysis to solve the problem. What would be the 
first subgoal? You have to get Disk 3 on Peg C. You cannot, however, achieve this 
immediately, so you have to set up another subgoal. What is it? You have to get 

PRObleM SOlving  |  237
Disk 1 on top of Disk 2 on Peg B. You cannot achieve this immediately either, so 
what is the next subgoal? Yes, you have to get Disk 2 on Peg B. To achieve this,  
you need to get Disk 1 off Disk 2 and not on Peg B. How do you achieve this sub-
goal? By now you should have the idea. Go ahead and finish solving the problem. 
It takes a minimum of seven moves. (The list of moves is given at the end of this 
chapter.) Using means–end analysis (setting up subgoals and so on) to solve the 
Tower of Hanoi problem obviously involves planning. Remember that Phineas 
Gage’s left frontal lobe damage led to deficits in planning. Thus, patients with 
frontal lobe damage should have difficulty solving this problem, and this is exactly  
what Goel and Grafman (1995) and Morris, Miotto, Feigenbaum, Bullock, &  
Polkey (1997) found. 
The specific solution steps to a Tower of Hanoi problem with a certain number 
of disks can be varied by manipulating the start and goal states (which peg the 
disks are on and which peg they need to be moved to, respectively). Such changes 
allow researchers to see if problem performance is enhanced with practice on 
various versions of the problem. As you would expect, they found that people do 
get more efficient in solving these problems with practice. Interestingly though, 
this practice effect is also shown by anterograde amnesics, such as H. M. (who was 
described in Chapter 5). They too can learn to solve the Tower of Hanoi problem 
(their frontal lobes are intact) and solve it more efficiently with practice, but they 
have no recollection each time of ever having seen the problem before (Squire & 
Cohen, 1984). Why? As we learned in Chapter 5, amnesics like H. M. form implicit 
procedural memories from practice in solving a problem because their cerebellum 
and basal ganglia are intact, but no explicit episodic memories of working on the 
problem are formed because the hippocampus is critical for forming such memo-
ries and they have had their hippocampus removed.
Given the solution to the 3-disk Tower of Hanoi problem described above, 
let’s consider a 64-disk Tower of Hanoi problem. Everything is the same except 
the number of disks—64 instead of 3. What is your estimate of the minimum 
number of moves necessary to solve the 64-disk version? Don’t read further until 
you derive an estimate. If you used the anchoring and adjustment heuristic to 
derive an estimate, you probably greatly underestimated the answer. You probably 
derived a rather small anchor based on the 3-disk version that required only seven 
moves and then failed to adjust it upward sufficiently. The minimum number of 
moves for the Tower of Hanoi problems is 2n 2 1, where n is the number of disks 
(Raphael, 1976). Thus, for 3 disks, it is 7, or 23 2 1. Now do you see the problem 
with your estimate? The answer for 64 disks is 264 2 1, or trillions of moves! Did 
the anchoring and adjustment heuristic lead you astray again?
The events in our everyday lives are not as well-defined as the allowable moves 
in a Tower of Hanoi problem. They are uncertain. They have varying probabili-
ties of occurring, and therefore we have to learn how to think in a probabilistic 
world. Such thinking involves estimating event probabilities (uncertainties). The 
heuristics we have discussed so far are not usable for this type of judgment. The 
heuristics that we do use to make these probability judgments and, more gener-
ally, how we think under uncertainty are the main topics of the next section.

238  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
Section Summary
In this section, we discussed how problems are either well-defined or ill-defined. 
Well-defined problems provide clear definitions of the start and goal states, and the 
processes for reaching the goal state from the start state. Ill-defined problems do 
not. Everyday problems tend to be ill-defined; therefore, interpreting the problem is 
necessary. Such interpretation may block problem solving. Blocks can be caused by 
problem misinterpretation, functional fixedness, or mental set. These blocks are all 
examples of the negative impact of our past experience on problem solving. We must 
make a mindful effort to overcome these blocks or our problem solving will suffer.
When attempting to solve a problem, we use either an algorithm that guarantees 
us a correct answer or heuristics that may lead to a quick solution or possibly to 
no solution. We prefer to use heuristics because they are less time-consuming. In 
addition, we may not know the appropriate algorithm for a problem or one may not 
even exist. Sometimes heuristics can lead to errors. A good example is the anchor-
ing and adjustment heuristic for making estimates. The error in this case stems from 
our failure to adjust our initial anchor sufficiently.
The working backward heuristic is especially useful for problems that have many 
paths going forward from the start state but only one (or a few) going backward 
from the goal state. Means–ends analysis is a useful heuristic for almost any type of 
problem. In this heuristic, you move forward by achieving subgoals that continue to 
reduce the distance between the start state and goal state.
ConceptCheck | 1
➤	 explain how functional fixedness and mental set are examples of the nega-
tive impact of past experience.
➤	 explain why we tend to use heuristics and not algorithms even though algo-
rithms guarantee correct solutions.
➤	 explain how the anchoring and adjustment heuristic may lead you to make 
a serious error in estimation.
Thinking Under Uncertainty
We live in an uncertain world; everything that happens has a probability. 
For example, there is a probability for whether it will rain today and another 
probability for whether you will get an “A” in this class. The probability of an 
event is the likelihood that it will happen. Probabilities range from 0 (never hap-
pens) to 1 (always happens), but they are usually uncertain, somewhere between 
0 and 1. An event with a probability of 0.5 is maximally uncertain because it is 
equally likely to occur and not to occur. Because we live in an uncertain world, we 
have to learn to estimate the probabilities (uncertainties) of various events. But 
how do we do this? Let’s try to estimate some probabilities.

Thinking undeR unceRtainty  |  239
Consider this: Does the letter r occur more often as the first letter or third 
letter in English words? To answer this question, you need to make a judgment 
about the probability of one event (r occurring as the first letter) in relation to the 
probability of a second event (r occurring as the third letter). Think about how 
you would estimate these probabilities. One way to proceed would be to compare 
the ease of thinking of words beginning with r versus having r in the third posi-
tion. Isn’t it easier to think of words beginning with r? Does this mean that such 
words occur more often and that this event is more probable? If you think so, 
you are using a heuristic (words that are more available in our memory are more 
probable) to answer the probability question. When we discuss the main heuris-
tics that humans use to judge probabilities, we’ll return to this problem and see 
if this heuristic led us to the correct answer.
In addition to judging the uncertainty of events in our environment, we 
attempt to reduce our uncertainty about the world by trying to find out how vari-
ous events are related to each other. For example, is the amount of arthritis pain 
related to the weather? To answer such questions, we develop and test hypotheses 
about how the events in our world are related. Such hypothesis testing allows 
us to learn about the world. Many of our beliefs are the conclusions that we 
have arrived at from testing such hypotheses. However, we usually don’t test our 
hypotheses in well-controlled formal experiments the way that psychologists do. 
Instead we conduct subjective, informal tests of our hypotheses. Obviously, such 
a nonscientific approach may be biased and result in incorrect conclusions and 
erroneous beliefs. A good example is belief in the paranormal. If you are like most 
college students, you probably believe in at least one paranormal phenomenon, 
such as mental telepathy, clairvoyance, or psychokinesis (Messer & Griggs, 1989). 
But, as you learned in Chapter 3, there is not one replicable scientific finding for 
any of these phenomena. We’ll discuss how such erroneous beliefs might arise 
from our subjective hypothesis testing method.
We also often engage in hypothesis testing in various medical situations. One 
very common instance is testing the hypothesis that we have a specific disease given 
a positive result on a medical screening test for the disease. This actually amounts 
to trying to compute a conditional probability, which for most people (doctors and 
patients) is not that easy. Research that we will discuss shows that both doctors and 
patients tend to greatly overestimate such probabilities. To help you more accu-
rately assess your chances of having the disease in this situation, we’ll teach you a 
relatively simple way to compute such probabilities. But first let’s see how we judge 
probabilities in general and how these judgments might be biased.
Judging Probability
Cognitive psychologists Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman identified two heu-
ristics that we often use to make judgments about probabilities—the representa-
tiveness heuristic and the availability heuristic (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). It is 
important to point out that these two heuristics usually lead to reasonably good 
judgments, but they sometimes lead to errors. Why? The major reason is that a 

240  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
heuristic can lead us to ignore information that is extremely relevant to the par-
ticular probability judgment. To understand, let’s consider the following problem 
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1983).
You will read a brief description of Linda, and then you will be asked to 
make a judgment about her. Here’s the description:
Linda is 31 years old, single, outspoken, and very bright. She majored 
in philosophy. As a student, she was deeply concerned with issues of 
discrimination and social justice, and also participated in antinuclear 
demonstrations.
Which of the following alternatives is more likely?
Linda is a bank teller.
Linda is a bank teller and active in the feminist movement.
The representativeness heuristic.  To decide which 
alternative is more probable, most people would use what is 
called the representativeness heuristic—a rule of thumb for 
judging the probability of membership in a category by how 
well an object resembles (is representative of) that category. 
Simply put, the rule is: the more representative, the more 
Amos Tversky
Daniel Kahneman
Daniel Kahneman was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences in 2002 for the 
groundbreaking research on heuristics that we partially describe here. His collaborator Amos 
Tversky would surely have shared the Nobel Prize with him, but he died in 1996, and Nobel 
committees are prohibited from awarding prizes posthumously. As we will learn, Kahneman 
and Tversky’s research demonstrated that people often make decisions using heuristics rather 
than complete rational analysis. Kahneman’s prize was in Economic Sciences because this 
research had important applications to economic theory and because there is no Nobel Prize 
awarded in psychological sciences. Incidentally, Kahneman was the first person with a doctorate 
from a psychology department to win a Nobel Prize. Other Nobel Prize winners that we have 
mentioned (Roger Sperry, David Hubel, and Torsten Wiesel) all received their degrees in other 
disciplines such as zoology and medicine. Herbert Simon, another cognitive psychologist, who 
won the Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences in 1978, received his degree in political science.
Courtesy of Barbara Tversky
Andreas Rentz/Getty Images for Burda Media
➤ representativeness heuristic  A 
heuristic for judging the probability 
of membership in a category by how 
well an object resembles (is repre-
sentative of) that category (the more 
representative, the more probable).

Thinking undeR unceRtainty  |  241
probable. Using this heuristic, most people, including 
undergraduates, graduate students, and professors, 
judge that the second alternative (Linda is a bank teller 
and active in the feminist movement) is more likely 
than the first alternative (Tversky & Kahneman, 1983). 
Why? Linda resembles someone active in the feminist 
movement more than she resembles a bank teller. 
However, it is impossible for the second alternative to 
be more likely than the first. Actually the description of 
Linda is totally irrelevant to the probability judgment!
Let’s look at the set diagram in Figure 6.1. This dia-
gram illustrates what is known as the conjunction rule 
for two different uncertain events (in this case, being a 
bank teller and being active in the feminist movement). 
The conjunction rule is that the likelihood of the overlap 
of two uncertain events (the green section of the diagram) 
cannot be greater than the likelihood of either of the two 
events because the overlap is only part of each event. This 
means that all of the tellers who are active in the feminist 
movement make up only part of the set of all bank tellers. 
Because the set of bank tellers is larger and includes those 
tellers who are active in the feminist movement, it is more 
likely that someone is a bank teller than that someone 
is a bank teller and active in the feminist movement. 
Judging that it is more likely that Linda is a bank teller 
and active in the feminist movement illustrates the conjunction fallacy—incorrectly 
judging the overlap of two uncertain events to be more likely than either of the two 
events. By using the representativeness heuristic, we overlook a very simple principle 
of probability, the conjunction rule. This illustrates the shortcoming of using such 
heuristics—overlooking essential information for making the probability judgment.
Using the representativeness heuristic also leads to the gambler’s fallacy—the 
erroneous belief that a chance process is self-correcting in that an event that has 
not occurred for a while is more likely to occur. Suppose a person has flipped 
eight heads in a row and we want to bet $100 on the next coin toss, heads or tails. 
Some people will want to bet on tails because they think it more likely, but in 
actuality the two events are still equally likely. One of the most famous examples 
of the gambler’s fallacy occurred in a Monte Carlo casino in 
1913 when a roulette wheel landed on black 26 times in a 
row (Lehrer, 2009). During that run, most people bet against 
black since they felt that red must be “due.” They assumed 
that the roulette wheel would somehow correct the imbal-
ance and cause the wheel to land on red. The casino ended 
up making millions of francs. “The wheel has no mind, no 
soul, no sense of fairness . . . Yet, we often treat it otherwise” 
(Vyse, 1997, p. 98).
 Figure 6.1 | The Overlapping Set 
Diagram for the Linda Problem | 
The overlap (the green area) of the two 
sets (all bank tellers and all people active 
in the feminist movement) indicates the 
probability of being both a bank teller 
and active in the feminist movement. 
Because this area is a subset (part) of 
each of the two sets, its probability has 
to be less than that for either of the two 
sets. This is the conjunction rule.
All people
active
in feminist
movement
All bank
tellers
People who are both active
in feminist movement and
bank tellers
➤ conjunction fallacy  Incorrectly 
judging the overlap of two uncer-
tain events to be more probable 
than either of the two events.
➤ gambler’s fallacy  Incorrectly 
believing that a chance process 
is self-correcting in that an event 
that has not occurred for a while is 
more likely to occur.

242  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
Why do people commit the gambler’s fallacy? Again, they are using the representa-
tiveness heuristic (Tversky & Kahneman, 1971). People believe that short sequences 
(the series of eight coin tosses or the 26 spins of the roulette wheel) should reflect 
the long-run probabilities. Simply put, people believe random sequences, whether 
short or long, should look random. This is not the case. Probability and the law of 
averages only hold in the long run, not the short run. In addition, the long run is 
indeed very long—infinity. The representativeness heuristic leads us to forget this.
Why are we so prone to using the representativeness heuristic and making judg-
ments based only on categorical resemblance? The answer is tied to the fact that 
the mind categorizes information automatically. Categorization is just another 
name for pattern recognition, an automatic process that we discussed in Chapter 3.  
The brain constantly recognizes (puts into categories) the objects, events, and 
people in our world. Categorization is one of the brain’s basic operational prin-
ciples, so it shouldn’t be surprising that we may judge categorical probabilities in 
the same way that we recognize patterns. This is how the brain normally operates. 
In addition to probability judgments, the representativeness heuristic can lead us 
astray in judging the people we meet because our first impression is often based 
on categorical resemblance. We tend to categorize the person based on the little 
information we get when we meet him or her. Remember that this initial judg-
ment is only an anchor, and we need to process subsequent information carefully 
in order to avoid misjudgment of the person.
The availability heuristic.  Let’s go back to the judgment that you made  
earlier. Does the letter r appear more often as the first letter or third letter in 
English words? Actually, the letter r appears twice as often as the third letter in 
words than as the first letter. However, if you used the availability heuristic that 
was described, you would judge the reverse to be the case (that r occurs more often 
as the first letter). The availability heuristic is the rule of thumb that the more 
available an event is in our memory, the more probable it is (Tversky & Kahneman, 
1973). We can think of more words beginning with the letter r than with r in the 
third position because we organize words in our memories by how they begin. This 
does not mean that they are more frequent, but only that it is easier to think of 
them. They are easier to generate from memory. The opposite is the case—words 
with r in the third position are more frequent. This is actually true for seven letters: 
k, l, n, r, v, x, and z (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973).
Remember that a heuristic does not guarantee a correct answer. The availability 
heuristic may often lead to a correct answer; but as in the letter r problem, events are 
sometimes more easily available in our memories for reasons other than how often 
they actually occur. An event may be prominent in our memories because it recently 
happened or because it is particularly striking or vivid. In such 
cases, the availability heuristic will lead to an error in judgment. 
Think about judging the risk of various causes of death. Some 
causes of death (airplane crashes, fires, and shark attacks) are 
highly publicized and thus more available in our memories, 
especially if they have occurred recently. Using the availability 
➤ availability heuristic  A heuristic 
for judging the probability of an 
event by how available examples 
of the event are in memory 
(the more available, the more 
probable).

Thinking undeR unceRtainty  |  243
heuristic, we judge them to be more likely than lesser publicized, less dramatic causes 
of death such as diabetes and emphysema, which are actually more likely but not very 
available in our memories (Lichtenstein, Slovic, Fischhoff, Layman, & Combs, 1978). 
In fact, the probability of dying from falling airplane parts is 30 times greater than 
that of being killed by a shark (Plous, 1993). The lesson to be learned here is that 
greater availability in memory does not always equal greater probability.
Availability in memory also plays a key role in what is termed a dread risk. A dread 
risk is a low-probability, high-damage event in which many people are killed at one 
point in time. Not only is there direct damage in the event, but there is secondary, 
indirect damage mediated through how we psychologically react to the event. A good 
example is our reaction to the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks (Gigerenzer, 
2004, 2006). Fearing dying in a terrorist airplane crash because the September 11 
events were so prominent in our memories, we reduced our air travel and increased 
our automobile travel, leading to a significantly greater number of fatal traffic acci-
dents than usual. It is estimated that about 1,600 more people needlessly died in 
these traffic accidents (Gigerenzer, 2006). These lives could have been saved had we 
not reacted to the dread risk as we did. We just do not seem to realize that it is far 
safer to fly than to drive. National Safety Council data reveal that you are 37 times 
more likely to die in a vehicle accident than on a commercial flight (Myers, 2001).
Since heuristics may mislead us, you may wonder why we rely upon them so 
often. First, heuristics are adaptive and often serve us well and lead to a correct 
judgment. Second, they stem from what cognitive psychologists call System 1 
(automatic) processing (Evans, 2008, 2010; Stanovich & West, 2000). System 1  
AP Photo
Because airplane crashes are so visually dramatic and highly publicized by the media, they 
tend to be very available in our memories. This availability leads us to greatly overestimate 
our likelihood of dying in a plane crash.

244  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
processing is part of a dual processing system and is contrasted with System 2 (reflec-
tive) processing. Kahneman (2011) refers to System 1 as fast, intuitive, and largely 
unconscious thinking and System 2 as slow, analytical, and consciously effortful 
thinking. Although System 2 is responsible for more rational processing and can 
override System 1, it is also lazy. System 2 is willing to accept the easy but possibly  
unreliable System 1 answer. Clearly there are shortcomings with the System 1 heu-
ristics that we use to judge probabilities (uncertainties). Thus, you should work 
to engage System 2 processing. Slow down your thinking; be more analytical. For 
example, make sure you have not overlooked relevant probability information 
when using the representativeness heuristic, and try to think beyond prominence 
in memory when using the availability heuristic. In brief, don’t “rush to judgment.” 
Are there also shortcomings with the way we try to reduce our uncertainty and 
learn about the world through hypothesis testing? We now turn to this question.
Hypothesis Testing
In Chapter 1, we discussed the experimental research method that psychologists use 
to test their hypotheses about human behavior and mental processing. Like psychol-
ogists, we too have beliefs about the relationships between the variables in our envi-
ronment (hypotheses), and we too collect data to test these beliefs. However, we don’t 
use the experimental method discussed 
in Chapter 1. So what do we do? How 
do people test their hypotheses and thus 
reduce their uncertainty about the world? 
British researcher Peter Wason devised two 
problems to examine this question—the 
2-4-6 task and the four-card selection task.
Confirmation bias.  In the 2-4-6 task, 
you are presented the number sequence 
“2-4-6” and asked to name the rule that 
the experimenter used to generate that 
sequence (Wason, 1960). Before present-
ing your hypothesized rule (your answer),  
you are allowed to generate as many 
sequences of three numbers as you want 
and get feedback on whether each con-
forms to the experimenter’s rule. When 
you think that you know the rule, you tell 
the experimenter. Before we describe how 
people perform on this task, think about 
how you would proceed. What would be 
your first hypothesis for the rule and what 
sequences of three numbers would you 
generate to test your hypothesized rule?
Could increased smart phone usage lead to even 
more System 1 fast, intuitive thinking?
Dan Thompson/Universal Press UClick

Thinking undeR unceRtainty  |  245
Most of the participants do not name the correct rule. 
They devise a hypothesis (e.g., “numbers increasing by 2”) 
and proceed to test the hypothesis by generating series that 
conform to it (e.g., 8-10-12). In other words, they test their 
hypotheses by trying to confirm them. Did you do this? People do not test their 
hypotheses by trying to disconfirm them (e.g., generating the sequence 10-11-12 
for the hypothesis “numbers increasing by 2”). The tendency to seek evidence 
that confirms one’s beliefs is called confirmation bias. This bias is pervasive in 
our everyday hypothesis testing, so it is not surprising that it occurs on the 2-4-6 
task. The 2-4-6 task serves to highlight the inadequacy of the confirmation bias 
as a way to test a hypothesis. To truly test a hypothesis, we must try to discon-
firm it. We should attempt to disconfirm each hypothesis that we generate. The 
experimenter’s rule for the 2-4-6 task was a very simple, general rule, so most 
sequences that people generated conformed to it. What was it? The rule was sim-
ply any three increasing numbers; how far apart the numbers were did not matter.
Now let’s look at the four-card selection task (Wason, 1966, 1968). Try the 
problem before reading further.
➤ confirmation bias  The tendency to 
seek evidence that confirms one’s 
beliefs.
The four cards below have information on both sides. On one side of a 
card is a letter, and on the other side is a number.
Consider this rule: If a card has a vowel on one side, then it has an even 
number on the other side.
Select the card or cards that you definitely must turn over to determine 
whether the rule is true or false for these four cards.
Well, if you’re like most people, you haven’t answered correctly. The correct 
response rate for this problem is usually less than 10 percent (Griggs & Cox, 
1982). The most frequent error is to select the cards showing A and 4. The card 
showing A is part of the correct solution, but the card showing 4 is not. You 
should select the cards showing A and 7. Why? First, you should decide what type 
of card would falsify the rule. The rule states that if a card has a vowel on one side, 
it has to have an even number on the other side. Therefore, a card with a vowel 
on one side and an odd number on the other side would falsify the rule. Now do 
you see why the answer is A and 7? An odd number on the other side of the A card 
would falsify the rule, and so would a vowel on the other side of the 7 card. No 
matter what is on the other side of the K and 4 cards, the rule is true.
So why do people select the cards showing A and 4? As in the 2-4-6 task, peo-
ple focus on confirmation and select cards to verify the rule (show that it is true). 
They choose the cards showing A and 4 because they incorrectly think that the 
rule must hold in both directions (it doesn’t) and they must verify that it does 

246  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
so. They choose the card showing a vowel (A) to verify that it has an even number 
on the other side and the card showing an even number (4) to verify that it has 
a vowel on the other side. Instead of deducing what will falsify (disconfirm) the 
rule, people merely try to confirm it (demonstrating confirmation bias). There 
is, however, some recent evidence that people motivated to reject a rule because 
it is personally threatening or disagreeable to them will focus on disconfirma-
tion and thus perform better on the four-card selection task (Dawson, Gilovich, 
& Regan, 2002).
Research on the 2-4-6 task and the four-card selection task show that people 
typically try to confirm hypotheses. Confirmation bias, however, is not limited to 
the 2-4-6 and four-card selection tasks, but extends to many aspects of our daily 
lives such as jury decisions, physicians’ diagnoses, and the justification of govern-
mental policies (Nickerson, 1998). In addition, it leads to other cognitive difficul-
ties. For example, confirmation bias may lead us to perceive illusory correlations 
between events in our environment (Chapman, 1967; Chapman & Chapman, 
1967). An illusory correlation is the erroneous belief that two variables are 
statistically related when they actually are not. If we believe a relationship exists 
between two things, then we will tend to notice and remember instances that 
confirm this relationship. Let’s consider an example.
Many people erroneously believe that a relationship exists between weather 
changes and arthritis. Why? They focus on instances when the weather changes 
and their arthritic pain increases. To determine if this relationship actually exists, 
we need to consider the frequency of all four possible events, the two that confirm 
the hypothesis and the two that disconfirm it. In our example, the two confirm-
ing instances would be (1) when the weather changes and arthritic pain changes, 
and (2) when the weather does not change and arthritic pain does not change. 
The two disconfirming instances are (1) when the weather changes but arthritic 
pain does not, and (2) when the weather does not change but arthritic pain does. 
When the frequencies of all four events are considered, it turns out that there isn’t 
a relationship between these two variables. The confirming events are not more 
frequent than the disconfirming events (Redelmeier & Tversky, 1996).
Confirmation bias is likely responsible for many of our erroneous beliefs. Science 
provides better answers than informal, biased hypothesis testing. When our beliefs 
are contradicted by science, as in the case of belief in paranor-
mal events, we should think about our hypothesis testing pro-
cedure versus that of the scientist. We may have only gathered 
evidence to support our belief. We have to be willing to accept 
that our beliefs may be wrong. This is not easy for us to do. 
We suffer from belief perseverance—the tendency to cling to 
our beliefs in the face of contradictory evidence (Anderson, 
Lepper, & Ross, 1980). Our beliefs constitute a large part of 
our identity; therefore, admitting that we are wrong is very dif-
ficult. Such denial is illustrated by person-who reasoning— 
questioning a well-established finding because we know a 
➤ illusory correlation  The erroneous 
belief that two variables are statis-
tically related when they actually 
are not.
➤ belief perseverance  The tendency 
to cling to one’s beliefs in the face 
of contradictory evidence.
➤ person-who reasoning  Questioning 
a well-established research finding 
because one knows a person who 
violates the finding.

Thinking undeR unceRtainty  |  247
person who violates the finding (Nisbett & Ross, 1980; 
Stanovich, 2004). A good example is questioning the valid-
ity of the finding that smoking leads to health problems, 
because we know someone who has smoked most of his 
or her life and has no health problems. Such reasoning 
also likely indicates a failure to understand that these 
research findings are probabilities. Such research find-
ings are not certain; they do not hold in absolutely every 
case. Exceptions to these sorts of research findings are to 
be expected. Person-who reasoning is not valid, and we 
shouldn’t engage in it.
Testing medical hypotheses.  As we pointed out, con-
firmation bias seems to impact physicians’ testing of 
hypotheses during the diagnostic process (Nickerson, 1998). Physicians (and 
patients) also seem to have difficulty in interpreting positive test results for medical 
screening tests, such as for various types of cancer and HIV/AIDS (Gigerenzer, 2002). 
They often overestimate the probability that a patient has a disease based on a posi-
tive test result. When considering what a positive result for a screening test means, 
you are testing the hypothesis that a patient actually has the disease being screened 
for by determining the probability that the patient has the disease given a positive 
test result. Because you will be considering the results of medical screening tests 
throughout your lifetime and will inevitably get some positive results, you should 
understand how to compute this conditional probability in order to know your 
chances of actually having the disease. Because this computation is not a very intui-
tive process, I will show you a straightforward way to do it, so that you can make 
more informed medical decisions.
Much of the research that is focused on how successful doctors and patients 
are at correctly interpreting a positive result for a medical screening test and on 
how they can improve their performance has been conducted by Gerd Gigerenzer 
and his colleagues (Gigerenzer, 2002; Gigerenzer & Edwards, 2003; Gigerenzer, 
Gaissmaier, Kurz-Milcke, Schwartz, & Woloshin, 2007). Both doctors and 
patients have been found to overestimate these conditional probabilities. An older 
study by Eddy (1982) with 100 American doctors as the participants illustrates 
this overestimation finding; but before considering it, some explanation is neces-
sary. In medicine, probabilities are often expressed in percentages rather than as 
numbers between 0 and 1.0. Three terms relevant to screening tests, the base rate 
for a disease and the sensitivity and false positive rates for the test, also need to 
be explained before we continue. The base rate (prevalence) of a disease is simply 
the probability with which it occurs in the population. The sensitivity rate for a 
screening test is the probability that a patient tests positive if she has the disease, 
and the false positive rate is the probability that a patient tests positive if she does 
not have the disease. Now consider Eddy’s problem. You should try to estimate 
the probability asked for in the problem before reading on.
Gerd Gigerenzer
Oliver Hartung/The New York Times/Redux

248  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
Estimate the probability that a woman has breast cancer given a positive 
mammogram result and a base rate for this type of cancer of 1%, a sensi-
tivity rate for the test of 80%, and a false positive rate for the test of 9.6%.
What was your estimate? If you acted like the doctors, you overestimated the 
probability. Almost all of the doctors estimated this probability to be around 
75 percent. The correct answer, however, is much less, only around 8 percent. 
Hoffrage and Gigerenzer (1998) replicated Eddy’s finding with even more shock-
ing results. Physicians’ estimates ranged from 1 percent to 90 percent, with a 
90 percent chance of breast cancer being the most frequent estimate. Given the 
doctors’ overestimation errors, think of how many women who tested positive 
in this case would have been unnecessarily alarmed had this been real life and 
not an experiment. Think about the possible consequences, which are far from 
trivial—emotional distress, further testing, biopsy, more expense, and maybe even 
unnecessary surgery. To correctly compute the conditional probability that some-
one has the disease given a positive test result, Gigerenzer recommends that you 
convert all of the percentages (probabilities) into natural frequencies, or simple 
counts of events. According to Gigerenzer, natural frequencies represent the way 
humans encoded information before probabilities were invented and are easier 
for our brains to understand. In brief, they make more sense to us. To convert 
to natural frequencies, we begin by supposing there is a sample of women who 
have had the screening test. It’s best to suppose a large, even number such as 
1,000, because such numbers allow an easier conversion to natural frequencies. 
Assuming a sample of 1,000 women, we can then proceed to convert Eddy’s per-
centages into natural frequencies and compute the conditional probability.
Given a base rate of 1%, we would expect 10 (1% of 1,000) women to 
have breast cancer.
Of these 10, we expect 8 (80% of 10) to test positive because the test 
has a sensitivity rate of 80%. The results for these 8 women are called 
true positives because these women have breast cancer and their test 
results were positive. The test results for the other 2 women are called 
false negatives because these women have breast cancer but their test 
results were negative.
Among the 990 (1,000 2 10) women without breast cancer, 95 (9.6% 
of 990) will test positive given the 9.6% false positive rate. The results 
for these 95 women are called false positives because these women do 
not have cancer but their test results were positive. The results for the 
remaining 895 women are called true negatives because these women 
do not have cancer and their test results were negative.
Thus, 103 (8 1 95) women in the sample of 1,000 will test positive, 
but only 8 are true positives. Thus, the conditional probability that a 
woman testing positive actually has cancer is the percentage of positive 
test results that are true positives, 8/103 5 0.077 (7.7%).
Hoffrage and Gigerenzer (1995) found that once they presented the numbers 
as natural frequencies to doctors, the majority suddenly understood the problem. 

Thinking undeR unceRtainty  |  249
Do you? If not, the solution steps are visually illustrated in the natural frequency 
tree diagram in Figure 6.2. Read through the steps in the tree diagram and then 
read through them again in the text. After doing this, you should better under-
stand how to do such calculations.
It should be clear to you now that a positive result for a medical screening test 
does not necessarily mean that you have the disease. You might or you might not. 
It is natural to assume the worst when faced with a positive test result, but it may 
be more probable that you do not have the disease. There is uncertainty, and the 
hypothesis that you have the disease must be tested by computing the conditional 
probability that you do, given the positive test result. You now know how to do 
this by representing the base, sensitivity, and false positive rates as natural fre-
quencies and using these frequencies to compute the probability. Combine a low 
incidence rate (for example, 1 or 2 percent) with just a modest false positive rate 
(for example, 10 percent) for a screening test, and there will be many false posi-
tives (Mlodinow, 2008). A good example is mammography with young women. 
In this case, a positive mammogram is actually more likely not to indicate cancer. 
Of course, screening tests with high false positive rates are also problematic, lead-
ing to both overdiagnosis and overtreatment. A good example is the PSA test for 
prostate cancer in men (Gilligan, 2009). Given that the potential benefits do not 
outweigh the harms for this test, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (the fed-
eral panel empowered to evaluate cancer screening tests) recommended in 2012 
m Figure 6.2 | Natural Frequency Tree Diagram for Cancer Problem in Eddy 
(1982) | This tree diagram visually illustrates the solution steps necessary to solve 
Eddy’s (1982) cancer problem by converting all of the relevant probability information to 
natural frequencies as suggested by Gigerenzer (2002). Remember, the probability that a 
person has a disease given a positive screening test result for that disease is the  
percentage of positive test results that are true positives. (Source: Gerd Gigerenzer, Director of Max 
Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin.)
Therefore, the probability of cancer given a positive
test result is:
=
= .077 (7.7%).
8
103
8
8 + 95
895
true
negatives
(990 − 95 = 895)
1,000
women
95
false
positives
(9.5% of 990 = 95)
2
false
negatives
(10 − 8 = 2)
8
true
positives
(80% of 10 = 8)
10
have cancer
(1% of 1,000 = 10)
990
do not have cancer
(1,000 − 10 = 990)

250  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
against PSA screening for men, regardless of age (Moyer, 2012). For more detailed 
coverage of interpreting screening test results and understanding other medical 
statistics, see Gigerenzer (2002) and Woloshin, Schwartz, and Welch (2008).
Section Summary
In this section, we learned that when we make probability judgments, we often use 
the representativeness and availability heuristics. When using the representative-
ness heuristic, we judge the likelihood of category membership by how well an 
object resembles a category (the more representative, the more probable). This 
heuristic can lead us to ignore extremely relevant probability information such as 
the conjunction rule. The availability heuristic leads us to judge the likelihood of an 
event by its availability in memory (the more available, the more probable). We may 
make errors with the availability heuristic, because events may be highly prominent 
in our memories because of their recent occurrence or because they are particularly 
vivid and not because they occur more often. Using these heuristics arises from 
System 1 (automatic, intuitive) processing. We need to slow down our thinking and 
engage System 2 (effortful, analytical) processing to improve our judgment.
We also considered that when we test hypotheses about our beliefs, we tend 
to suffer from confirmation bias (the tendency to seek evidence that confirms our 
beliefs). This bias may lead us to have erroneous beliefs based on illusory correla-
tions, believing two variables are related when they actually are not. To prevent 
this, we should attempt to disconfirm our hypotheses and beliefs rather than con-
firm them. Even in the face of contradictory evidence, we tend to persevere in our 
beliefs and ignore the evidence, or we engage in denial through invalid person-who 
statistical reasoning (thinking that a well-established finding should not be accepted 
because there are some exceptions to it). Lastly, we discussed medical hypothesis 
testing, specifically how to compute the conditional probability that a person actu-
ally has a disease that is being screened for, given a positive test result. Research 
indicates that both doctors and patients tend to overestimate such probabilities. The 
conversion of the relevant probability information, however, to natural frequencies 
greatly facilitates the computation of these conditional probabilities.
ConceptCheck | 2
➤	 explain how using the representativeness heuristic can lead to the conjunc-
tion fallacy.
➤	 explain how using the availability heuristic can lead to the misjudgment of 
the probabilities of various causes of death.
➤	 explain how confirmation bias can lead to the perception of an illusory 
correlation.
➤	 Given a base rate of 2% for a disease and a false positive rate of 10% and 
a sensitivity rate of 90% for the screening test for the disease, use natural 
frequencies to compute the conditional probability that a person actually 
has the disease given a positive test result.

Intelligent Thinking  |  251
Intelligent Thinking
The types of thinking that we have discussed so far—problem solving, judgment, 
and hypothesis testing—are important aspects of intelligent thinking, or what we 
call intelligence. We have a pretty good idea of what intelligence is, and we can 
recognize examples of intelligent thinking. However, finding a definition of intel-
ligence that most psychologists can agree upon is not that easy. The definition of 
intelligence is controversial, and intelligence tests and their use are even more con-
troversial. Their fairness and usefulness are constantly questioned. In this section, 
we will examine two of the major questions concerning intelligence and intelli-
gence tests. First, is intelligence one general ability or is it a set of specific mental 
abilities? Second, is intelligence due to genetics or experience? To put these two 
discussions into proper perspective, we will first consider the historical develop-
ment of intelligence tests and then the characteristics of a good intelligence test.
Intelligence Tests
The first attempts to develop intelligence tests took place in late nineteenth-century  
England and in early twentieth-century France. From the start, intelligence test-
ing was enmeshed in the nature-versus-nurture controversy—is intelligence innate 
(set by genetics) or is it nurtured by one’s environmental experiences? You will see 
that the major intelligence theorists tended to favor one side or the other. As each 
theorist’s work is described, his bias will be pointed out.
The history of intelligence tests.  In late nineteenth-century England, Sir 
Francis Galton was trying to develop an intelligence test for the purpose of eugen-
ics, selective reproduction to enhance the capacities of the human race (Fancher, 
1985). Galton clearly fell on the nature side of the nature–nurture debate. He 
believed in the genetic determination of intelligence and thought he could mea-
sure intelligence by measuring various aspects of the human brain and nervous 
system. Galton assumed that more intelligent people would have more acute 
senses, greater strength, and faster reactions to stimuli, so he devised a series of 
tests measuring these physical traits and tested thousands of people. As you 
might guess, Galton’s tests were not good predictors of intelli-
gent thinking. Probably more significant to intelligence testing 
was Galton’s invention of the basic mathematics behind correla-
tional statistics (what he termed “co-relations”) that are used for 
numerous aspects of testing from assessing genetic contribu-
tions to determining a test’s validity (Gardner, Kornhaber, & 
Wake, 1996). Before Galton, correlational statistics did not exist. 
Actually, his disciple, Karl Pearson, formalized Galton’s ideas to 
allow computation of the correlation coefficient (Fancher, 
1985), which we discussed in Chapter 1.
In France at the beginning of the twentieth century, Alfred 
Binet and his assistant Theophile Simon were working on 
the problem of academic retardation. France had recently  
Sir Francis Galton
Bettman/Corbis

252  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
introduced mass public education, and the French government 
asked Binet to develop a test to diagnose children whose intellec-
tual development was subnormal and who would not be able to 
keep up with their peers in school. This test, published in 1905, 
was the first accepted test of intelligence (Fancher, 1985). The test 
calculated a child’s performance as an intellectual level, or mental 
age, that then could be used in diagnosing academic retardation. 
Mental age is the age typically associated with a child’s level of 
test performance. If a child’s mental age were less than his or 
her chronological (actual) age, the child would need remedial 
work. The fact that Binet helped in the development of “mental 
orthopedics”—mental exercises designed to raise the intelligence 
of children classified as subnormal—clearly illustrated his bent 
toward the nurture side of the nature–nurture debate. The Binet-
Simon test was revised in 1908 and again in 1911, the year Binet died unexpectedly  
at the age of 54 from a terminal disease whose exact nature is no longer known 
(Fancher, 1985). Within ten years of Binet’s death, translations and revisions of 
the Binet-Simon scale were in use all over the world (Miller, 1962). Ironically, 
the test was not used extensively in France until the 1940s—and only then when 
a French social worker who had been working in the United States brought the 
American version of the test back to France (Kaufman, 2009; Miller, 1962).
The next major figure in intelligence test development, Lewis Terman, 
had Galton’s nature bias, but he used Binet and Simon’s test. Working 
at Stanford University, Terman revised the intelligence test for use with 
American schoolchildren. This revision, first published in 1916, became 
known as the Stanford-Binet (Terman, 1916). To report Stanford-Binet 
scores, Terman used the classic intelligence quotient formula suggested 
by William Stern, a German psychologist (Stern, 1914). The intelligence  
quotient (IQ) formula was the following: IQ 5 (mental age/
chronological age) 3 100. Multiplying by 100 centered the 
scale at 100. When a child’s mental age 
(as assessed by the test) was greater than 
the child’s chronological age (actual 
age), the child’s IQ was greater than 100; 
when chronological age was greater than 
mental age, the child’s IQ was less than 
100. The IQ formula, however, is no 
longer used to compute a person’s intel-
ligence test score on the Stanford-Binet.  
It is a confounded measure because a 
year’s growth doesn’t have a constant 
meaning from year to year for mental 
ability. Mental growth levels off, but 
age keeps increasing. How intelligence 
Alfred Binet
Bettmann/Corbis
➤ intelligence quotient (IQ)  (mental 
age/chronological age) 3 100.
Lewis Terman
David Wechsler
News Service, Stanford University
Archives of the History of American Psychology, The Center 
for the History of Psychology, The University of Akron

Intelligent Thinking  |  253
test scores are computed is explained in our discus-
sion of the next major figure of intelligence testing, 
David Wechsler.
David Wechsler was working as chief psycholo-
gist at Bellevue Hospital in New York City in the 
1930s and was in charge of testing thousands 
of adult patients from very diverse backgrounds 
(Fancher, 1985). Like Binet, Wechsler thought that 
intelligence was nurtured by one’s environment. 
Given that most of his patients were underedu-
cated, he wanted to get a much broader assessment 
of their abilities. The Stanford-Binet wasn’t well-
suited for his purposes, because it only provided a 
single measure of abilities related to academic per-
formance (IQ). The IQ formula was especially irrel-
evant for adults because, as we mentioned earlier, at 
some point mental age levels off but chronological 
age keeps increasing. Based on the Stanford-Binet, 
a person’s IQ would automatically go down with 
age regardless of one’s mental abilities.
Given all of these problems, Wechsler developed his own test, the Wechsler 
Bellevue Scale, in 1939 (Gardner, Kornhaber, & Wake, 1996). This test became 
known as the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) in 1955 and is appropriate 
for ages 16 and older. Wechsler also developed the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for 
Children (WISC) in 1949 for children aged 6 to 16. Both tests (the WAIS and WISC) 
provide finer analyses of a person’s abilities by providing test scores for a battery of 
not only verbal tests (such as vocabulary and word reasoning) but also nonverbal, 
performance tests (such as block design, matrix reasoning, and visual puzzles). An 
item similar to those on the WAIS nonverbal Visual Puzzles subtest and one similar 
to those on the WISC nonverbal Matrix Reasoning subtest are given in Figure 6.3a 
and 6.3b, respectively. The WAIS and WISC are now in their fourth editions, and the 
Stanford-Binet is in its fifth. Like Wechsler’s tests, the latest edition of the Stanford-
Binet provides a broader assessment of intelligence, including nonverbal subtests.
Deviation IQ scores.  Wechsler also devised a better way to report intelligence 
test scores, called deviation IQ scores. Like IQs, deviation IQs involve standardiza-
tion. Standardization is the process that allows test scores to be interpreted by 
providing test norms. To standardize a test, the test must be given to a representa-
tive sample of the relevant population. The scores of this sample then serve as the 
test norms for interpretation. For example, Terman standardized the original 
Stanford-Binet on American children of various ages. Any 
child’s raw test score could be compared to the standardiza-
tion norms to calculate the child’s mental age and IQ. Because 
of the problems in the IQ formula for adults, however,  
© J.B. Handelsman/The New Yorker Collection www.cartoonbank.com
➤ standardization  The process that 
allows test scores to be interpreted 
by providing test norms.

254  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
?
1
A
B
C
d
E
(a)
(b)
f
2
3
4
5
m Figure 6.3 | Sample Performance (Nonverbal) Test Items | (a) This is a nonverbal 
test item similar to those on the WAIS Visual Puzzles subtest. (b) This is a nonverbal test item 
similar to those on the WISC Matrix Reasoning subtest. (Source: www.pearsonassessments.com.)
Wechsler decided to use his standardization data differently. He collected stan-
dardization data for various adult age groups. The data for each age group form 
a normal distribution (see Figure 6.4).
To calculate a person’s deviation IQ, Wechsler compared the person’s raw test score 
to the normal distribution of raw scores for that person’s standardization age group. 
He calculated how far the raw score was from the mean raw score in terms of standard 
deviation units from the mean. To make the deviation scores resemble IQ formula 
scores, he set the mean to 100 and the standard deviation to 15. He then defined a 
person’s deviation IQ score as 100 plus or minus (15 3 the number of standard 
deviation units a person’s raw test score is from the mean for the relevant age group 
norms). For example, if a person’s raw test score fell 1 standard deviation above the 
mean for his or her age group, he or she would have a deviation IQ score of 100 plus  
(15 3 1), or 115. The deviation IQ scale for the WAIS is illustrated in Figure 6.4.  
The same scale is used for the WISC but with standardization 
data for various child age groups; a similar deviation IQ scale 
with the standard deviation set at 15 is now used for scoring 
the fifth edition of the Stanford-Binet intelligence test.
Reliability and validity.  In addition to being standard-
ized, a good test must also be reliable and valid. Reliability is 
the extent to which the scores for a test are consistent. This 
➤ deviation IQ score  100 plus or 
minus (15 3 the number of stan-
dard deviations the person is from 
the raw score mean for their  
standardization group).
➤ reliability  The extent to which the 
scores for a test are consistent.
Which 3 of these pieces go together  
to make this puzzle?
Select the item that properly  
completes the matrix.

Intelligent Thinking  |  255
may be assessed in various ways. In the test–retest method, the test is given twice 
to the same sample, and the correlation coefficient for the two sets of scores is 
computed. If the test is reliable, this coefficient should be strongly positive. 
Remember from Chapter 1 that a strong correlation coefficient approaches 1.0, 
hence acceptable reliability coefficients should be around 0.90 or higher. The reli-
ability coefficients for the major intelligence tests, the WAIS, WISC, and Stanford-
Binet, are at this level (Kaufman, 2000).
If multiple forms of the test are available, then alternate-form reliability can be 
assessed. Alternate-form reliability is determined by giving different forms of the 
test to the same sample at different times and computing the correlation coef-
ficient for performance on the two forms. A third type of reliability assessment 
involves consistency within the test. If the test is internally consistent, then per-
formance on the two halves of the test (odd versus even items) should be strongly 
positively correlated. This type of reliability is called split-half reliability because 
performance on half of the test items (the odd-numbered items) is compared to 
performance on the other half (the even-numbered items).
In addition to reliability, a test should have validity. Validity is the extent to 
which a test measures what it is supposed to measure or predicts what it is sup-
posed to predict. The former type of validity is called content validity, and the latter,  
predictive validity. Content validity means that the test covers the content that it is 
supposed to cover. Experts decide this. All course exams should have content valid-
ity (be on the content that was assigned). Predictive validity 
means that the test predicts behavior that is related to what 
is being measured by the test; for example, an intelligence test 
should predict how well a child does in school. Children and 
teenagers higher in intelligence should do better on average 
Number of Standard Deviations from the Mean
+3
–3
+2
–2
0.13%
+1
–1
Mean
145
55
130
70
115
85
100
WAIS Deviation IQ Scores
0
Frequency
2.15%
13.59% 34.13% 34.13%
99.74%
13.59%
0.13%
2.15%
95.44%
68.26%
 Figure 6.4 | 
Deviation IQ Scores 
on the WAIS | Deviation 
IQ scores for the WAIS are 
indicated for the mean, 
and 1 to 3 standard  
deviations above or below 
the mean. To make  
deviation IQ scores  
resemble IQ scores, the 
mean was set at 100 points 
and the standard deviation 
at 15 points.
➤	 validity  The extent to which a test 
measures what it is supposed to 
measure or predicts what it is  
supposed to predict.

256  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
than children and teenagers lower in intelligence, and this is the case for the intel-
ligence tests that we have discussed. These tests all have good predictive validity. 
It is important to note that if a test is valid, then it will also be reliable. However, 
the reverse is not true. A test may be reliable, but not valid. A good example is mea-
suring the circumference of the head as an indicator of intelligence. This number 
would be consistent across two measurements and therefore reliable, but it does 
not predict intelligent behavior (does not have predictive validity).
Intelligence test scores are among the most valid predictors of academic per-
formance and job performance across just about every major occupation studied 
(Neisser et al., 1996; Sackett, Schmitt, Ellingson, & Kabin, 2001; Schmidt & Hunter, 
1998). Not only do intelligence tests have good predictive validity, but they also are 
not biased against women or minorities. The tests’ predictive validity applies equally 
to all. It is roughly the same regardless of gender, race, ethnicity, and so on. Group 
differences in test scores are accompanied by comparable differences in perfor-
mance. As Lilienfeld, Lynn, Ruscio, and Beyerstein (2010) point out, the belief that 
these tests are biased in this way is a widespread myth and the research on this belief 
indicates that intelligence tests and other standardized abilities tests, such as the 
SAT, are not biased against either women or minorities. A task force of the American 
Psychological Association (Neisser et al., 1996) and two National Academy of 
Science panels (Hartigan & Wigdor, 1989; Wigdor & Garner, 1982) reached this 
same conclusion. In sum, the question of intelligence test bias with respect to pre-
dictive validity has been settled about as conclusively as any scientific controversy 
can be (Gottfredson, 1997, 2009; Sackett, Bornerman, & Connelly, 2008).
Psychologists agree on what an intelligence test should predict, but they do not 
agree on how intelligence should be defined. Is intelligence one general ability or 
many specific abilities? Does intelligence involve more than just mental abilities? Are 
there multiple types of intelligence? Different psychologists answer these questions 
in different ways based on their definitions of intelligence. The other major con-
troversy concerning intelligence is the nature–nurture debate on the basis of intel-
ligence. Galton’s work marked the beginning of this debate, and the debate is still 
with us today, over a century later. It is to these two controversies that we now turn.
Controversies About Intelligence
The argument over whether intelligence is a single general ability or a collection 
of specific abilities has been around for over a hundred years. Many theorists 
have argued that intelligence comprises multiple abilities, but the exact number 
of abilities or types of intelligence proposed has varied from 2 to over 100. In our 
discussion, we’ll consider a few of the more prominent theories, first consider-
ing those that propose that intelligence is one or more mental abilities and then 
theories that define intelligence more broadly, including more than just mental 
abilities as assessed by intelligence tests.
Theories of intelligence.  Mental ability theories of intelligence began with 
Charles Spearman (1927), who argued that intelligence test performance is a 
function of two types of factors: (1) a g factor (general intelligence), and (2) some 

Intelligent Thinking  |  257
s factors (specific intellectual abilities such as reasoning). 
Spearman thought that the g factor was more important 
because it was relevant across the various mental abilities that 
make up an intelligence test, and that the s factors were more 
pertinent to specific subtests of an intelligence test. 
Spearman’s theory was based on his observation that people who did well on one 
subtest usually did well on most of the subtests, and people who did poorly usu-
ally did so on most of the subtests. Individuals did not do equally well on all of 
the various subtests, however, indicating the secondary effects of the s factors or 
specific abilities on the various subtests. Contemporary research has shown the g 
factor to be a good predictor of performance both in school and at work 
(Gottfredson, 2002a, 2002b).
In contrast, one of Spearman’s contemporaries, L. L. Thurstone, argued that spe-
cific mental abilities (like Spearman’s s factors) were more important (Thurstone, 
1938). Based on his research, he argued that there were seven primary mental 
abilities—verbal comprehension, number facility, spatial relations, perceptual speed, 
word fluency, associative memory, and reasoning. Thurstone identified these prima-
ry abilities by using factor analysis, a statistical technique that identifies clusters of 
test items that measure the same ability (factor). Spearman also used factor analysis, 
so why the difference in theories? Basically, they emphasized different aspects of 
the analysis. Thurstone emphasized the specific factor clusters, whereas Spearman 
emphasized the correlations across the various clusters.
Later, Raymond Cattell (a student of Spearman) and John Horn proposed a 
slightly different type of mental ability theory that has mainly influenced research-
ers focused on aging (Cattell, 1987; Horn & Cattell, 1966, 1967). They proposed 
that the g factor should be viewed as two types of intelligence: (1) fluid intelligence 
and (2) crystallized intelligence. Fluid intelligence refers to abilities independent 
of acquired knowledge, such as abstract reasoning, logical problem solving, and 
the speed of information processing. They defined crystallized intelligence as accu-
mulated knowledge and verbal and numerical skills. This theory has interested 
researchers focused on aging because crystallized intelligence increases with expe-
rience and formal education and grows as we age; fluid intelligence is not influ-
enced by these factors and actually declines with age. We will return to this theory 
in Chapter 7 when we consider how intelligence changes across the life span.
All of the theories we have discussed thus far focus on definitions of intel-
ligence as mental abilities that can be assessed by standard intelligence tests 
such as the Stanford-Binet and WAIS. Three major contemporary theories by 
Howard Gardner (1983, 1993, 1999), Robert Sternberg (1985, 1988, 1999), 
and Keith Stanovich (2009a, b) extend this definition to include other types of 
abilities. We’ll consider Gardner’s first. According to Gardner’s theory of mul-
tiple intelligences, there are eight independent intelligences—linguistic, logical-
mathematical, spatial, musical, bodily-kinesthetic, intrapersonal, interpersonal, 
and naturalistic. Brief descriptions of each of these intelligences are given in 
Table 6.1. The linguistic and logical-mathematical intelligences seem to fit with 
other definitions of intelligence in terms of mental abilities, but the other six are 
➤ factor analysis  A statistical  
technique that identifies clusters of  
test items that measure the same 
ability (factor).

258  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
Table 6.1    Brief Descriptions of Gardner’s Eight Intelligences
Linguistic
Language ability as in reading, writing, and speaking
Logical-mathematical
Mathematical problem solving and scientific analysis
Spatial
Reasoning about visual spatial relationships
Musical
Musical skills such as the ability to compose and 
understand music
Bodily-kinesthetic
Skill in body movement and handling objects
Intrapersonal
Understanding oneself
Interpersonal
Understanding other people
Naturalist
Ability to discern patterns in nature
controversial; many psychologists see these as talents or skills instead of types of 
intelligence. In addition, many of these intelligences are difficult to quantify (such 
as intrapersonal intelligence) and present measurement problems.
According to Sternberg’s triarchic theory of intelligence, there are three types 
of intelligence—analytical, practical, and creative. Analytical intelligence is essen-
tially what is measured by standard intelligence tests, the skills necessary for 
good academic performance. However, the other two types of intelligence are 
not really measured by standard intelligence tests. Practical intelligence could be 
equated with good common sense or “street smarts.” Creative intelligence is con-
cerned with the ability to solve novel problems and deal with unusual situations. 
Sternberg’s intelligences are all types of mental ability, but the inclusion of practi-
cal and creative intelligences broadens our conception of intelligence by including 
mental abilities that seem to have more applicability in the nonacademic world.
Cognitive researcher Keith Stanovich (2009a, b) argues that intelligence is a 
meaningful, useful construct and, unlike Gardner and Sternberg, is not interested 
in expanding the definition of intelligence. Rather he argues that intelligence 
is only one component of good thinking and thus by itself is not sufficient to 
explain such thinking. The other critical component is our ability to think and 
act rationally, which is not assessed by standard intelligence tests. Further, these 
two components are independent so you can be intelligent and not act rationally 
and vice versa. This is why smart people sometimes do foolish things. Stanovich 
coined the term “dysrationalia” to describe this failure to think and behave ratio-
nally despite having adequate intelligence.
One cause of dysrationalia is that we tend to be cognitive misers, using System 1  
too much. This is the reason we have developed a whole set of heuristics and biases  
(many such as anchoring, representativeness, and confirmation bias were dis-
cussed earlier in this chapter) to limit the amount of reflective, analytical thinking  
that we need to engage in. As we have learned, these shortcut strategies provide 
rough and ready answers that are right sometimes but often wrong. Another 

Intelligent Thinking  |  259
source of dysrationalia is what Stanovich calls the mindware gap, which occurs 
when we haven’t learned the appropriate mindware (specific knowledge, such as 
an understanding of probability, and cognitive rules and strategies, such as sci-
entific thinking, that are necessary to think rationally). According to Stanovich, 
many intelligent people never acquire the appropriate mindware. Finally, given 
such causes, Stanovich thinks that rational thinking and behavior can be taught 
and that it ought to be taught at every stage of the educational system.
The six theories of intelligence that we have discussed are briefly summarized 
in Table 6.2. Next we will consider the controversial nature–nurture debate on the 
basis of intelligence.
Nature versus nurture.  Not only do psychologists disagree upon the defini-
tion of intelligence, they also argue about its origins—the nature–nurture debate 
that we discussed earlier. This debate was popularized by Galton, a strong propo-
nent of the nature side of the argument, over a century ago. Most contemporary 
psychologists, however, believe that both heredity (nature) and environmental 
experiences (nurture) are important. The disagreement now is over the relative 
contribution of each part (nature and nurture) to intelligence. We’ll take a brief 
look at how some psychologists have tried to settle this disagreement.
Table 6.2    Theories of Intelligence
Theorist
Theory Summary
Spearman
Intelligence is mainly a function of a general intelli-
gence (g) factor
Thurstone
Intelligence is a function of seven primary mental  
abilities—verbal comprehension, number facility,  
spatial relations, perceptual speed, word fluency,  
associative memory, and reasoning
Cattell and Horn
There are two types of intelligence—crystallized intel-
ligence, which refers to accumulated knowledge and 
verbal and numerical skills, and fluid intelligence, 
which refers to abilities independent of acquired  
knowledge, such as abstract reasoning, logical problem 
solving, and speed of information processing
Gardner
Intelligence is defined as eight independent intelligences— 
linguistic, logical-mathematical, spatial, ­musical, 
bodily-kinesthetic, intrapersonal, interpersonal, and 
naturalist
Sternberg
Intelligence is defined as three types of abilities— 
analytical, creative, and practical
Stanovich
Intelligence is not sufficient for good thinking; 
­rationality, which is independent of intelligence, is 
also necessary

260  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
First, we’ll consider the results of genetic similarity studies. Genetic similar-
ity between people varies from 100 percent similarity between identical twins to  
50 percent between fraternal twins and between siblings (brothers and sisters) to 
0 percent between two unrelated people. If intelligence were due to heredity, the 
average correlations between intelligence scores should decrease as genetic simi-
larity decreases. Researchers have found this to be the case (Bouchard & McGue, 
1981). The average correlation coefficient drops from 10.86 for identical twins 
to essentially 0 for unrelated people. The data, however, also show effects of envi-
ronment. For example, if identical twins are raised apart (adopted into different 
families), the average correlation between their intelligence test scores drops to 
10.72, indicating the importance of sharing similar environments.
Let’s consider two more of these findings to see how the effects of both heredity 
and environment are indicated. The average correlation between fraternal twins 
raised together (10.60) is less than that for identical twins reared apart (10.72), 
indicating the influence of heredity; but the average correlation is greater than that 
for ordinary siblings reared together (10.47), indicating environmental influences. 
Remember that the amount of genetic similarity for fraternal twins and ordinary 
siblings is the same, 50 percent. This means that the greater correlation for frater-
nal twins (10.60 versus 10.47) must be due to environmental factors. The frater-
nal twins are the same age; hence their environmental experiences are more similar 
than those for ordinary siblings of different ages. As these two findings indicate, 
heredity and environment work together to influence intelligence test scores.
Researchers have also looked at adopted children and the correlations between 
their scores with both their adoptive and biological parents. The modest correla-
tion between the intelligence test scores of adopted children with their adoptive 
parents disappears as the children age (McGue, Bouchard, Iacono, & Lykken, 
1993). The reverse is true, however, for the correlation between the scores for 
adopted children and their biological parents. It increases (Plomin, DeFries, 
McClearn, & Rutter, 1997). This stronger relationship between a person’s intel-
ligence and that of his or her biological parents means that nature plays a larger 
role in determining a person’s intelligence than environmental experiences.
The results of genetic similarity studies of intelligence can also be used to estimate 
its heritability, an index of the degree that variation of a trait within a given popu-
lation is due to heredity. These estimates vary, usually in the range from around 50 
percent up to 70 percent (Bouchard, Lykken, McGue, Segal, & Tellegen, 1990). Thus, 
for a given population, 50 percent to 70 percent of the variation in their intelligence test 
scores is estimated to be due to heredity. However, because heritability is not 100 per-
cent, this means that heredity and environment work together to 
determine intelligence (though heredity may make a larger con-
tribution). Given this fact, recent research focuses on how hered-
ity and environment interact to determine a person’s intelligence 
score. The assumption is that heredity determines a reaction  
range, genetically determined limits for an individual’s intel-
ligence. Heredity places upper and lower limits on a person’s 
➤ heritability  An index of the degree 
that variation of a trait within a 
given population is due to heredity.
➤ reaction range  The genetically 
determined limits for an individu-
al’s intelligence.

Intelligent Thinking  |  261
intelligence, but the quality of the person’s 
environment determines where the indi-
vidual falls within this range. The principle 
is simple—the higher the environmental 
quality, the higher the person’s intelligence 
within the reaction range.
Two points about heritability should be 
made clear. First, it is a group statistic and is 
not relevant to individual cases. For exam-
ple, if the heritability estimate for intelli-
gence for a population were 50 percent,  
this does not mean that 50 percent of 
the intelligence of an individual in the 
group is determined by genetics and the 
other 50 percent by environmental experi-
ences. It only means that 50 percent of the 
variation in intelligence among people 
in the population is due to genetics and  
50 percent of the variation is due to 
environmental experiences. Second, it is important to understand that heritability 
has nothing to do with the differences that have been observed between popula-
tions, such as the difference in scores for Asian schoolchildren versus American 
schoolchildren. Heritability only applies to the variation within a given population 
or group, not to variation between groups. Observed group differences must be 
analyzed individually and in a different way.
Let’s examine the gap between Asian and American schoolchildren to see one way 
such analyses are done (Stevenson, Chen, & Lee, 1993; Stevenson & Stigler, 1992). 
In this case, researchers examined the group difference for children of different ages 
and concluded that the gap is likely due to the priority placed on education in Asian 
countries. Why? There doesn’t seem to be a gap before the children enter school. 
The gap begins and increases as the children proceed through school. The Asian cul-
tures place higher value on education, and so the children spend more time study-
ing and work harder, achieving more in school and higher test scores. There seem to 
be clear environmental factors operating to explain this particular group difference.
As if there are not enough unanswered questions and debates about intelligence, 
a recent curious finding has led to yet another. It is called the “Flynn effect” because 
intelligence researcher James Flynn popularized it. The “Flynn effect” label was coined 
by Herrnstein and Murray in their book The Bell Curve (1994). Actually Flynn (2007) 
says that if he had thought to name it, he would have called 
it the “Tuddenham effect” because Tuddenham (1948) was  
the first to present convincing evidence of the effect using the 
intelligence test scores of U.S. soldiers in World Wars I and II. 
The Flynn effect refers to the fact that in the United States and 
other Western industrialized nations, average intelligence scores 
Mike Twohy/The New Yorker Collection. Cartoonbank.com
“Big deal, an A in math. That would be a D in any other country.”
➤ Flynn effect  The finding that the 
average intelligence test score 
in the United States and other 
industrialized nations has improved 
steadily over the last century.

262  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
have improved steadily over the past century (Flynn, 1987, 1999, 
2007, 2012). For example, the average score in 1918 would be 
equivalent to a score of 76 when compared to recent standard-
ization norms. This translates to a gain of about three points 
per decade on both the Stanford-Binet and Wechsler intelligence 
scales. Proposed explanations involve many environmental fac-
tors ranging from better nutrition to more education, but the 
explanation still remains a source of debate (Neisser, 1998).
Joining this debate, Flynn has recently proposed that the 
effect is not due to people getting smarter overall but rather to 
the fact that they are getting smarter at skills that have become 
more important in our society over the past century, especially 
abstract, scientific thinking (Flynn, 2007, 2012). Our society has 
changed from agriculture-based to industry-based to informa-
tion-based. Thus, the need to develop abstract, scientific think-
ing has grown as the nature of our society has changed. Flynn’s 
hypothesis is supported by the finding that large intelligence 
increases have not been observed for all types of cognitive functioning. For example, 
the largest intelligence gains have come on intelligence subtests that involve abstract, 
scientific thinking, and the gains on subtests that are related to traditional aca-
demic subjects, such as vocabulary, general knowledge, and arithmetic, have been 
very small. Flynn’s explanation will likely not be the final word on the Flynn effect, 
but it seems to make enough progress in that direction that this effect is not quite 
the mystery that it used to be. Recent data, however, which indicate that the Flynn 
effect may have already ended in some industrialized nations (for example, Denmark 
and Norway) but is still alive in the United States and some other highly developed 
nations such as Germany and those comprising the United Kingdom, should 
maintain interest in this effect (Flynn, 2012; Kaufman, 2009). For example, why the 
demise of intelligence gains in Scandinavian countries and not in other developed 
nations is one of the new Flynn effect puzzles.
Section Summary
In this section, we discussed how the first attempts at developing a valid intel-
ligence test began with Galton in late nineteenth-century England and with 
Binet and Simon in early twentieth-century France. Galton failed, but Binet and 
Simon, hired by the French government to develop a test to find children who 
would have difficulty in school, succeeded in 1905. Lewis Terman, working at 
Stanford University, revised the Binet-Simon test to use with American school-
children in 1916, and this test became known as the Stanford-Binet. Results for 
the Stanford-Binet were reported in terms of Stern’s IQ formula, IQ 5 (mental 
age/chronological age) 3 100. Subsequently, David Wechsler developed both 
the WAIS for adults and the WISC for children. Unlike the Stanford-Binet, these 
tests included both verbal and nonverbal subtests. In addition, Wechsler used 
deviation IQ scores instead of IQs to report performance on his tests. Deviation 
IQ scores are based on how many standard deviations a person’s raw test score 
is above or below the raw score mean for his or her age group norms. Wechsler 
James Flynn
Bryce Edwards/Flickr

Intelligent Thinking  |  263
set the mean to 100 and the standard deviation to 15 to create deviation IQ scores 
that resemble IQ formula scores.
We also learned that these intelligence tests have both reliability (consistency 
in measurement) and predictive validity (predicting what we suppose they should 
predict) and are among the most valid predictors of both academic performance 
and job performance. In addition, research has not supported the claim that they are 
biased toward women or minorities.
We also considered some of the major theories of intelligence. Most of these theo-
ries define intelligence in terms of mental abilities, but differ with respect to how many 
abilities are proposed. Using the results of factor analysis, Spearman thought that a 
general intelligence factor (the g factor) was most important, but other theorists, like 
Thurstone, emphasized multiple, more specific abilities in their definitions. Two recent 
theories have attempted to broaden the conception of intelligence and another theory 
points to the limitations of intelligence as a sufficient explanation of good thinking. 
Howard Gardner has proposed a theory of eight independent types of intelligence, but 
critics view some of these as talents or skills and not really types of intelligence. Robert 
Sternberg has also attempted to broaden the conception of intelligence in his triarchic 
theory of intelligence, which includes analytical, creative, and practical intelligences, 
with the latter two having more applicability in the nonacademic world. Keith Stanovich 
does not want to expand the definition of intelligence but rather argues that rationality 
in addition to intelligence is necessary for good thinking.
Last, we considered the origins of intelligence. We found that genetic similarity stud-
ies indicate that both nature (heredity) and nurture (environmental experiences) are 
important in determining one’s intelligence. However, both heritability estimates and 
the results of adoption studies indicate that nature likely plays a larger role than nurture 
in determining intelligence. The concept of reaction range attempts to explain how 
heredity and environmental experiences work together to determine an individual’s 
intelligence—heredity places limits on intellectual development, but the quality of the 
person’s environment determines where the person’s intelligence level falls within 
these limits. Finally, we discussed the Flynn effect—the finding that intelligence, at least 
as assessed by intelligence tests, has dramatically increased in the United States and 
other Western industrialized nations over the past century. Flynn’s recent proposal that 
the effect is not due to people getting smarter overall but rather to the fact that they are 
getting smarter at skills that have become more important in our society over the past 
century, especially abstract, scientific thinking, has greatly reduced the mystery of this 
effect. However, recent data indicating that the effect has ended in some industrialized 
nations but not others create a new puzzle to be solved.
ConceptCheck | 3
➤	 explain why standardization of a test is necessary.
➤	 explain what a deviation IQ score is and how it differs from an IQ score.
➤	 explain how the results of studies examining the impact of genetic similarity 
on intelligence support both nature and nurture explanations.
➤	 explain how the more contemporary theories of intelligence proposed by 
Gardner, Sternberg, and Stanovich differ from the more traditional theories 
of intelligence (e.g., those proposed by Spearman and thurstone).

264
Study Guide
Chapter Key Terms
You should know the definitions of the following key terms from the chapter. they 
are listed in the order in which they appear in the chapter. For those you do not know, 
return to the relevant section of the chapter to learn them. When you think that you 
know all of the terms, complete the matching exercise based on these key terms.
thinking
well-defined problem
ill-defined problem
fixation
functional fixedness
mental set
insight
algorithm
heuristic
anchoring and adjustment 
heuristic
working backward heuristic
means–end analysis heuristic
representativeness heuristic
conjunction fallacy
gambler’s fallacy
availability heuristic
confirmation bias
illusory correlation
belief perseverance
person-who reasoning
intelligence quotient (IQ)
standardization
deviation IQ score
reliability
validity
factor analysis
heritability
reaction range
Flynn effect
Key Terms Exercise
Identify the correct term for each of the 
following definitions. the answers to this 
exercise follow the answers to the Concept 
Checks at the end of the chapter.
  1.	 Incorrectly judging the overlap of two 
uncertain events to be more probable 
than either of the two events.
	 	
 
  2.	 The extent to which a test measures what 
it is supposed to measure or predicts 
what it is supposed to predict.
	 	
 
  3.	 A new way to interpret a problem that 
immediately yields the solution.
	 	
 
  4.	 Questioning a well-established research 
finding because you know a person who 
violates the finding.
	 	
 
  5.	 The genetically determined limits for an 
individual’s intelligence.
	 	
 
  6.	 A problem-solving heuristic in which the 
distance to the goal state is decreased 
systematically by breaking the problem 
down into subgoals and achieving these 
subgoals.
	 	
 
  7.	 The tendency to use previously successful 
problem-solving strategies without con-
sidering others that are more appropriate 
for the current problem.
	 	
 
  8.	 An index of the degree that variation of a trait  
within a given population is due to heredity.
	 	
 
  9.	 The process that allows test scores to be 
interpreted by providing test norms.
	 	
 

Study Guide  |  265
10.	 Incorrectly believing that a chance process is 
self-correcting in that an event that has not 
occurred for a while is more likely to occur.
	 	
 
11.	 A problem lacking clear specification of 
either the start state, goal state, or the 
processes for reaching the goal state.
	 	
 
12.	 A heuristic for estimation problems in 
which one uses his or her initial estimate 
as an anchor estimate and then adjusts the 
anchor up or down (often insufficiently).
	 	
 
13.	 A problem-solving heuristic in which one 
attempts to solve a problem by working 
from the goal state back to the start state.
	 	
 
14.	 The tendency to cling to one’s beliefs in 
the face of contradictory evidence.
	 	
 
15.	 A statistical technique that identifies  
clusters of test items that measure the 
same ability (factor).
	 	
 
Practice Test Questions
the following are practice multiple-choice test 
questions on some of the chapter content. the 
answers are given after the Key terms exercise 
answers at the end of the chapter. If you 
guessed or incorrectly answered a question, 
restudy the relevant section of the chapter.
  1.	 The tendency to think of only the most 
typical uses of objects in a problem set-
ting is called ______.
a.	 fixation
b.	mental set
c.	 functional fixedness
d.	confirmation bias
  2.	 If you compute the area of a room by 
using the formula length 3 width 5 area, 
you are using a(n)/the ______.
a.	 algorithm
b.	heuristic
c.	 conjunction rule
d.	anchoring and adjustment heuristic
  3.	 The representativeness heuristic leads us 
to ______.
a.	 judge the probability of an event in 
terms of its prominence in memory
b.	judge the probability of category mem-
bership by resemblance to the category
c.	 seek only evidence that confirms our 
beliefs
d.	maintain our beliefs even though we 
have been given evidence that contra-
dicts them
  4.	 Overestimating the probability of dying 
in an airplane crash is likely the result of 
using the ______.
a.	 representativeness heuristic
b.	availability heuristic
c.	 anchoring heuristic
d.	conjunction rule
  5.	 In the 2-4-6 task, participants demonstrate 
______ in testing their hypotheses.
a.	 mental set
b.	confirmation bias
c.	 person-who reasoning
d.	belief perseverance
  6.	 Mistakenly believing that two events are 
related is called ______.
a.	 functional fixedness
b.	illusory correlation
c.	 the Flynn effect
d.	the conjunction fallacy
  7.	 Which of the following statements about 
test reliability and validity is false?
a.	 A test can be reliable and valid.
b.	A test can be reliable but not valid.
c.	 A test can be valid but not reliable.
d.	A test can be neither reliable nor valid.
  8.	 The intelligence test scores for ______ are 
most strongly correlated.
a.	 identical twins reared apart
b.	fraternal twins reared together

266  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
c.	 siblings reared together
d.	unrelated people reared apart
  9.	 Which of the following intelligence theo-
rists emphasized the g factor?
a.	 Sternberg
b.	Gardner
c.	 Spearman
d.	Thurstone
10.	 The Flynn effect refers to the observation  
that average intelligence test scores in 
the United States and other Western 
industrialized nations have ______ over 
the past century.
a.	 increased
b.	decreased
c.	 stayed the same
d.	first increased but then decreased
11.	 Which of the following intelligence  
theorists proposed three types of  
intelligence—analytical, practical, and 
creative?
a.	 Sternberg
b.	Gardner
c.	 Thurstone
d.	Spearman
12.	 The folding problem in which you were 
asked to estimate the thickness of a 
0.1 millimeter sheet of paper folded in 
on itself 100 times illustrates how the 
______ can lead to dramatic underesti-
mates of the correct answer to an  
estimation problem.
a.	 representativeness heuristic
b.	availability heuristic
c.	 anchoring and adjustment heuristic
d.	conjunction rule
13.	 A person who questions the validity 
of the research findings that indicate 
smoking leads to health problems as a 
result of his knowing someone who has 
smoked most of their life and has no 
health problems is using ______.
a.	 the representativeness heuristic
b.	the availability heuristic
c.	 person-who reasoning
d.	inferential-statistical reasoning
14.	 A heritability estimate of 100% for intel-
ligence in a given population means that 
the variation in intelligence for this popu-
lation is determined ______.
a.	 solely by genetics
b.	solely by environmental experiences
c.	 50% by genetics and 50% by environ-
mental experiences
d.	75% by genetics and 25% by environ-
mental experiences
15.	 In the Linda problem, if you judge that it 
is more likely that Linda is a bank teller 
and active in the feminist movement than 
that Linda is a bank teller, you are likely 
using the ______ heuristic and committing 
the ______ fallacy.
a.	 availability; gambling
b.	availability; conjunction
c.	 representativeness; gambling
d.	representativeness; conjunction
Chapter Concept Check Answers
Concept Check | 1
• In functional fixedness, we fixate on the 
normal function of an object given our 
past experiences with that object. Our 
past experience with the object may block 
us from seeing how to use it in a novel 
way. Similarly, mental set leads us to 
approach a problem in the same way we 
have approached similar problems in the 
past, especially the recent past. We tend 
to block developing a new approach  
because our mental set keeps us locked 
into the old approach based on our past 
experiences.
• We use heuristics rather than algorithms 
because algorithms tend to be time- 
consuming and more difficult to use. 
Solving anagram puzzles is a good example 
of a case where we know the algorithm, but 
we do not use it unless there are only a few 
letters, because it is too time-consuming 
and difficult to use.

Study Guide  |  267
• The anchoring and adjustment heuristic leads 
to a serious error in estimation when we fail 
to adjust our initial anchor sufficiently either 
up or down in magnitude. The paper-folding 
problem is a good example of such a failure.
Concept Check | 2
• The representativeness heuristic can lead 
to the conjunction fallacy by causing us to 
ignore the conjunction rule when making a 
probability judgment involving the conjunc-
tion of two uncertain events. Use of the 
heuristic for the Linda problem illustrates 
how this occurs. We focus on how much 
Linda resembles a feminist and ignore the 
conjunction rule that says that the probabil-
ity that Linda is a bank teller has to be more 
probable than the conjunction of her being 
a bank teller and active in the  
feminist movement.
• The availability heuristic can lead us to 
overestimate the risk of causes of death 
that are highly publicized (such as airplane 
crashes, fires, and shark attacks) and under-
estimate those that are less publicized 
and not as dramatic (such as diabetes and 
emphysema). Because the highly publicized 
causes are more available in our memories, 
we misjudge them to be more probable 
than the less publicized causes.
• Confirmation bias can lead to the perception 
of an illusory correlation by leading us to 
confirm our belief about the correlation by 
focusing only on events that confirm the 
belief and not on those that disconfirm the 
belief. To test to see if a relationship exists, 
we must consider the probabilities of both 
types of events.
• Assume that 1,000 people are screened for 
the disease. Given a base rate of 2% for the 
disease, only 20 (2% of 1,000) would actually 
have the disease. This means that 980 people  
(1,000 2 20) would not have the disease. 
Given a test sensitivity rate of 90%, 18 of the 
20 (90% of 20) people who have the disease 
would test positive. Given a false positive 
rate of 10%, 98 (10% of 980) people who do 
not have the disease would test positive. 
Thus, there would be 116 positives (18 true 
positives and 98 false positives). Hence the 
conditional probability that someone testing 
positive actually has the disease is 18/116, 
which is 0.155 (15.5%).
Concept Check | 3
• Standardization of a test is necessary for 
the interpretation of test performance.  
In the standardization process, a represen-
tative sample of the relevant population 
takes the test and their scores are used as 
the norms for the test. Test takers’ scores 
are compared to those of the standardiza-
tion group in order to determine an index 
of performance. For example, on intel-
ligence tests a person’s performance is 
compared to the scores for a representative 
sample of the person’s age group.
• A deviation IQ score is based on the normal 
distribution of scores for a person’s stan-
dardization age group. First, a person’s raw 
score is determined in terms of standard 
deviation units above or below the mean 
for that normal distribution. Then the  
person’s score in terms of standard devia-
tion units is converted to a score that 
resembles an IQ score. For example, on the 
WAIS the mean (or 0 point) is set equal to 
100 and the standard deviation to 15. Thus, 
a person who scores 1 standard deviation 
above the mean in comparison to his age 
group norms receives a score of 100 1 15, 
or 115. IQ scores were based on the follow-
ing formula, IQ 5 (mental age/chronological 
age) 3 100. A deviation IQ tells us how well 
a person did relative to the standardization 
data for the person’s age group.  
An IQ told us how well a child did relative 
to the child’s own actual age.
• The results of genetic similarity studies 
support the nature (heredity) explana-
tion of intelligence because as genetic 
similarity decreases, the average cor-
relation between intelligence test scores 
also decreases. The average correlation 
is strongest for identical twins (about 
0.90). However, these results also indicate 
that environment (nurture) plays a role. 
For example, the average correlation for 

268  |  Chapter 6  |  ThINKING ANd INTELLIGENCE
intelligence test scores for identical twins 
decreases when the twins are adopted and 
raised apart in different environments. The 
twins are 100 percent genetically similar in 
both cases; therefore, environmental fac-
tors must be responsible for the difference 
in average correlations.
• The theories proposed by Gardner and 
Sternberg are different from the traditional 
theories of intelligence that we discussed in 
that both theorists broaden the definition  
of intelligence by proposing types of intel-
ligence that are not measured by stan-
dard intelligence tests like the WAIS and 
Stanford-Binet. In Gardner’s case, six of 
his proposed eight intelligences fall into 
this category. In Sternberg’s case, two of 
his three proposed types of intelligence do 
so. However, all three of Sternberg’s intel-
ligences are types of mental ability, but this 
is not true for Gardner’s proposed intelli-
gences. With respect to Stanovich’s theory, 
he doesn’t want to expand the definition of 
intelligence like Gardner and Sternberg do, 
but rather argues that intelligence is only 
one component of good thinking. The other 
critical component is our ability to think 
and act rationally, which is not assessed by 
standard intelligence tests.
Answers to Key Terms Exercise
  1.	 conjunction fallacy
  2.	 validity
  3.	 insight
  4.	 person-who reasoning
  5.	 reaction range
  6.	 means–end analysis heuristic
  7.	 mental set
  8.	 heritability
  9.	 standardization
10.	 gambler’s fallacy
11.	 ill-defined problem
12.	 anchoring and adjustment heuristic
13.	 working backward heuristic
14.	 belief perseverance
15.	 factor analysis
Answers to Practice Test Questions
  1.	 c; functional fixedness
  2.	 a; algorithm
  3.	 b; judge the probability of category mem-
bership by resemblance to the category
  4.	 b; availability heuristic
  5.	 b; confirmation bias
  6.	 b; illusory correlation
  7.	 c; A test can be valid but not reliable.
  8.	 a; identical twins reared apart
  9.	 c; Spearman
10.	 a; increased
11.	 a; Sternberg
12.	 c; anchoring and adjustment heuristic
13.	 c; person-who reasoning
14.	 a; solely by genetics
15.	 d; representativeness; conjunction
Answers to Problems
Solutions to nine-circle problems,  
p. 230
the sample four-straight-line solution is not 
unique. You may draw your first line from 
any of the other corner circles and continue 
from there to achieve a similar solution. the 
sample three-straight-line solution is taken 
from adams (1986).
Solution to insight problem, p. 232
as Knoblich and Oellinger (2006) explain, 
most people try to create a correct equation 
by moving a matchstick that changes the 
numbers because we are taught in school 
that solving math problems is all about 

Study Guide  |  269
manipulating quantities. this knowledge, 
however, blinds us to the needed insight. 
to experience insight on this problem, you 
need to change your perspective about 
where the solution might lie—realize that 
you can also change operators. the solution 
lies in moving one matchstick to change 
the operators as shown below.
Most efficient solution to Tower of 
Hanoi problem, p. 236
Move 1: Move Disk 1 to Peg C
Move 2: Move Disk 2 to Peg B
Move 3: Move Disk 1 to Peg B
Move 4: Move Disk 3 to Peg C
Move 5: Move Disk 1 to Peg A
Move 6: Move Disk 2 to Peg C
Move 7: Move Disk 1 to Peg C
© W.H.Freeman/Worth

Developmental Psychology
 PRENATAL DEVELOPMENT 
AND INFANCY
Prenatal development
how We develop during 
Infancy
 HOW WE THINK 
THROUGHOUT OUR LIVES
how We Learn Language
Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive 
development
vygotsky’s Sociocultural 
Approach to development
how Intelligence Changes 
in Adulthood
 MORAL DEVELOPMENT AND 
SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Kohlberg’s Theory of Moral Reasoning
Attachment and Parenting Styles
Theory of Mind
Erikson’s Psychosocial Stage Theory  
of development
7

271
s
o far we have discussed perception, learning, memory, thinking, and intel-
ligence, but we have not considered how these processes develop over the 
life span. This is what developmental psychologists study—how and why 
we change as we grow older. They examine our behavior and mental processing 
from conception until death. Developmental psychology is the scientific study of 
biological, cognitive, social, and personality development throughout the life span. 
This chapter will focus on three major types of development— biological, cogni-
tive, and social (the next chapter will deal with personality).
Historically, a major issue for all types of development has been the nature- 
versus-nurture question (which we also confronted in our discussion of intel-
ligence). As with intelligence, most psychologists now believe that nature and  
nurture interact to influence our development. Lingering controversial issues 
include exactly how nature and nurture interact and which is more important to 
the various aspects of our development (Harris, 1998). We will return to the nature–
nurture issue at different points in the chapter.
Developmental psychologists usually divide the life span into several stages, 
beginning with the prenatal stage and ending with late adulthood. Table 7.1  
provides a commonly used set of stages, each of which is characterized by dif-
ferent biological, cognitive, and social changes. Most of the major theories in 
developmental psychology that we will discuss are stage theories. Stage theories 
organize developmental change by providing the approximate age ranges at which 
we can expect certain types of behavior and cognitive functioning. Keep in mind, 
however, that the age at which individuals enter and leave stages can vary, that 
stage transition is probably more gradual than abrupt, and that stage definitions 
may vary across cultures.
This chapter is divided into discussions 
of different types of development, but it is 
important to remember that the various types 
of development occur simultaneously and so 
have an impact on each other. We begin with 
a discussion of the first two stages of the life 
➤  developmental psychology  The 
scientific study of biological, 
cognitive, social, and personality 
development across the life span.
Table 7.1       Dividing the Life Span into Developmental Stages
Stage
Approximate Age Range
Prenatal
Conception to birth
Infancy
Birth to 2 years
Childhood
2 to 12 years
Adolescence
12 to 18 years
Young adulthood
18 to 40 years
Middle adulthood
40 to 65 years
Late adulthood
65 years and over

272  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
span—prenatal development and infancy—to learn how development begins and 
progresses very early in our lives. Here we will be mainly concerned with physical  
development, specifically sensory and motor development. Next we will focus on 
our cognitive development from birth through adulthood by discussing early lan-
guage development, Jean Piaget’s influential stage theory of cognitive development,  
Lev Vygotsky’s sociocultural approach to such development, and the question of 
whether intelligence declines across the life span.
In the last section of this chapter, we will consider social development. We will 
begin with a discussion of Lawrence Kohlberg’s influential theory of the develop-
ment of moral reasoning, then examine early social development with a discus-
sion of the research on attachment formation, parenting styles, and theory of 
mind development, and conclude with a description of Erik Erikson’s stage theory 
of social-personality development across the life span. This chapter will give you 
a better idea about where you are in your development, how you got there, and 
where you can expect to go.
Prenatal Development and Infancy
What happens in the prenatal environment? What sensory abilities do we have 
at birth? Is our brain fully developed at birth? These are the kinds of questions 
that we will address in this section. We know, for instance, that the brain is not 
fully developed at birth. Remember, we learned in Chapter 5, on memory, that 
we do not have any explicit memories about this period of our life because the 
hippocampus isn’t fully developed until later. Thus, this next section should 
interest all of us, because we have no memory of our own life in the prenatal stage 
and infancy. Let’s get started with the beginning of all development—the union 
of sperm and egg.
Prenatal Development
Human conception begins when a sperm (male reproductive cell) penetrates the 
membrane of an ovum or egg (female reproductive cell). Each of these reproduc-
tive cells contains genetic instructions. When the two combine, a complete set of 
genetic instructions is formed, half from the father and half from the mother. The 
fertilized egg that is formed from the union of the sperm and egg cells is called 
a zygote. All other cells in the human body develop 
from this single cell, and each duplicate cell carries a 
copy of the genetic instructions of the original zygote. 
The zygote develops into a growing cluster as the cells 
duplicate.
The gene is the basic unit of genetic instruction. Genes 
are short segments of chromosomes, molecules of DNA 
(deoxyribonucleic acid) that hold the genetic instruc-
tions for every cell in our body. Except for reproductive  
➤	 zygote  The fertilized egg that is formed 
from the union of the sperm and egg 
cells in human reproduction.
➤ gene  The basic unit of genetic  
instruction.
➤ chromosomes  Molecules of DNA that 
hold the genetic instructions for every 
cell in the body.

Prenatal development and Infancy  |  273
cells (sperm and eggs), every cell of a normal human has 23 pairs of chromosomes, 
one of each pair coming from the mother and one from the father. Reproductive 
cells receive only one member of each pair, giving them only 23 chromosomes. 
This means that when a sperm combines with an ovum, the zygote will have the 
complete 46. It is the 23rd pair of chromosomes that determines a person’s sex. 
In a female, there are two X-shaped chromosomes (XX); in a male, there is one 
X-shaped chromosome and one smaller Y-shaped chromosome (XY). It is the Y 
chromosome that leads to the development of a male; hence the sex of the zygote 
is determined by which sperm, X or Y, fertilizes the ovum.
In some cases, the growing cluster of duplicated cells breaks apart early in 
development, resulting in two clusters with identical genes. These clusters become 
identical (monozygotic) twins. They are identical because they originate from 
the same zygote. Fraternal (dizygotic) twins originate from the fertilization of 
two eggs at approximately the same time. Thus, fraternal twins are nonidentical 
and could be of different sexes and just as different as any two children with the 
same parents. You may be wondering why two children with the same parents can 
be very different in appearance. The answer is the same reason that children with 
different parents vary greatly in appearance—chance determines which one of the 
23 pairs of chromosomes goes to a reproductive cell. This means that there are  
223 (eight million or so) chromosome possibilities for each reproductive cell 
in each parent. In addition, when the two reproductive cells unite to form the 
zygote, they interact to further increase the uniqueness of the zygote. This is why 
children from the same family can look so different.
Prenatal development (conception until birth) is divided into three stages—
the germinal stage, the embryonic stage, and the fetal stage. The germinal stage 
begins with the formation of the zygote and ends after about two weeks, when 
the outer portion of the zygote’s developing cluster of cells has attached itself to 
the uterine wall. This implantation leads to the formation of the placenta and 
umbilical cord, which allow oxygen and nutrients from the mother to enter and 
wastes to exit. The inner portion of the zygote becomes the developing organism, 
the embryo. During the embryonic stage (from two weeks to about two months), 
the major structures and organs of the body begin to develop, and the embryo 
starts to resemble a human being. During the fetal stage (from about two months 
following conception to birth), the developing organism 
is called a fetus, and through very rapid growth, the body 
structures and organs complete their development.
Both genetic and environmental factors impact pre-
natal development. The nature–nurture issue is relevant, 
even in prenatal development. This development is 
mainly a function of the zygote’s genetic code (nature), 
but it is also affected by the mother’s environment (nur-
ture). Teratogens are environmental agents (such as 
drugs or viruses), diseases (such as German measles), and 
physical conditions (such as malnutrition) that impair 
➤	 identical (monozygotic) twins  Twins 
that originate from the same zygote.
➤	 fraternal (dizygotic) twins  Twins that 
originate from the fertilization of two 
eggs at approximately the same time 
(two zygotes).
➤	 teratogens  Environmental agents such 
as drugs and viruses, diseases, and 
physical conditions that impair prenatal 
development and lead to birth defects 
and sometimes death.

274  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
prenatal development and lead to birth defects or even 
death. Expectant mothers who drink alcohol, smoke, 
or take drugs put their developing fetuses at great risk. 
Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) occurs when mothers 
consume alcohol during pregnancy, resulting in a range 
of severe effects including mental retardation and facial 
abnormalities in the child. As alcohol consumption 
increases, the risk of FAS increases. And since there is no 
known safe limit of alcohol consumption, the best strat-
egy is to avoid alcohol and other teratogens entirely during pregnancy. The effects 
of teratogens also vary depending on when during pregnancy the fetus is exposed. 
Early in pregnancy a teratogen may affect the formation of the eyes, whereas later 
it may be the brain that is affected. There are other maternal factors that affect 
prenatal development. Age is one such factor. The probability of health risks to 
the fetus increases for mothers who are very young, 15 or younger, or very old, 
over 35 (Andersen, Wohlfahrt, Christens, Olsen, & Melbe, 2000; Phipps, Blume, & 
DeMonner, 2002).
Other risks to newborns include prematurity and low birth weight. Those 
that are born prematurely, before the thirty-seventh week, have a number of 
problems, which increase with the degree of prematurity. Major health prob-
lems of premature infants include immaturity of the lungs and the digestive 
and immune systems. Premature infants also have low birth weight, although 
some full-term infants can as well. Low birth weight increases the chances of 
neurological handicaps and death (Holsti, Grunau, & Whitfield, 2002). Many of 
the teratogens discussed above increase the likelihood of prematurity, although 
in about 50 percent of the cases there are no identifiable causes. So remember, 
a healthy woman providing a healthy prenatal environment enhances the prob-
ability of a healthy child.
How We Develop During Infancy
Motor development and sensory-perceptual development are the two major areas 
of development during infancy. We will start with an overview of our abilities at 
birth. Then we will discuss how these processes develop during infancy.
Motor development. The newborn comes equipped with several motor reflexes, 
which are unlearned responses. Some of these reflexes, such as the breathing reflex 
that provides us with oxygen, have obvious survival value and are permanent, but 
others aren’t as necessary and disappear within the first year of life. 
Two examples of reflexes that disappear are the Babinski reflex, in 
which infants fan their toes upward when their feet are touched, and 
the grasping reflex, in which infants grasp any object that touches 
their palms. Two other motor reflexes, the sucking reflex and the 
rooting reflex, are concerned with getting nourishment and so are 
obviously related to survival. The sucking reflex leads infants to suck 
Picture Partners/age fotostock
➤	 fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS)   
A syndrome affecting infants whose 
mothers consumed large amounts of 
alcohol during pregnancy, resulting in a 
range of severe effects including mental 
retardation and facial abnormalities.
➤	 sucking reflex  An innate human reflex 
that leads infants to suck anything that 
touches their lips.

Prenatal development and Infancy  |  275
anything that touches their lips, and the rooting reflex 
leads infants to turn their mouths toward anything that 
touches their cheeks and search for something to suck on.
In this first year or so of life, infants learn to sit, 
stand, and walk. This is an orderly sequence; each new 
motor behavior builds upon previous ones. Infants learn 
to prop up and support their body, then to sit without 
support, then to crawl, then to stand while holding onto an object, then to stand 
without support, and finally to walk without support at somewhere around  
12 months of age. It was once thought that motor development was primarily a 
maturational process that unfolded according to a genetic program. However, as 
with most achievements, the process is more complex. Learning how to walk, for 
instance, involves the interaction of multiple factors, such as increases in strength, 
body proportions, and balance (Thelen, 1995). During this first year, infants are 
also developing their perceptual abilities and learning to coordinate their body 
movements with perceptual input. In fact, the process infants go through when 
they learn how to move around by themselves leads to changes in depth percep-
tion (our ability to perceive the distance of objects from us). Infants who have 
experienced crawling develop a fear of heights and falling, whereas infants of the 
same age who are not yet crawling do not show this fear (Campos, Anderson, 
Barbu-Roth, Hubbard, Hertenstein, & Witherington, 2000).
Sensory-perceptual development. Psychologists have developed a number 
of interesting experimental techniques to study sensory-perceptual abilities in 
nonverbal infants. The preferential-looking technique, a procedure used to study 
vision, is surprisingly simple (Fantz, 1961, 1963). Two visual stimuli are displayed 
side by side, and the researcher records how long the infants look at each stimu-
lus. If the infants look at one side longer, it is inferred that they can tell the dif-
ference between the two stimuli and have a preference. Another technique 
involves habituation, a decrease in the physiological responding to a stimulus 
once it becomes familiar. Infants will stare at a novel, unfamiliar stimulus, but 
this interest habituates and the infants look at it less and less. They get bored with 
it. If infants look longer at a new stimulus than an old one, then it is inferred that 
they must be able to perceive the difference between the two stimuli. Researchers 
may use measures other than viewing time. For example, infants intensify their 
sucking of a pacifier in their mouth when confronted with a novel, unfamiliar 
stimulus. When they habituate to the stimulus, the sucking returns to normal. 
Similarly, a developmental researcher may use changes in biological mechanisms, 
such as heart rate, to indicate infants’ perceptual behavior.
Through these ingenious techniques we have learned that our five senses are 
functional at birth (though not fully developed). Vision, our dominant sense, is 
the least developed at birth. Newborns cannot see very clearly. Their visual acuity 
(resolution of visual detail) is estimated to be about 20/400 to 20/800 (Kellman & 
Banks, 1998). This means that the visual detail that a person with normal 20/20 
vision can see at 400 to 800 feet is what the infant sees at 20 feet. Acuity develops 
➤	 rooting reflex  An innate human reflex 
that leads infants to turn their mouth 
toward anything that touches their cheeks 
and search for something to suck on.
➤	 habituation  A decrease in the 
physiological responding to a stimulus 
once it becomes familiar.

276  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
rather quickly and reaches 20/20 within the first year of life. Color vision devel-
ops even sooner, by two to three months, when it becomes comparable to that 
of adults (Kellman & Arterberry, 1998). We also know that infants have a visual 
preference for faces, especially their mother’s face, and other complex stimuli 
(Field, Cohen, Garcia, & Greenberg, 1984; Valenza, Simion, Cassia, & Umiltà, 
1996). Infants’ preference for such visual complexity may be due to the fact that 
such stimulation is necessary for proper development of the visual pathways and 
cortex during infancy (Greenough, Black, & Wallace, 1987).
In addition to their visual preference for faces, recent research indicates that 
the ability to process configural information in upright faces (i.e., the structural 
relationships between the individual features on the face) may already be present 
at birth (Leo & Simion, 2009). The manner in which Leo and Simion demon-
strated this is interesting because it involves what is called Thatcherization, an 
illusion created by Peter Thompson (1980) involving images of former Prime 
Minister Margaret Thatcher. Thatcherization is created by rotating the eyes and 
mouth 180º within the image of a face, causing the face to appear grotesque. See 
Figure 7.1. The top row looks like two upside-down Thatchers, but the bottom 
row looks like a Thatcher on the left and a horrible mutant on the right (her face 
m Figure 7.1 | The Margaret 
Thatcher Illusion | The top and 
bottom row of images of former 
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher 
are identical to each other but 
flipped vertically. The top row 
looks like two upside-down 
Thatchers, but the bottom row 
looks like a Thatcher on the left 
and grotesque mutant Thatcher 
on the right. You do not notice 
that the Thatcher at the upper 
right is the mutant Thatcher 
because the eyes and mouth are 
right side up although the overall 
face is upside down. (Courtesy of 
Peter Thompson. From “Margaret 
Thatcher: A new illusion,” by  
P. Thompson, 1980, Perception, 9, 
383–384.)

Prenatal development and Infancy  |  277
has been Thatcherized). Although the Thatcher on the right in the top row looks 
ok, it isn’t. It’s the image on the bottom right flipped vertically. Turn the page 
upside down and the mutant Thatcher will reappear.
Adults readily detect changes in face patterns brought about by Thatcherization 
when the faces are viewed upright but not when they are viewed upside down 
(Thompson, 1980). This inability to quickly discriminate a Thatcherized face 
from an unaltered face when viewed upside down is thought to be caused by 
the disruption of configural processing, so that the structural changes from 
Thatcherization are no longer apparent (Bartlett & Searcy, 1993). Leo and Simion 
wanted to know if newborns would respond like adults to such faces. Using the 
habituation paradigm, they tested newborns’ ability to discriminate a normal face 
and a Thatcherized face when presented upright and also upside down. Newborns 
could do so when the faces were upright (as in the bottom row of Figure 7.1) but 
not when the faces were upside down (as in the top row), the same inversion effect 
observed in adults. Hence, Leo and Simion concluded that newborns were sensi-
tive to configural information in faces.
Hearing in the newborn is even more fully developed than vision. In fact, new-
borns can distinguish their mother’s voice from those of others (DeCasper & Fifer, 
1980). Research indicates this ability and several auditory preferences develop in 
the womb before birth (Dirix, Nijhuis, Jongsma, & Hornstra, 2009). Let’s briefly 
consider one of the most famous studies indicating the effects of prenatal learning 
on auditory preferences after birth (DeCasper & Spence, 1986). During the final  
16 weeks of pregnancy, mothers read Dr. Seuss’s The Cat in the Hat aloud twice a 
day. Following birth, the researchers had the babies suck on an artificial nipple 
that, depending upon the infant’s sucking pattern, would activate a tape of their 
mother reading the Dr. Seuss story or another story that the mother had never read 
aloud. Most of the infants sucked to hear The Cat in the Hat. The infants preferred 
the familiar story that their mothers had read to them while they were still in the 
womb. Then, Spence and Freeman (1996) carried out a similar experiment but 
used a low-pass filter to muffle recorded female voices so that they sounded as they 
would in the womb. Again, indicating the effects of prenatal learning, the infants 
preferred their mothers’ filtered voices over those of other women. Infants also  
prefer the sound of the human voice and speech sounds versus other types of 
sounds. By about six months, an infant’s hearing is comparable to that of an adult.
One of the most remarkable hearing abilities that infants possess involves 
speech perception. Phonemes are the smallest distinctive speech sounds in a lan-
guage. They allow us to distinguish between different words. For example, the dif-
ference between the words pat and bat is the difference in the pa and ba phonemes. 
In order to learn a language, infants must be able to detect these subtle differences 
between phonemes, and they are able to do so soon after birth. Different languag-
es do not use all the same phonemes, and adults who are not native speakers of a 
particular language have difficulty detecting the speech 
sounds of that language. Japanese adults, for example, 
have trouble with the English r and l sounds. Infants, in 
➤	 phonemes  The smallest distinctive 
speech sounds in a language.

278  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
contrast, can detect all phonemes whether or not they have been exposed to them. 
By 12 months of age, however, they no longer can easily detect speech sounds not 
in their native language (Kuhl, 2004). Interestingly though, a brief amount of 
exposure given through live social interaction is sufficient to maintain the abil-
ity to detect nonnative phonemes (Kuhl, Tsao, & Liu, 2003). It seems as though 
infants come into the world prepared to learn whatever language they happen to 
find themselves exposed to, and experience fine-tunes this ability.
The senses of smell, taste, and touch are also fairly well developed at birth. For 
example, infants can differentiate the smell of their mother from the smells of 
other people. Researchers discovered this by placing a nursing pad worn by the 
mother on one side of an infant and a pad worn by another woman on the other 
side, then measured how long the baby was turned toward each side. The infants 
spent more time turned toward their mother’s pad (MacFarlane, 1975).
Some recent studies have indicated that infants’ understanding of the physi-
cal world and their cognitive abilities may be much better than was previously 
thought. Researchers have demonstrated that very young infants may have 
an innate conceptual understanding of object movement—for instance, that 
objects cannot simply go through solid surfaces (Baillargeon, 1993, 2002). Other 
researchers have suggested that infants can perform simple mathematical opera-
tions such as addition and subtraction (Wynn, 1992). Needless to say, such claims 
are not without controversy—trying to understand the mind of a nonverbal infant 
is not an easy task (see Cohen & Marks, 2002). 
Development of an infant’s cognitive and perceptual abilities depends upon 
brain development. The brain contains about 100 billion neurons at birth, but 
the infant’s brain is rather immature, and connections between neurons (neural 
networks) need to be formed. During the first few months of life, there is a large 
growth spurt for these connections between neurons, especially those in the cortex 
that control perception and cognition. Thousands of new connections are estab-
lished for these neurons. The connections between the retina and the brain are a 
good example. Without visual experiences, these visual pathways do not develop, 
and vision will be permanently lost (Kalat, 2007). This is why a baby born with 
cataracts that prevent vision needs to have them removed as early as possible, so 
that normal vision will develop. During infancy, the networks of neurons that are 
used become stronger, and those that are not used disappear (Thompson, 2000).
Section Summary
Our prenatal development starts with conception, the fertilization of an egg by a 
sperm to form a zygote, and proceeds through the germinal stage (first two weeks), 
the embryonic stage (two weeks to two months), and the fetal stage (two months 
to birth). Prenatal development is guided by the zygote’s genetic code (nature), 
but teratogens (environmental agents such as drugs or viruses, diseases, and mal-
nutrition) can impact the prenatal environment (nurture) and result in birth defects 
and even death. Other factors that affect prenatal development include fetal alcohol 

how We Think Throughout Our Lives  |  279
syndrome and the age of the mother. Prematurity and low birth weight are also risks 
to newborns. The newborn comes equipped with several motor reflexes, some criti-
cal for survival, such as the rooting and sucking reflexes that lead to nourishment, 
and some not so critical, such as the grasping reflex, which disappear within the first 
year of life. Within this first year, the infant learns to sit, stand, and walk in a very 
orderly sequence; each new motor behavior builds upon previous ones. They also 
learn to coordinate their body movements with perceptual input.
Although not fully developed, our five senses are functional at birth, with vision 
being the least developed. To study early sensory-perceptual capabilities in the 
nonverbal infant, researchers developed special techniques that allow them to 
determine what an infant can discriminate. Such research has shown, for example, 
that infants have the remarkable ability to discriminate phonemes, the smallest dis-
tinctive speech units in a language. Sensory-perceptual development depends upon 
brain development in the form of a large growth spurt of neural networks, such as 
between the retina and the brain. If these visual pathways do not develop in infancy, 
vision would be permanently lost. The neural networks that are used grow stronger, 
and those that are not used are eliminated.
ConceptCheck | 1
➤	 explain how the effects of teratogens are due to nurture and not nature.
➤	 explain how habituation is used to study infant sensory-perceptual skills.
How We Think Throughout Our Lives
In this section, we will examine how our cognitive abilities, such as thinking and 
language, develop. Because we are verbal animals and our language ability differ-
entiates us from all other animals, we will look first at how this ability begins its 
development, which will lead us back to the nature–nurture issue. Next we will 
outline one of the most important theoretical contributions to psychology, Swiss 
psychologist Jean Piaget’s theory of cognitive development. According to Piaget, 
starting at birth all of us go through the same four stages of cognitive develop-
ment, each of which is qualitatively different. Next we will discuss Russian psychol-
ogist Lev Vygotsky’s sociocultural approach to cognitive development. Vygotsky’s 
approach has recently become very popular because it emphasizes the importance 
of social and cultural contexts in development. Last, we will consider the question 
of whether intelligence declines throughout the adult portion of the life span.
How We Learn Language
Our ability to use language makes us unique. No other animal seems to be able 
to acquire and develop language ability as humans do. Although speechless at 
birth, our capacity for language begins to develop soon after. Children in different 
cultures learn to speak very different languages, but they all seem to go through 

280  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
the same sequence of stages. We will describe these stages of language acquisition 
and then consider the nature–nurture issue in explaining how language acquisi-
tion occurs.
Let’s begin with the newborn infant and see how language develops. Infants are 
speechless, but one way they communicate is through crying. Infants cry differ-
ently, for example, to indicate hunger versus pain. Crying, movement, and facial 
expressions allow infants to communicate fairly well. Infants also prefer baby 
talk (parentese), the different format of speech that adults use when talking with 
babies that involves the use of shorter sentences with a higher, more melodious 
pitch than normal speech. Actually, these exaggerated speech melodies parents 
use when speaking to their babies help the infants grasp the speaker’s intentions. 
Fernald (1993) exposed five-month-old infants from English-speaking families to 
approval and prohibition phrases spoken in German, Italian, and both nonsense 
and regular English parentese. Even though all of this speech was gibberish to 
the babies, they responded with the appropriate emotion, crying when they heard 
prohibitions and smiling when they heard approvals. Thus, the melodious nature 
and not the content of parentese conveys the message to an infant.
By two months or so, infants are making more meaningful noises such as coo-
ing (repeating vowel sounds such as “oo” and “ah”) and laughing. Infants use coo-
ing as their response in vocal interactions with their parents. At about six or seven 
months, babbling, the rhythmic repetition of various syllables, including both 
consonants and vowels, begins. The syllables that are babbled are not limited to 
the sounds that the infant hears or those from their parents’ language. However, 
this early babbling begins to include more and more sounds from the infant’s 
native language over the next six months. The infant can now also understand 
some words such as “mommy” and “daddy.” For example, the question “Where is 
mommy?” will lead the infant to look at her mother.
At about one year of age, infants begin to speak a few 
words. Their first words usually refer to their caregivers 
and objects in their daily environment. Sometimes, infants 
use a holophrase, a word that expresses a complete idea. 
A good example is children going to the door and saying 
“bye-bye.” Vocabulary grows slowly until about 18 months, 
and then there is a vocabulary spurt, maybe of 100 words or 
more per month. This is also the period during which over-
extension and underextension occur. Overextension is the 
application of a newly learned word to objects that are not 
included in the meaning of the word. Underextension is 
the failure to apply the new word more generally to objects 
that are included within the meaning of the new word. A 
couple of examples will make these concepts clearer. A 
good example of overextension is children’s tendency to 
call any male “dada,” overextending the word and deflating 
the father’s ego. Underextension frequently occurs when 
➤	 baby talk (parentese)  The different 
format of speech that adults use when 
talking with babies that involves the use 
of shorter sentences with a higher, more 
melodious pitch.
➤	 babbling  The rhythmic repetition of  
various syllables including both  
consonants and vowels.
➤	 holophrase  A word used by an infant to 
express a complete idea.
➤	 overextension  The application of a 
newly learned word to objects that are 
not included in the meaning of the word.
➤	 underextension  The failure to apply a 
new word more generally to objects  
that are included within the meaning  
of the word.

how We Think Throughout Our Lives  |  281
children do not extend the categories of “dog” and “cat” to dogs and cats beyond the 
family’s pet dog or cat. The words are applied too narrowly. As vocabulary expands, 
the incidences of overextension and underextension decrease. This expansion of 
vocabulary reflects the influence of cognitive development; as children acquire new 
concepts, they learn the names that go with them.
One of the challenges children face in acquiring a vocabulary is determining the 
meaning of words, because the context in which children hear language is often 
ambiguous. For instance, if a mother points out a bird flying overhead and exclaims 
“look at the bird,” the child has to consider many possibilities as the potential 
meaning of the word bird. For example, bird could refer to any object above them or 
any object in the sky. Research has shown, however, that children use many differ-
ent types of cues to identify the speaker’s intended meaning of bird. Some research-
ers have argued that children are particularly good at using social cues, such as 
the speaker’s eye gaze, pointing, and emotional reactions to determine what the 
adult means when using a novel word (Baldwin & Moses, 2001; Brooks & Meltzoff, 
2008; Golinkoff & Hirsh-Pasek, 2006). For instance, Tomasello, Strosberg, and 
Akhtar (1996) showed that children could use a speaker’s emotional reaction to 
determine which novel object a speaker is labeling. In their task, an experimenter 
told 18-month-old infants that she was going to find a “toma” (a novel object). 
She then picked up a novel object but then rejected it and acted disappointed. She 
then picked up a second novel object and acted excited. She didn’t name either of 
the two objects. The child was then shown both novel objects and asked to give 
the experimenter the “toma.” If the child was able to use the emotional reaction 
of the experimenter to determine which object was the toma, she should select the 
object that the experimenter was excited about; and most 18-month-old children 
were able to do so even though it was not the first object seen.
The next step in language development is the combining of words into sen-
tences. This begins during the vocabulary spurt between 18 and 24 months. 
Children engage in what is called telegraphic speech, using two-word sentences 
with mainly nouns and verbs. It is called telegraphic speech because the speech is 
like that in a telegram, concise and direct. Some examples are “Dada gone” and 
“Throw ball.” These two-word statements begin to be expanded, and between the 
ages of two and five years, children acquire the grammar of their native language. 
Children learn these rules implicitly and in a very predictable order across all cul-
tures. How they do so returns us to the nature–nurture issue.
Children acquire language early and easily, without direct instruction, and this 
acquisition process seems to be the same across cultures that have very different 
languages. This is why there is much support for the argument that language 
development is a genetically programmed ability (Chomsky, 1965; Pinker, 1994). 
Children, however, cannot develop normal speech without exposure to human 
speech, and it is clear that caregivers can facilitate and 
enhance language development, indicating that expe-
rience definitely plays a role in language acquisition.  
As is usually the case with the nature–nurture issue, there 
➤	 telegraphic speech  Using two-word 
sentences with mainly nouns and verbs.

282  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
is some evidence for both sides; nature and nurture provide interactive influences 
(Elman, Bates, Johnson, Karmiloff-Smith, Paisi, & Plunkett, 1996).
One of the best illustrations of children’s special skill in learning a language is 
the existence of a critical period for acquiring it. A critical period is a time period 
when learning certain skills is most easily accomplished and is thought to reflect the 
influence of biology (brain maturation) on development. If children do not acquire 
a language by a certain age, usually thought to be around the time of puberty or 
perhaps earlier, then they will not learn it as well as younger children. For example, 
children who are isolated from human contact prior to puberty have difficulty 
learning a language, even after years of later exposure. The best known example of 
this is a girl known as “Genie” (Fromkin, Krasjen, Curtiss, Rigler, & Rigler, 1974). 
Genie was kept tied to a potty chair for most of the first 13 years of her life. During 
this time, Genie heard very little language and had minimal social interactions. 
After she was rescued, both researchers and therapists worked hard to rehabilitate 
her. Although she did make some linguistic progress and was able to learn several 
hundred words, her grammatical development never reached typical developmental 
levels, even after several years of trying. A similar critical period exists for children 
acquiring American Sign Language (ASL). Most deaf children of hearing parents are 
not as adept at ASL as deaf children of deaf parents because they are typically taught 
ASL later, since their parents are not signers themselves (Newport, 1991; Senghas 
& Coppola, 2001). A critical period also exists for second language learning. As you 
may know from your own struggles to learn a second language, children have a 
much easier time than adults (Birdsong & Molis, 2001; Johnson & Newport, 1989).
Language development occurs during the first few years of life when the brain 
and cognitive abilities, such as thinking and reasoning, are also developing. When 
children start talking, it is easy to start thinking of them as miniature adults, but 
this would be a big mistake. Their cognitive abilities are not at all like those of 
an adult. To see how these cognitive abilities develop, we’ll consider Piaget’s stage 
theory of cognitive development, which tells us how a speechless newborn devel-
ops into a cognitively complex adult.
Piaget’s Theory of Cognitive Development
Jean Piaget was a twentieth-century Swiss psychologist whose research on chil-
dren’s thinking led to a landmark theory of cognitive development. He was 
named one of the twentieth century’s 20 most influential thinkers by Time 
magazine in 1999. Piaget started his career in France working with Theophile 
Simon (of Binet-Simon intelligence scale fame) standardizing intelligence tests 
(Hunt, 1993). However, he soon returned to Switzerland and began his research 
on how children think. Piaget did not conduct formal experiments. In his loosely 
structured interviews he instead posed problems for children to solve (he used 
his own three children in his early research), observed their actions carefully, and 
questioned them about their solutions. He was particularly interested in chil-
dren’s errors, which he thought provided insight into the child’s thinking, espe-
cially into how it differed from adult thinking. He found that children of roughly 

how We Think Throughout Our Lives  |  283
the same age often gave the same wrong answers. 
From such data, he developed a theory of cognitive 
development that revolutionized our understanding 
of children’s thinking and its development (Piaget, 
1926/1929, 1936/1952, 1983).
Piaget’s cognitive theory incorporated two of his 
interests, biology and philosophy. He assumed that 
cognitive development stems from a child’s adapta-
tion to the environment, and that children attempt 
to promote their survival by trying to learn about 
their environment. This means that a child is an 
active seeker of knowledge and gains an understand-
ing of the world by operating in it. The child orga-
nizes this knowledge into what Piaget called schemes 
(now called schemas), which are frameworks for our 
knowledge about people, objects, events, and actions. 
Remember, we discussed these in Chapter 5. Schemas 
are the basic units of our knowledge that allow us to 
organize and interpret information about our world. 
In our long-term memories, we have schemas for con-
cepts (such as books or dogs), events (such as going 
to a restaurant or to the dentist’s office), and actions 
(such as riding a bicycle).
According to Piaget, cognitive adaptation involves 
two processes, assimilation and accommodation, both 
of which impact the development of schemas and thus learning. Assimilation is 
the interpretation of new experiences in terms of our existing schemas; accom-
modation is the modification of current schemas to allow for new experiences. 
Our earlier example of overextension— when infants call all men “dada”—would 
represent a child’s attempt to assimilate. Children learn, however, that they need 
to accommodate and change their schemas. A child has only one father, but there 
are many men in the world. It is through accommodation that the number and 
complexity of a child’s schemas increase and learning occurs. In accommodation, 
either new schemas are created for information that doesn’t fit into one’s present 
schemas or existing schemas are modified to include the new information (such 
as for father and men).
Piaget also proposed that major changes in children’s thinking occur in stages. 
Each stage permits only certain kinds of thinking and involves qualitatively dif-
ferent cognitive functioning. Piaget further assumed 
that all children go through the same stages in the same 
order. He proposed four stages, outlined in Table 7.2. 
As you learn about each stage, realize that you will be 
changing your own schemas to accommodate all this 
new information about Piaget’s theory. Then, after you 
have finished reading about the stages, look back at 
Jean Piaget interacting with a child attempting 
to solve a problem in one of Piaget’s loosely 
structured studies.
Bill Anderson/Science Source
➤	 assimilation   Piaget’s term for the inter-
pretation of new experiences in terms of 
present schemas.
➤	 accommodation  Piaget’s term for the 
modification of present schemas to fit 
with new experiences.

284  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
Table 7.2. You should easily be able to assimilate the stage descriptions into your 
modified schemas for Piaget’s theory.
The sensorimotor stage.  In the sensorimotor stage, from birth to about age 
two, infants learn about the world through their sensory and motor interactions 
with it. Beginning with the simple reflexes that we discussed earlier, infants come 
to know the world by looking, listening, sucking, grasping, and manipulating. 
Infants less than 8 to 12 months old lack object permanence, the knowledge that 
an object exists independent of perceptual contact with it. For example, young 
infants do not understand that a toy continues to exist even if they can no longer 
see it. Object permanence develops over the first two years of life. Very young 
infants will not search for a toy that vanishes; but at about 4 to 8 months, they 
will sometimes search for it, especially if it is only par-
tially hidden. At 8 to 12 months, they will search for a toy 
even if it is completely hidden, indicating that they real-
ize that the toy still exists even if they cannot see it. 
Children continue to develop their understanding of 
object permanence and have a fairly complete under-
standing by two years of age. Similarly, symbolic repre-
sentation of objects and events starts to develop during 
the latter part of the sensorimotor stage. Infants begin to 
use words as symbols to represent known objects at 
around 18 months. By 18 to 24 months, infants use tele-
graphic speech, which represents continuing develop-
ment of symbolic representation.
The preoperational stage.  In the preoperational 
stage, from age two to age six, children’s thinking 
➤	 sensorimotor stage  The first stage 
in Piaget’s theory of cognitive 
development, from birth to about age 
two, during which infants learn about 
the world through their sensory and 
motor interactions with it and develop 
object permanence.
➤	 object permanence  The knowledge 
that an object exists independent of 
perceptual contact with it.
➤	 preoperational stage  The second 
stage in Piaget’s theory of cognitive 
development, from age two to six, during 
which the child’s thinking becomes 
more symbolic and language-based, but 
remains egocentric and lacks the mental 
operations that allow logical thinking.
Table 7.2     Piaget’s Stages of Cognitive Development
Stage (age range)
Stage Description
Sensorimotor  
(birth to 2 years)
Children use senses and motor abilities to learn about 
the world and develop object permanence.
Preoperational  
(2 to 6 years)
Children use symbolic thinking to understand the 
world but remain egocentric and lack the mental  
operations that allow logical thinking.
Concrete operational  
(6 to 12 years)
Children gain cognitive operations for logical thinking 
about concrete events, understand conservation, and 
perform mathematical operations, but they cannot 
reason abstractly.
Formal operational (12 years  
through adulthood)
Further development of cognitive operations enables  
adolescents to engage in abstract thinking and  
hypothetical-deductive reasoning.

how We Think Throughout Our Lives  |  285
becomes more symbolic and language-based, but remains ego-
centric and lacks the mental operations that allow logical 
thinking. Preoperational children can pretend, imagine, and 
engage in make-believe play. They have the ability to use one 
thing to represent another. Preoperational children might pre-
tend that a broom is a horse to ride, or that their finger is a 
toothbrush. They no longer need to be interacting with an 
object to think about it. For example, they now can point to a 
picture of a dog and say “doggie” or crawl around and pretend 
to be a dog by barking like a dog. Word learning also continues 
at a rapid pace, and children have learned thousands of words 
by the end of the preoperational stage. Children also learn to 
produce narratives, descriptions of past events that have the 
structure of a story. However, preoperational children’s think-
ing still has major limitations. Let’s first consider what it means 
that their thinking is egocentric.
Egocentrism is the inability to distinguish one’s own percep-
tions, thoughts, and feelings from those of others. This means 
that a preoperational child cannot perceive the world from another person’s per-
spective. For example, preoperational children don’t realize what they are doing 
when they block the view of the television. They assume that another’s view is the 
same as their view. Egocentric behavior does not stem from selfishness or a lack of 
consideration. Preoperational children just have not developed the cognitive abil-
ity to see another person’s view. It is important for parents to realize this cognitive 
limitation in their preoperational children. If not, they may misinterpret their 
children’s behavior in a negative way, leading to unjust punishment of the child.
Next, to understand what Piaget meant by the lack of mental operations that 
allow a child to think logically, let’s consider conservation. Some grasp of conserva-
tion marks the end of the preoperational stage and the beginning of the concrete 
operational stage. Conservation is the knowledge that the quantitative proper-
ties of an object (such as mass and number) remain the same despite changes in 
appearance. Simply put, the quantitative properties of an object do not change with 
a change in appearance. There are many Piagetian conservation tests, but a well-
known one is the liquid/beakers problem (see Figure 7.2). In this test, the child is 
first shown two identical short, fat beakers with equal amounts of liquid in each. 
With the child watching, the liquid in one of the beakers is poured into a taller, 
thinner beaker. Then the child is asked if the two beakers have the same amount 
of liquid or if one has more liquid than the other. If the 
child understands conservation, then he can explain why 
the two differently shaped beakers have an equal amount 
of liquid in them. No liquid was taken away or added. 
However, a preoperational child will say that the two bea-
kers have different amounts and most often that the taller, 
thinner beaker has more liquid. Like egocentric thinking, 
the failure to understand conservation illustrates one of 
The child in this cartoon is demon-
strating egocentric behavior, so he 
would be in Piaget’s preoperational 
stage of cognitive development. 
Given his egocentrism, he thinks 
that everybody sees what he sees 
regardless of where they’re at.
Family Circus © 1984 Bil Keane, Inc. King  Features Syndicate.
➤	 egocentrism  The inability to distinguish 
one’s own perceptions, thoughts, and 
feelings from those of others.
➤	 conservation   The knowledge that the 
quantitative properties of objects (such 
as mass and number) remain the same 
despite changes in appearance.

286  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
Piaget’s main points—a child is not like a miniature 
adult with less information. A child’s way of thinking 
is very different and how it is different depends upon 
the child’s stage of cognitive development.
A major reason why a preoperational child does 
not understand conservation is that the child lacks 
an understanding of reversibility—the knowledge 
that reversing a transformation brings about the 
conditions that existed before the transformation. 
As adults, you and I realize that you could eas-
ily pour the liquid in the taller beaker back into 
the shorter beaker to return to the starting state. 
A preoperational child does not understand this 
reversibility operation. A preoperational child’s 
thinking also reflects centration—the tendency to 
focus on only one aspect of a problem at a time. 
In the liquid/beakers problem, for example, the 
child may only focus on the heights of the beakers 
and conclude that one has more because it is taller. Obviously, both the height  
and width of the beakers need to be considered in order to make a correct judg-
ment. Other Piagetian conservation tests in addition to the liquid/beakers prob-
lem are illustrated in Figure 7.2 (page 287). Find a preoperational child around 
three to four years of age and try these tests. The child’s responses will not only 
amaze you but will also give you a much better understanding of the cognitive 
limitations of the preoperational stage of development.
The concrete operational and formal operational stages. During the 
concrete operational stage, from about age 6 to 12, children gain a fuller under-
standing of conservation and other mental operations that allow them to think 
logically, but only about concrete events. Different forms of conservation are devel-
oped at different times. For example, conservation of continuous quantity, number, 
and mass are acquired rather early, but conservation of length is more difficult and 
is acquired later in the concrete operational stage (Vasta, 
Miller, & Ellis, 2004). In addition to conservation opera-
tions, concrete operational children develop other mental 
operations that allow them to reason logically, such as 
transitivity (if A . B, and B . C, then A . C) and seriation 
(the ability to order stimuli along a quantitative dimen-
sion, such as a set of pencils by their length).
However, all of these operations are limited to reason-
ing logically about concrete events. For example, transitiv-
ity is limited to having the actual objects present, such as 
three sticks of different lengths. Children wouldn’t be able 
to solve the transitivity problem without the sticks physi-
cally present. Similarly, concrete objects (such as beakers of 
➤	 reversibility  The knowledge that 
reversing a transformation brings about 
the conditions that existed before the 
transformation.
➤	 centration  The tendency to focus on 
only one aspect of a problem at a time.
➤	 concrete operational stage  The third 
stage in Piaget’s theory of cognitive 
development, from age 6 to 12, during 
which children gain a fuller understand-
ing of conservation and other mental 
operations that allow them to think 
logically, but only about concrete events.
Dennis The Menace © 1992 North American Syndicate.
“Cut it up into a LOT of slices, Mom.  
I’m really hungry!”

how We Think Throughout Our Lives  |  287
liquid) would need to be present to solve the conservation of continuous quantity 
problem. This means that the reasoning of concrete operational children is tied to 
immediate reality (what is in front of them and tangible) and not with the hypo-
thetical world of possibility. They cannot deal with what-if and if-then problems 
and abstract thinking. They also do not engage in systematic deduction to solve a 
problem, but rather use a haphazard trial-and-error strategy.
In the formal operational stage, starting at age 12 or so, children gain the capac-
ity for such hypothetical-deductive thought. According to Piaget, this capacity allows 
adolescents to engage not only in hypothetical thought but also in systematic deduc-
tion and tests of hypotheses, what could easily be referred to as scientific thinking. 
To understand the difference in thinking between concrete and formal operational 
children, Piaget used several scientific thinking tasks (Inhelder & Piaget, 1958).
In one of these tasks, children or adolescents are 
shown several flasks of what appear to be the same clear 
liquid and are told that one combination of two of these 
liquids would produce a blue liquid. The task is to deter-
mine the combination that would produce the blue liq-
uid. The concrete operational children just start mixing 
➤	 formal operational stage  The last 
stage in Piaget’s theory of cognitive 
development, starting at age 12 or so, 
during which a child gains the capacity 
for hypothetical-deductive thought.
tests of Various types of Conservation
type of
Conservation
Initial
presentation
preoperational
Child’s answer
transformation
Question
Continuous
Quantity
Two identical beakers
with equal amounts
of liquid.
The taller one.
Pour one beaker
into a taller, narrower
beaker.
Which beaker
contains more
liquid?
Number
Two identical rows
of checkers.  
The longer one.
Increase the space
between the
checkers in one row.
Which row has more
checkers? 
Mass
Two equivalent lumps
of clay.
The long one.
Squeeze one lump
into  a long, thin
shape.
Which shape has
more clay?
Length
Two sticks of identical
length.
The one that is
farther to the right.
Move one stick.
Which stick is longer?
m Figure 7.2 | Tests of Conservation | These are examples of tests for conservation of continuous quantity, 
number, mass, and length. The typical preoperational child’s responses are given in the last column.

288  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
different clear liquids together haphazardly. The formal operational children, 
however, proceed very differently. They develop a systematic plan for deducing 
what the correct combination must be by determining all of the possible combi-
nations (hypotheses for the correct combination) and then systematically evaluat-
ing each one. To accomplish this plan, they systematically mix the liquid in one 
beaker with each of the other liquids. If none of these combinations produced 
the blue liquid, they deduce that the liquid in that beaker is not relevant to the 
sought-after combination and then proceed to test each of the other clear liquids 
in the same manner until they find the correct combination.
Formal operational adolescents can also evaluate the logic of verbal statements 
without referring to concrete situations; the concrete operational child can only 
do so with concrete evidence. For example, in one formal operational study, the 
experimenter asked whether a statement about some colored poker chips was 
true, false, or uncertain (Osherson & Markman, 1975). When the experimenter 
hid a chip in his hand and asked about the statement, “Either the chip is red or it 
is not red,” the formal operational children realized that the statement was true 
regardless of the color of the hidden chip, but the concrete operational children 
were uncertain of the statement’s truth status. The formal operational children 
understood the disjunctive logic of the statement, and the concrete operational 
children did not. Concrete operational children also have difficulty with propo-
sitional logic that contradicts reality (Moshman & Franks, 1986). For example, 
concrete operational children would judge the following reasoning to be faulty, 
“If cats are bigger than horses and horses are bigger than mice, then cats are big-
ger than mice,” because the first relationship does not hold in real life. Concrete 
operational children are tied to the realistic truth of the content (what is) in their 
logical reasoning, but formal operational children are not.
Evaluation of Piaget’s theory. Recent research has shown that cognitive 
development seems to proceed in the general sequence of stages that Piaget pro-
posed (Lourenco & Machado, 1996). This means that Piaget’s theory seems to 
have captured the general nature of cognitive development accurately. However, 
there are many issues with the specifics of Piaget’s stage theory. For example, 
recent research has demonstrated that rudiments of many of Piaget’s key con-
cepts (such as object permanence) may begin to appear at earlier ages than Piaget 
proposed. Infants and young children may be more cognitively competent than 
Piaget theorized. Piaget’s tests for the understanding of concepts may have been 
too complex and thus missed partial knowledge of the concept. For example, 
Piaget’s test for object permanence required infants to reach for a hidden object. 
A complete understanding required the infants to search for the object after sev-
eral invisible (hidden) movements. Later research that involved tracking infants’ 
eye movements has found that infants (as young as three months) continue to 
stare at the place where the object disappeared from sight, indicating some degree 
of object permanence (Baillargeon, 1987).
More recent research on the formal operational stage also makes it clear that 
not all people reach this stage of thinking, especially in cultures that do not 

how We Think Throughout Our Lives  |  289
emphasize such thinking, and that those that do reach 
the stage may not always use such thinking (Dasen, 
1994; McKinnon & Renner, 1971). For example, people 
in non-Western cultures do not usually do well on the 
specific scientific reasoning tasks used by Piaget, but 
they do very well and demonstrate formal operational 
thought on comparable tasks involving content that 
they are familiar with and that is significant within their 
culture (Vasta, Miller, & Ellis, 2004). Even Piaget, late in his life, realized that there 
were limitations on achieving formal operations (Piaget, 1972).
Other cognitive developmental researchers question whether Piaget’s character-
ization of distinct stages of development is correct. In particular, the information-
processing approach to cognitive development questions the existence of stages 
and argues that development is continuous and not comprised of distinct stages. 
So how do information-processing developmental psychologists explain the 
growth in children’s cognitive abilities? They attribute this growth to developmen-
tal changes in children’s information-processing abilities—how they take in, store, 
and use information. The information-processing approach uses a computer 
metaphor to describe children’s thinking. Just as a computer’s ability to solve 
problems is affected by memory and requires specific processing steps, children’s 
problem-solving ability involves similar information processing. Information-
processing researchers study factors that affect such processing. For example, 
developmental improvements in speed of processing (Kail, 1991), storage capacity 
(Pascual-Leone, 1989), and knowledge base (Schneider, 1993) have all been found 
to influence improvements in children’s memory and thinking. As children grow 
older, they become increasingly more adept at information processing. 
We should mention two other major criticisms of Piaget’s stage theory. One is 
that Piaget did not sufficiently consider the impact of culture and social environ-
ment on cognitive development (Miller, 2011; Segall, Dasen, Berry, & Poortinga, 
1990). The second is that Piaget’s stage theory of cognitive development ends with 
adolescence and the development of formal operations, instead of continuing 
through to adulthood. Although Piaget did not address these issues, other devel-
opmental psychologists have done so. We will discuss the first issue in the next 
section when we examine the work of Russian psychologist Lev Vygotsky, whose 
theory did emphasize the sociocultural aspects of cognitive development. The 
second issue will be addressed in the section after that when we examine the ques-
tion of what happens to intelligence from adolescence to old age. Does it decline 
as we age, especially in late adulthood? This discussion will allow us to examine 
two major research methods used by developmental psychologists, cross-sectional 
studies and longitudinal studies.
Vygotsky’s Sociocultural Approach to Development
Lev Vygotsky was a Russian developmental psychologist who was a contempo-
rary of Piaget. Both were born in 1896, but Vygotsky died of tuberculosis at a 
➤	 information-processing approach to 
cognitive development  An approach 
to studying cognitive development that 
assumes cognitive development is 
continuous and improves as children 
become more adept at processing 
information (taking in, storing, and 
using information).

290  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
very young age, 37, and did not have the opportunity to finish 
developing his theory. As with Piaget’s work, there was little 
interest in the Western world in Vygotsky’s work until the 1960s. 
Vygotsky’s approach has become especially popular recently, how-
ever, because of its sociocultural emphasis on development.
Vygotsky (1930, 1933, 1935/1978, 1934/1986) stressed that 
cognitive abilities develop through interactions with others and 
represent the shared knowledge of one’s culture. The social aspects 
of Vygotsky’s approach are straightforward. We are social animals, 
and therefore much of our learning occurs within social interac-
tions. In brief, we learn from other people—our parents, siblings, 
friends, teachers, and others. Vygotsky proposed that culture 
impacts both the content and the processes of the child’s cogni-
tive development, because a child’s cognitive development occurs 
within this cultural context. Now that we have a general idea of 
Vygotsky’s theory, let’s take a look at two of his major theoretical 
concepts—the zone of proximal development and scaffolding.
In Vygotsky’s theory, the zone of proximal development is the difference 
between what a child can actually do and what the child could do with the help 
of others. In Vygotsky’s terms, this is the difference between the levels of actual 
development and potential development. It means that there are thinking skills 
that the child can display with the help of others but cannot perform indepen-
dently. It also leads to a style of teaching called scaffolding. In scaffolding, the 
teacher adjusts the level of help in relation to the child’s level of performance, 
while directing the child’s learning progress toward the upper level of the child’s 
zone of proximal development. The teacher gauges the amount of assistance nec-
essary based on the learner’s needs. The learning is structured in steps so that the 
child learns to achieve each step independently, but is guided and supported by 
the teacher throughout the learning process.
To illustrate these two concepts and Vygotsky’s theory, let’s consider the exam-
ple of a child trying to solve a jigsaw puzzle (Berger, 2006). A child may appear 
not to be able to solve the puzzle. However, Vygotsky would say that this par-
ticular problem-solving task could be within the child’s zone 
of proximal development, but that she could not achieve it 
on her own. She needs a teacher to scaffold the task for her. 
How might this scaffolding proceed? The teacher would 
break the task down into manageable units; for example, 
the teacher might ask the child just to look for pieces for 
a particular section of the puzzle with specific suggestions 
about the size, shape, and colors of the relevant pieces. If this 
doesn’t work, the teacher might actually place a few pieces 
in their proper places or move a few relevant pieces to their 
correct orientations, so their relevance is more obvious to the 
child. Throughout this scaffolding process, the teacher must 
Lev Vygotsky
Sovfoto/UIG via Getty Images
➤	 zone of proximal development   
According to Vygotsky, the 
difference between what a child 
can actually do and what the child 
could do with the help of others.
➤ scaffolding  According to 
Vygotsky, a style of teaching in 
which the teacher adjusts the level 
of help in relation to the child’s 
level of performance while orient-
ing the child’s learning toward the 
upper level of his or her zone of 
proximal development.

how We Think Throughout Our Lives  |  291
be totally supportive of the child’s progress and sensitive to how much help the 
child needs to progress toward solving the puzzle and how best to direct her to  
succeed in the next step of the solution process. After solving the puzzle, the 
teacher might have the child do it again, but this time with less guidance. Soon 
the child will be able to complete the puzzle independently. The teacher builds a 
scaffold to enable the child’s learning. Once the learning is achieved, the scaffold 
is no longer necessary.
As recommended with Piaget’s tests for the various types of conservation, find 
a young child and try to teach her how to solve a jigsaw puzzle using Vygotsky’s 
scaffolding method. It will not only give you a better understanding of this 
approach but will also lead you to understand the social aspects of learning that 
Vygotsky stressed in his theory.
How Intelligence Changes in Adulthood
Piaget’s description of intellectual development stops in adolescence with the 
onset of formal operations (hypothetical thought and systematic deduction), 
but it is important to examine what happens to intelligence across the various 
stages of adulthood from youth to old age. Do our cognitive abilities severely 
decrease across adulthood, especially in old age? The attempt to answer this 
question illustrates the differences between two major research methods in 
developmental psychology, cross-sectional studies versus longitudinal studies. 
In a cross-sectional study, people of different ages are studied and compared 
with one another at a single point in time. In a longitudinal study, the same 
people are studied over a long period of time. This involves collecting data peri-
odically on the same people as they age. Longitudinal studies assess changes in 
people over time, whereas cross-sectional studies assess differences among age 
groups at a particular point in time. We will examine the use of both of these 
developmental research methods to answer the question about intelligence 
across the life span, learning the advantages and disadvantages of each.
The cross-sectional method.  The early studies on this question about intel-
ligence across the life span used the cross-sectional method. These studies used 
representative samples of people of various ages and consistently found that intel-
ligence declined with age. Later studies, however, used 
the longitudinal method. When the same people were 
retested over a period of years, researchers found that 
intelligence did not decline with age, but remained 
rather stable and possibly increased until very late in life 
when it showed a decline. Now think about why there 
were two different answers to the intelligence question. 
First, consider the nature of a cross-sectional study and 
the possible problems with this method. A cross- 
sectional study compares people not only of different 
ages but also of different generations. This difference in 
➤	 cross-sectional study  A study in which 
the performances of groups of partici-
pants of different ages are compared to 
one another.
➤	 longitudinal study  A study in which 
performance of the same group of par-
ticipants is examined at different ages.
➤	 cohort effects  People of a given age 
(cohorts) are affected by factors unique 
to their generation, leading to differences 
in performance between generations.

292  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
generations can lead to what are called cohort effects—people of a given age 
(cohorts) are affected by factors unique to their generation, leading to differences 
in performance among generations. For example, there were significant differ-
ences in education and educational opportunities for the various generations 
across the twentieth century. Earlier generations generally received less education, 
which could certainly account for the intellectual decline observed in the cross-
sectional studies. So, why would a researcher use the cross-sectional method, 
given such possible cohort effects? The cross-sectional method is far less time-
consuming and less expensive than the longitudinal method. In addition, there is 
no need for continual retesting, as there is in longitudinal research.
The longitudinal method.  Now consider the longitudinal research method. 
Although there is no possibility of cohort effects when using the longitudinal 
method, it is time-consuming and expensive, and repeated testing has to be con-
ducted. In addition, another problem arises. Participants may discontinue their 
participation, move far away, or die. This means that the sample changes across 
time, which could have an impact on the research findings if those who disappear 
from the sample are unlike, in some relevant characteristic, those who stay. How 
might a changing sample lead to the misleading finding that intelligence remains 
fairly stable? Here’s one explanation—those who survived to be tested at the older 
ages may have been the most intelligent and healthiest participants, those whose 
intelligence would be the most likely not to decline. This would also mean that the 
participants whose intelligence was likely to decline may have no longer been in the 
study. Given the shortcomings of both methods (see Table 7.3), it has proven rather 
difficult to get a clear answer to this question of intelligence across the life span.
The type of intelligence that is being tested is also important and further compli-
cates the search for an answer. Remember from the last chapter, in our discussion of 
types of intelligence, that we differentiated fluid intelligence and crystallized intel-
ligence. Crystallized intelligence refers to accumulated knowledge, verbal skills, and 
numerical skills that increase with age; fluid intelligence involves abilities, such as 
abstract thinking and logical problem solving, that decrease with age (Horn, 1982). 
This difference may help to explain why scientists make their major contributions 
early, but historians and philosophers make theirs later in their careers.
The Seattle Longitudinal Study was a major attempt to answer the question of 
whether or not intelligence declines with age (Schaie, 1994, 1995). It was a large-
scale longitudinal study of various intellectual abilities (such as inductive reason-
ing, word fluency, and perceptual speed) across the entire span of adulthood. It 
started in 1956 with more than 5,000 participants being tested every seven years 
through 1998. The study was actually a combination of the longitudinal and cross-
sectional methods, since groups of new participants were added periodically. This 
allowed the researchers to examine the possible shortcomings of both methods.
In general, the researchers found that most intellectual abilities decline 
somewhat by age 60, but the decline is not great until a person reaches age 80 
or more (except for abilities largely dependent upon speed of processing, which 
clearly declines as we age). There are large individual differences, however. Those 

how We Think Throughout Our Lives  |  293
who suffer the least decline seem to be those who have stayed healthy, are in the 
higher socioeconomic categories, and are still involved in intellectually stimulat-
ing environments. In brief, it seems that if we work to stay healthy and cognitively 
stimulated, we won’t suffer major deficits in our cognitive abilities until rather 
late in adulthood.
Section Summary
We are speechless at birth, but our capacity for language develops soon thereafter. 
Children of different cultures learn different languages, but they seem to go through 
the same sequence of stages for language acquisition. At about 12 months, infants 
begin to speak a few words, and then to use holophrases, words that express com-
plete ideas. Their vocabulary grows slowly. Overextension and underextension of a 
word’s meaning occur. A vocabulary spurt starts at about 18 months, and children 
engage in telegraphic speech, using two-word sentences of mainly nouns and 
verbs. These brief statements start to expand, and between the ages of two to five 
years, children acquire the grammar of their native language. Children acquire lan-
guage early and easily, without direct instruction, and this process seems universal. 
Table 7.3   Advantages and Disadvantages for Cross-sectional and 
Longitudinal Research Methods
Research 
Method
Description
Advantages
Disadvantages
Cross-sectional 
study
People of dif-
ferent ages are 
studied at a 
single time
Not very time-
consuming or 
expensive
No need for con-
tinued retesting
Possible con-
founding due to 
cohort effects 
(differences in 
performance 
between age 
groups caused 
by generational 
differences)
Longitudinal 
study
Same people are 
studied repeat-
edly over a long 
period of time
No possibility of 
cohort effects
Very time-
consuming and 
expensive
Repeated test-
ing has to be 
conducted
Possible con-
founding due to 
changes in sam-
ple over time

294  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
There is much support for the argument that language development is a genetically 
programmed ability. It is also clear that certain environmental experiences (expo-
sure to human speech) are necessary, and that caregivers can facilitate and enhance 
language development.
It appears that children’s thinking, in general, goes through a universal sequence 
of development. Jean Piaget’s theory proposes distinct stages of cognitive devel-
opment and emphasizes that the child is trying to adapt to his environment and is 
an active seeker of knowledge. This knowledge about the world is organized into 
schemas, and these schemas are developed through the processes of assimilation 
and accommodation.
During the sensorimotor stage (from birth to two years), infants learn and know 
about their world only through their sensory and motor interactions with it, but 
during this stage, object permanence develops along with language and the sym-
bolic representation of objects and events. In the preoperational stage (from two 
to six years), the child’s thought becomes more symbolic and language-based but 
remains egocentric and lacks the mental operations that allow logical thinking. For 
example, the child lacks the reversibility operation and so does not understand 
conservation. In the concrete operational stage (from about 6 to 12 years), the child 
gains a fuller understanding of conservation and other mental operations that allow 
logical thinking, but only about concrete events. In the last stage, the formal opera-
tional stage (from age 12 through adulthood), the individual gains the capacity for 
hypothetical and deductive thought.
Recent research indicates that many of Piaget’s key concepts (such as object 
permanence) may begin to appear at earlier ages than Piaget proposed, but that 
cognitive development seems to proceed in the general sequence that he proposed. 
It is clear, however, that not everyone reaches formal operational thinking, espe-
cially in cultures that do not emphasize such thinking, and that those who do may 
not always use such thinking. In addition, the information-processing approach to 
cognitive development questions the existence of stages and argues that cogni-
tive development is continuous and not comprised of stages. The information-
processing approach argues that cognitive development stems from improvements 
in children’s information-processing abilities—how they take in, store, and use 
information.
Piaget was not concerned with the sociocultural aspects of cognitive develop-
ment, but Russian psychologist Lev Vygotsky was. Vygotsky proposed that cognitive 
abilities develop through interaction with others and represent shared knowledge of 
one’s culture. According to Vygotsky, a child’s zone of proximal development is the 
difference between what a child can actually do and what the child could do with 
the help of others. This is why Vygotsky recommended a style of teaching called 
scaffolding. The teacher structures the child’s learning in steps, so that the child 
learns each step independently but is guided and supported by the teacher toward 
the upper level of the child’s zone of proximal development.
Piaget and Vygotsky didn’t really examine what happens to cognitive abilities 
across the life span, but other developmental researchers have. They have used the 
cross-sectional (studying people of different ages at a single time) and longitudinal 
(studying the same people repeatedly over a long period of time) methods, as well 
as the combination of the two, to do so. In general, developmental researchers have 
found that the ability to perform tasks that involve crystallized intelligence tends to 
increase with age, but that the ability to perform tasks that involve fluid intelligence 
shows a pattern of decline with age. Cognitive abilities that do not involve speed of 

Moral development and Social development  |  295
processing, however, do not show dramatic decline until the age of 80 and beyond; 
but there are large individual differences. Those people who have stayed healthy, 
are in the higher socioeconomic levels, and are still involved in intellectually stimu-
lating environments tend to see the smallest declines in intelligence as they age.
ConceptCheck | 2
➤	 explain how overextension and underextension in language development 
relate to piaget’s concepts of assimilation and accommodation in schema 
development.
➤	 explain why a child who thought that a pizza cut into eight slices was more 
than the same pizza cut into six slices would be in the preoperational stage 
of cognitive development.
➤	 explain how Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development and scaffolding are 
related to learning and teaching.
➤	 explain the difference between the cross-sectional and longitudinal research 
methods.
Moral Development and Social Development
We develop cognitively and socially simultaneously, so these two types of develop-
ment are difficult to separate. As Vygotsky stressed, cognitive development is best 
understood in its social context. In this section, we will discuss moral and social 
development, but we need to remember that it occurs simultaneously with cogni-
tive development and is affected by it. Moral reasoning that involves both social 
and cognitive elements is a good illustration of this interactive development. For 
example, until a child moves away from egocentric thinking, it would be difficult 
for her to consider different perspectives when reasoning about the morality of a 
particular action. We begin our discussion of social development with a descrip-
tion of the major theory of moral development, Kohlberg’s stage theory of moral 
reasoning. Then, we examine early social development with a discussion of attach-
ment formation and parenting styles followed by a discussion of one of the most 
important social developments in early childhood, theory of mind. We conclude 
with a description of Erik Erikson’s stage theory of social-personality develop-
ment across the life span, from birth through late adulthood.
Kohlberg’s Theory of Moral Reasoning
The most influential theory of moral reasoning is Lawrence Kohlberg’s stage 
theory (Kohlberg, 1976, 1984). Building on an earlier theory of moral reasoning  

296  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
proposed by Piaget (1932), Kohlberg began the 
development of his theory by following in Piaget’s 
footsteps, using stories that involved moral dilem-
mas to assess a child’s or an adult’s level of moral 
reasoning. To familiarize you with these moral 
dilemmas, consider Kohlberg’s best-known story—
a dilemma involving Heinz, whose wife was dying 
of cancer. In brief, there was only one cure for this 
cancer. A local druggist had developed the cure, but 
he was selling it for much more than it cost to make 
and than Heinz could pay. Heinz tried to borrow 
the money to buy it, but could only get about half 
of what the drug cost. He asked the druggist to sell it to him cheaper or to let him 
pay the rest later, but the druggist refused. Out of desperation, Heinz broke into 
the druggist’s store and stole the drug for his wife. Given this story, the person is 
asked if Heinz should have stolen the drug and why or why not.
Using the responses to and explanations of this and other moral dilemmas, 
Kohlberg found three levels of moral reasoning—preconventional, conventional, 
and postconventional. These levels are outlined in Table 7.4. Each level has 
two stages. At the preconventional level of moral reasoning, the emphasis 
is on avoiding punishment and looking out for your own welfare and needs. 
Moral reasoning is self-oriented. At the conventional level, moral reasoning is 
based on social rules and laws. Social approval and being a dutiful citizen are  
important. At the highest level, the postconventional level, moral reasoning is  
based on self-chosen universal ethical principles, with human rights taking  
precedence over laws, and on the avoidance of self-condemnation for violating 
such principles.
It is important to point out that in determining a 
person’s level, it did not matter to Kohlberg whether the 
person answered yes or no to the dilemma. For example, 
in the Heinz dilemma, it did not matter whether the 
person said he should steal the drug or that he should 
not do so. The reasoning provided in the person’s expla-
nation is what mattered. Kohlberg provided examples of 
such explanations for each level of reasoning. To under-
stand how Kohlberg used these responses to the moral 
dilemmas, let’s consider sample Stage 4 rationales for 
stealing the drug and for not stealing the drug. The pro-
stealing explanation would emphasize that it is Heinz’s 
duty to protect his wife’s life, given the vow he took in 
marriage. But it’s wrong to steal, so Heinz would have 
to take the drug with the idea of paying the druggist for 
it and accepting the penalty for breaking the law. The 
anti-stealing rationale would emphasize that you have 
Lawrence Kohlberg
Lee Lockwood/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images.
➤	 preconventional level of moral 
reasoning  The first level of reasoning in 
Kohlberg’s theory of moral development 
in which moral reasoning is based on 
avoiding punishment and looking out for 
your own welfare and needs.
➤	 conventional level of moral reasoning   
The second level of reasoning in 
Kohlberg’s theory of moral development 
in which moral reasoning is based on 
social rules and laws.
➤	 postconventional level of moral rea-
soning  The last level of reasoning in 
Kohlberg’s theory of moral development 
in which moral reasoning is based on 
self-chosen universal ethical principles 
(with human rights taking precedence 
over laws) and the avoidance of self-con-
demnation for violating such principles.

Moral development and Social development  |  297
to follow the rules regardless of how you feel and regardless of the special circum-
stances. Even if his wife is dying, it is still Heinz’s duty as a citizen to follow the 
law. If everyone started breaking laws, there would be no civilization. As you can 
see, both explanations emphasize the law-and-order orientation of this stage—if 
you break the law, you must pay the penalty.
Kohlberg proposed that we all start at the preconventional level as children 
and as we develop, especially cognitively, we move up the ladder of moral reason-
ing. The sequence is unvarying, but, as with Piaget’s formal operational stage, 
we all may not make it up to the last stage. That the sequence does not vary and 
that a person’s level of moral reasoning is age-related (and so related to cognitive 
development) has been supported by research.
Research also indicates that most people in many different cultures reach the 
conventional level by adulthood, but attainment of the postconventional level 
is not so clear (Snarey, 1985). There are other problems. First, it is important 
to realize that Kohlberg was studying moral reasoning and not moral behavior. 
As we will see in Chapter 9, on social psychology, thought and action are not 
always consistent. Ethical talk may not equate to ethical behavior. Second, some 
researchers have criticized Kohlberg’s theory for not adequately representing the 
Table 7.4    Kohlberg’s Stage Theory of Moral Reasoning
Level I Preconventional Morality
Stage 1
Punishment orientation
Compliance with rules to avoid 
punishment
Stage 2
Reward orientation
Compliance with rules to obtain 
rewards and satisfy own needs
Level II Conventional Morality
Stage 3
Good-girl/good-boy  
orientation
Engages in behavior to get 
approval of others
Stage 4
Law and order orientation
Behavior is guided by duty to 
uphold laws and rules for their 
own sake
Level III Postconventional Morality
Stage 5
Social contract orientation
Obeys rules because they are nec-
essary for social order but under-
stands rules are relative
Stage 6 
Universal ethical  
principles orientation
Concerned about self-condemna-
tion for violating universal ethical 
principles based on human rights

298  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
morality of women. They argue that feminine moral 
reasoning is more concerned with a morality of care that 
focuses on interpersonal relationships and the needs of 
others than a morality of justice, as in Kohlberg’s theory. 
Similarly, critics have questioned the theory’s universal-
ity by arguing that the higher stages are biased toward Western values. In sum-
mary, Kohlberg’s theory has both support and criticism, but more importantly, 
it has stimulated research that continues to develop our understanding of moral 
development.
Attachment and Parenting Styles
As we have said before, humans are social creatures. Infants’ first social 
relationship—between them and their primary caregivers—is important and has 
been carefully studied by developmental psychologists (Bowlby, 1969). This life-
long emotional bond that exists between the infants and their mothers or other 
caregivers is formed during the first six months of life and is called attachment. 
Traditionally, the primary caregiver has been the infant’s mother, but times have 
changed; today the primary caregiver could be the mother, father, grandparent, 
nanny, or day care provider. Because attachment is related to children’s later 
development, it is also important to examine whether children who are put in 
day care at a young age are at a disadvantage in comparison to those who remain 
at home. Following a discussion of some of the early research on attachment, we 
will address this question. First, we consider the question of why the attachment 
forms. Is it because the caregiver provides food, and the attachment forms as a 
consequence of reinforcement?
Attachment and Harlow’s monkeys.  Harry Harlow used newborn monkeys in 
his attachment research to address this question (Harlow, 1959; Harlow & Harlow, 
1962; Harlow & Zimmerman, 1959). These attachment studies were a consequence 
of an accidental discovery during his learning research using the infant monkeys. 
The infant monkeys often caught diseases from their mothers, so Harlow had sepa-
rated the infant monkeys from their mothers. He gave cheesecloth blankets to the 
isolated infant monkeys. The infant monkeys became strongly attached to 
these blankets and were greatly disturbed if their “security” blankets were 
taken away.
After this observation, Harlow began to separate the infant mon-
keys from their mothers at birth and put them in cages containing 
two inanimate surrogate (substitute) mothers—one made of wire and 
one made of terry cloth. Figure 7.3 shows examples of these surrogate 
mothers and the motherless monkeys. Half of the monkeys received 
their nourishment from a milk dispenser in the wire mother and half 
from a dispenser in the terry cloth mother. However, all of the monkeys 
preferred the cloth monkey regardless of which monkey provided their 
nourishment. The monkeys being fed by the wire mother would only 
Harry Harlow
Nina Leen//Time Life Pictures/Getty Images.
➤	 attachment  The lifelong emotional bond 
between infants and their mothers or 
other caregivers, formed during the first 
six months of life.

Moral development and Social development  |  299
m Figure 7.3 | Harlow’s Motherless Monkeys and Surrogate Mothers | In 
Harry Harlow’s research on the role of feeding in the attachment process, he found 
that contact comfort, rather than feeding, was the most important factor in an infant 
monkey’s attachment. The infant monkeys spent most of their time on the terry cloth 
surrogate mother regardless of whether she provided their nourishment or not. The 
infant monkey would often even cling to the cloth monkey while feeding from the 
wire mother.
Photo Researchers, Inc.
Photo Researchers, Inc.
go to the wire mother to eat and then return to the cloth mother. As shown in 
Figure 7.3, if possible, the infant monkeys would often cling to the cloth monkey 
while feeding from the wire mother. In brief, the infant monkeys would spend 
most of each day on the cloth mother. The monkeys clearly had become attached 
to the cloth mother. Harlow concluded that “contact comfort” (bodily contact 
and comfort), not reinforcement from nourishment, was the crucial element for 
attachment formation.
In addition, the infant monkeys would cower in fear when confronted with a 
strange situation (an unfamiliar room with various toys) without the surrogate 
mother. When the surrogate mother was brought into the strange situation, the 
infant monkeys would initially cling to the terry cloth mother to reduce their 
fear, but then begin to explore the new environment and eventually play with 
the toys. Harlow concluded that the presence of the surrogate mother made the 
monkeys feel secure and therefore sufficiently confident to explore the strange 
situation. This situation is very similar to the strange situation procedure devel-
oped by Mary Ainsworth to study the attachment relationship in human infants 
(Ainsworth, 1979; Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall, 1978). In this procedure, an 
infant’s behavior is observed in an unfamiliar room with toys, while the infant’s 
mother and a stranger (an unfamiliar woman) move in and out of the room 
in a structured series of situations. The key observations focus on the infant’s 

300  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
reaction to the mother’s leaving and returning, both when 
the stranger is present and absent, and on the child exploring 
the situation (the room and the toys in it).
Types of attachment. Ainsworth and her colleagues 
found three types of attachment relationships—secure, inse-
cure-avoidant, and insecure-ambivalent. Secure attachment 
is indicated by the infant exploring the situation freely in 
the presence of the mother, but displaying distress when the 
mother leaves, and responding enthusiastically when the 
mother returns. Insecure-avoidant attachment is indicated 
by exploration but minimal interest in the mother, the 
infant showing little distress when the mother leaves, and 
avoiding her when she returns. Insecure-ambivalent attach-
ment is indicated by the infant seeking closeness to the 
mother and not exploring the situation, high levels of dis-
tress when the mother leaves, and ambivalent behavior when 
she returns by alternately clinging to and pushing away from 
her. About two-thirds of the infants studied are found to 
have a secure attachment, and the other third insecure 
attachments. Cross-cultural research indicates that these 
proportions may vary across different cultures, but the 
majority of infants worldwide seem to form secure attach-
ments. Later researchers have added a fourth type of insecure 
attachment, insecure-disorganized (disoriented) attach-
ment, which is indicated by the infant’s confusion when the 
mother leaves and when she returns. The infant acts disori-
ented, seems overwhelmed by the situation, and does not 
demonstrate a consistent way of coping with it (Main & 
Solomon, 1990).
Before putting the infants in the strange situation series, 
researchers observed the infant–mother relationship at home 
during the first six months of an infant’s life. From such 
observations, they found that the sensitivity of the mother is 
the major determinant of the quality of the attachment relationship. A mother who 
is sensitive and responsive to an infant’s needs is more likely to develop a secure 
attachment with the infant. Although the mother’s caregiver style is primary, does 
the infant also contribute to the attachment formation? The answer is yes. Each of 
us is born with a temperament, a set of innate tendencies or dispositions that lead 
us to behave in certain ways. Our temperament is fundamental to both our person-
ality development and also how we interact with others (our social development). 
The temperaments of infants vary greatly. Some infants are more responsive, more 
active, and happier than others. How an infant’s temperament matches the child-
rearing expectations and personality of his caregiver is important in forming the 
➤	 secure attachment  The type of 
attachment indicated by the infant 
exploring freely in the presence 
of the mother in the Ainsworth 
strange situation procedure, dis-
playing distress when the mother 
leaves, and responding enthusias-
tically when she returns.
➤ insecure-avoidant attachment   
The type of attachment indi-
cated by the infant exploring with 
little interest in the mother in 
the Ainsworth strange situation 
procedure, showing only minimal 
distress when the mother leaves, 
and avoiding her when she returns.
➤	 insecure-ambivalent attachment   
The type of attachment indicated 
by the infant not exploring but 
seeking closeness to the mother 
in the Ainsworth strange situation 
procedure, showing high levels of 
distress when the mother leaves, 
and ambivalent behavior when she 
returns—by alternately clinging to 
and pushing away from her.
➤	 insecure-disorganized (disoriented) 
attachment  The type of attach-
ment indicated by the infant’s 
confusion when the mother leaves 
and returns in the Ainsworth 
strange situation procedure. The 
infant acts disoriented, seems 
overwhelmed by the situation, and 
does not demonstrate a consistent 
way of coping with it.
➤	 temperament  The set of innate 
tendencies or dispositions that 
lead a person to behave in cer-
tain ways.

Moral development and Social development  |  301
attachment relationship. A good match or fit between the 
two enhances the probability of a secure attachment.
The type of attachment that is formed is important 
to later development. Secure attachments in infancy 
have been linked to higher levels of cognitive function-
ing and social competence in childhood (Jacobsen & 
Hoffman, 1997; Schneider, Atkinson, & Tardif, 2001). 
This doesn’t mean, however, that the type of attach-
ment cannot change or that an insecure attachment 
cannot be overcome by later experiences. As family 
circumstances change, interactions change and so may 
the type of attachment. For example, divorce might 
put a child into day care, or remarriage might bring 
another caring adult into the family. This brings us to 
a very important question in our present-day society of 
working mothers and single parents: Is day care det-
rimental to the formation of secure attachments and 
therefore to cognitive and social development? The 
general answer is no. Children in day care seem to be 
generally as well off as those who are raised at home 
(Erel, Oberman, & Yirmiya, 2000; NICHD Early Child 
Care Research Network, 1997, 2001). However, the effects of day care for a par-
ticular child are moderated by many variables, such as the age of the child when 
starting day care, the number of hours of day care per week, and the quality of 
the day care.
Parenting styles.  Attachment formation in infants is important in shaping 
later development. But how do parenting styles impact development in chil-
dren and adolescents? Diana Baumrind (1971, 1991) has identified four styles 
of parenting—authoritarian, authoritative, permissive, and uninvolved 
(Baumrind, 1971, 1991). Authoritarian parents are demanding, expect unques-
tioned obedience, are not responsive to their children’s desires, and communi-
cate poorly with their children. Authoritative parents are demanding 
but set rational limits for their children and communicate well with 
their children. Permissive parents make few demands and are overly 
responsive to their children’s desires, letting their children do pretty 
much as they please. Uninvolved parents minimize both the time 
they spend with the children and their emotional involvement with 
them. They provide for their children’s basic needs but little else. 
These parenting styles have been related to differences in cognitive 
and social development. Authoritative parenting seems to have the 
most positive effect on a child’s development (Baumrind, 1996). The 
children of authoritative parents are not only the most independent, 
happy, and self-reliant, but also the most academically successful. 
➤	 authoritarian parenting  A style of  
parenting in which the parents are 
demanding, expect unquestioned obedi-
ence, are not responsive to their chil-
dren’s desires, and communicate poorly 
with their children.
➤	 authoritative parenting  A style of  
parenting in which the parents are 
demanding, but set rational limits for 
their children and communicate well 
with their children.
➤	 permissive parenting  A style of par-
enting in which the parents make few 
demands and are overly responsive to 
their children’s desires, letting their  
children do pretty much as they please.
➤	 uninvolved parenting  A style of parent-
ing in which the parents minimize both 
the time they spend with their children 
and their emotional involvement with 
them and provide for their children’s 
basic needs, but little else.
Diana Baumrind
Courtesy of Diana Baumrind

302  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
These relationships between parenting style and child development were pri-
marily established based on studies of white, middle-class families. Recent 
studies of more diverse populations and cultures suggest that these effects may 
vary across different ethnic and cultural groups. For instance, an authoritarian 
parenting style is associated with more positive outcomes for African-American 
girls and children of Chinese parents. The existence of these cultural differ-
ences illustrates that development is impacted not only by the immediate 
family but also by the broader cultural context in which the child lives 
(Bronfenbrenner, 1993).
So far we have discussed social development for the infant and child in terms 
of attachment and parenting styles, but such development involves others 
as well, such as friends and teachers. Friends become increasingly important 
and assume different functions as children age (Furman & Bierman, 1984; 
Simpkins, Parke, Flyr, & Wild, 2006). Early friendships are primarily due to 
children having similar play interests or living close together. As adolescence 
approaches, however, friendships begin to serve more important emotional 
needs, and friends provide emotional support for one another. Despite the 
increasing importance of friends, adolescents still value their relationships with 
their parents and try to uphold parental standards on major issues such as 
careers and education. In addition to friends, children are also part of a larger 
social peer network in which the social status of members varies (Asher, 1983; 
Jiang & Cillessen, 2005). Popular children tend to be liked by most other chil-
dren and have good social skills. Children who are rejected by their peers, how-
ever, lack these social skills and often tend to be either aggressive or withdrawn. 
Rejected children are at increased risk for both emotional and social difficulties 
(Buhs & Ladd, 2001).
Theory of Mind
One of the most important social developments that occurs in early childhood 
is in the area of social cognition—the development of a theory of mind. Theory 
of mind refers to the understanding of the mental and emotional states of both 
ourselves and others. In order to have a theory of mind, children must realize that 
other people do not necessarily think the same thoughts, have the same beliefs, or 
feel the same emotions that they themselves do. Whenever we interact with oth-
ers, we interpret and explain their behavior in terms of their beliefs, desires, and 
emotions. If a friend is angry, we might explain it by attributing it to his or her 
belief that we did something to upset them. It is difficult to imagine what social 
relationships would be like if we were unable to infer the mental and emotional 
states of others.
While there are many aspects of theory of mind 
development that begin in infancy and early child-
hood, one critical theory of mind accomplishment is 
the understanding of false beliefs (recognizing that 
➤	 theory of mind  The understanding of 
the mental and emotional states of both 
ourselves and others.

Moral development and Social development  |  303
others can have beliefs about the world that 
are wrong) that typically develops between 
four and five years of age. To test for this 
understanding, researchers use false-belief 
problems in which another person believes 
something to be true that the child knows 
is false. The question is whether the child 
thinks that the other person will act in 
accord with his false belief or with the child’s 
correct understanding of the situation. 
These problems reveal whether the child 
has the understanding that different people 
can have different beliefs about the same 
situation. For example, in an unexpected 
location task designed to assess false-belief 
understanding, a child sees a ball being hid-
den in a box by Big Bird and then Big Bird 
leaves the room to play outside. Next, the 
child observes Cookie Monster move the ball 
to a toy chest. The child is then asked where 
Big Bird will think the ball is when he comes 
back in from playing. A five–year-old can 
accurately predict that Big Bird will think it is in the original box even though 
the child knows it is in the toy chest. That is, the child understands that dif-
ferent people can have different beliefs about the same situation. A three-year 
old typically does not understand this and would incorrectly predict that Big 
Bird would think it is in the toy chest, because younger children believe that 
everyone thinks like they do. Such findings are extremely robust and have been 
observed with different problems and in different cultures (Wellman, Cross, & 
Watson, 2001).
The early emergence of theory of mind understanding has led some research-
ers to suggest that there is a biological basis for this knowledge (Baron-Cohen, 
2000). The developmental disorder of autism, in which children are primar-
ily characterized by difficulty in social interactions, supports this biological 
view of theory of mind (Frith, 2003). What might be the biological basis for 
theory of mind development? We have already learned about one possibility. 
Remember, in Chapter 4 we learned that mirror neuron systems may provide 
the neural basis for imitation learning and play a role in empathy and the 
understanding of the intentions and emotions of others. Thus, early mirror 
neuron system deficits might cascade into developmental impairments in imi-
tation learning and subsequently in theory of mind development, leading to 
autism (Iacoboni & Dapretto, 2006; Williams, Whiten, Suddendorf, & Perrett, 
2001). For example, Dapretto et al. (2006) had high-functioning children with 
autism and normal control children undergo fMRI while imitating emotional 
Dennis The Menace © 1990 North American Syndicate

304  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
expressions. For the children with 
autism, they found little activity 
in brain regions associated with 
mirror neurons. For the children 
without autism, however, these 
regions were active, suggesting 
that a dysfunctional mirror-neu-
ron system may underlie the social 
deficits observed in autism. We 
must remember, however, that this 
is presently just a hypothesis and 
that much more extensive research 
must be conducted before any firm 
conclusions can be made.
We have primarily focused on 
social development during child-
hood and adolescence but social 
development continues throughout 
our lives. This is why we now turn 
to Erik Erikson’s stage theory of 
how we develop throughout our life, 
from birth to old age.
Erikson’s Psychosocial Stage Theory  
of Development
Erik Erikson’s psychosocial stage theory covers the whole life span. Like Vygotsky, 
Erikson emphasized the impact of society and culture upon development, but 
Erikson’s theory is different because it considered both personality develop-
ment and social development. We discuss it here rather than in the next chapter, 
with the other personality theories, because it is a developmental theory. In fact, 
Erikson’s inclusion of the three stages of adulthood in his theory has played a 
major role in the increased amount of research on all parts of the life span—not 
just on childhood and adolescence. However, Erikson’s theory has been criti-
cized because of the lack of solid experimental data to support it. Erikson used 
only observational data, which is a criticism that can be leveled against most  
personality theories.
Erikson divided the life span into eight stages of development, summarized in 
Table 7.5 (Erikson, 1950, 1963, 1968, 1980). The first five stages cover infancy, 
childhood, and adolescence, where Freud’s theory of personality development 
(discussed in the next chapter) and Piaget’s theory of cognitive development end. 
Erikson’s last three stages go beyond Freud and Piaget and deal with the three 
stages of adulthood (young, middle, and late).
Erik Erikson
Ted Streshinsky/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images

Moral development and Social development  |  305
Erikson viewed our social-personality development as the product of our social 
interactions and the choices we make in life. At each stage, there is a major psy-
chosocial issue or crisis that has to be resolved. Think of each stage as a “fork in 
the road” choice whose resolution greatly impacts our development. Each stage is 
named after the two sides of the issue relevant in that stage. For example, the first 
stage is trust versus mistrust. In this stage, infants in the first year of life are 
wrestling with the issue of whether they can trust or not trust others to take care 
of them. The resolution of each stage can end up on either side of the issue. The 
infant can leave the first stage either generally trusting or generally mistrusting 
the world. When an issue is successfully resolved, the person increases in social 
competence. Erikson felt that the resolution of each stage greatly impacted our 
personal development. Table 7.5 includes the possible resolutions for each stage.
Table 7.5    Erikson’s Psychosocial Stages
Stage (age range)
Stage Description
Trust vs. mistrust  
(birth to 1 year)
Infants learn that they can or cannot trust others to take 
care of their basic needs.
Autonomy vs. shame 
and doubt  
(1 to 2 years)
Children learn to be self-sufficient in many activi-
ties such as toilet training, walking, and exploring. If 
restrained too much, they learn to doubt their abilities 
and feel shame.
Initiative vs. guilt  
(3 to 5 years)
Children learn to assume more responsibility by taking 
initiative but will feel guilty if they overstep limits set by 
parents.
Industry vs. inferiority 
(5 years to puberty)
Children learn to be competent by mastering new intel-
lectual, social, and physical skills or feel inferior if they 
fail to develop these skills.
Identity vs. role confu-
sion (adolescence)
Adolescents develop a sense of identity by experiment-
ing with different roles. No role experimentation may 
result in role confusion.
Intimacy vs. isolation 
(young adulthood)
Young adults form intimate relationships with others or 
become isolated because of a failure to do so.
Generativity vs. stagna-
tion (middle adulthood)
Middle-aged adults feel they are helping the next gen-
eration through their work and child rearing, or they 
stagnate because they feel that they are not helping.
Integrity vs. despair 
(late adulthood)
Older adults assess their lives and develop a sense of 
integrity if they find their lives have been meaningful, 
and a sense of despair if their lives do not seem  
meaningful.

306  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
Erikson’s best-known concept, identity crisis, is part of his fifth stage. The 
main task of this stage is the development of a sense of identity—to figure out 
who we are, what we value, and where we are headed in life. As adolescents, we 
are confused about our identity. The distress created by the confusion is what 
Erikson meant by identity crisis. For most adolescents, however, it’s more of a 
search or exploration than a crisis. Teenagers experiment with different identities 
in the search to find their own. If you are a traditional-age college student, you 
may have just experienced or are still experiencing this search. Attending college 
and searching for a major and a career path may delay the resolution of this stage. 
Finding our true selves is clearly not easy. We usually explore many alternative 
identities before finding one that is satisfactory.
This identity stage is critical to becoming a productive adult, but development 
doesn’t end with its resolution. Probably the greatest impact of Erikson’s theory 
is that it expanded the study of developmental psychology past adolescence into 
the stages of adulthood. In young adulthood (from the end of adolescence to the 
beginning of middle age), a person establishes independence from her parents 
and begins to function as a mature, productive adult. Having established her own 
identity, a person is ready to establish a shared identity with another person, lead-
ing to an intimate relationship. This sequence in Erikson’s theory (intimacy issues 
following identity issues) turns out to be most applicable to men and career-
oriented women (Dyk & Adams, 1990). Many women may solve these issues in 
reverse order or simultaneously. For example, a woman may marry and have 
children and then confront the identity issues when her children become adults.
The crisis in middle adulthood (from about age 40 to age 60) is concerned with 
generativity versus stagnation. “Generativity” is being concerned with the next gener-
ation and producing something of lasting value to society. Generative activity comes 
in many forms. In addition to making lasting contributions to society, which most 
of us will not do, generative activity includes rearing children, engaging in meaning-
ful work, mentoring younger workers, and contributing to civic organizations.
In Erikson’s final stage, late adulthood, we conduct reviews of our lives, look-
ing back at our lives to assess how well we have lived them. If we are satisfied, we 
gain a sense of integrity and the ability to face death. If not, we despair and look 
back with a sense of sadness and regret, and we fear death.
Section Summary
The most influential theory of moral development is Kohlberg’s stage theory of moral 
reasoning. Using moral dilemmas, Kohlberg proposed three levels of reasoning—
preconventional, conventional, and postconventional. The first level is self-oriented, 
and the emphasis is on avoiding punishment and looking out for one’s own needs. 
At the conventional level, reasoning is guided by social approval and being a duti-
ful citizen. At the highest postconventional level, morality is based on universal 
ethical principles and the realization that society’s laws are only a social contract, 
which can be broken if they violate these more global principles. Research indicates 
that proceeding through the stages is related to age and cognitive development,  

Moral development and Social development  |  307
but that most people do not reach the postconventional stage of reasoning. The 
theory is criticized for being based on moral reasoning and not moral behavior 
(since these may be very different); for being biased against women, who may focus 
more on a morality of care than a morality of justice; and for being biased toward 
Western moral values.
Social development begins with attachment, the strong emotional bond formed 
between an infant and his mother or primary caregiver. Harry Harlow’s studies 
with infant monkeys and surrogate mothers found that contact comfort, and not 
reinforcement from nourishment, is the crucial element in attachment formation. 
Using Mary Ainsworth’s strange situation procedure, researchers have identified 
four types of attachment—secure, insecure-avoidant, insecure-ambivalent, and 
insecure-disorganized. The sensitivity of the caregiver to the infant and how well an 
infant’s temperament matches the child-rearing expectations and personality of the 
caregiver are important to attachment formation. The majority of infants worldwide 
form secure attachments, and this type of attachment has been linked to higher 
levels of social competence and cognitive functioning in childhood. With respect 
to parenting styles, authoritative parenting—in which the parents are demanding 
but rational in setting limits for their children and communicate well with their 
children—seems to have the most positive effect on social and cognitive develop-
ment. Recent research, however, indicates that parenting style effects may vary 
across ethnic and cultural groups. Friends are also important to social development, 
especially during adolescence when friendships serve important emotional needs.
One of the most important social developments that occurs in early childhood 
is the development of a theory of mind, the understanding of the mental and emo-
tional states of both ourselves and others. One critical accomplishment in theory of 
mind development is the understanding of false beliefs around four to five years of 
age. To test for this understanding, researchers use false-belief problems in which 
another person believes something to be true that the child knows is false. If the 
child has the understanding of false beliefs, he will predict that the other person 
will act in accord with his false belief and not the child’s correct understanding of 
the situation. Children without an understanding of false beliefs would make just 
the opposite prediction. The early emergence of theory of mind development has 
led some researchers to suggest that there is a biological basis for it. Mirror neuron 
systems are a possibility for this basis because they seem to provide the neural 
basis for imitation learning and play a role in empathy and the understanding of the 
intentions and emotions of others. Thus, early mirror neuron system deficits might 
lead to developmental impairments in imitation learning and subsequently theory 
of mind development, leading to social disorders such as autism.
With respect to social development across the life span, Erik Erikson developed 
an eight-stage theory of social and personality development. In each stage, there 
is a major psychosocial issue with two sides that has to be resolved. If the stage is 
resolved successfully, the person leaves the stage on the positive side of the stage 
issue. For example, the infant in the first year of life is dealing with the issue of trust 
versus mistrust. If resolved successfully, the infant will leave this stage trusting the 
world. Erikson stressed the fifth stage, in which a sense of identity must be devel-
oped during adolescence. This is the stage during which the identity crisis occurs. 
Erikson’s theory is unusual in that it includes the three stages of adulthood. This 
inclusion played a major role in leading developmental psychologists to expand 
their focus to development across the entire life span.

308  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
ConceptCheck | 3
➤	 Describe how Kohlberg would classify the following response explaining 
why heinz should not steal the drug. “You shouldn’t steal the drug because 
you’ll be caught and sent to jail if you do. If you do get away with it, your 
conscience would bother you thinking how the police would catch up with 
you any minute.”
➤	 explain why an infant’s temperament is important to the process of attach-
ment formation.
➤	 explain the differences between authoritarian and authoritative parenting 
styles.
➤	 In the false-belief problem described in the text involving Big Bird and 
Cookie Monster, how will a child who does not have an understanding 
of false beliefs answer, and why will he answer in this way? how will he 
answer if he has an understanding of false beliefs, and why will he answer in 
this way?
➤	 explain what erikson meant by psychosocial issue or crisis.

Study Guide
309
Chapter Key Terms
You should know the definitions of the following key terms from the chapter. they 
are listed in the order in which they appear in the chapter. For those you do not know, 
return to the relevant section of the chapter to learn them. When you think that you 
know all of the terms, complete the matching exercise based on these key terms.
developmental psychology
zygote
gene
chromosomes
identical (monozygotic) twins
fraternal (dizygotic) twins
teratogens
fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS)
sucking reflex
rooting reflex
habituation
phonemes
baby talk (parentese)
babbling
holophrase
overextension
underextension
telegraphic speech
assimilation
accommodation
sensorimotor stage
object permanence
preoperational stage
egocentrism
conservation
reversibility
centration
concrete operational stage
formal operational stage
information-processing 
approach to cognitive 
development
zone of proximal 
development
scaffolding
cross-sectional study
longitudinal study
cohort effects
preconventional level of 
moral reasoning
conventional level of moral 
reasoning
postconventional level of 
moral reasoning
attachment
secure attachment
insecure-avoidant attachment
insecure-ambivalent 
attachment
insecure-disorganized 
(disoriented) attachment
temperament
authoritarian parenting
authoritative parenting
permissive parenting
uninvolved parenting
theory of mind
Key Terms Exercise
Identify the correct term for each of the 
following definitions. the answers to this 
exercise follow the answers to the Concept 
Checks at the end of the chapter.
	  1.	 The knowledge that an object exists  
independent of perceptual contact with it.
	 	
 
	  2.	 An innate human reflex that leads infants 
to turn their mouth toward anything 
that touches their cheeks and search for 
something to suck on.
	 	
 
	  3.	 The fertilized egg that is formed from 
the union of the sperm and egg cells in 
human reproduction.
	 	
 
	  4.	 Piaget’s term for the modification of pres-
ent schemas to fit with new experiences.
	 	
 
	  5.	 A style of parenting in which the parents 
are demanding, but set rational limits for 
their children and communicate well with 
their children.
	 	
 

310  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
	  6.	 The type of attachment indicated by the 
infant exploring freely in the presence of 
the mother in the Ainsworth strange  
situation procedure, but displaying 
distress when the mother leaves, and 
responding enthusiastically when  
she returns.
	 	
 
	  7.	 The different format of speech that  
adults use when talking with babies  
that involves the use of shorter  
sentences with a higher, more melodi-
ous pitch.
	 	
 
	  8.	 Agents such as drugs, viruses, diseases, 
and physical conditions that impair 
prenatal development and lead to birth 
defects and sometimes death.
	 	
 
	  9.	 A study in which the performance of the 
same group of participants is examined 
at different ages.
	 	
 
10.	 According to Vygotsky, the difference 
between what a child can actually do and 
what the child could do with the help of 
others.
	 	
 
11.	 The smallest distinctive speech sounds in 
a language.
	 	
 
12.	 Using two-word sentences with mainly 
nouns and verbs.
	 	
 
13.	 The knowledge that the quantitative prop-
erties of objects (such as mass and num-
ber) remain the same despite changes in 
appearance.
	 	
 
14.	 A style of teaching in which the teacher 
adjusts the level of help in relation to the 
child’s level of performance while orienting  
the child toward the upper level of his or 
her zone of proximal development.
	 	
 
15.	 The set of innate tendencies or disposi-
tions that lead a person to behave in  
certain ways.
	 	
 
Practice Test Questions
the following are practice multiple-choice 
test questions on some of the chapter 
content. the answers are given after the 
Key terms exercise answers at the end of 
the chapter. If you guessed or incorrectly 
answered a question, restudy the relevant 
section of the chapter.
	  1.	 In human conception, another name for 
the fertilized egg is  
.
a.	 gene
b.	zygote
c.	 chromosome
d.	teratogen
	  2.	 At about six or seven months of age, an 
infant starts rhythmically repeating vari-
ous syllables. This is called  
.
a.	 baby talk
b.	holophrase
c.	 telegraphic speech
d.	babbling
	  3.	 According to Piaget’s theory of cognitive 
development, children are in the  
 
stage if they have symbolic ability but 
lack conservation.
	a.	 sensorimotor
	b.	preoperational
	c.	 concrete operational
	d.	formal operational
	  4.	 According to Piaget,  
 is the inter-
pretation of new experiences in terms of 
present schemas, and 
 
 is the modifi-
cation of present schemas to fit with new 
experiences.
a.	 assimilation; accommodation
b.	accommodation; assimilation

Study Guide  |  311
c.	 reversibility; centration
d.	centration; reversibility
	  5.	 Vygotsky’s term for the difference 
between what a child can actually do and 
what the child can do with the help of 
others is  
.
a.	 zone of proximal development
b.	erogenous zone
c.	 scaffolding
d.	cohort effect
	  6.	 In a ______ study, people of different ages 
are studied at one point in time and com-
pared to one another.
a.	 cross-sectional
b.	longitudinal
c.	 habituation
d.	scaffolding
	  7.	 According to Kohlberg, a person who 
complies with rules and laws to avoid 
punishment is in the ______ level of moral 
development.
a.	 preconventional
b.	conventional
c.	 postconventional
d.	authoritarian
	  8.	 According to Ainsworth, a child 
who shows little distress when the mother 
leaves in the strange situation procedure 
and neglects her when she returns has 
developed a(n) ______ attachment.
a.	 secure
b.	insecure-disorganized
c.	 insecure-ambivalent
d.	insecure-avoidant
	  9.	 Which of the following parenting styles is 
most positively related to academic suc-
cess, happiness, independence, and self-
confidence?
a.	 authoritative
b.	authoritarian
c.	 permissive
d.	indifferent
10.	 According to Erikson’s psychosocial 
theory, ______ is the issue that a person 
faces during adolescence.
a.	 initiative versus guilt
b.	industry versus inferiority
c.	 identity versus role confusion
d.	intimacy versus isolation
11.	 During the ______ stage of prenatal devel-
opment (the final stage starting about 
two months after conception), the body 
structures and organs complete their 
growth.
a.	 embryonic
b.	fetal
c.	 germinal
d.	zygote
12.	 A decrease in the physiological respond-
ing to a stimulus once it becomes familiar 
is called ______.
a.	 assimilation
b.	centration
c.	 habituation
d.	conservation
13.	 Johnny, who is only four years old, 
stands in front of you blocking your view 
of the television screen, and he does not 
realize that he is doing so. He thinks that 
his view is the same as yours. Johnny is 
displaying ______ and is in Piaget’s ______ 
stage of cognitive development.
a.	 egocentrism; concrete
b.	egocentrism; preoperational
c.	 centration; concrete
d.	centration; preoperational
14.	 Michelle, who is 18 months old, has a 
pet dog named Sam. After she learns  
the name of her dog, she calls all of the 
dogs she sees Sam. Michelle is demon-
strating ______.
a.	 babbling
b.	holophrase
c.	 underextension
d.	overextension

312  |  Chapter 7  |  dEvELOPMENTAL PSyChOLOGy
15.	 Studies of intelligence in adulthood 
reveal that fluid intelligence abilities 
______ with age, and crystallized intelli-
gence abilities ______ with age.
a.	 increase; increase
b.	increase; decrease
c.	 decrease; increase
d.	decrease; decrease
Chapter Concept Check Answers
Concept Check | 1
•	 Teratogens are agents such as drugs, viruses, 
and diseases and conditions such as malnu-
trition that impair prenatal development and 
lead to birth defects or even death. Thus, they 
are not due to heredity (nature). They are 
prenatal environmental factors, and therefore 
their effects are due to nurture.
•	 Habituation, a decrease in physiological 
responding to a stimulus once it becomes 
familiar, is used to determine what stimuli 
an infant can perceptually discriminate. The 
inference is that if an infant looks longer at 
a new stimulus than an old one, then the 
infant must be able to perceive the differ-
ence. In addition to looking, researchers 
use other measures such as changes in 
the rates of sucking on a pacifier and the 
infant’s heart rate.
Concept Check | 2
•	 Overextension and underextension in lan-
guage development involve using a word 
too broadly or too narrowly, respectively. 
Through experience we learn to extend a 
word’s meaning correctly. Overextension 
can be viewed as overassimilation—  
incorrectly attempting to assimilate the 
new object into the existing schema for 
the word when accommodation is neces-
sary. Underextension can be viewed as 
underassimilation—failing to assimilate the 
new object into the existing schema for the 
word. In overextension, the child assimilates 
when he needs to accommodate, and in  
underextension, the child does not assimilate 
when he needs to assimilate.
•	 A child who thought that a pizza cut into 
eight slices was more than the same pizza 
cut into six slices would be in the preop-
erational stage, because she is not demon-
strating knowledge of conservation. She is 
centering her attention on the number of 
slices and not the size of the slices.
•	 Together these two concepts, zone of proxi-
mal development and scaffolding, comprise 
a teaching method. First, the zone of proxi-
mal development (the difference between 
what a child can actually do and what the 
child could do with help) is determined. 
Then scaffolding (adjusting the level of 
help in relation to the child’s level of per-
formance) is used to structure and guide 
the learning to the upper level of the child’s 
zone of proximal development.
•	 In a cross-sectional study, groups of partici-
pants of different ages are studied at one 
point in time. In a longitudinal study, one 
group of participants is studied at many 
different points in time as the group ages. 
The cross-sectional method is less time-
consuming and expensive but subject to 
cohort effects created by factors unique to 
each generation in the study. Because the 
same participants are tested at different 
ages, the longitudinal method is not subject 
to such effects; but due to participant attri-
tion, sample-group changes over time may 
impact the results.
Concept Check | 3
•	 The response indicates that Heinz should 
not steal the drug because he would be 
caught and sent to jail—punished. Even if 
he weren’t caught, his conscience would 
punish him. Thus, Kohlberg would classify 
this explanation for not stealing the drug 
as reflective of Stage 1 (punishment  
orientation) in which people comply with 
rules in order to avoid punishment.
•	 An infant’s temperament is the set of innate 
dispositions that lead him to behave in 
a certain way. It determines the infant’s 
responsiveness in interactions with caregiv-
ers, how happy he is, how much he cries, 

Study Guide  |  313
and so on. The temperaments of infants 
vary greatly. Those that fit the child-rearing 
expectations and personality of the caregiv-
ers likely facilitate attachment formation. 
Difficult infants probably do not.
•	 Authoritarian parents are demanding and 
expect unquestioned obedience, are not 
responsive to their children’s desires, 
and do not communicate well with their 
children. Authoritative parents, however, 
are demanding but reasonably so. Rather 
than demanding blind obedience, they 
explain the reasoning behind rules. Unlike 
authoritarian parents, they are both 
responsive to and communicate well with 
their children.
•	 A child without understanding of false 
beliefs would predict that Big Bird will look 
for the ball in the toy chest where Cookie 
Monster has rehidden it, because the child 
does not understand that others can have 
beliefs that disagree with his. If the child 
has an understanding of false beliefs, he 
would predict that Big Bird will look in 
the box where he had earlier put the ball 
because he realizes that others can have 
beliefs that disagree with his.
•	 Erikson thought that at each stage there is 
a major psychosocial issue or crisis (e.g., 
identity versus role confusion) that has to 
be resolved and whose resolution greatly 
impacts one’s development. For each crisis, 
there is a positive adaptive resolution and a 
negative maladaptive resolution. When an 
issue is positively resolved, social compe-
tence increases and one is more adequately 
prepared for the next issue.
Answers to Key Terms Exercise
	  1.	 object permanence
	  2.	 rooting reflex
	  3.	 zygote
	  4.	 accommodation
	  5.	 authoritative parenting
	  6.	 secure attachment
	  7.	 baby talk (parentese)
	  8.	 teratogens
	  9.	 longitudinal study
10.	 zone of proximal development
11.	 phonemes
12.	 telegraphic speech
13.	 conservation
14.	 scaffolding
15.	 temperament
Answers to Practice Test Questions
	  1.	 b; zygote
	  2.	 d; babbling
	  3.	 b; preoperational
	  4.	 a; assimilation; accommodation
	  5.	 a; zone of proximal development
	  6.	 a; cross-sectional
	  7.	 a; preconventional
	  8.	 d; insecure-avoidant
	  9.	 a; authoritative
10.	 c; identity versus role confusion
11.	 b; fetal
12.	 c; habituation
13.	 b; egocentrism; preoperational
14.	 d; overextension
15.	 c; decrease; increase

Personality Theories 
and Assessment
 THE PSYCHOANALYTIC 
APPROACH TO PERSONALITY 
freudian Classical 
Psychoanalytic Theory of 
Personality
Neo-freudian Theories of 
Personality
 THE HUMANISTIC 
APPROACH AND THE SOCIAL-
COGNITIVE APPROACH TO 
PERSONALITY 
The humanistic Approach to 
Personality
The Social-Cognitive Approach 
to Personality
8
 TRAIT THEORIES OF 
PERSONALITY AND 
PERSONALITY ASSESSMENT
Trait Theories of Personality 
Personality Assessment

315
a
s with intelligence, psychologists cannot agree upon a definition of per-
sonality, a word that we all use and whose meaning we think we know. 
In its everyday usage, personality is an individual’s characteristic ways 
of acting and thinking. If I asked you to describe the personality of your best friend 
or your mother, you probably would respond with a set of adjectives that capture 
the defining characteristics (prominent qualities) of that person’s behavior, such 
as caring, independent, and honest. You would also prob-
ably assume that these behavioral characteristics originate 
from within the person, that they are internally based. For 
our purposes, this is a satisfactory definition of personality—
a person’s internally based characteristic ways of acting 
and thinking.
Psychologists call such internally based characteristics “personality traits.” 
Each trait corresponds to a continuum on which one end is the behavioral extreme 
for that characteristic and the other end is its opposite. For example, the extremes 
for caring would be “very caring” and “very uncaring.” 
These trait dimensions are the building blocks of per-
sonality. Individuals’ personalities correspond to their 
patterns of traits, leading to personality differences 
between people. But what causes these differences? 
What makes us the way that we are?
Throughout history, all sorts of theories of personal-
ity differences have been proposed. For example, the 
ancient Greeks thought that one’s mental health (per-
sonality) was a function of the balance of four humors, 
or bodily fluids—black bile, yellow bile, blood, and 
phlegm. According to Franz Gall’s phrenology theory 
in the early nineteenth century, personality was deter-
mined by the contours and bumps of a person’s head. 
In the twentieth century, William Sheldon’s theory pro-
posed that personality is tied to one’s body type. None 
of these theories, however, proved very satisfactory.
Today, there are many theoretical approaches to the 
study of personality, but we will limit our discussion 
to the four major types of theories—psychoanalytic, 
humanistic, social-cognitive, and trait. These theories 
vary greatly in how they explain personality differ-
ences and in what aspects of personality they empha-
size and study. Psychoanalytic theories emphasize 
the interaction of unconscious forces and childhood 
experiences in determining personality development. 
Humanistic theories emphasize the personal growth 
motive. Social-cognitive theories emphasize the impor-
tance of thought processes and interactions with 
others. Trait theories emphasize the role of basic per-
sonality dimensions. Because our descriptions of these 
theories will focus on what each one emphasizes, there 
will not be as much continuity as you might like across 
➤ personality  A person’s internally 
based characteristic ways of 
acting and thinking.
In the early nineteenth century, Franz Gall 
developed the phrenology theory of person-
ality, which assumed that a person’s person-
ality could be determined by measuring the 
bumps on his skull. Areas that he believed 
were associated with particular personality 
traits are indicated in this phrenology chart. 
Although Gall’s idea that brain functions, 
such as language, tend to be localized is 
true (as we learned in Chapter 2), the size of 
the bumps on a person’s head has nothing 
to do with their personality.
Bettmann/Corbis

316  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
these discussions. Unfortunately, this is unavoidable given the diverse nature 
of these approaches.
Three of these four theoretical approaches also focus on problems in personality 
development; they have thus led to the development of therapies (based on the 
theories) to treat such problems. The prime example is psychoanalysis, developed 
by Freud; the humanistic approach and the social-cognitive approach have also led 
to well-known styles of therapy. We will discuss all of these therapies in Chapter 10, 
on abnormal psychology.
The trait approach is not a therapeutic approach; it is more of a descriptive 
approach to personality. Its primary aim is to identify the set of traits—behavioral 
dimensions—necessary to describe human personality. Instead of leading to 
styles of therapy, trait theories often lead to personality tests designed to measure 
their theorized dimensions of personality. This is why the trait approach is paired 
with personality assessment in the final section of this chapter. We will treat the 
other three theoretical approaches in the order that they appeared historically—
psychoanalytic followed by humanistic and social-cognitive. The humanistic 
approach and the social-cognitive approach were both reactions to the earlier 
psychoanalytic and behavioral approaches; therefore, we have paired them together 
in the second section. We begin with Freud’s psychoanalytic theory of personality, 
which influenced not only psychological theorizing about personality but also 
twentieth-century culture.
The Psychoanalytic Approach to Personality
Freud developed his landmark psychoanalytic theory of personality starting in 
the late nineteenth century and continuing until his death in 1939. His first 
solo authored book, The Interpretation of Dreams, came out in 1900 and was fol-
lowed by more than 20 other volumes. Freud’s psychoanalytic theory has been so 
influential that many of its important concepts—id, ego, defense mechanisms, 
Oedipus conflict, Freudian slip, and so on—have become part of our culture. 
Freud’s theory is usually referred to as classical psychoanalytic theory. This 
distinguishes it from both other psychoanalytic theories developed by Freud’s 
disciples and from contemporary psychodynamic theories (personality theories 
with a psychoanalytic base). The theories of Freud’s disciples are usually called 
neo-Freudian theories (“neo” is Greek for new). The neo-Freudian theories 
shared many assumptions with classical Freudian theory, but differed in one 
or more important ways. Modern psychodynamic theories have veered even 
further away from Freud’s original work. They still emphasize the importance 
of childhood experiences, unconscious thought processes, and addressing inner 
conflicts, but they don’t use much of Freud’s terminology nor do they focus 
on sex as the origin of personality. In this chapter, we will first discuss Freud’s 
classical psychoanalytic theory and then describe some prominent neo-Freudian 
theories of personality.

The Psychoanalytic Approach to Personality  |  317
Freudian Classical Psychoanalytic Theory 
of Personality
Freud received a medical degree from the University of Vienna and 
established a practice as a clinical neurologist treating patients with 
emotional disorders. Through his work with these patients, Freud 
became convinced that sex was a primary cause of emotional prob-
lems (Freud, 1905/1953b). Sex, including infantile sexuality, became 
a critical component of his personality theory (Freud 1900/1953a, 
1901/1960, 1916 & 1917/1963, 1933/1964). To help you understand 
Freud’s theory, we will consider its three main elements: (1) different 
levels of awareness, with an emphasis on the role of the unconscious; 
(2) the dynamic interplay between the three parts of the personality—
id, ego, and superego; and (3) the psychosexual stage theory of per-
sonality development.
Freud’s three levels of awareness.  According to Freud, the mind has 
three levels of awareness—the conscious, the preconscious, and the uncon-
scious. This three-part division of awareness is Freud’s famous iceberg model 
of the mind (Figure 8.1). The iceberg’s visible tip above the surface is the 
Conscious mind
(present awareness)
Ego
(executive
mediator)
Superego
(internalized
ideals)
Id
(unconscious psychic
energy)
Preconscious mind
(outside awareness
but accessible)
Unconscious mind
(not accessible)
m Figure 8.1 | Freud’s Iceberg Model of the Mind | In the iceberg model of the mind, 
the small part above water is our conscious mind; the part just below the surface is the 
preconscious; and the major portion, hidden below water, is the unconscious. A person has 
access only to the conscious and preconscious levels of awareness. The conscious is what 
the person is presently thinking about, and the preconscious is information that the person 
could bring into conscious awareness.
Sigmund Freud
Keystone/The Image Works

318  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
conscious mind, what you are presently aware of. In mem-
ory terms, this is your short-term memory. It is what you 
are thinking about right now. The part of the iceberg just 
beneath the surface is the preconscious mind, what is 
stored in your memory that you are not presently aware of 
but can gain access to. In memory terms, this is your long-
term memory. For example, you are not presently thinking 
about your birthday, but if I asked you what your birthday 
was, you could bring that information from the precon-
scious to the conscious level of awareness.
It is the third level of awareness, the unconscious, that 
Freud emphasized in his personality theory. In Freud’s ice-
berg model, the large base of the iceberg that is hidden deep 
beneath the surface is the unconscious mind, the part of 
our mind that we cannot freely access. Freud believed this 
area contains the primary motivations for all of our actions 
and feelings, including our biological instinctual drives (such 
as for food and sex) and our repressed unacceptable thoughts, memories, and 
feelings, especially unresolved conflicts from our early childhood experiences. To 
better understand the role of these motivations, we need to become familiar with 
Freud’s theory of the personality structure and his psychosexual stage theory of 
personality development.
Freud’s three-part personality structure.  Freud divided the personality 
structure into three parts—id, ego, and superego. These are mental processes or 
systems and not actual physical structures. Freud believed that personality is the 
product of the dynamic interaction of these three systems. The id is the original 
personality, the only part present at birth and the part out of which the other two 
parts of our personality emerge. As you can see in Figure 8.1 (page 317), the id 
resides entirely in the unconscious part of the mind. The id includes biological 
instinctual drives, the primitive parts of personality located in the unconscious. 
Freud grouped these instinctual drives into life instincts (survival, reproduction, 
and pleasure drives such as for food, water, and sex) and death instincts (destruc-
tive and aggressive drives that are detrimental to survival). Freud downplayed the 
death instincts in his theory and emphasized the life instincts, especially sex. The 
id contains psychic energy, which attempts to satisfy these instinctual drives 
according to the pleasure principle—immediate gratification for these drives 
without concern for the consequences. Thus, the id is like a spoiled child, totally 
self-centered and focused on satisfying these drives. For example, if you’re hungry, 
the id, using the pleasure principle, would lead you to take any food that is avail-
able without concern for whom it belongs to.
Obviously the id cannot operate totally unchecked. We cannot go around 
taking anything we want to satisfy the id’s drives. Our behavior is constrained 
by social norms and laws. We have to buy food from markets, stores, and 
restaurants. Our personality develops as we find ways to meet our needs within 
➤ conscious mind  Freud’s term for 
what we are presently aware of.
➤ preconscious mind  Freud’s term 
for what is stored in one’s memory 
that one is not presently aware of 
but can access.
➤ unconscious mind  Freud’s term 
for the part of our mind that we 
cannot become aware of.
➤ id  The part of the personality that 
a person is born with, where the 
biological instinctual drives reside, 
and that is located totally in the 
unconscious mind.
➤ pleasure principle  The principle 
of seeking immediate gratification 
for instinctual drives without con-
cern for the consequences.

The Psychoanalytic Approach to Personality  |  319
these social constraints. The second part of the personality 
structure, the ego, starts developing during the first year or 
so of life in order to find realistic outlets for the id’s needs. 
Because the ego emerges out of the id, it derives its psychic 
energy from the id. The ego has the task of protecting the 
personality while ensuring that the id’s drives are satisfied.
The ego, then, is the pragmatic part of the personality; it 
weighs the risks of an action before acting. The ego uses the 
reality principle—finding gratification for instinctual drives 
within the constraints of reality (the norms and laws  of 
society). In order to do this, the ego spans all three levels of 
awareness (see Figure 8.1 on page 317). Because of its ties to 
the id, part of the ego must be located in the unconscious; 
and because of its ties to reality (the external world), part of 
it must be in the conscious and preconscious. The ego uses 
memory and conscious thought processes, such as reasoning, 
to carry out its job.
The ego functions as the manager or executive of the personality. It must 
mediate not only between the instinctual drives of the id and reality but also 
between these drives and the third part of the personality structure, the superego, 
which represents the conscience and idealized standards of behavior in a particular 
culture. The superego develops during childhood and, like the ego, develops from 
id energy and spans all levels of awareness. It tells the ego how one ought to act. 
Thus, the superego might be said to act in accordance with a morality principle. 
For example, if the id hunger drive demanded satisfaction, and the ego had found 
a way to steal some food without being caught, the superego would threaten to 
overwhelm the individual with guilt and shame for such an act. Inevitably, the 
demands of the superego and the id will come into conflict, and the ego will have 
to resolve this turmoil within the constraints of reality. This is not an easy task.
Here is why the ego’s job is so difficult. Imagine that your parents are making 
conflicting demands on you. For example, when you were deciding which college 
to attend, let’s say your father wanted you to attend a state university and your 
mother wanted you to attend her private college alma mater. Imagine also 
that your boyfriend or girlfriend is adding a third level of conflicting demands 
(wanting to go to school together at the local community college). You want to 
satisfy all three, but because the demands are conflicting, it is not possible. You 
get anxious, because there is no good resolution to the conflict. This is what 
often happens to the ego in its role as mediator between its three masters (id, 
superego, and reality). To prevent being overcome with anxiety, the ego uses what 
Freud called defense mechanisms, processes that distort reality and protect us 
from anxiety (Freud, 1936). The ego has many different defense mechanisms 
available for such self-deception, including repression, denial, displacement, and 
rationalization. Table 8.1 (page 320) provides descriptions and examples of several  
defense mechanisms.
➤ ego  The part of the personality 
that starts developing in the first 
year or so of life in order to find 
realistic outlets for the id’s instinc-
tual drives.
➤ reality principle  The principle of 
finding gratification for instinctual 
drives within the constraints of 
reality (norms of society).
➤ superego  The part of the person-
ality that represents one’s con-
science and idealized standards 
of behavior.
➤ defense mechanism  A process 
used by the ego to distort reality 
and protect a person from anxiety.

320  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
Freud thought of repression as the primary defense mechanism. He believed 
that repression, along with other defense mechanisms, helps us deal with 
anxiety. If we are unaware of unacceptable feelings, memories, and thoughts 
(they have been put in our unconscious), then we cannot be anxious about 
them. But it is important to remember that Freud proposed that repression 
occurs automatically—without conscious awareness. Once repressed, we have no 
conscious memory that the thought, event, or impulse ever existed. Although 
defense mechanisms may indeed help us with anxiety, we now know that we 
may also become dependent upon them. They may prevent us from facing our 
problems and dealing with them. The best defense mechanism may be using no 
defense mechanisms. Facing up to problems may allow us to see that reality is 
not as bad as we thought, and that consciously working to change reality is more 
beneficial than distorting it.
Freud believed that unhealthy personalities develop not only when we 
become too dependent upon defense mechanisms, but also when the id or 
superego is unusually strong or the ego is unusually weak. In such cases, the ego 
cannot control the other two processes. For example, a person with a weak ego 
Table 8.1    Some of Freud’s Defense Mechanisms
Defense 
Mechanism
Description
Example
Repression
Unknowingly placing an unpleasant 
memory or thought in the unconscious
Not remembering a traumatic incident 
in which you witnessed a crime
Regression
Reverting back to immature behavior 
from an earlier stage of development
Throwing temper tantrums as an adult 
when you don’t get your way
Denial
Refusing to acknowledge anxiety-
provoking realities
Refusing to accept evidence that your 
spouse is having an affair
Displacement
Redirecting unacceptable feelings from 
the original source to a safer, substitute 
target
Taking your anger toward your boss 
out on your spouse or children by 
yelling at them and not your boss
Sublimation
Replacing socially unacceptable 
impulses with socially acceptable 
behavior
Channeling aggressive drives into 
playing football or inappropriate 
sexual desires into art
Reaction 
formation
Acting in exactly the opposite way to 
one’s unacceptable impulses
Being overprotective of and lavishing 
attention on an unwanted child
Projection
Attributing one’s own unacceptable 
feelings and thoughts to others and not 
yourself
Accusing your boyfriend of cheating 
on you because you have felt like 
cheating on him
Rationalization
Creating false excuses for one’s unac-
ceptable feelings, thoughts, or behavior
Justifying cheating on an exam by 
saying that everyone else cheats

The Psychoanalytic Approach to Personality  |  321
would not be able to hold the id drives 
in check, possibly leading to a self-
centered personality. Or, a person with 
an overly strong superego would be 
too concerned with morality, possibly 
leading to a guilt-ridden personality. A 
healthy personality, according to Freud’s 
personality structure, is one in which 
none of the three personality systems 
(id, ego, and superego) is dominating, 
allowing the three systems to interact in 
a relatively harmonious way.
In addition to imbalances between the 
three personality parts, Freud stressed 
the importance of our early childhood experiences in determining our adult per-
sonality traits. In fact, he thought that our experiences during the first six years or 
so of life were critical in the development of our adult personality. To understand 
exactly how Freud proposed that early childhood experiences impact personality, 
we now turn to a consideration of his psychosexual stage theory.
Freud’s psychosexual stage theory.  Freud did not spend much time observ-
ing children to help him develop his psychosexual stage theory of personality 
development. Freud’s psychosexual stage theory was developed chiefly from his 
own childhood memories and from his years of interactions with his patients and 
their case studies, which included their childhood memories.
Two key concepts in his psychosexual theory are erogenous zone and fixation. 
An erogenous zone is the area of the body where the id’s pleasure-seeking psychic 
energy is focused during a particular stage of psychosexual development. The 
erogenous zone feels good when stimulated in various ways. Thus, the erogenous 
zones are the body areas where instinctual satisfaction can be obtained. Each of 
Freud’s psychosexual stages is named after the erogenous zone involved, and a 
change in location of the erogenous zone designates the beginning of a new stage. 
For example, the first stage is called the oral stage, and the erogenous zone is the 
mouth area, so pleasure is derived from oral activities such as sucking. Freud 
proposed five stages—oral, anal, phallic, latency, and genital. They are outlined in 
Table 8.2 (page 322), with the erogenous zone for each stage 
indicated.
Freud’s concept of fixation is important in understand-
ing how he believed our childhood experiences impact our 
adult personality. A fixation occurs when a portion of the 
id’s pleasure-seeking energy remains in an earlier psycho-
sexual stage because of excessive or insufficient gratification 
of our instinctual needs during that stage of development. A 
person who is overindulged will want to stay and not move 
on, while a person who is frustrated has difficulty moving 
➤ erogenous zone  The area of the 
body where the id’s pleasure-
seeking energies are focused 
during a particular stage of psy-
chosexual development.
➤ fixation  Some of the id’s pleasure-
seeking energies remaining stuck 
in a psychosexual stage due to 
excessive or insufficient gratifica-
tion of instinctual needs.
Robert Mankoff/The New Yorker Collection 
www.cartoonbank.com
“Look, call it denial if you like, but I think what goes on in my 
personal life is none of my own damn business.”

322  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
on because his needs are not met. The stronger the fixation, the more of the id’s 
pleasure-seeking energy remains in that stage. Such fixations continue through-
out the person’s life and impact his behavior and personality traits. For example, 
a person who is fixated in the oral stage because of excessive gratification may 
become overly concerned with oral activities such as smoking, eating, and drink-
ing. Because his oral needs have been overindulged, such a person may continue 
to depend upon others to meet his needs and thus have a dependent personality. 
Such a person is also likely to be gullible or willing to “swallow” anything. We will 
consider some other examples of fixation as we describe the five stages.
In the oral stage (from birth to 18 months), the erogenous zones are the 
mouth, lips, and tongue, and the child derives pleasure from oral activities such 
as sucking, biting, and chewing. As already pointed out, a fixation would lead to 
having a preoccupation with oral behaviors, such as smoking, 
gum chewing, overeating, or even talking too much. Freud 
himself had such a preoccupation with smoking. He smoked 
20 or so cigars a day and had numerous operations for cancer 
in his mouth, which eventually led to his death (Larsen & 
Buss, 2000). Many other personality characteristics can also 
stem from oral fixations. For example, a fixation created by 
too little gratification might lead to an excessively mistrust-
ful person. The deprived infant has presumably learned that 
the world cannot be trusted to provide for basic needs.
In the anal stage (from about 18 months to 3 years), the 
erogenous zone is the anus, and the child derives pleasure 
from stimulation of the anal region through having and 
withholding bowel movements. Toilet training and the issue 
of control are major concerns in this stage. Parents try to get 
Table 8.2    Freud’s Psychosexual Stages of Personality Development
Stage (age range)
Erogenous Zone
Activity Focus
Oral (birth to 1½ years)
Mouth, lips, and tongue
Sucking, biting, and chewing
Anal (1½ to 3 years)
Anus
Bowel retention and elimination
Phallic (3 to 6 years)
Genitals
Genital stimulation, attraction to 
opposite-sex parent and later 
identifying with same-sex parent to 
learn gender role and sense of morality
Latency (6 years to puberty)
No erogenous zone
Cognitive and social development
Genital (puberty through 
adulthood)
Genitals
Development of sexual relation-
ships, moving toward intimate adult 
relationships
➤ oral stage of psychosexual devel-
opment  The first stage in Freud’s 
theory (from birth to 18 months), in 
which the erogenous zones are the 
mouth, lips, and tongue, and the 
child derives pleasure from oral 
activities such as sucking, biting, 
and chewing.
➤ anal stage of psychosexual 
development  The second stage in 
Freud’s theory (from 18 months to 
3 years), in which the erogenous 
zone is the anus, and the child 
derives pleasure from stimulation 
of the anal region through having 
and withholding bowel movements.

The Psychoanalytic Approach to Personality  |  323
the child to have self-control during toilet training. Freud believed that fixations 
during this stage depend upon how toilet training is approached by the parents. 
Such fixations can lead to two famous adult personalities, anal retentive and anal 
expulsive. Both are reactions to harsh toilet training in which the parents admon-
ish and punish the child for failures. If the child reacts to this harsh toilet train-
ing by trying to get even with the parents and withholding bowel movements, an 
anal-retentive personality with the traits of orderliness, neatness, stinginess, and 
obstinacy develops. The anal-expulsive personality develops when children rebel 
against harsh training and have bowel movements whenever and wherever they 
please. Such people tend to be sloppy, disorderly, and possibly even destructive 
and cruel.
In the phallic stage (from age 3 to 6 years), 
the erogenous zone is located at the genitals, 
and the child derives pleasure from genital 
stimulation. According to Freud, there is 
much psychological conflict in this stage, 
including the Oedipus conflict for boys. In 
the Oedipus conflict, the little boy becomes 
sexually attracted to his mother and fears 
the father (his rival) will find out and cas-
trate him. This parallels the Greek tragedy 
Oedipus Rex, in which Oedipus unknowingly 
kills his father, marries his mother, and then 
realizes what he’s done and gouges his eyes 
out as punishment. Freud was much less 
confident about the existence of a compa-
rable Electra conflict for girls, in which a girl 
is supposedly attracted to her father due to 
penis envy.
Freud believed that children, especially boys, resolve con-
flicts in this stage by repressing their desire for the opposite-
sex parent and identifying with the same-sex parent. It is in 
this process of identification that Freud believed children 
adopt the characteristics of the same-sex parent and learn 
their gender roles. For example, a little boy would adopt the 
behaviors and attitudes of his father. According to Freud, 
unsuccessful resolution of this conflict would result in a 
child having a conflicted gender role, sexual relationship 
problems with the opposite sex, and possibly a homosexual 
orientation. It is also during this identification process that 
the superego develops, as a child learns his sense of morality 
by adopting the attitudes and values of his parents.
Freud considered the final two stages of his psychosexual 
theory the least important for personality development. 
➤ phallic stage of psychosexual 
development  The third stage in 
Freud’s theory (from 3 to 6 years), 
in which the erogenous zone is 
located at the genitals, and the 
child derives pleasure from genital 
stimulation.
➤ Oedipus conflict  A phallic stage 
conflict for a boy in which the boy 
becomes sexually attracted to his 
mother and fears his father will 
find out and castrate him.
➤ identification  The process by 
which children adopt the charac-
teristics of the same-sex parent 
and learn their gender role and 
sense of morality.
Lee Lorenz/The New Yorker Collection/www.cartoonbank.com
“During the next stage of my development,  
Dad, I’ll be drawing closer to my mother—I’ll get  
back to you in my teens.”

324  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
He  assumed that how a child progresses through the first three stages pretty 
much determined the child’s adult personality. In the latency stage (from about 
age 6 to puberty), there is no erogenous zone, sexual drives become less active, 
and the focus is on cognitive and social development. A child of this age is most 
interested in school, sports, hobbies, and in developing friendships with other 
children of the same sex. In the genital stage (from puberty through adulthood), 
the erogenous zone is at the genitals again, and Freud believed a person develops 
sexual relationships in a move toward intimate adult relationships.
Evaluation of Freud’s psychoanalytic theory of personality.  Freud’s 
ideas were controversial when he first proposed them and have remained 
controversial over the past century. Let’s consider some of the criticisms of his 
major concepts. First, consider Freud’s “unconscious” level of awareness. Because 
this concept is not accessible to anyone, it is impossible to examine scientifically 
and thus cannot be experimentally tested. We can’t observe and study a factor that 
we are not aware of. This criticism does not deny that unconscious processing 
greatly impacts thinking and behavior. On the contrary, it acknowledges that the 
impact is great. Think back to Chapter 3, on the human senses and perception, to 
Chapter 5, on memory, and to Chapter 6, on thinking. Our conscious level of 
awareness of these important processes is like Freud’s “tip of the iceberg.” We have 
learned, however, that this iceberg is not a storehouse of instinctual drives, 
conflicts, and repressed memories and desires as Freud proposed. It is the location 
of all of our cognitive processes and the knowledge base they use—the center of our 
information processing. Freud was correct in pointing to unconscious processing 
as crucial, but he was incorrect about its role and the nature of its importance.
Freud was also correct in pointing to the importance of early childhood experi-
ence, but he was again incorrect about the nature of its importance. There is little 
evidence that psychosexual stages impact development, but there is evidence that 
many of the concepts we discussed in the last chapter, such as the connection 
between the type of attachment an infant forms and parenting style, are impor-
tant. What about Freud’s main defense mechanism, repression? Contemporary 
memory researchers think that it seldom, if ever, occurs 
(Holmes, 1990; Loftus & Ketcham, 1994; McNally, 2003). 
Remember the discussion of so-called recovered memo-
ries in Chapter 5, on memory? We understand today how 
Freud’s questioning during therapy may have created such 
“repressed” memories in his patients. Do the other defense 
mechanisms fare any better? There is evidence that we do use 
certain defense mechanisms to ward off anxiety, though we 
do not necessarily do so unconsciously.
We must remember that Freud started developing his 
theory over 100 years ago. Our world and the state of psycho-
logical research knowledge were very different then. So, it is 
not surprising that Freud’s theory doesn’t stand up very well 
today. What is surprising is that he could develop a theory 
➤ latency stage of psychosexual 
development  The fourth stage in 
Freud’s theory (from 6 years old 
to puberty), in which there is no 
erogenous zone, sexual feelings 
are repressed, and the focus is on 
cognitive and social development.
➤ genital stage of psychosexual 
development  The fifth stage 
in Freud’s theory (from puberty 
through adulthood), in which the 
erogenous zone is at the genitals, 
and the child develops sexual rela-
tionships, moving toward intimate 
adult relationships.

The Psychoanalytic Approach to Personality  |  325
from such a scant database, a theory that has had such great impact on our think-
ing and culture. In 1999 he was on the cover of a special issue of Time magazine 
commemorating the 100 greatest thinkers and scientists of the twentieth century. 
We can only speculate on what his theory would be like if he had started in 1990 
rather than 1890.
Neo-Freudian Theories of Personality
Even Freud’s own circle of psychoanalysts disagreed with him on some aspects 
of his theory. These disagreements led them to develop psychoanalytic theories 
that accepted most of Freud’s basic ideas, but differed from Freud in one or more 
important ways. They became known as neo-Freudian psychoanalytic theorists. 
In addition to Erik Erikson, whose psychosocial stage theory of development was 
described in the last chapter, the major neo-Freudian theorists were Carl Jung, 
Alfred Adler, and Karen Horney (pronounced HORN-eye). In general, these three 
neo-Freudian theorists, like Erikson, thought that Freud placed too much impor-
tance on psychosexual development and sexual drives and not enough emphasis 
on social and cultural influences on the development of personality. We discuss 
Jung first because, other than Freud, he is the best-known psychoanalytic theorist.
Jung’s collective unconscious.  Carl Jung extended 
Freud’s notion of the unconscious to include not only the per-
sonal unconscious—each individual’s instinctual drives and 
repressed memories and conflicts—but also the collective 
unconscious, the accumulated universal experiences of human-
kind. Each of us inherits this same cumulative storehouse of all 
human experience that is manifested in archetypes—symbolic 
images of all of the important themes in the history of human-
kind (such as God, the mother, and the hero). The archetypes 
in the collective unconscious are why myths and legends in very 
diverse cultures tend to have common themes. In addition to 
these shared universal archetypes, each of us inherits more spe-
cific ones that guide our individual personality development. 
Jung’s theoretical concepts are rather mystical and not really 
scientific. His interest in the mystical side of life greatly influenced his theory, 
and his concepts, such as the collective unconscious and archetypes, are beyond 
empirical verification. These symbolic, mystical aspects of Jung’s theory may be 
why it has been more popular in the fields of religion, anthropology, and litera-
ture than in psychology.
Personality psychologists, however, have pursued some other aspects of Jung’s 
theory. Most prominently, Jung proposed two main personality attitudes— 
extraversion and introversion. People’s attitudes focus them toward the external, 
objective world (extraversion) or toward the inner, subjective world (introver-
sion). Along with these two general outlooks, Jung proposed four functions (or 
cognitive styles)—sensing and intuiting for gathering information and thinking 
Carl Jung
Archives of the History of American Psychology, The Center 
for the History of Psychology, The University of Akron

326  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
and feeling for evaluating information. Across individuals, the 
development of these four functions varies, with one of them being 
dominant. These two attitudes and four functions lead to eight pos-
sible personality types. These eight types were the basis for a personal-
ity test, the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, developed in the 1920s by 
Katherine Briggs and her daughter, Isabel Myers. This test has been 
the primary tool for research on Jung’s personality types, and it is 
still in use today (Myers & McCaulley, 1985). In addition, Jung’s two 
personality attitudes, extraversion and introversion, play a central role 
in contemporary trait theories of personality, which we will discuss in 
the last section of this chapter.
Adler’s striving for superiority.  Another neo-Freudian theorist, 
Alfred Adler, disagreed with Freud’s assumption that the main 
motivation in personality development is the satisfaction of sexual urges. Adler 
thought that the main motivation was what he termed “striving for superiority,” 
the need to overcome the sense of inferiority that we feel as infants, given our 
totally helpless and dependent state. Adler believed that these feelings of inferi-
ority serve as our basic motivation. They lead us to grow and strive toward suc-
cess. A healthy person learns to cope with these feelings, becomes competent, 
and develops a sense of self-esteem. Parental love and support help a child over-
come her initial feelings of inferiority. Adler used the phrase “inferiority com-
plex” to describe the strong feelings felt by those who never overcome the initial 
feeling of inferiority. People with an inferiority complex often have unloving, 
neglectful, or indifferent parents. The complex leads to feelings of worthless-
ness and a mistrust of others. Adler also defined what he termed a “superiority 
complex,” an exaggerated opinion of one’s abilities. This leads to a self-centered, 
vain person.
Horney and the need for security.  Like Adler, Karen Horney focused on 
our early social experiences with our parents, not on instinctual biological drives. 
Unlike Adler, Horney’s focus was on dealing with our need for security rather 
than a sense of inferiority. Remember the importance of a secure attachment for 
infants that we discussed in the last chapter, on human 
development? According to Horney’s theory, a child’s care-
givers must provide a sense of security for a healthy person-
ality to develop. Children whose parents do not lead them 
to feel secure would suffer from what Horney called “basic 
anxiety,” a feeling of helplessness and insecurity in a hostile 
world. This basic anxiety about personal relationships may 
lead to neurotic behavior and a disordered personality 
(Horney, 1937). Horney differentiated three neurotic per-
sonality patterns—moving toward people (a compliant, sub-
missive person), moving against people (an aggressive, 
domineering person), and moving away from people (a 
detached, aloof person). This focus of Horney and other 
Karen Horney
Alfred Adler
Universal History Archive/Getty Images
The Bettmann Archive/Corbis

The Psychoanalytic Approach to Personality  |  327
neo-Freudian theorists on the importance of interpersonal relationships, both in 
childhood and in adulthood, continues in contemporary psychodynamic theory 
(Westen, 1998).
Section Summary
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Freud developed his psycho-
analytic theory of personality. He divided the mind into three levels of awareness—
conscious, preconscious, and unconscious—with the unconscious (the part that 
we cannot become aware of) being the most important in his theory. It is the 
unconscious that contains life and death instinctual drives, the primary motivators 
for all of our actions and feelings. In addition, there are three parts of the person-
ality structure—the id (which contains the instinctual drives and is located totally 
in the unconscious), the ego (the manager of the personality), and the superego 
(our conscience and sense of morality). The ego and the superego span all three 
levels of awareness. The ego attempts to find gratification for the id’s instinctual 
drives within the constraints of the superego and reality (societal laws and norms). 
When the ego cannot achieve this difficult task, we become anxious. To combat 
such anxiety, Freud suggested that we use defense mechanisms, which protect us 
from anxiety by distorting reality. The primary defense mechanism is repression, 
unknowingly placing an unpleasant memory or thought in the unconscious, where 
it cannot bother us.
Freud also emphasized the importance of early childhood experience in his 
theory. He proposed that how successfully a child progresses through the early 
psychosexual stages greatly impacts his personality development. Freud proposed 
five psychosexual stages, with the first three being most important to our personal-
ity development. The stages—in order, with the erogenous zone (pleasure center) 
indicated for that stage—are oral (mouth), anal (anus), phallic (genitals), latency (no 
erogenous zone), and genital (genitals). A fixation, which occurs when some of the 
id’s pleasure-seeking energies remain in a stage because of excessive or insufficient 
gratification, influences a person’s behavior and personality for the rest of his life. 
For example, a person with an oral fixation will seek physical pleasure from oral 
activities and may be overly dependent and gullible. The important Oedipus conflict 
for boys (and Electra conflict for girls) in which the child is attracted to the opposite-
sex parent occurs in the phallic stage of development from about age 3 to age 6. 
Resolution of this conflict leads the child to identify with the same-sex parent and 
learn his or her proper gender role and sense of morality.
Neo-Freudian theorists were psychoanalytic theorists who agreed with much of 
Freud’s theory but disagreed with some of Freud’s key assumptions, which led them 
to develop their own versions of psychoanalytic theory. For example, Carl  Jung 
theorized that, in addition to the personal unconscious, we have a collective uncon-
scious that contains the accumulated experiences of humankind. Alfred Adler pro-
posed that the main motivation was not sexual, but rather a striving for superiority 
in which we must overcome the sense of inferiority that we feel as infants. Failure 
to do so leads to an inferiority complex. Karen Horney focused her attention on our 
need for security as infants, rather than our sense of inferiority. She argued that if 
our caregivers do not help us to gain a feeling of security, we suffer from a sense of 
basic anxiety, which leads to various types of personality problems.

328  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
The Humanistic Approach and the Social-
Cognitive Approach to Personality
Humanistic theories of personality developed during the 1960s as part of the 
general humanistic movement in psychology. The humanistic movement was in 
response to the deterministic psychoanalytic and strict behavioral psychologi-
cal approaches that dominated psychology and the study of personality at that 
time. As we just discussed, the classical psychoanalytic approach assumes that 
personality is a product of how the id’s unconscious instinctual drives find sat-
isfaction, especially during the first three psychosexual stages. The strict behav-
ioral approach assumes that our personality and behavior are merely products 
of our environment, as a result of classical and operant conditioning (discussed 
in Chapter 4). Our personality is determined by our behavior and is conditioned 
by environmental events. According to both approaches, we are not in charge 
of our behavior and personality development. According to the psychoanalytic 
approach, our unconscious instinctual drives are the major motivators of our 
behavior and personality development. According to the behavioral approach, 
the environment motivates and controls our actions. In contrast, the humanistic 
approach emphasizes conscious free will in one’s actions, the uniqueness of the 
individual person, and personal growth. Unlike the psychoanalytic approach’s 
focus on our personality problems, the humanistic approach centers on the posi-
tive motivations for our actions and development, especially personal growth. To 
familiarize you with this approach, we will describe the theories of the two major 
humanistic proponents, Abraham Maslow and Carl Rogers.
At about the same time as the humanists, social-cognitive theorists rebelled 
against the narrowness of the strict behavioral approach to the development of per-
sonality. The behavioral approach limited itself to the factors of classical and oper-
ant conditioning for learning behaviors (personality). Social-cognitive theorists 
agreed that conditioning was important, but that the situation was more complex 
than that. Remember, Albert Bandura’s work on social (observational) learning in 
Chapter 4 demonstrated our ability to learn from observing others without direct 
reinforcement, which meant that social and cognitive factors were involved in 
learning. The social-cognitive approach includes social and cognitive factors along 
with conditioning to explain personality development. Thus, the strict behavioral 
ConceptCheck | 1
➤	 explain, according to Freudian theory, why the ego has such a difficult job.
➤	 explain the difference between Freud’s two defense mechanisms—reaction 
formation and projection.
➤	 explain how fixations in psychosexual development affect adult behavior and 
personality.

The humanistic Approach and the Social-CoGnitive Approach to Personality  |  329
approach to personality is subsumed under the more extensive 
social-cognitive approach. Because of this, the social-cognitive 
approach is sometimes referred to as the social-learning 
approach and the cognitive-behavioral approach. We refer to 
it as the social-cognitive approach here in order to note its 
emphasis on these two types of factors in personality devel-
opment. We will describe some of the theoretical concepts of 
two important social-cognitive theorists, Albert Bandura and 
Julian Rotter, to illustrate why they think social and cognitive 
factors are important in personality development.
The Humanistic Approach to Personality
Abraham Maslow is considered the father of the humanistic 
movement. He studied the lives of very healthy and creative 
people to develop his theory of personality. His main theoreti-
cal emphases were psychological health and reaching one’s full 
potential. In describing how one goes about reaching one’s full 
potential, Maslow proposed a hierarchy of needs that motivate 
our behavior in this quest. Because of the motivating role of 
these various types of needs, Maslow’s personality theory is also 
considered a theory of motivation.
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs.  An overview of Maslow’s 
motivational hierarchy of needs, which is often depicted as a 
pyramid-like structure, is given in Figure 8.2. The hierarchy of 
needs is an arrangement of the innate needs that motivate 
behavior, from the strongest needs at the bottom of the 
Need to live up to one’s
fullest unique potential
Need for self-esteem,
achievement,
competence, and independence
Need to love and be loved, to
belong and be accepted
Need to feel safe, secure, and stable
Need to satisfy hunger and thirst
Self-actualization need
esteem needs
Belongingness and love needs
Safety needs
physiological needs
m Figure 8.2 | Maslow’s 
Hierarchy of Needs | Needs are 
organized hierarchically into levels, 
with more pressing basic needs at the 
bottom of the pyramid. The level at 
which a person is investing most of his 
effort is the most important one at that 
particular point in time.
➤ hierarchy of needs  The motivational 
component in Maslow’s theory of 
personality, in which our innate 
needs that motivate our behavior 
are hierarchically arranged in a 
pyramid shape. From bottom to top, 
the needs are physiological, safety, 
belonging and love, esteem, and 
self-actualization.
Abraham Maslow
Bettman/Corbis

330  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
pyramid to the weakest needs at the top of the pyramid (Maslow, 1968, 1970). 
From bottom to top, the needs are physiological, safety, belonging and love, 
esteem, and self-actualization. For obvious practical reasons, motivation proceeds 
from the bottom of the hierarchy to the top; lower needs are more urgent and 
have to be satisfied before higher needs can even be considered. On average, 
people seem to work their way up the hierarchy, but they also work on several 
levels simultaneously. The level at which the person is investing most of his effort 
is the one most important to a person at a particular point in time.
As you move up in the hierarchy, the needs become more human and less basic. 
The most basic needs are physiological needs (such as for food and water); there-
fore, they form the base of the pyramid structure. At the next level, the needs to 
feel safe, secure, and out of danger are also relevant to our survival, but not quite 
as basic as physiological needs. At the next level in the hierarchy, however, needs 
begin to have social aspects. Love and belongingness needs (needs for affection, 
acceptance, family relationships, and companionship) are met through interac-
tions with other people. Self-esteem needs at the next level in the hierarchy are 
concerned with achievement, mastery, and gaining appreciation from others for 
our achievements, as well as developing a positive self-image.
These first four levels of needs are more deficiency-based needs, stemming 
from deprivation, while self-actualization at the top of the hierarchy is a growth-
based need. Self-actualization is the fullest realization of a person’s potential, 
becoming all that one can be. According to Maslow, the characteristics of self-
actualized people include accepting themselves, others, and the natural world 
for what they are; having a need for privacy and only a few very close, emotional 
relationships; and being autonomous and independent, unquestionably demo-
cratic, and very creative. In addition, self-actualized people have what Maslow 
termed “peak experiences”—experiences of deep insight in which you experience 
whatever you are doing as fully as possible. In peak experiences, you are deeply 
immersed in what you are doing and feel a sense of awe and wonder. Peak experi-
ences might, for example, arise from great music or art, or from intense feelings 
of love.
Maslow based his description of self-actualization on his study of about 
50 people who he deemed “self-actualized.” Some, such as Albert Einstein and 
Eleanor Roosevelt, were living, so he studied them through interviews and per-
sonality tests, but others, such as Thomas Jefferson and Abraham Lincoln, were 
not, so he used biographies and historical records to study them. Maslow was 
rather vague about how he conducted these “studies,” however. Maslow’s theory 
has been criticized for being based on nonempirical, imprecise studies of a small 
number of people that he subjectively selected as self-actualized (Smith, 1978). 
His theory may have been biased toward his own idea of a healthy, self-actualized 
person. Regardless of these criticisms, his theory popularized the humanistic 
movement and led many psychologists to focus on human 
potential and the positive side of humankind. Carl Rogers, 
the other major proponent of the humanistic approach, also 
➤ self-actualization  The fullest real-
ization of a person’s potential.

The humanistic Approach and the Social-CoGnitive Approach to Personality  |  331
focused on self-actualization. Unlike Maslow, however, Rogers 
based his theory upon his clinical work.
Rogers’s self theory.  Freud’s psychoanalytic theory of per-
sonality led to psychoanalysis, a type of psychotherapy used to 
help those suffering personality problems. Carl Rogers’s self 
theory of personality led to another influential style of psycho-
therapy, client-centered (or person-centered) therapy (Rogers, 
1951, 1961), which we will discuss in Chapter 10, on abnormal 
psychology. It is interesting to note that Rogers was a clinician 
in an academic setting during most of the time he was develop-
ing his theory (Schultz, 2001). His clients were not like those of 
psychotherapists in the private sector; he mainly dealt with 
young, bright people with adjustment problems. Keep this in 
mind as we consider his theory, since his clinical experiences 
likely guided its development.
Like Maslow, Rogers emphasized self-actualization, 
the development of one’s fullest potential. He believed 
that this was the fundamental drive for humans. 
Sometimes we have difficulty in this actualization 
process, though, and this is the source of personality 
problems. How does this happen? Like Freud, Rogers 
believed that early experience was important, but for 
very different reasons. He thought that we have a 
strong need for positive regard—to be accepted by and 
have the affection of others, especially the significant 
others in our life. Our parents (or caregivers) set up 
conditions of worth, the behaviors and attitudes for 
which they will give us positive regard. Infants and 
children develop their self-concept in relation to these 
conditions of worth in order to be liked and accepted 
by others and feel a sense of self-worth.
Meeting the conditions of worth continues throughout our lives. We want to 
be regarded positively by others, so we meet their conditions. There’s the problem, 
though. In meeting these conditions of worth, we may develop a self-concept of 
what others think we should be. The problem is that this self-concept might not 
be the same as our true, ideal self, and thus would deter self-actualization. This 
conflict is created by conditional positive regard, so Rogers 
developed the concept of unconditional positive regard—
acceptance and approval without conditions. In addition to 
giving us unconditional positive regard (liking us no matter 
what we are like), it is important that others be empathetic 
(able to truly understand our feelings) and genuine with 
respect to their own feelings if we are to self-actualize. As 
we will find in Chapter 10, these characteristics are critical 
➤ conditions of worth  The behav-
iors and attitudes for which other 
people, starting with our parents, 
will give us positive regard.
➤ unconditional positive regard 
Unconditional acceptance and 
approval of a person by others.
Carl Rogers
Roger Ressmeyer/Corbis
© The New Yorker Collection, 2001, Pat Byrnes 
from cartoonbank.com. All Rights Reserved
“Just remember, son, it dosn’t matter whether 
you win or lose—unless you want Daddy’s love.”

332  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
elements in Rogers’s client-centered therapy. Rogers’s self theory is summarized 
in Figure 8.3.
Rogers’s theory’s, like Freud’s theory, is based on clinical experience and 
is important mainly because of its application to therapy. Neither theory 
is research based. The social-cognitive approach, which we will discuss 
next, is research based. It combines elements of three of the major research 
perspectives—the cognitive, behavioral, and sociocultural approaches. The 
social-cognitive approach stresses that personality development involves 
learning that occurs in a social context and is mediated by cognitive processes. 
Let’s see how.
The Social-Cognitive Approach to Personality
Social-cognitive theorists agree with behaviorists that learning through envi-
ronmental conditioning contributes to personality development. However, they 
think that social learning (modeling) and cognitive processes, such as perception 
and thinking, are also involved and are actually more important to the develop-
ment of our personality. To understand how modeling and cognitive processes 
are involved, we’ll first consider the work of Albert Bandura, one of the main 
proponents of the social-cognitive approach.
Bandura’s self-system.  Bandura proposed that the 
behaviors that define one’s personality are a product of a 
person’s self-system (Bandura, 1973, 1986). This self-system 
is the set of cognitive processes by which a person observes, 
evaluates, and regulates her behavior. Social learning 
➤ self-system  The set of cognitive 
processes by which a person 
observes, evaluates, and regulates 
her behavior.
Self-actualization
Self-concept
congruent
with true self
Conditional
positive regard
Conditions of worth
Self-concept
not congruent
with true self
Self-actualization
deterred;
needs unconditional
positive regard
to develop true self
m Figure 8.3 | Carl Rogers’s Self Theory | According to Carl Rogers, the develop-
ment of your self-concept is impacted by the conditions of worth set up by those people 
who are important to you. Their conditional positive regard may lead you to develop a self-
concept that is congruent with your true self, thereby allowing you to self-actualize; or it 
may lead to a conflict between your developed self-concept and your true self. If there is a 
conflict, then you will need unconditional positive regard in order to develop your true self 
and self-actualize.

The humanistic Approach and the Social-CoGnitive Approach to Personality  |  333
illustrates how this system works. Children observe the various behaviors of the 
models in their social environment, especially those of their parents. Given this 
observational learning, children may then choose, at some later time, to imitate 
these behaviors, especially if they were reinforced earlier. If these behaviors 
continue to be reinforced, children may then incorporate them into their 
personality. This means that there is self-direction (the child consciously chooses 
which behaviors to imitate). The child’s behavior is not just automatically elicited 
by environmental stimuli. People observe and interpret the effects of not only 
their own behavior, but also the behavior of others. Then they act in accordance 
with their assessment of whether the behavior will be reinforced or not. We do not 
respond mechanically to the environment; we choose our behaviors based on our 
expectations of reinforcement or punishment.
Bandura also proposed that people observe their own behavior and judge its 
effectiveness relative to their own standards (Bandura, 1997). This self-evaluation 
process impacts our sense of self-efficacy—a judgment of one’s effectiveness in 
dealing with particular situations. Success increases our sense of self-efficacy; 
failure decreases it. According to Bandura, our sense of self-efficacy plays a major 
role in determining our behavior. People generally low in self-efficacy tend to be 
depressed and anxious and feel helpless. People generally high in self-efficacy are 
confident and positive in their outlook and have little self doubt. They also have 
greater persistence in working to attain goals and usually achieve greater success 
than those with low self-efficacy. Self-efficacy parallels the story of the little 
engine that could. To do something, you have to think you can do it.
Rotter’s locus of control.  Bandura’s self-efficacy concept is similar to locus 
of control, a concept proposed by another social-cognitive theorist, Julian Rotter. 
According to Rotter, locus of control refers to a person’s perception of the extent 
to which he controls what happens to him (Rotter, 1966, 1990). “Locus” means 
place. There are two major places that control can reside—outside you or within 
you. External locus of control refers to the perception that chance or external 
forces beyond your personal control determine your fate. Internal locus of 
control refers to the perception that you control your own fate. How is locus of 
control different from self-efficacy? People with an internal locus of control 
perceive their success as dependent upon their own actions, but they may or may 
not feel that they have the competence (efficacy) to bring about successful out-
comes in various situations. For example, students may think 
that their own study preparation determines their exam per-
formance, but they may not think that they have satisfactory 
study skills to produce good exam performance. For those 
with external locus of control, the self-efficacy concept isn’t 
as relevant because such people believe that the outcomes of 
their actions are not affected by their actions.
Why is Rotter’s locus of control concept important? 
Research has shown that people with an internal locus 
of control are psychologically and physically better off. 
➤ self-efficacy  A judgment of one’s 
effectiveness in dealing with 
particular situations.
➤ external locus of control  The 
perception that chance or external 
forces beyond one’s personal 
control determine one’s fate.
➤ internal locus of control  The 
perception that we control our own 
individual fate.

334  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
They are more successful in school, healthier, and better able 
to cope with the stresses of life (Lachman & Weaver, 1998). 
In addition, an external locus of control may contribute 
to learned helplessness, a sense of hopelessness in which 
individuals think that they are unable to prevent unpleasant 
events (Seligman, 1975). But how does this happen? What 
goes on in the minds of those who become helpless? To 
understand, we first need to consider self-perception and the 
attribution process.
Self-perception.  Given the impact of self-efficacy and 
locus of control, positive self-perception is important to healthy behavior. Our 
behavior, however, does not always lead to good outcomes. How then do we deal 
with poor outcomes and maintain positive self-perception? To understand how 
we do so, we need to understand attribution, the process by which we explain our 
own behavior and that of others. There are two types of attributions, internal and 
external. An internal attribution means that the outcome is attributed to the per-
son. An external attribution means that the outcome is attributed to factors out-
side the person. Let’s consider an example. You fail a psychology exam. Why? An 
internal attribution gives you the blame. For example, you might say, “I just 
didn’t study enough.” An external attribution would place the blame elsewhere. 
For example, you might say, “I knew the material, but that exam was unfair.” In 
this case, you tend to make an external attribution. Why?
We place the blame elsewhere in order to protect our self-esteem. This attribu-
tion bias is called the self-serving bias, the tendency to make attributions so that 
one can perceive oneself favorably. If the outcome of our behavior is positive, we 
take credit for it (make an internal attribution). However, if the outcome is nega-
tive, we place the blame elsewhere (make an external attribution). The research 
evidence indicating that we use the self-serving bias is overwhelming (Myers, 
2013). Think about it. Don’t most of us think that we are above average in intel-
ligence, attractiveness, and other positive characteristics? But most people can’t 
be above average, can they? These self-enhancing perceptions created by the self-
serving bias serve to maintain our self-esteem. This bias is adaptive because it pro-
tects us from falling prey to learned helplessness and depression. When negative 
events happen, we don’t blame ourselves. Instead, we make external attributions 
and place the blame elsewhere.
So what type of explanatory style might lead us toward learned helplessness 
and depression? A pessimistic explanatory style is one answer (Peterson, Maier, 
& Seligman, 1993). First, the attributions of people using a pessimistic explana-
tory style tend to show a pattern that is the opposite of those generated by self-
serving bias. Negative outcomes are given internal explanations (“I don’t have 
any ability”), and positive outcomes external explanations (“I just got lucky”). 
There is more to it, however. Pessimistic explanations also tend to be stable (the 
person thinks that the outcome causes are permanent) and global (the causes 
affect most situations). Think about a person using a pessimistic explanatory 
➤ learned helplessness  A sense of 
hopelessness in which a person 
thinks that he is unable to prevent 
aversive events.
➤ attribution  The process by which 
we explain our own behavior and 
that of others.
➤ self-serving bias  The tendency to 
make attributions so that one can 
perceive oneself favorably.

The humanistic Approach and the Social-CoGnitive Approach to Personality  |  335
style when experiencing a series of negative events. Not only would such people 
blame themselves (internal), but they would also think that such negative events 
would continue (stable) and impact most aspects of their lives (global). Such 
thinking could easily lead to the perception of an external locus of control 
and learned helplessness followed by depression. Indeed, research has found 
that such an explanatory style puts a person at risk for depression (Peterson & 
Seligman, 1984).
Section Summary
The humanistic approach to the study of personality developed as part of the 
humanistic movement in the 1960s in response to the rather deterministic psy-
choanalytic and behavioral approaches that dominated psychology at that time. In 
contrast to these two approaches, the humanistic theorists emphasized conscious 
free will in one’s development and the importance of self-actualization, the fullest 
realization of our potential, as a major motivator of our behavior. Based on his 
studies of very healthy and creative people, humanistic theorist Abraham Maslow 
developed a hierarchy of needs that motivate our behavior and development. From 
bottom to top, the needs are physiological, safety, belonging and love, esteem, and 
self-actualization. Motivation proceeds from the bottom of the hierarchy to the top, 
because a person cannot work toward self-actualization until the lower-level needs 
are met. Carl Rogers, the other major humanistic theorist, also focused on self-
actualization as a major human motivation. According to Rogers, for a person to be 
self-actualized, the people in that person’s life must set up conditions of worth that 
lead the person’s developed self-concept to match her true self or they must give 
unconditional positive regard—acceptance and approval without conditions—which 
will allow the person to develop into her true self.
The social-cognitive approach to personality arose out of disenchantment with 
the rather narrow strict behavioral approach. Social-cognitive theorists agree that 
learning through conditioning is important, but that social learning (modeling) and 
cognitive processes are more important to the development of personality. For 
example, Albert Bandura proposed a self-system, a set of cognitive processes by 
which a person observes, evaluates, and regulates her behavior. Our sense of self-
efficacy (our evaluation of our effectiveness in particular situations) is a key element 
in Bandura’s theory for maintaining a healthy personality.
Julian Rotter’s locus of control concept also demonstrates the importance of 
cognitive processing to psychological health. An external locus of control is the per-
ception that chance or external forces beyond our personal control determine our 
fate. An internal locus of control is the perception that we control our own fate. 
People with an internal locus of control do better in school, are healthier, and are 
better able to cope with the stresses of life. To maintain positive self-evaluation, we 
also use self-serving bias in our explanations of our behavior. If the outcome of our 
behavior is positive, we take credit for it; if it is not, we do not. This bias is adaptive 
and protects us from depression. A pessimistic explanatory style—in which we take 
the blame for negative outcomes and not positive ones, and see these outcomes 
as both stable and global—is maladaptive and will likely lead to feelings of learned 
helplessness and depression.

336  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
Trait Theories of Personality and 
Personality Assessment
As we pointed out at the beginning of this chapter, personality traits are internally 
based, relatively stable characteristics that define an individual’s personality. Traits 
are continuous dimensions, and people vary from each other along the dimensions 
for each of the various traits that make up personality. But what are the specific traits 
that make up human personality? Think about all of the adjectives that can describe 
a person. There are thousands, but this doesn’t mean that thousands of traits are 
necessary to describe human personality. Trait theories attempt to discover exactly 
how many traits are necessary. You will be surprised to find out that the major trait 
theories propose that this number is rather small. How are such numbers derived?
Trait theorists use factor analysis (and other statistical techniques) to tell them 
how many basic personality factors (or traits) are needed to describe human personal-
ity, as well as what these factors are. Remember, factor analysis is the statistical tool 
from Chapter 6 that we used to discuss the question of whether intelligence was one 
ability or many. Factor analysis identifies clusters of test items (in this case, on a per-
sonality test) that measure the same factor (trait). Allport and Odbert (1936) did the 
initial analyses, starting with 18,000 words that could be used to describe humans. 
Their analyses left them with around 200 clusters. Later trait researchers have reduced 
this number considerably; the consensus number of necessary traits is only five.
In this section, we’ll consider two major trait theories that were developed using 
factor analysis, Hans Eysenck’s three-factor theory and the Five Factor Model of per-
sonality. We’ll also discuss personality assessment, because personality tests are often 
developed to assess a theorist’s proposed basic traits. The major uses for personality 
tests, however, are to diagnose personality problems, to aid in counseling, and to aid 
in making personnel decisions; therefore, we’ll focus our discussion on the two main 
types of personality tests used, personality inventories and projective tests.
Trait Theories of Personality
According to trait theorists, basic traits are the building 
blocks of personality. Each trait is a dimension, a continuum 
ConceptCheck | 2
➤	 explain which needs, according to Maslow, must be satisfied before a person 
can worry about self-actualization.
➤	 explain why, according to rogers’s self theory, unconditional positive regard 
is important.
➤	 explain how the social-cognitive concepts of self-efficacy and locus of control 
are similar.
➤ traits  The relatively stable inter-
nally based characteristics that 
describe a person.

Trait Theories of Personality and Personality Assessment  |  337
ranging from one extreme of the dimension to the other. A person can fall at 
either extreme or anywhere in between on the continuum. An individual’s per-
sonality stems from the amount of each trait that he has. This is analogous to 
the trichromatic theory of color vision that we discussed in Chapter 3. Remember 
that according to the trichromatic theory, all of the thousands of different colors 
that we can perceive stem from different proportions of the three primaries (red, 
green, and blue). In trait theories, all personalities stem from different propor-
tions of the basic traits.
The number and kind of personality traits.  Different theorists have come 
up with different answers to the question of how many basic personality traits 
there are and even what they are. For example, using factor analysis, early trait 
researcher Raymond Cattell found that 16 traits were necessary (Cattell, 1950, 
1965). More recently, Hans Eysenck, also using factor analysis, has argued for only 
three trait dimensions (Eysenck, 1982; Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985). There are two 
major reasons for the different numbers—the level of abstraction and the type of 
data. First, the number of traits depends upon the level of abstraction in the fac-
tor analysis. For example, if you factored Cattell’s 16 traits further, you would 
probably get something closer to Eysenck’s three higher-order factors (Digman, 
1990). This means that Eysenck’s theory is at a more general and inclusive level of 
abstraction than Cattell’s theory. More important, the number of traits depends 
upon which databases and what types of data different theorists use in their fac-
tor analysis. Different data could, of course, lead to different traits, as well as a 
different number of traits. Surprisingly, contemporary trait researchers have 
reached something of a consensus about the number and the nature of the basic 
personality traits. The three traits proposed by Eysenck are insufficient, and the 
16-factor theory of Cattell is needlessly complex (McCrae, 2011). The consensus 
number is five, and these five traits (or factors) are referred to as the “Big Five.” 
First, we’ll discuss Eysenck’s three-factor theory, because he (unlike most trait 
theorists) proposes actual causal explanations for his traits, and then we’ll discuss 
the Five Factor Model of personality.
Eysenck’s three-factor theory.  Hans Eysenck’s three trait dimensions are 
extraversion–introversion, neuroticism–emotional stability, and psychoticism–
impulse control. These are continuous dimensions, with extraversion, neuroti-
cism, and psychoticism, respectively, at the high ends. Eysenck argues that these 
three traits are determined by heredity and proposes a biological basis for each 
one of them (Eysenck, 1990, 1997).
Extraversion and introversion have their normal meanings, indicating differ-
ences in sociability. Extraverts are gregarious, outgoing people with lots of friends; 
introverts are those who are quiet, are more introspective, and tend to avoid social 
interaction. For example, in a study of students going off to college, the extraverted 
ones struck up new friendships more quickly than the introverted ones (Asendorpf 
& Wilpers, 1998). The proposed biological basis for the extraversion–introversion 
trait is level of cortical arousal (neuronal activity). According to Eysenck, an 

338  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
introvert has a higher normal level of arousal in the brain than an extravert. The 
brains of introverts are more active. This means that an extravert has to seek out 
external stimulation in order to raise the level of arousal in the brain to a more 
optimal level.
People who are high on the neuroticism–emotional stability dimension tend to 
be overly anxious, emotionally unstable, and easily upset; people who are low on this 
dimension tend to be calm and emotionally stable. People high on this dimension 
experience more lingering negative emotional states in their daily lives and suffer 
from higher rates of anxiety and depression (Widiger, 2009). Eysenck proposes 
differences in the sympathetic nervous system as the basis for this trait. People high 
on the neuroticism trait have more reactive sympathetic nervous systems.
The psychoticism–impulse control trait dimension is concerned with aggres-
siveness, impulsiveness, empathy (seeing situations from other people’s perspec-
tives), and antisocial behavior. Eysenck assumes that a high level of testosterone 
and a low level of MAO, a neurotransmitter inhibitor, lead to behavior that is 
aggressive, impulsive, antisocial, and lacking in empathy.
Eysenck’s very specific biological assumptions make his theory rather easy to 
test experimentally. Thus, it has generated much research, and the findings have 
been somewhat supportive. However, most research seems to indicate that five 
factors, rather than three, are necessary (Funder, 2001; Goldberg, 1990; John, 
1990; McCrae & Costa, 2003; Wiggins, 1996). Unlike Eysenck, five-factor theorists 
use only the high end of each trait dimension to identify the factor. So how do 
you get to five from Eysenck’s three factors? Eysenck’s extraversion and neuroti-
cism factors are retained, but his psychoticism factor is broken into two parts, 
conscientiousness and agreeableness, and an openness factor is added (Nettle, 
2007). Now let’s take a closer look at the Five Factor Model of personality.
The Five Factor Model of personality.  The Five Factor Model of personal-
ity was formulated by Robert McCrae and Paul Costa (McCrae & Costa, 1999). 
The descriptions of the high and low ends of the five trait dimensions (called the 
Big Five) given in Table 8.3 will provide you with a brief overview of the five 
proposed factors. To remember the five factors, try forming acronyms using their 
first letters. Order is not important. You could use OCEAN (Openness, 
Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism) or CANOE 
(Conscientiousness, Agreeableness, Neuroticism, Openness, and Extraversion). 
Similarly, you might use PEN to remember Eysenck’s three traits (Psychoticism, 
Extraversion, and Neuroticism). 
We have already briefly discussed extraversion and neuroticism when we 
described Eysenck’s trait theory, so let’s see what conscientiousness, openness, 
and agreeableness entail and what real-world behaviors they are related to. 
Conscientiousness is a tendency to show self-discipline, dependability, and orga-
nization and to prefer planned versus spontaneous behavior. Conscientiousness is 
positively correlated with high school and college GPAs (Noftle & Robins, 2007) 
and is linked to living a healthier and longer life (Bogg & Roberts, 2004; Kern & 
Friedman, 2008; Roberts, Smith, Jackson, & Edmonds, 2009). Openness (often 

Trait Theories of Personality and Personality Assessment  |  339
referred to as openness to experience) reflects a person’s degree of intellectual 
curiosity, creativity, and preference for novelty and variety. A person who scores 
high on the openness factor is willing to try new things, is imaginative, and tends 
to have liberal values and be open-minded (McCrae & Sutin, 2009). High scorers 
on openness also tend to score high on intelligence tests and the SAT Verbal test 
(Noftle & Robins, 2007; Sharp, Reynolds, Pedersen, & Gatz, 2010). Agreeableness 
is the tendency to be compassionate and cooperative rather than suspicious and 
antagonistic toward others. People who score high on the agreeableness factor 
tend to be friendly, altruistic, empathetic, and to have an optimistic view of 
human nature (Graziano, Habashi, Sheese, & Tobin, 2007). Variation in agree-
ableness also correlates well with the variation in social-cognitive theory of mind 
functioning in adults, with high scorers performing better on theory of mind 
tasks (Nettle & Liddle, 2008).
According to Costa and McCrae (1993, p. 302), the Five Factor Model “is the 
Christmas tree on which findings of stability, heritability, consensual validation, 
cross-cultural invariance, and predictive validity are hung like ornaments.” Indeed, 
recent research indicates that these five factors may be universal. They have been 
observed across gender, and in many diverse languages (such as English, Korean, 
and Turkish) and cultures (including American, Hispanic, European, African, and 
Asian cultures), and not just in Western industrialized societies (McCrae & Costa, 
1997, 2001; McCrae et al., 2004; Schmidt, Allik, McCrae, & Benet-Martinez, 2007). 
In addition, research has found that the Big Five factors have about a 50 percent 
heritability rate across several cultures (Bouchard & McGue, 2003; Jang et al; 
2006; Loehlin, 1992; Loehlin, McCrae, Costa, & John, 1998), indicating a strong 
genetic basis. The Big Five factors also seem consistent from about age 30 to late 
adulthood (Costa & McCrae, 1988) and are generally consistent across situations 
(Buss, 2001). Given their general consistency over time and situations, some 
psychologists think that each trait must be associated with a specific pattern of 
Table 8.3    The Big Five Personality Trait Dimensions
Low End of Dimension
Trait Dimension
High End of Dimension
Conforming, practical, narrow 
interests, closed to new ideas
Openness
Independent, imaginative, broad 
interests, receptive to new ideas
Disorganized, undependable, 
careless, impulsive
Conscientiousness
Well-organized, dependable, careful, 
disciplined
Reclusive, quiet, aloof, cautious
Extraversion
Sociable, talkative, friendly, adventurous
Tough-minded, rude, irritable, 
ruthless
Agreeableness
Sympathetic, polite, good-natured,  
soft-hearted
Calm, secure, relaxed,  
self-satisfied
Neuroticism
Emotional, insecure, nervous,  
self-pitying

340  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
brain behavior or structure (e.g., Canli, 2006). In fact, DeYoung et al. (2010) have 
proposed a theory of the biological bases of the Big Five personality factors and 
found supporting evidence using magnetic resonance imaging for four of the five 
factors.
Given the importance of the Big Five factors, Robert McCrae and Paul Costa 
have developed personality inventory assessment instruments, the NEO-PI-R, 
the NEO-PI-3, and the NEO-FFI, which provide personality profiles of these 
five factors (Costa & McCrae, 1985, 1992, 2008; McCrae, Costa, & Martin, 
2005). Rammstedt and John (2007) have developed a 10-item, one-minute-or-
less measure of the NEO-PI-R that retains significant levels of reliability and 
validity. An adapted version of their test is given in Table 8.4. Go ahead and 
take the test. It will help you to get a better understanding of not only the Big 
Five personality traits but also personality inventories in general and how they 
differ from the better-known projective personality tests. After taking the test 
and before going on to read about personality assessment, review Table 8.5 
(page 342), which summarizes all of the theoretical approaches to personality 
that we have discussed. Make sure that you know and understand the various 
theorists and their key concepts.
Personality Assessment
Personality tests are a major tool in personality trait research, but the main uses 
of personality tests are to aid in diagnosing people with problems, in counseling, 
and in making personnel decisions. There are many types of personality tests, 
but we will focus on two, personality inventories and projective tests. Most of the 
other types of personality tests have more limited use. For example, Carl Rogers 
and humanistic psychologists have developed questionnaires that only address 
the self-concept, and Julian Rotter has developed a test that specifically assesses 
locus of control.
Personality inventories.  A personality inventory is designed to measure 
multiple traits or, in some cases, disorders. It is a series of questions or statements 
for which the test taker must indicate whether they apply to him or not. The 
typical response format is True–False or Yes–No. Often a third response category 
of Can’t Say or Uncertain is included. The assumption is that the person both can 
and will provide an accurate self-report. These tests include items dealing with 
specific behaviors, attitudes, interests, and values. We will discuss the MMPI, the 
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (Hathaway & McKinley, 1943), 
revised to become the MMPI-2 in 1989 (Butcher, Dahlstrom, Graham, Tellegen, 
& Kaemmer, 1989). It is the most used personality test in the 
world (Weiner & Greene, 2008), and it has been translated 
into more than 100 languages.
The MMPI-2 uses a True–False–Cannot Say format with 
567 simple statements (such as “I like to cook”) and takes 
about 60 to 90 minutes to complete. Most of the statements 
➤ personality inventory  An objective 
personality test that uses a series 
of questions or statements for 
which the test taker must indicate 
whether they apply to her or not.

Trait Theories of Personality and Personality Assessment  |  341
Table 8.4    Big Five Inventory-10 (BFI-10)
Instruction: For each of the 10 statements that follow, rate how well each one 
describes your personality from 1 (Disagree strongly) to 5 (Agree strongly).
I see myself as 
someone who …
Disagree 
strongly
Disagree a 
little
Neither 
agree nor 
disagree
Agree a 
little
Agree 
strongly
1. … is reserved
1
2
3
4
5
2. … is generally 
trusting
1
2
3
4
5
3. … tends to be lazy
1
2
3
4
5
4. … is relaxed, 
handles stress well
1
2
3
4
5
5. … has few artistic 
interests
1
2
3
4
5
6. … is outgoing, 
sociable
1
2
3
4
5
7. … tends to find 
fault with others
1
2
3
4
5
8. … does a thor-
ough job
1
2
3
4
5
9. … gets nervous 
easily
1
2
3
4
5
10. … has an active 
imagination
1
2
3
4
5
To assess your tendencies toward the five factors in the Five Factor Model of 
personality, use the following scoring instructions. Your score on each factor can 
vary from 2 (Low) to 10 (High).
Extraversion
1R, 6 (R means that this item should be reverse scored; 1 = 5, 2 = 5, 3 = 3, 
4 = 1, 5 = 1; for example, a 1 on Item 1 and a 5 on Item 6 would indicate a 
high Extraversion score of 10)
Agreeableness
2, 7R
Conscientiousness
3R, 8
Neuroticism
4R, 9
Openness
5R, 10
(Adapted from “Measuring personality in one minute or less: A 10-item version of the Big five Inventory in English and German,” by B. Rammstedt and O. P. John, 2007, 
Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 203-212.)

342  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
Table 8.5    Major Personality Theoretical Approaches
Theoretical Approach
Theorist
Key Concepts
Psychoanalytic
Sigmund Freud
Id, ego, superego
Conscious, preconscious, unconscious
Pleasure principle, reality principle
Defense mechanisms
Psychosexual stages—oral, anal, phallic, 
latency, genital 
Erogenous zone, fixation
Carl Jung
Collective unconscious, archetypes
Alfred Adler
Striving for superiority, inferiority complex
Karen Horney
Need for security, basic anxiety
Humanistic
Abraham Maslow
Hierarchy of needs, self-actualization
Carl Rogers
Conditions of worth, unconditional 
positive regard, self-actualization
Social-cognitive
Albert Bandura
Self-system, self-efficacy
Julian Rotter
Locus of control
Trait
Hans Eysenck
Three factors:
Extraversion–Introversion
Neuroticism–Emotional Stability
Psychoticism–Impulse Control
Robert McCrae and 
Paul Costa
Five Factor Model:
Openness
Conscientiousness
Extraversion
Agreeableness
Neuroticism
are from the original MMPI. Some were reworded to update the item content and 
to eliminate sexist language, and most of the questions pertaining to religion and 
sexual practices were eliminated (Ben-Porath & Butcher, 1989). The MMPI was 
developed to be a measure of abnormal personality, with 10 clinical scales. Many 

Trait Theories of Personality and Personality Assessment  |  343
of the test statements have obvious connections to disorders, such as “I believe I 
am being plotted against,” but many are just simple ordinary statements, such as 
“I am neither gaining nor losing weight.”
The MMPI test statements were chosen in the same way that Binet and 
Simon chose test items for their first valid test of intelligence (discussed in 
Chapter 6). Binet and Simon developed a large pool of possible test items 
and then chose only those items that differentiated fast and slow learners. 
Similarly, a large pool of possible test items (simple statements of all types) 
was developed, and then only those items that were answered differently (by 
a representative sample of people suffering from a specific disorder versus a 
group of normal people) were chosen for the test. It didn’t matter what each 
group responded or what the content of the statement happened to be; what 
mattered was that the two groups generally responded to the item in opposite 
ways. Thus, the test developers were only concerned with whether, and not 
why, the items were answered differently by the groups. This test construction 
method allowed the test developers to choose items that clearly identified the 
response patterns of people with 10 different disorders (for example, depres-
sion or schizophrenia).
The MMPI and MMPI-2 are scored by a computer, which then generates 
a profile of the test taker on 10 clinical (disorder) scales. There are also test 
statements that comprise the basis for three validity scales, which attempt to 
detect test takers who are trying to cover up problems and fake profiles or who 
were careless in their responding. For example, there is a lie detection scale 
that assesses the extent to which the test taker is lying to create a particular 
test profile. The lie scale is based on responses to a set of test items such as 
“I get angry sometimes,” to which most people would respond “True.” The 
profile for a person consistently answering “False” to these questions would 
be invalidated.
Personality inventories like the MMPI are objective tests and are objec-
tively scored by a computer. The computer converts the test taker’s responses 
into a personality profile for the trait or disorder dimensions that the test 
is measuring. This is why the MMPI has been so popular in clinical settings 
for making diagnoses of personality problems. Its test construction method 
leads to good predictive validity for its clinical scales, and its objective scoring 
procedure leads to reliability in interpretation. Projective personality tests, 
which we will discuss next, do not have good validity or reliability, but are 
widely used.
Projective tests.  The chances are that when personality 
tests are mentioned, you think of the Rorschach Inkblot 
Test, a projective personality test. In contrast with 
personality inventories, a projective test is a series of 
ambiguous stimuli, such as inkblots, to which the test 
taker must respond about his perceptions of the stimuli. 
An objective response format is not used. Test takers are 
➤ projective test  A personality test 
that uses a series of ambiguous 
stimuli to which the test taker must 
respond about her perceptions of 
the stimuli.

344  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
asked to describe the stimulus 
or tell a story about it. We 
will discuss the two most 
used projective tests, the 
Rorschach Inkblot Test and 
the Thematic Apperception 
Test (TAT).
Projective tests aren’t ad- 
ministered, scored, or inter­
preted in the same way as 
the MMPI, MMPI-2, and 
other objective personality 
inventories. They are not 
as objective, especially with 
respect to interpretation. The 
most popular and widely 
used projective test is the 
Rorschach Inkblot Test (often 
referred to as The Rorschach), 
which 
Swiss 
psychiatrist 
Hermann Rorschach included 
as part of a monograph in 1921 (Rorschach, 1921/1942). Actually Rorschach 
never intended this to be a test of personality. He created it for use as a 
diagnostic tool for schizophrenia. Sadly, in 1922, the year after his monograph 
was published, he died from appendicitis; he was only 37 years old. There are 
only 10 symmetric inkblots used in the test. Five are in black ink, two in 
black and red ink, and three are multicolored. All have a white background. 
The test taker is asked what he sees in each inkblot, though the inkblots are 
ambiguous and have no inherent meaning. The examiner then goes through 
the cards and asks the test taker to clarify his responses by 
identifying the various parts of the inkblot that led to the 
response.
The assumption is that the test taker’s responses are pro-
jections of his personal conflicts and personality dynamics. 
This means that the test taker’s responses have to be inter-
preted, which makes the test scoring subjective and creates 
great variability among test scorers. In fact, one could view 
the test scorer’s interpretations as projections themselves. 
The Rorschach Inkblot Test has been widely used (Watkins, 
Campbell, Nieberding, & Hallmark, 1995), but it has yet to be 
demonstrated that this test is either reliable or valid (Dawes, 
1994; Lilienfeld, Wood, & Garb, 2000), leading some research-
ers to call for a moratorium on its use (Garb, 1999). If you 
are interested in the Rorschach Inkblot Test, all 10 of the 
Roz Chast/The New Yorker Collection/www.cartoonbank.com
A Simulation of a Rorschach Inkblot
Spencer Grant/Photo Researchers, Inc

Trait Theories of Personality and Personality Assessment  |  345
inkblots along with popular responses to each are given in 
the Rorschach Inkblot Test entry at the Wikipedia Web site, 
www.wikipedia.org.
Now let’s consider another popular projective test, the 
Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), developed by Henry 
Murray and his colleagues in the 1930s (Morgan & Murray, 
1935). The TAT consists of 31 cards (the original version 
had only 20), 30 with black and white pictures of ambigu-
ous settings and one blank card (the ultimate in ambigu-
ity). Only 10 or so of the 31 cards are used in an individual 
testing session. The test taker is told that this is a story-
telling test and that for each picture he has to make up a 
story. He is to tell what has happened before, what is hap-
pening now, what the people are feeling and thinking, and 
how things will turn out. In scoring these responses, the 
scorer looks for recurring themes in the feelings, relation-
ships, and motives of the characters in the created stories. 
Like the Rorschach Inkblot Test, however, it has yet to be 
demonstrated that the TAT scoring (interpretation) is either reliable or valid 
(Lilienfeld, Wood, & Garb, 2000). You are probably wondering why these two 
projective tests are so popular if neither has demonstrated reliability or valid-
ity. Therapists who use them believe that such tests allow them to explore 
aspects of the test taker’s personality that the reliable and valid objective 
personality tests do not. These therapists tend to be psychoanalysts who 
believe projections are meaningful; therefore, the tests’ subjective nature is 
not problematic for them.
Section Summary
The trait approach to personality attempts to identify the basic traits (dimensions) 
we need to describe human personality. These traits are the building blocks of 
personality. Given the basic traits, each person’s personality can be viewed as her 
unique combination of values on these basic personality dimensions. Using fac-
tor analysis and other statistical techniques, trait theorists have proposed theories 
with varying numbers of basic dimensions. For example, Hans Eysenck has pro-
posed three dimensions—psychoticism, extraversion, and neuroticism. Recent trait 
research indicates that five factors (the Big Five—openness, conscientiousness, 
extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism) are necessary. These five factors 
seem to be stable throughout adulthood and universal across gender and many 
diverse languages and cultures.
To assess personality, psychologists make use of two types of tests—personality 
inventories and projective tests. A personality inventory is a set of questions or 
statements for which the test taker must indicate whether they apply to her or 
not. Such objective tests usually employ a True–False–Cannot Say format. The 
most used personality inventory is the MMPI/MMPI-2. These tests have predictive 
A young girl taking the TAT
Lewis J. Merrim/Science Source.

346  |  Chapter 8  |  PERSONALITy ThEORIES ANd ASSESSMENT
validity for diagnosing personality problems on 10 clinical scales, since the items 
on these tests were chosen because they differentiated normal people from people 
diagnosed with the 10 disorders. Projective tests are more subjective tests in 
which the test taker must respond about her perceptions of a series of ambigu-
ous stimuli. The assumption is that the test taker’s responses are projections of 
her personal conflicts and personality dynamics. Though widely used, projective 
tests, such as the Rorschach Inkblot Test and the TAT, have yet to be shown to be 
reliable or valid.
ConceptCheck | 3
➤	 explain why factor analysis can lead to different numbers of basic personal-
ity dimensions.
➤	 explain how the test construction method used to develop the MMpI 
ensures predictive validity for the test.

Study Guide
347
Chapter Key Terms
You should know the definitions of the following key terms from the chapter. 
they are listed in the order in which they appear in the chapter. For those you do 
not know, return to the relevant section of the chapter to learn them. When you 
think that you know all of the terms, complete the matching exercise based on 
these key terms.
personality
conscious mind
preconscious mind
unconscious mind
id
pleasure principle
ego
reality principle
superego
defense mechanism
erogenous zone
fixation
oral stage of psychosexual 
development
anal stage of psychosexual 
development
phallic stage of psychosexual 
development
Oedipus conflict
identification
latency stage of psychosexual 
development
genital stage of psychosexual 
development
hierarchy of needs
self-actualization
conditions of worth
unconditional positive regard
self-system
self-efficacy
external locus of control
internal locus of control
learned helplessness
attribution
self-serving bias
traits
personality inventory
projective test
Key Terms Exercise
Identify the correct term for each of the 
following definitions. the answers to this 
exercise follow the answers to the Concept 
Checks at the end of the chapter.
  1.	 A process used by the ego to distort real-
ity and protect a person from anxiety.
	 	
 
  2.	 Unconditional acceptance and approval 
of a person by others.
	 	
 
  3.	 A judgment of one’s effectiveness in deal-
ing with particular situations.
	 	
 
  4.	 The third psychosexual stage in Freud’s 
theory (from ages 3 to 6 years old) in 
which the erogenous zone is located at 
the genitals, and the child derives plea-
sure from genital stimulation.
	 	
 
  5.	 The principle of finding gratification for 
instinctual drives within the constraints of 
reality (norms of society).
	 	
 
  6.	 The part of the personality that a person 
is born with and that contains the biologi-
cal instinctual drives and is located in the 
unconscious mind.
	 	
 
  7.	 The process by which children adopt the 
characteristics of the same-sex parent 
and learn their gender role and sense of 
morality.
	 	
 

348  |  Chapter 8  |  Personality Theories and Assessment
  8.	 The tendency to make attributions so that 
one can perceive oneself favorably.
	 	
 
  9.	 A personality test that uses a series of 
ambiguous stimuli to which the test tak-
ers must respond about their perceptions 
of the stimuli.
	 	
 
10.	 The perception that chance or external 
forces beyond one’s individual control 
determine one’s fate.
	 	
 
11.	 Freud’s term for the area of the body 
where the id’s pleasure-seeking energies 
are focused during a particular stage of 
psychosexual development.
	 	
 
12.	 The behaviors and attitudes for which 
other people, starting with our parents, 
will give us positive regard.
	 	
 
13.	 Freud’s term for what is stored in our 
memories that we are not presently 
aware of but can access.
	 	
 
14.	 The process by which we explain our 
own behavior and that of others.
	 	
 
15.	 Freud’s term for the part of the personal-
ity that represents one’s conscience and 
idealized standards of behavior.
	 	
 
Practice Test Questions
the following are practice multiple-choice test 
questions on some of the chapter content. the 
answers are given after the Key terms exercise 
answers at the end of the chapter. If you 
guessed or incorrectly answered a question, 
restudy the relevant section of the chapter.
  1.	 According to Freud, the ______, the execu-
tive of the personality, is located ______
	a.	 ego; entirely in the unconscious
	b.	ego; in all three levels of awareness
	c.	 superego; entirely in the unconscious
	d.	superego; in all three levels of 
awareness
  2.	 A woman has unacceptable feelings of 
hatred toward her mother, but lavishes 
attention and love on her. Freud would 
say that this is an example of ______.
	a.	 projection
	b.	reaction formation
	c.	 displacement
	d.	sublimation
  3.	 Which of the following neo-Freudian the-
orists proposed “striving for superiority” 
as the primary motivation for personality 
development?
	a.	 Carl Jung
	b.	Karen Horney
	c.	 Alfred Adler
	d.	Erik Erikson
  4.	 In Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, ______ 
needs are at the bottom of the hierarchy, 
and ______ needs are at the top.
	a.	 physiological; self-actualization
	b.	self-actualization; physiological
	c.	 safety; belonging and love
	d.	belonging and love; safety
  5.	 In Rogers’s self theory, which of the fol-
lowing contributes greatly to one’s self-
actualization?
	a.	 conditional positive regard
	b.	unconditional positive regard
	c.	 an internal locus of control
	d.	an external locus of control
  6.	 “Self-efficacy” is the answer to which of 
the following questions?
	a.	 What is the fullest realization of a per-
son’s potential?
	b.	What is a sense of one’s effectiveness 
in dealing with a particular situation?

Study Guide  |  349
	c.	 What is the perception that one 
controls one’s own fate?
	d.	What is the tendency to make attribu-
tions so that one can view one’s self 
favorably?
  7.	 After losing a tennis match, which of 
the following comments is a person 
most likely to make if self-serving bias 
is operating?
	a.	 “I should have practiced more.”
	b.	“I made too many unforced errors.”
	c.	 “My opponent had the advantage of 
playing on his home court.”
	d.	“My mental concentration was 
lacking.”
  8.	 Which of the following theoretical 
approaches uses factor analysis to deter-
mine the number of factors necessary to 
describe human personality?
	a.	 the psychoanalytic approach
	b.	the trait approach 
	c.	 the humanistic approach
	d.	the social-cognitive approach
  9.	 Which one of Eysenck’s three personal-
ity factors is not one of the “Big Five” 
factors?
	a.	 openness
	b.	neuroticism
	c.	 psychoticism
	d.	agreeableness
10.	 Which of the following personality tests 
uses True–False items and generates a pro-
file of the test taker on 10 clinical scales?
	a.	 MMPI-2
	b.	Rorschach Inkblot Test
	c.	 TAT
	d.	all of the above 
11.	 According to social-cognitive personality 
theorists, which of the following is least 
likely to lead to depression?
	a.	 low sense of self-esteem
	b.	self-serving bias
	c.	 external locus of control
	d.	learned helplessness
12.	 Which of the following trait dimensions is 
one of the “Big Five” personality dimen-
sional labels?
	a.	 aggressiveness
	b.	effectiveness
	c.	 cheerfulness
	d.	openness
13.	 Inferiority complex is to basic anxiety as 
______ is to ________.
	a.	 Adler; Horney
	b.	Horney; Adler
	c.	 Jung; Horney
	d.	Horney; Jung
14.	 Imagine a patient who was just diag-
nosed with a serious illness. According 
to Julian Rotter, if the patient has a 
strong internal locus of control, what is 
the patient’s most likely response to the 
situation?
	a.	 “Whatever happens, it is in God’s 
hands.”
	b.	“I’ll just do what the doctor says and 
trust his judgment.”
	c.	 “Whether I make it or not is just a mat-
ter of luck.”
	d.	“I want to learn about this illness and 
work to fight it.”
15.	 Glenn’s room looks like a tornado hit it. 
He is incredibly messy. His car is filled 
with old pizza boxes, last month’s news-
papers, and dirty laundry. According to 
Freud, Glenn is most likely fixated at the 
______ stage.
	a.	 phallic
	b.	oral
	c.	 anal
	d.	genital
Chapter Concept Check Answers 
Concept Check | 1
• According to Freud, the ego is the execu-
tive of the personality in that it must find 
acceptable ways within reality (society’s 
norms) and the constraints of the superego 
to satisfy the instinctual drives of the id. 

350  |  Chapter 8  |  Personality Theories and Assessment
Finding such ways is not easy, and the ego 
may not be able to do its job.
• In reaction formation, the ego transforms 
the unacceptable impulses and behavior into 
their opposites; in projection they are pro-
jected onto other people. For example, con-
sider thoughts of homosexuality in a man. In 
reaction formation, the man would become 
just the opposite in his behavior, romanti-
cally overly interested in the opposite sex. 
However, in projection, the homosexual feel-
ings would be projected onto other men. He 
would see homosexual tendencies in other 
men and think they were gay, but he would 
not think this about himself.
• According to Freud, as a child progresses 
through the first three psychosexual stages 
(oral, anal, and phallic), he may become 
fixated in a stage when there is an unre-
solved conflict in that stage. If fixated, part 
of the id’s pleasure-seeking energy remains 
at that erogenous zone and continues 
throughout a person’s life. Thus, it will 
show up in the child’s adult personality. For 
example, anal fixations will lead to the anal 
retentive or expulsive personality types.
Concept Check | 2
• In Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, physiologi-
cal, safety, belonging and love, and esteem 
needs have to be satisfied before the highest 
level need for self-actualization can be met.
• Positive regard for a person should be 
unconditional so that the person is free to 
develop her true self and thus work toward 
self-actualization. If our positive regard 
for a person is conditionalized (we set up 
conditions of worth for that person), then 
the person develops a self-concept of what 
others think she should be. This self may 
be very different from the person’s true 
self and thus prevent self-actualization.
• Both self-efficacy and locus of control 
are cognitive judgments about our 
effectiveness in dealing with the situations 
that occur in our lives. Whereas self-
efficacy is a person’s judgment of his 
effectiveness in dealing with particular 
situations, locus of control is a more global 
judgment of how much a person controls 
what happens to him. Both a low general 
sense of self-efficacy and an external locus 
of control (i.e., the perception that forces 
beyond one’s control determine one’s fate) 
often lead to depression.
Concept Check | 3
• There are two major reasons that factor 
analysis can lead to different numbers of 
basic personality dimensions. The first con-
cerns the level of abstraction at which a the-
orist uses the analysis. Some theorists have 
used a level of analysis in which some of 
the dimensions are still correlated (Cattell); 
others (Eysenck) have used higher-order 
factors that are not correlated. Thus, theo-
rists may use different levels of inclusive-
ness, with those using more global levels 
leading to fewer factors. Second, and inde-
pendent of level of abstraction, is what data 
are being analyzed. Different theorists have 
examined different databases. Obviously, 
varying input will lead to varying results, 
even with the same type of analysis.
• The test construction method used to 
develop the MMPI involves only choos-
ing test items that clearly differentiate the 
responding of two distinct groups. In the 
case of the MMPI, test items were chosen 
that were responded to differently by rep-
resentative samples of people with 1 of 10 
different disorders versus normal people. 
Thus, predictive validity is ensured because 
only test items that definitely differentiate 
test takers according to the purpose of the 
test are chosen. In the case of the MMPI, 
this means that various clinical personality 
problems, such as depression or schizo-
phrenia, can be detected by comparing a 
test taker’s response pattern to those of the 
disordered groups.
Answers to Key Terms Exercise
  1.	 defense mechanism
  2.	 unconditional positive regard
  3.	 self-efficacy

Study Guide  |  351
  4.	 phallic stage of psychosexual 
development
  5.	 reality principle
  6.	 id
  7.	 identification
  8.	 self-serving bias
  9.	 projective test
10.	 external locus of control
11.	 erogenous zone
12.	 conditions of worth
13.	 preconscious
14.	 attribution
15.	 superego
Answers to Practice Test Questions
  1.	 b; ego; in all three levels of awareness
  2.	 b; reaction formation
  3.	 c; Alfred Adler
  4.	 a; physiological; self-actualization
  5.	 b; unconditional positive regard
  6.	 b; What is a sense of one’s effec-
tiveness in dealing with a particular 
situation?
  7.	 c; “My opponent had the advantage of 
playing on his home court.”
  8.	 b; the trait approach
  9.	 c; psychoticism
10.	 a; MMPI-2
11.	 b; self-serving bias
12.	 d; openness
13.	 a; Adler; Horney
14.	 d; “I want to learn about this illness and 
work to fight it.”
15.	 c; anal

Social Psychology
 HOW OTHERS INFLUENCE 
OUR BEHAVIOR
Why We Conform
Why We Comply
Why We Obey
how Groups Influence us
 HOW WE THINK ABOUT 
OUR OWN AND OTHERS’ 
BEHAVIOR
how We Make Attributions
how Our Behavior Affects  
Our Attitudes
9

353
H
umans are social animals. We affect each other’s thoughts and actions, 
and how we do so is the topic of this chapter. This research area is called 
social psychology—the scientific study of how we 
influence one another’s behavior and thinking. To understand 
what is meant by such social influence, we’ll consider two 
real-world incidents in which social forces influenced behav-
ior, and then, later in the chapter, we’ll return to each incident 
to see how social psychologists explain them.
The first incident is the brutal murder of Kitty Genovese in New York City in 
1964 (briefly discussed in Chapter 1). Kitty Genovese was returning home from 
work late one night, when she was attacked in front of her apartment building. 
The attack was a prolonged one over a half-hour period in which the attacker left 
and came back more than once. Kitty screamed for help and struggled with the 
knife-wielding attacker, but no help was forthcoming. Some apartment residents 
saw the attack, and others heard her screams and pleas for help. Exactly how many 
residents witnessed the attack is not clear. Initially reported as 38 in The New York 
Times report, more recent analysis of the available archival evidence indicates that 
the number was somewhat less (Manning, Levine, & Collins, 2007). The struggle 
between Kitty and her attacker continued for 35 minutes before he finally fatally 
stabbed her. Her cries for help went unanswered. Someone finally called the police 
after the attacker had left, but it was too late. What social forces kept these people 
from acting sooner, so that Kitty Genovese’s life might have been spared? Media 
accounts blamed apathy created by a big-city culture (Rosenthal, 1964). Social 
psychological researchers, however, provide a very different explanation. We 
will describe this explanation in the section on social influence, when we discuss 
bystander intervention.
The second incident occurred in 1978, when over 900 people who were members 
of Reverend Jim Jones’s Peoples Temple religious cult in Jonestown, Guyana (South 
America), committed mass suicide by drinking cyanide-laced Kool-Aid (though some 
sources say it was Flavor-Aid, a drink mix similar to Kool-Aid). These were Americans 
who had moved with Jones from San Francisco to Jonestown in 1977. Jonestown 
parents not only drank the poisoned Kool-Aid, but they also gave it to their infant 
children to drink. Strangely, the mass suicide occurred in a fairly orderly fashion 
as one person after another drank the poison. 
Hundreds of people went into convulsions and died 
within minutes. What social forces made so few of 
these people willing to disobey Reverend Jones’s 
command for this unified act of mass suicide? We 
will return to this question in the social influence 
section, when we discuss obedience.
What if you had been one of those people who 
witnessed Kitty Genovese’s murder? Would you 
have intervened or called the police? If you are like 
most people, you probably think that you would 
have done so. However, none of the witnesses to 
the attack did so until it was too late. Similarly, most 
people would probably say that they would not have 
drunk the poison at Jonestown. However, the vast 
The New York Times Photo Archives/Redux
Kitty Genovese
➤  social psychology   The scientific 
study of how we influence one 
another’s behavior and thinking.

354  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
majority did so. Why is there this discrepancy between what we say we would do  
and what we actually do? Social psychologists would say that when we just think 
about what our behavior would be in such a situation, we are not subject to the 
social forces that are operating in the actual situation. If you’re in the situation,  
however, social forces are operating and may guide your behavior in a dif­
ferent way. In summary, situational social forces greatly influence our behavior 
and thinking. Keep this in mind as we discuss various types of social influence  
and social thinking.
How Others Influence Our Behavior
Social influence research examines how other people and the social forces they 
create influence an individual’s behavior. There are many types of social influence, 
including conformity, compliance, obedience, and group influences. In this section, 
we will discuss all of these types of social influence. We start with conformity.
Why We Conform
Conformity is usually defined as a change in behavior, belief, or both to conform 
to a group norm as a result of real or imagined group pressure. The word confor-
mity has a negative connotation. We don’t like to be thought of as conformists. 
However, conformity research indicates that humans have a strong tendency 
to conform. To understand the two major types of social influence leading to 
conformity (informational social influence and normative social influence), we’ll 
consider two classic studies on conformity: Muzafer Sherif ’s study using the 
autokinetic effect and Solomon Asch’s study using a line-length judgment task.
The Sherif study and informational social influence.  In Sherif ’s study, 
the participants thought that they were part of a visual perception experiment 
(Sherif, 1937). Participants in completely dark rooms were exposed to a stationary 
point of light and asked to estimate the distance the light moved. Thanks to an 
illusion called the autokinetic effect, a stationary point of light appears to move 
in a dark room because there is no frame of reference and our eyes spontaneously 
move. How far and in what direction the light appears to move varies widely 
among different people. During the first session in Sherif’s study, each partici-
pant was alone in the dark room when making his judgments. Then, during the 
next three sessions, he was in the room with two other participants and could 
hear the others’ estimates of the illusory light movement. What happened?
The average of the individual estimates varied greatly during 
the first session. Over the next three group sessions, however, the 
individual estimates converged on a common group norm. See 
Figure 9.1. All of the participants in the group ended up mak-
ing the same estimates. What do you think would happen if you 
brought the participants back a year later and had them make 
➤  conformity   A change in behavior, 
belief, or both to conform to a 
group norm as a result of real or 
imagined group pressure.

how OThERs INfluENcE OuR BEhavioR  |  355
estimates again while alone? Would their estimates regress back to their earlier indi-
vidual estimates or stay at the group norm? Surprisingly, they stay at the group norm 
(Rohrer, Baron, Hoffman, & Swander, 1954).
To understand why conformity was observed in Sherif’s 
study, we need to consider informational social influ-
ence. This effect stems from our desire to be right in 
situations in which the correct action or judgment is not 
obvious and we need information. In Sherif’s study, par-
ticipants needed information because of the illusory nature of the judg-
ment; thus, their conformity was due to informational social influence. 
When a task is ambiguous or difficult and we want to be correct, we 
look to others for information. But what about conformity when infor-
mation about the correct way to proceed is not needed? To understand 
this type of conformity, we need to consider Asch’s study on line-length 
judgment and normative social influence.
The Asch study and normative social influence.  Student 
participants in Asch’s study made line-length judgments similar to 
the one in Figure 9.2 on page 356 (Asch, 1955, 1956). These line-
length judgments are easy. If participants are alone when making 
these judgments, they don’t make mistakes.
➤  informational social influence  Influence 
stemming from the need for information 
in situations in which the correct action 
or judgment is uncertain.
m Figure 9.1 | Results of Sherif’s Study of Conformity | When the three 
participants in Sherif’s study were alone in the laboratory room on the first day, their 
estimates of the apparent movement of the stationary point of light varied greatly. 
However, once they were all together in the laboratory room from the second through 
the fourth day and could hear each other, their estimates converged. By the fourth day, 
they were all making the same judgments. (Adapted from Sherif & Sherif, 1969, p. 209.)
10
8
6
4
2
0
first day
Second day
Alone
With others
With others
With others
Third day
fourth day
Person 1
Average estimated movement in inches
Person 2
Person 3
Solomon Asch Center for Study of Ethnopolitical Conflict
Solomon Asch

356  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
But in Asch’s study, they were not alone. There were 
others in the room who were Asch’s student confederates but  
who were playing the role of participants. Across various 
conditions in the study, the number of confederate par-
ticipants varied from one to 15. On each trial, judgments 
were made orally, and Asch structured the situation so 
that confederate participants responded before the actual 
participant. Seating was arranged so that the actual par-
ticipant was the next to last to respond. The confederate 
participants purposely made judgmental errors on certain 
trials. Asch wondered what the actual participant would 
do when confronted with other participants unanimously 
voicing an obviously incorrect judgment. For example, if 
all of the other participants said that “1” was the answer to the sample judgment 
in Figure 9.2, what would you say?
Surprisingly, a large number of the actual participants conformed to the obvi-
ously incorrect judgments offered by the confederates. About 75 percent of the 
participants conformed some of the time, and overall, participants conformed  
37 percent of the time. Asch’s results have been replicated many times and in many  
different countries (Bond & Smith, 1996). The correct answers are clear in the Asch 
judgment task, and there are no obvious reasons to conform. The students in the 
experimental room didn’t know each other, and they were all of the same status. 
The judgment task was incredibly easy. Why, then, was conformity observed?
The reason for the conformity in Asch’s study is nor-
mative social influence, an effect stemming from our 
desire to gain the approval and to avoid the disapproval 
of others. We change our behavior to meet the expecta-
tions of others and to get the acceptance of others. We go 
m Figure 9.2 | An Example of 
Asch’s Line-Length Judgment 
Task | The task is to judge which one 
of the comparison lines (1, 2, or 3) is 
the same length as the standard line 
on the left.
Standard Line
Comparison Lines
a
2
1
3
Reproduced with permission. Copyright © 2013 Scientific 
American, Inc. All rights reserved
Asch’s Conformity Study | This is a photograph taken from one of Asch’s conformity  
experiments. The student in the middle (#6) is the actual participant. The other participants are 
confederates of the experimenter. As you can see, the actual participant is perplexed by the  
obviously incorrect responses of the confederate participants on this trial.
➤  normative social influence  Influence 
stemming from our desire to gain the 
approval and to avoid the disapproval 
of others.

how OThERs INfluENcE OuR BEhavioR  |  357
along with the crowd. But Asch, who died in 1996, always wondered whether the  
subjects who conformed did so only out of normative needs, knowing that their 
answers were wrong, or whether they did so because the social pressure of the 
situation also actually changed their perceptions to agree with the group—what 
the confederates said changed what the participants saw (Blakeslee, 2005). Berns 
et al. (2005) found some evidence that the latter may possibly be the case. Using 
fMRI (see Chapter 2), they scanned subjects’ brain activity while participat-
ing in an Asch-type conformity experiment employing a mental rotation task 
instead of a line-length judgment task. As in Asch’s studies, conformity was 
observed. Subjects gave the group’s incorrect answers (conformed) 41 percent 
of the time. Surprisingly, the brain activity for conforming responses was in 
the cortical areas dedicated to visual and spatial awareness, regions devoted to 
perception. However, the brain activity for independent responses was in the 
cortical areas devoted to emotion, such as the amygdala, indicating that non-
conformity creates an emotional cost. These findings led the study’s lead author, 
Gregory Berns, to conclude that, “We like to think that seeing is believing, but 
the study’s findings show that seeing is believing what the group tells you to 
believe” (Blakeslee, 2005). This conclusion seems too strong given limitations 
on deciding the exact nature of the visual processing leading to the activity in 
the indicated brain areas. While it can be concluded that different brain areas 
were active during conforming versus nonconforming responding, clearly, more 
research is needed before it can be concluded that the conformers actually 
change their perceptions.
Situational, cultural, and gender factors that impact conformity.  Asch 
and other conformity researchers have found many situational factors that affect 
whether we conform. Let’s consider three. (1) Unanimity of the group is impor-
tant. It’s difficult to be a minority of one, but not two. For example, Asch found 
that the amount of conformity drops considerably if just one of the confederate 
participants gives an answer—right or wrong—that differs from the rest of the 
group. (2) The mode of responding (voting aloud versus secret ballot) is also 
important. In Asch’s study, if the actual participant did not have to respond aloud 
after hearing the group’s responses, but rather could write her response, the 
amount of conformity dropped dramatically. So, in the various groups to which 
you belong, be sure to use secret ballots when voting on issues if you want the true 
opinions of your group members. (3) Finally, more conformity is observed from a 
person who is of lesser status than the other group members or who is attracted 
to the group and wants to be a part of it. These situational factors are especially 
effective in driving conformity when there is a probationary period for attaining 
group membership.
Cultural factors also seem to impact the amount of conformity that is 
observed. Bond and Smith (1996) conducted a meta-analysis of 133 conformity 
studies drawn from 17 countries using an Asch-type line-length judgment task 
to investigate whether the level of conformity has changed over time and whether  
it is related cross-culturally to individualism–collectivism. Broadly defined, 

358  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
individualism emphasizes individual needs and achievement. Collectivism, in 
contrast, emphasizes group needs, thereby encouraging conformity and dis-
couraging dissent with the group. Analyzing just the studies conducted in the 
United States, they found that the amount of conformity has declined since 
the 1950s, paralleling the change in our culture toward more individualism. 
Similarly, they found that collectivist countries (e.g., Hong Kong) tended to 
show higher levels of conformity than individualist countries (e.g., the United 
States). Thus, whereas Asch’s basic conformity findings have been replicated 
in many different countries, cultural factors do play a role in determining the 
amount of conformity that is observed.
In their meta-analysis, Bond and Smith (1996) also found evidence for gender 
differences in conformity. They observed a higher level of conformity for female 
participants, which is consistent with earlier reviews of conformity studies (e.g., 
Eagly & Carli, 1981). They also found that this gender difference in conformity 
had not narrowed over time. Mori and Arai (2010) recently replicated this gender 
difference finding, using a very clever presentation technique called the fMORI 
technique that eliminates the need for confederates. This technique allowed 
the researchers to present different stimuli to the minority participants and the 
majority participants on critical trials without their awareness. The top part of the 
standard lines appeared in either green or magenta so that the two groups of par-
ticipants would see them differently when wearing different types of polarizing 
sunglasses that filtered either green or magenta to make the lines appear longer 
or shorter. Mori and Arai’s study, incorporating a new presentation technique, 
testifies to the continuing interest in Asch’s conformity research, which is over a 
half-century old. 
Why We Comply
Conformity is a form of social influence in which people change their behav-
ior or attitudes in order to adhere to a group norm. Compliance is acting in 
accordance to a direct request from another person or group. Think about 
how often others—your parents, roommates, friends, salespeople, and so 
on—make requests of you. Social psychologists have identified many differ-
ent techniques that help others to achieve compliance with such requests. 
Salespeople, fundraisers, politicians, and anyone else who wants to get people 
to say “yes” use these compliance techniques. After reading this section you 
should be much more aware of how other people—especially salespeople—
attempt to get you to comply with their requests. Of course, you’ll also be bet-
ter equipped to get other people to comply with your requests. As we discuss  
these compliance techniques, note how each one involves two requests, 
and how it is the second request with which the  
person wants compliance. We’ll start our discussion 
with a compliance technique that you have probably  
encountered—the foot-in-the-door technique.
➤  compliance   Acting in accordance with 
a direct request from another person or 
group.

how OThERs INfluENcE OuR BEhavioR  |  359
The foot-in-the-door technique.  In the foot-in-the-door technique, compli-
ance to a large request is gained by preceding it with a very small request. The  
tendency is for people who have complied with the small request to comply with the  
next, larger request. The principle is simply to start small and build. One classic 
experimental demonstration of this technique involved a large, ugly sign about driv-
ing carefully (Freedman & Fraser, 1966). People were asked directly if this ugly sign 
could be put in their front yards, and the vast majority of them refused. However, 
the majority of the people who had complied with a much smaller request two 
weeks earlier (for example, to sign a safe-driving petition) agreed to have the large, 
ugly sign put in their yard. The smaller request had served as the “foot in the door.”
In another study, people who were first asked to wear a pin publicizing a 
cancer fund-raising drive and then later asked to donate to a cancer charity were 
far more likely to donate to the cancer charity than were people who were asked 
only to contribute to the charity (Pliner, Hart, Kohl, & Saari, 1974). Why does 
the foot-in-the-door technique work? Its success seems to be partially due to our 
behavior (complying with the initial request) affecting our attitudes both to be 
more positive about helping and to view ourselves as generally charitable people. 
In addition, once we have made a commitment (such as signing a safe-driving 
petition), we feel pressure to remain consistent (putting up the large ugly sign) 
with this earlier commitment.
This technique was used by the Chinese Communists during the Korean War 
on prisoners of war to help brainwash them about Communism (Ornstein, 1991). 
Many prisoners returning after the war had praise for the Chinese Communists. 
This attitude had been cultivated by having the prisoners first do small things like 
writing out some questions and then the pro-Communist answers, which they 
might just copy from a notebook, and then later writing essays in the guise of 
students summarizing the Communist position on various issues such as poverty. 
Just as the participants’ attitudes changed in the Freedman and Fraser study and 
they later agreed to put the big, ugly sign in their yard, the POWs became more 
sympathetic to the Communist cause. The foot-in-the-door technique is a very 
powerful technique. Watch out for compliance requests of increasing size. Say no, 
before it is too late to do so.
The door-in-the-face technique. The door-in-the-face technique is the opposite 
of the foot-in-the-door technique (Cialdini, Vincent, Lewis, Catalan, Wheeler, & 
Danby, 1975). In the door-in-the-face technique, compliance is gained by start-
ing with a large, unreasonable request that is turned 
down and following it with a more reasonable, smaller 
request. The person who is asked to comply appears to be 
slamming the door in the face of the person making the 
large request. It is the smaller request, however, that the 
person making the two requests wants all along. For 
example, imagine that one of your friends asked you to 
watch his pet for a month while he is out of town. You 
➤  foot-in-the-door technique   Compliance 
to a large request is gained by preceding 
it with a very small request.
➤  door-in-the-face technique  Compliance is 
gained by starting with a large, unreasonable 
request that is turned down and following it 
with a more reasonable, smaller request.

360  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
refuse. Then your friend asks for what he really wanted, which was for you to 
watch the pet over the following weekend. You agree. What has happened? You’ve 
succumbed to the door-in-the-face technique.
The success of the door-in-the-face technique is probably due to our tendency 
toward reciprocity, making mutual concessions. The person making the requests 
appears to have made a concession by moving to the much smaller request. 
Shouldn’t we reciprocate and comply with this smaller request? Fear that others 
won’t view us as fair, helpful, and concerned for others likely also plays a role 
in this compliance technique’s success. The door-in-the-face technique seems 
to have even been involved in G. Gordon Liddy getting the Watergate burglary 
approved by the Committee to Reelect the President, CREEP (Cialdini, 1993). The 
committee approved Liddy’s plan with a bare bones $250,000 budget, after they 
had disapproved plans with $1 million and $500,000 proposed budgets. The only 
committee person who opposed acceptance had not been present for the previous 
two more costly proposal meetings. Thus, he was able to see the irrationality of 
the plan and was not subject to the door-in-the-face reciprocity influence felt by 
other committee members.
The low-ball technique.  Consider the following scenario (Cialdini, 1993). You 
go to buy a new car. The salesperson gives you a great price, much better than you 
ever imagined. You go into the salesperson’s office and start filling out the sales 
forms and arranging for financing. The salesperson then says that before complet-
ing the forms, she forgot that she has to get approval from her sales manager. She 
leaves for a few minutes and returns looking rather glum. She says, regretfully, that 
the sales manager said that he couldn’t give you that great price you thought you 
had. The sales price has to be a higher one. What do most people do in this situa-
tion? You probably are thinking that you wouldn’t buy the car. However, research 
on this compliance tactic, called the low-ball technique, indicates that it does 
work—people buy the car at the higher price (Cialdini, 
Cacioppo, Bassett, & Miller, 1978).
In the low-ball technique, compliance to a costly 
request is achieved by first getting compliance to an 
attractive, less costly request and then reneging on 
➤  low-ball technique   Compliance to a 
costly request is gained by first getting 
compliance to an attractive, less costly 
request but then reneging on it.
BLONDIe
© 2013 King Features Syndicate, Inc. World 
rights reserved

how OThERs INfluENcE OuR BEhavioR  |  361
it. This is similar to the foot-in-the-door technique in that a second, larger 
request is the one desired. In the low-ball technique, however, the first request 
is one that is very attractive to you. You are not making a concession (as in 
the foot-in-the-door technique), but rather getting a good deal. However, the 
“good” part of the deal is then taken away. Why does the low-ball technique 
work? The answer is that many of us feel obligated to go through with the deal 
after we have agreed to the earlier deal (request) even if the deal has changed 
for the worse. This is similar to the pressure we feel to remain consistent in 
our commitment that helps drive the foot-in-the-door technique. So remem-
ber, if somebody tries to use the low-ball technique on you, walk away. You are 
not obligated to comply with the new request.
The that’s-not-all technique.  There’s another compliance technique, which 
is often used in television infomercials. Just after the price for the product is 
given and before you can decide yes or no about it, the announcer says, “But 
wait, that’s not all, there’s more,” and the price is lowered or more merchandise 
is included, or both, in order to sweeten the deal. Sometimes an initial price is 
not even given. Rather, the announcer says something like, “How much would 
you pay for this incredible product?” and then goes on to sweeten the deal 
before you can answer. As in the low-ball technique, the final offer is the one 
that was planned from the start. However, you are more likely to comply and 
take the deal after all of the build up than if this “better” deal were offered 
directly (Burger, 1986). This technique is called the that’s-not-all technique—
to gain compliance, a planned second request with additional benefits is made 
before a response to a first request can be made. Like the door-in-the-face tech-
nique, salespeople also use this technique. For example, before you can answer 
yes or no to a price offered by a car salesperson, he throws in some “bonus 
options” for the car. As in the door-in-the-face technique, reciprocity is at work 
here. The seller has made a concession (the bonus options), so shouldn’t you 
reciprocate by taking the offer, complying? We often do.
In summary, each of these compliance techniques involves two requests (see 
Table 9.1 on page 362). In the foot-in-the-door technique, a small request is fol-
lowed by a larger request. In the door-in-the-face technique, a large request is 
followed by a smaller request. In the low-ball technique, an attractive first request 
is taken back and followed by a less-attractive request. In the that’s-not-all  
technique, a more attractive request is made before a response can be given to 
an initial request. In all cases, the person making the requests is attempting 
to manipulate you with the first request. It is the second request for which 
compliance is desired. The foot-in-the-door and low-ball techniques both lead 
to commitment to the first request with the hope 
that the person will feel pressure to remain true to his 
initial commitment and accede to the second request.  
The other two techniques involve reciprocity. Once the 
other person has made a concession (accepted our refusal 
in the door-in-the-face technique) or done us a favor  
➤  that’s-not-all technique   Compliance 
to a planned second request with  
additional benefits is gained by present-
ing this request before a response can 
be made to a first request.

362  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
(an even better deal in the that’s-not-all technique), we think we should recipro-
cate and accede to the second request.
Why We Obey
Compliance is agreeing to a request from a person. Obedience is following the 
commands of a person in authority. Obedience is sometimes constructive and 
beneficial to us. It would be difficult for a society to exist, for instance, without 
obedience to its laws. Young children need to obey their caretakers for their 
own well-being. Obedience can also be destructive, though. There are many 
real-world examples of its destructive nature. Consider Nazi Germany, in which 
millions of innocent people were murdered, or the My Lai massacre in Vietnam, 
in which American soldiers killed hundreds of innocent children, women, and 
old people. In the My Lai massacre, the soldiers were 
ordered to shoot the innocent villagers, and they did. 
The phrase “I was only following orders” usually sur-
faces in such cases. When confronted with these atroci-
ties, we wonder what type of person could do such horrible 
things. Often, however, it’s the situational social forces, and 
not the person, that should bear more of the responsibility 
for the actions. Just as we found that situational factors lead 
us to conform and comply, we find that such social forces can 
lead us to commit such acts of destructive obedience.
Milgram’s basic experimental paradigm.  The experiments 
that point to social forces as causes of destructive obedience—
probably the most famous and controversial ones in psychology— 
are Stanley Milgram’s obedience studies done at Yale University 
in the early 1960s (Milgram, 1963, 1965, 1974). We will describe 
Milgram’s experimental paradigm and findings in more detail 
than usual. It is also worth noting that Milgram was one of 
Table 9.1   Four Compliance Techniques
Technique
1st Request
2nd Request
Major Reason 
for Compliance
Foot-in-the-door
Small
Larger
Consistency
Door-in-the-face
Large
Smaller
Reciprocity
Low-ball
Attractive
Less attractive
Consistency
That’s-not-all
Attractive
More attractive
Reciprocity
➤  obedience   Following the commands of 
a person in authority.
Stanley Milgram
The Graduate Center, CUNY

how OThERs INfluENcE OuR BEhavioR  |  363
Asch’s graduate students and actually got the initial idea for his obedience studies 
from conducting some of Asch’s conformity studies (Blass, 2004). What exactly did 
Milgram do?
First, let’s consider Milgram’s basic experimental procedure from the perspec-
tive of a participant in this study. Imagine that you have volunteered to be in an 
experiment on learning and memory. You show up at the assigned time and place, 
where you encounter two men, the experimenter and another participant, a middle- 
aged man. The experimenter explains that the study is examining the effects  
of punishment by electric shock on learning, specifically learning a list of word 
pairs (for example, blue—box). When tested, the learner would have to indicate for 
each of the first words in the word pairs, which of four words had originally been 
paired with it. He would press one of four switches, which would light up one of 
the four answer boxes located on top of the shock generator. The experimenter 
further explains that one participant will be the teacher and the other the learner. 
You draw slips for the two roles, and the other participant draws “learner,” mak-
ing you the teacher. You accompany the learner to an adjoining room where he is 
strapped into a chair with one arm hooked up to the shock generator in the other 
room. The shock levels in the experiment will range from 15 volts to 450 volts. 
The experimenter explains that high levels of shock need to be used in order for 
the study to be a valid test of its effectiveness as punishment. The experimenter 
gives you a sample shock of 45 volts so that you have some idea of the intensity 
of the various shock levels.
You return to the other room with the experimenter and sit down at the shock 
generator, which has a switch for each level of shock, starting at 15 volts and 
going up to 450 volts in 15-volt increments. There are also some labels below 
the switches—“Slight Shock,” “Very Strong Shock,” “Danger: Severe Shock,” and, 
under the last two switches, “XXX” in red. The experimenter reminds you that 
when the learner makes a mistake on the word pair task, you are to administer 
the shock by pushing the appropriate switch. You are to start with 15 volts and 
increase the shock level by 15 volts for each wrong answer.
The experiment begins, and the learner makes errors. Nothing else happens 
except for a few “Ugh!”s until at 120 volts the learner cries out that the shocks 
really hurt. As the shock level increases, you continue hearing him cry out, and 
his screams escalate with the increasing voltage (see Table 9.2 on page 364). At 
higher levels, he protests and says that he no longer wants to participate and 
that he isn’t going to respond anymore. After 330 volts, he doesn’t respond. 
You turn to the experimenter to see what to do. The experimenter says to treat 
a nonresponse as a wrong answer and to continue with the experiment. The 
learner never responds again.
This is basically the situation that Milgram’s participants confronted. What 
would you do? If you are like most people, you say you would stop at a rather 
low level of shock. Before this experiment was conducted, Milgram asked various 
types of people (college students, nonstudent adults, and psychiatrists) what they 
thought they and other people would do. Inevitably, the response was that they 

364  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
would stop at a fairly low level of shock, less than 150 volts, that others would 
also do so, and that virtually no one would go to the end of the shock generator. 
The psychiatrists said that maybe one person in a thousand would go to the end 
of the shock generator.
Table 9.2   Examples of the Learner’s Protests in Milgram’s 
Obedience Experiments with Escalated Vocal Protests
120 volts
Ugh! Hey, this really hurts.
150 volts
Ugh!!! Experimenter! That’s all. Get me out of here. I told you I had 
heart trouble. My heart’s starting to bother me now. Get me out of 
here, please. My heart’s starting to bother me. I refuse to go on. Let 
me out.
210 volts
Ugh!! Experimenter! Get me out of here. I’ve had enough. I won’t be 
in the experiment any more.
270 volts
(Agonized scream.) Let me out of here. Let me out of here. Let me 
out of here. Let me out. Do you hear? Let me out of here.
300 volts
(Agonized scream.) I absolutely refuse to answer any more. Get me 
out of here. You can’t hold me here. Get me out. Get me out of here.
315 volts
(Intensely agonized scream.) I told you I refuse to answer. I’m no  
longer part of this experiment.
330 volts
(Intense and prolonged agonized scream.) Let me out of here. Let 
me out of here. My heart’s bothering me. Let me out, I tell you. 
(Hysterically) Let me out of here. Let me out of here. You have no 
right to hold me here. Let me out! Let me out! Let me out! Let me 
out of here! Let me out! Let me out!
For the complete schedule of protests, see Milgram (1974), pp. 56–57.
These photos from Milgram’s 
obedience studies show the shock 
generator that the teacher used 
and the learner being strapped into 
a chair and fitted with electrodes.
From the film Obedience © 1968 by Stanley Milgram, © renewed 1993 
by Alexandra Milgram; and distributed by Alexander Street Press

how OThERs INfluENcE OuR BEhavioR  |  365
Milgram’s initial obedience finding.  As you have probably already guessed, 
Milgram didn’t find what these people predicted. For the conditions just 
described (learner in another room, escalated moaning and screaming, and non-
responding at higher levels of shock), almost two out of every three participants 
(62.5 percent) continued to obey the experimenter and administered the maxi-
mum possible shock (450 volts). This is even worse than it appears, as the 
learner had mentioned a slight heart condition before the experiment began 
and mentioned it again during his protests (see Table 9.2). There is a sad irony 
here in that the learner did have a heart problem and died from it about three 
years later (Blass, 2009). Milgram replicated this finding with new participants 
and observed the same result—65 percent obeyed and administered the maxi-
mum shock. He also observed a 65 percent maximal obedience rate in another 
experiment when the learner made no vocal protests but rather just pounded 
the laboratory wall in protest at 300 volts and stopped pounding and respond-
ing after 315 volts. Even more frightening is Milgram’s finding in a pilot study 
that without any auditory input (no vocal protests or pounding the wall), vir­
tually every participant continued to obey the experimenter and administer the 
maximum possible shock!
It is important to realize that the learner (a confederate of the experimenter) was 
never really shocked. The teacher only thought he was administering the shocks. 
The true participants, who always drew the role of teacher, were carefully debriefed 
after the experiment was over and told that they did not really shock the other 
person. Critics of Milgram’s study, however, argue that Milgram inflicted irrepa-
rable harm on them (Baumrind, 1964). Participants were put into an emotional 
situation in which many of them appeared to be on the point of nervous collapse 
(many bit their lips, dug their fingernails into their own flesh, laughed hysteri-
cally, and pushed their fists into their foreheads). Participants also learned some-
thing disturbing about themselves—that they would follow the commands of an 
authority figure to harm another human being. In his rebuttal to Baumrind (1964)  
and his other critics, Milgram (1964) reported the findings of a survey sent to all 
856 participants in the obedience experiments. The survey asked the participants 
to reflect on their experience during the experiment. Milgram ended up with a 
92 percent return rate, a remarkable return rate for a mailed survey. What were 
the survey results? Most participants in the obedience experiments had positive 
feelings about their participation. For example, almost 84 percent said that they 
were glad to have participated, and only 1.3 percent said that they were sorry they 
had. Eighty percent agreed that more studies of this sort should be carried out. 
Milgram also had a psychiatrist interview 40 participants with the aim of identify-
ing any who might have been harmed by the experiment. The psychiatrist found 
no harm in any of the participants he interviewed.
This difference between what we say we will do and what we actually do illus-
trates the power of situational social forces on our behavior. When we are not in the 
situation, we may say that we would act one way; however, when in the situation, 

366  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
we may act in the opposite way. Why does the situation have such a strong  
impact on our behavior? What situational factors are important? These are the 
questions that Milgram tried to answer in his 20 or so experiments with over 
1,000 participants using variants of the procedure described above.
Do you realize how Milgram used the foot-in-the-door technique in achieving 
obedience (Gilbert, 1981)? He had the participant start by administering very 
small shocks (beginning at 15 volts) and increased the level slowly (in 15-volt 
increments). The learner didn’t protest these mild, early shocks. The teacher 
had already obeyed several times by the time the learner started his protests (at  
120 volts), and by the time the shock level was high, the teacher had obeyed 
numerous times. Milgram’s results might have been very different if he would 
have had participants start at a high level of shock or if the learner had protested 
the first few small shocks. It is also important to realize that if at any time the 
teacher asked the experimenter about stopping, the experimenter would respond 
with a series of four standardized prompts, such as “Please go on” or “The 
experiment requires that you continue.” If the teacher refused to go on, the experi-
menter would stop the experiment; therefore, the participants were not coerced 
or forced to obey.
In addition, the participants in Milgram’s experiments were not college stu-
dents. He conducted the study at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut, 
and used volunteer participants from the New Haven community. They were paid 
$4, plus bus fare. The experimenter and the confederate participants were always 
men. In the experiments that I described and in all of his other experiments except 
one, Milgram used male participants from age 20 to age 50. In just one experi-
ment, female participants served as teachers with male learners, and the maximal 
obedience rate was the same as with male teachers, 65 percent. This finding of no 
gender differences in obedience has been replicated by other researchers (Blass, 
1999). Milgram’s basic obedience finding has also been replicated in many dif-
ferent countries, including Jordan, Spain, Italy, and Austria (Blass, 1999). This 
means that Milgram’s basic obedience-to-authority finding is definitely reliable. 
With this in mind, let’s see what some of the situational factors are that are 
critical to obtaining such obedience.
Situational factors that impact obedience.  Let’s label the Milgram 
experiment described earlier in this chapter as the baseline condition (the 
teacher and learner are in separate rooms but the teacher can hear the learner’s 
escalated screams and protests and his refusal to continue at higher voltage 
levels, and the learner does not respond after 330 volts). One important factor 
is the physical presence of the experimenter (the person with authority). 
Milgram found that if the experimenter left the laboratory and gave his com-
mands over the telephone, maximum obedience (administering the highest pos-
sible shock) dropped to 20.5 percent. The closeness of the teacher and the 
learner is also important (as the auditory input indicates). Remember, virtually 
every participant administered the maximum shock when the learner did not 
vocally protest or pound the wall, but only about two of every three participants 

how OThERs INfluENcE OuR BEhavioR  |  367
did so when the teacher could hear the learner’s protests 
or pounding. In another experiment, Milgram made the 
teacher and learner even closer by having them both in 
the same room instead of different rooms, and maxi-
mum obedience dropped to 40 percent. It dropped even 
further, to 30 percent, when the teacher had to administer 
the shock directly by forcing the learner’s hand onto a 
shock plate. This means that obedience decreases as the 
teacher and learner are physically closer to each other. 
Interestingly, though, the maximum obedience rate 
doesn’t drop to zero percent even when they touch; it is 
still 30 percent.
Some critics thought that the location of the experi-
ments, at prestigious Yale University, contributed to the 
high maximum obedience rate. To check this hypothesis, 
Milgram ran the same baseline condition in a rundown 
office building in nearby Bridgeport, Connecticut, com-
pletely dissociated from Yale. What do you think hap-
pened? The maximum obedience rate went down, but it 
didn’t go down much. Milgram found a maximum obedience rate of 47.5 percent. 
The prestige and authority of the university setting did contribute to the obe­
dience rate, but not nearly as much as the presence of the experimenter or the 
closeness of the teacher and the learner. The presence of two confederate disobe-
dient teachers dropped the obedience rate to 10 percent. To get the maximum 
obedience to zero percent, Milgram set up a situation with two experimenters 
who at some point during the experiment disagreed. One said to stop the experi-
ment, while the other said to continue. In this case, when one of the people in 
authority said to stop, all of the teachers stopped.
What about getting the maximum obedience rate to increase from that 
observed in the baseline condition? Milgram tried to do that by taking the 
direct responsibility for shocking away from the learner. Instead, the teacher 
only pushed the switch on the shock generator to indicate to another teacher 
(another confederate) in the room with the learner how much shock to 
administer. With this direct responsibility for shocking the learner lifted off 
of their shoulders, almost all of the participants (92.5 percent) obeyed the 
experimenter and administered the maximum shock level. This finding and all 
of the others that we have discussed are summarized in Table 9.3 (page 368), 
so that you can compare them. For more detail on the experiments that were 
described, see Milgram (1974).
Do you think that Milgram’s findings could be replicated today? Aren’t people 
today more aware of the dangers of blindly following authority than they were in 
the early 1960s? If so, wouldn’t they disobey more often than Milgram’s partici-
pants? To test this question, Burger (2009) conducted a replication of Milgram’s 
baseline condition. His participants were men and women who responded to 
From the film Obedience © 1968 by Stanley Milgram, © renewed 1993 by 
Alexandra Milgram; and distributed by Alexander Street Press
The teacher is administering the shock to the 
learner by directly forcing the learner’s arm 
on the shock plate. Even in this situation, 
maximal obedience was still 30 percent.

368  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
Table 9.3   Results for Some of Milgram’s Experimental Conditions
Experimental Conditions
Percent of Maximum  
Obedience Observed
Teacher and learner in different rooms, no audi-
tory input (pilot study)
100
Teacher does not have direct responsibility for 
administering shock
92.5
Teacher and learner in different rooms and 
learner pounds wall at 300 volts and stops 
pounding and responding after 315 volts
65
Baseline condition—teacher and learner in differ-
ent rooms, escalated vocal protests, and nonre-
sponding after 330 volts
62.5; 65 in replication
Baseline condition but female participants
65
In rundown office building in Bridgeport, 
Connecticut
47.5
Teacher and learner in same room
40
Teacher and learner in same room and teacher 
has to force learner’s hand onto shock plate
30
Experimenter not present
20.5
Two models of disobedience
10
Two experimenters who disagree
0
newspaper advertisements and flyers distributed locally. Their ages ranged from 
20 to 81 years, with a mean age of 42.9 years. Some procedural changes were 
necessary to obtain permission to run the study, which otherwise would not have 
met the current American Psychological Association guidelines for ethical treat-
ment of human subjects. The main procedural change of interest to us was that 
once participants pressed the 150-volt switch and started to read the next test 
item, the experiment was stopped—leading Elmes (2009) to refer to this procedure 
as “obedience lite.” The 150-volt point was chosen because in Milgram’s study, 
once participants went past 150 volts, the vast majority continued to obey up 
to the highest shock level (Burger, 2009). In a meta-analysis of data from eight 
of Milgram’s obedience experiments, Packer (2008) also found that the 150-volt 
point was the critical juncture for disobedience (the voltage level at which par-
ticipants were most likely to disobey the experimenter). Thus, in Burger’s study, 
it is a reasonable assumption that the percentage of participants that go past  
150 volts is a good estimate of the percentage that would go to the end of the shock  

how OThERs INfluENcE OuR BEhavioR  |  369
generator. Of course, the experimenter also ended the experiment when a partici-
pant refused to continue after hearing all of the experimenter’s prods. What do 
you think Burger found for male participants? What about female participants? 
66.7 percent of the men continued after 150 volts, and 72.7 percent of the women 
did so. Although these percentages have to be adjusted down slightly because not 
every participant in Milgram’s study who went past 150 volts maximally obeyed, 
these results are very close to Milgram’s finding of 65 percent obedience for both 
men and women in the baseline condition. Burger’s findings indicate that the 
average American reacted in this laboratory obedience situation today much like 
they did almost 50 years ago.
Some European psychologists have found an alternative way forward to 
reopening the study of obedience using the Milgram experimental paradigm. 
They have gotten around the ethical limitations by placing participants in an 
immersive virtual environment that reprises Milgram’s experimental setting 
(Cheetham, Pedroni, Antley, Slater, & Jäncke, 2009; Dambrun & Vatiné, 2010; 
Slater et al., 2006). The evidence thus far indicates that people tend to respond to 
the situation as if it were real. For example, in Slater et al., participants, wearing 
a virtual reality headset, were instructed to administer shocks to a computerized 
female whenever the word association memory tests were answered incorrectly. In 
the Visible condition, the learner (the female avatar) was seen and heard, and she 
responded to the shocks with increasing signs of discomfort including screaming 
and said that she wanted to stop. At the penultimate shock, her head slumped 
forward and she made no further responses. In the Hidden condition, her answers 
were communicated only through text and there were no protests. Replicating 
Milgram’s finding that the closeness of the teacher and learner impacts the 
amount of obedience, all 11 participants in the Hidden condition administered 
the strongest shock, and in the Visible condition, 17 of the 20 participants did 
so. Skin conductance analysis indicated that in spite of their knowledge that the 
situation was artificial, participants were aroused and distressed as if it were real. 
Using fMRI, Cheetham et al. found supportive evidence that this was indeed per-
sonal distress and not empathic concern. In sum, it appears that the immersive 
virtual environment procedure opens the door to future behavioral and neuroim-
aging studies of obedience and other extreme social situations.
Aside from ethical considerations, another criticism of Milgram’s experiments 
was that participants were in an experiment in which they had agreed to participate 
and were paid for their participation. Some thought that participants may have felt 
an obligation to obey the experimenter and continue in the experiment because of 
this agreement. However, the very different levels of obedience that were observed 
when various situational factors were manipulated shows that these situational fac-
tors were more important in obtaining the obedience than a feeling of experimental 
obligation. In addition, Milgram’s results have also been replicated without paying 
people for their participation. Let’s see how this was done.
The “Astroten” study.  The fascinating aspect of the “Astroten” study is that 
the participants did not even know they were in the study! The results, then, 

370  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
could hardly be due to a feeling of experimental obligation. The participants in 
this study were nurses on duty alone in a hospital ward (Hofling, Brotzman, 
Dalrymple, Graves, & Pierce, 1966). Each nurse received a call from a person using 
the name of a staff doctor not personally known by the nurse. The doctor ordered 
the nurse to give a dose exceeding the maximum daily dosage of an unauthorized 
medication (“Astroten”) to an actual patient in the ward. This order violated 
many hospital rules—medication orders need to be given in person and not over 
the phone, it was a clear overdose, and the medication was not even authorized. 
Twenty-two nurses, in different hospitals and at different times, were confronted 
with such an order. What do you think they did? Remember that this is not an 
experiment. These are real nurses who are on duty in hospitals doing their jobs.
Twenty-one of the twenty-two nurses did not question the order and went to 
give the medication, though they were intercepted before getting to the patient. 
Now what do you think that the researchers found when they asked other nurses 
and nursing students what they would do in such a situation? Of course, they  
said the opposite of what the nurses actually did. Nearly all of them (31 out of 33) said  
that they would have refused to give the medication, once again demonstrating 
the power of situational forces on obedience. These findings are far from isolated. 
For example, Krackow and Blass (1995) conducted a survey study of registered 
nurses on the subject of carrying out a physician’s order that could have harmful 
consequences for the patient. Nearly half (46 percent) of the nurses reported that 
they had carried out such orders, assigning most of the responsibility to the phy-
sicians and little to themselves. These findings are truly worrisome, because these 
were real patients who, through blind obedience, were placed into potentially 
life-threatening situations.
The Jonestown massacre. Given all of this research pointing to our tendency 
to obey people in authority, even if it is destructive, the Jonestown mass suicide 
orchestrated by the charismatic Reverend Jim Jones should not be that surprising. 
People are willing to obey an authority, especially one with whom they are familiar 
and they view as their leader. Using various compliance techniques, Jones fostered 
unquestioned faith in himself as the cult leader and discouraged individualism. For 
example, using the foot-in-the-door technique, he slowly increased the financial 
support required of Peoples Temple members until they had turned over essen-
tially everything they had (Levine, 2003). He even used the door-in-the-face and 
foot-in-the-door techniques to recruit members (Ornstein, 1991). He had his 
recruiters ask people walking by to help the poor. When they refused, the recruiters 
then asked them just to donate five minutes of their time to put letters in envelopes 
(door-in-the-face). Once they agreed to this small task, they were then given infor-
mation about future, related charitable work. Having committed to the small task, 
they then returned later as a function of the consistency aspect of the foot-in-the-
door technique. As they contributed more and more of their time, they became 
more involved in the Peoples Temple and were then easily persuaded to join.
There is one situational factor leading to the Jonestown tragedy that is not so 
obvious, though—the importance of Jones moving his almost 1,000 followers from 
San Francisco to the rain forests of Guyana, an alien environment in the jungle 

how OThERs INfluENcE OuR BEhavioR  |  371
of an unfamiliar country (Cialdini, 1993). In such an uncertain environment, the 
followers would look to the actions of others (informational social influence) to 
guide their own actions. The Jonestown followers looked to the settlement lead-
ers and other followers, which then helped Jones to manage such a large group of 
followers. With this in mind, think about the day of the commanded suicide. Why 
was the mass suicide so orderly, and why did the people seem so willing to com-
mit suicide? The most fanatical followers stepped forward immediately and drank 
the poison. Because people looked to others to define the correct response, they 
followed the lead of those who quickly and willingly drank the poison. In other 
words, drinking the poison seemed to be the correct thing to do. This situation 
reflects a “herd mentality,” getting some members going in the right direction 
so that others will follow like cattle being led to the slaughterhouse. The phrase 
“drinking the Kool-Aid” later became synonymous with blind allegiance.
How Groups Influence Us
Usually when we think of groups, we think of formalized groups such as com­
mittees, sororities and fraternities, classes, or trial juries. Social psychologists, 
however, have studied the influences of all sorts of groups, from less formal ones, 
such as an audience at some event, to these more formal ones. Our discussion 
of the influences of such groups begins with one of the earliest ones that was 
studied, social facilitation.
Social facilitation. How would your behavior be affected by the presence of other 
people, such as an audience? Do you think the audience would help or hinder? 
One of the earliest findings for such situations was social facilitation, improve-
ment in performance in the presence of others. This social facilitative effect is  
The Jonestown Massacre | These are the dead bodies of some of the over 
900 members of Reverend Jim Jones’s religious cult in Jonestown, Guyana, 
who committed mass suicide by drinking cyanide-laced Kool-Aid.
AP Photo

372  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
limited, however, to familiar tasks for which the person’s response is automatic 
(such as doing simple arithmetic problems). When people are faced with difficult 
unfamiliar tasks that they have not mastered (such as solving a complex maze), 
performance is hindered by the presence of others. Why? One explanation pro-
poses that the presence of others increases a person’s drive and arousal, and 
research studies have found that under increased arousal, people tend to give 
whatever response is dominant (most likely) in that situation (Bond & Titus, 1983; 
Zajonc, 1965). This means that when the task is very familiar or simple, the domi-
nant response tends to be the correct one; thus performance improves. When the 
task is unfamiliar or complex, however, the dominant response is likely not the 
correct one; thus performance is hindered. This means that people who are very 
skilled at what they do will usually do better in front of an audience than by them-
selves, and those who are novices will tend to do worse. This is why it is more accu-
rate to define social facilitation as facilitation of the dominant response on a task 
due to social arousal, leading to improvement on simple or well-learned tasks and 
worse performance on complex or unlearned tasks when other people are present.
Social loafing and the diffusion of responsibility.  Social facilitation occurs 
for people on tasks for which they can be evaluated individually. Social loafing 
occurs when people are pooling their efforts to achieve a common goal (Karau & 
Williams, 1993). Social loafing is the tendency for people to exert less effort when 
working toward a common goal in a group than when individually accountable. 
Social loafing is doing as little as you can get away with. Think about the various 
group projects that you have participated in, both in school and outside of school. 
Didn’t some members contribute very little to the group effort? Why? A major rea-
son is the diffusion of responsibility—the responsibility for the task is diffused 
across all members of the group; therefore, individual accountability is lessened.
Behavior often changes when individual responsi­bility is lifted. Remember that 
in Milgram’s study the maximum obedience rate increased to almost 100 percent  
when the direct responsibility for administering the shock was lifted from 
the teacher’s shoulders. This diffusion of responsibility can also explain why 
social loafing tends to increase as the size of the group 
increases (Latané, Williams, & Harkins, 1979). The larger 
the group, the less likely it is that a social loafer will be 
detected, and the more the responsibility for the task 
gets diffused. Think about students working together on 
a group project for a shared grade. Social loafing would 
be greater when the group size is seven or eight than 
when it is only two or three. However, for group tasks 
in which individual contributions are identifiable and 
evaluated, social loafing decreases (Williams, Harkins, 
& Latané, 1981; Harkins & Jackson, 1985). Thus, in a 
group project for a shared grade, social loafing decreases 
if each group member is assigned and responsible for a 
specific part of the project.
➤  social facilitation  Facilitation of a 
dominant response on a task due to 
social arousal, leading to improved 
performance on simple or well-learned 
tasks and worse performance on com-
plex or unlearned tasks when other 
people are present.
➤  social loafing  The tendency to exert 
less effort when working in a group 
toward a common goal than when  
individually working toward the goal.
➤  diffusion of responsibility  The lessen-
ing of individual responsibility for a 
task when responsibility for the task is 
spread across the members of a group.

how OThERs INfluENcE OuR BEhavioR  |  373
The bystander effect and the Kitty Genovese 
case.  Now let’s think about the Kitty Genovese case 
described at the beginning of this chapter. Many people 
saw or heard the prolonged fatal attack. No one inter-
vened until it was too late. Why? Was it big-city apathy, 
as proposed by many media people? Experiments by John 
Darley, Bibb Latané, and other social psychologists indicate that it wasn’t apathy, 
but rather that the diffusion of responsibility, as in social loafing, played a major 
role in this failure to help (Latané & Darley, 1970; Latané & Nida, 1981). 
Conducting experiments in which people were faced with emergency situations, 
Darley and Latané found what they termed the bystander effect—the probability 
of an individual helping in an emergency is greater when there is only one 
bystander than when there are many bystanders.
To understand this effect, Darley and Latané developed a model of the 
intervention process in emergencies. According to this model, for a person to 
intervene in an emergency, he must make not just one, but a series of decisions, 
and only one set of choices will lead him to take action. In addition, these 
decisions are typically made under conditions of stress, urgency, and threat of  
possible harm. The decisions to be made are 1) noticing the relevant event or not,  
2) defining the event as an emergency or not, 3) feeling personal responsibility 
for helping or not, and 4) having accepted responsibility for helping, deciding 
what form of assistance he should give (direct or indirect intervention). If the 
event is not noticed or not defined as an emergency or if the bystander does 
not take responsibility for helping, he will not intervene. Darley and Latané’s 
research (e.g., Latané & Darley, 1968, and Latané & Rodin, 1969) demonstrated 
that the presence of other bystanders negatively impacted all of these decisions, 
leading to the bystander effect.
Let’s take a closer look at one of these experiments (Darley & Latané, 1968) to 
help you better understand the bystander effect. Imagine that you are asked to 
participate in a study examining the adjustments you’ve experienced in attend-
ing college. You show up for the experiment, are led to a booth, and are told that 
you are going to participate in a round-robin discussion of adjustment problems 
over the laboratory intercom. You put on earphones so that you can hear the 
other participants, but you cannot see them. The experimenter explains that this 
is to guarantee each student’s anonymity. The experimenter tells you that when a 
light in the booth goes on, it is your turn to talk. She also says that she wants the 
discussion not to be inhibited by her presence, so she is not going to listen to the  
discussion. The study begins. The first student talks about how anxious he has been 
since coming to college and that sometimes the anxiety is so overwhelming, he has 
epileptic seizures. Another student talks about the difficulty she’s had in deciding 
on a major and how she misses her boyfriend who stayed at home to go to college. 
It’s your turn, and you talk about your adjustment problems. The discussion then 
returns to the first student, and as he is talking, he seems to be getting very anxious. 
Suddenly, he starts having a seizure and cries out for help. What would you do?
➤  bystander effect   The probability of a  
person’s helping in an emergency is  
greater when there are no other 
bystanders than when there are other 
bystanders.

374  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
Like most people, you would likely say that you would 
go to help him. However, this is not what was found. 
Whether a participant went for help depended upon how 
many other students the participant thought were avail-
able to help the student having the seizure (the bystander effect). Darley and Latané 
manipulated this number, so there were zero, one, or four others. In actuality, there 
were no other students present; the dialogue was all tape-recorded. There was only 
one participant. The percentage of participants who attempted to help before the 
victim’s cries for help ended decreased dramatically as the presumed number of 
bystanders increased, from 85 percent when alone to only 31 percent when four 
other bystanders who could help were assumed to be present. The probability of 
helping decreased as the responsibility for helping was diffused across more partici-
pants. Those participants who did not go for help were not apathetic, however. They 
were very upset and seemed to be in a state of conflict, even though they did not leave 
the booth to help. They appeared to want to help, but the situational forces (the 
presumed presence of other bystanders and the resulting diffusion of responsibility) 
led them not to do so. The bystander effect has been replicated many times for many 
different types of emergencies. Latané and Nida (1981) analyzed almost 50 bystander 
intervention studies with thousands of participants and 
found that bystanders were more likely to help when 
alone than with others about 90 percent of the time.
Now let’s apply the bystander effect to the Kitty 
Genovese case. The responsibility for helping was dif-
fused across all of the witnesses to the attack. Because 
the bystanders could not see or hear one another, each 
bystander likely assumed that someone else had called the 
police, so they didn’t need to do so. A situational factor,  
the presence of many bystanders, resulted in no one 
intervening until it was too late. Based on the results of 
the bystander intervention studies, Kitty Genovese might 
have received help and possibly might have survived if 
there had been only one bystander to her attack. With 
the total responsibility on the one bystander’s shoulders, 
intervention would have been far more likely.
Deindividuation.  Diffusion of responsibility also 
seems to play a role in deindividuation, the loss of self-
awareness and self-restraint in a group situation that 
fosters arousal and anonymity. The responsibility for 
the group’s actions is defused across all the members of 
the group. Deindividuation can be thought of as com-
bining the increased arousal in social facilitation with 
the diminished sense of responsibility in social loafing. 
Deindividuated people feel less restrained, and therefore 
may forget their moral values and act spontaneously  
➤  deindividuation  The loss of self-awareness 
and self-restraint in a group situation 
that fosters arousal and anonymity.
Deindividuation and the Ku Klux  
Klan | The uniform of Ku Klux Klan members, 
especially the hood, fosters deindividuation, 
the loss of self-awareness and self-restraint 
in a group situation that fosters arousal and 
anonymity. Deindividuation increases the 
likelihood that members will forget their 
moral values and act without thinking.
AP Photo/Pat Sullivan

how OThERs INfluENcE OuR BEhavioR  |  375
without thinking. The result can be damaging, as seen in 
mob violence, riots, and vandalism. In one experiment on 
deindividuation, college women wearing Ku Klux Klan–
type white hoods and coats delivered twice as much shock 
to helpless victims than did similar women not wearing 
Klan clothing who were identifiable by name tags 
(Zimbardo, 1970). Once people lose their sense of individ-
ual responsibility, feel anonymous, and are aroused, they 
are capable of terrible things.
Group polarization and groupthink.  Two other group influences, group 
polarization and groupthink, apply to more structured, task-oriented group 
situations (such as committees and panels). Group polarization is the 
strengthening of a group’s prevailing opinion about a topic following group 
discussion of the topic. The group members already share the same opinion on 
an issue, and when they discuss it among themselves, this opinion is further 
strengthened as members gain additional information from other members in 
support of the opinion. This means that the initially held view becomes even 
more polarized following group discussion.
In addition to this informational influence of the group discussion, there is a 
type of normative influence. Because we want others to like us, we may express 
stronger views on a topic after learning that other group members share our 
opinion. Both informational and normative influences lead members to stronger, 
more extreme opinions. A real-life example is the accentuation phenomenon in 
college students—initial differences in college students become more accentuated 
over time (Myers, 2002). For example, students who do not belong to fraternities 
and sororities tend to be more liberal politically, and this difference grows dur-
ing college at least partially because group members reinforce and polarize each 
other’s views. Group polarization for some groups may lead to destructive behav-
ior, encouraging group members to go further out on a limb through mutual 
reinforcement. For example, group polar-
ization within community gangs tends to 
increase the rate of their criminal behavior. 
Within terrorist organizations, group polar-
ization leads to more extreme acts of vio-
lence. Alternatively, association with a quiet, 
nonviolent group, such as a quilter’s guild, 
strengthens a person’s tendency toward qui-
eter, more peaceful behavior. In summary, 
group polarization may exaggerate prevailing 
attitudes among group members, leading to 
more extreme behavior.
Groupthink is a mode of group thinking 
that impairs decision making; the desire for 
group harmony overrides a realistic appraisal  
➤  group polarization  The strengthening 
of a group’s prevailing opinion about a 
topic following group discussion about 
the topic.
➤  groupthink  A mode of group thinking 
that impairs decision making, because 
the desire for group harmony overrides 
a realistic appraisal of the possible  
decision alternatives.
© The New Yorker Collection 1979 Henry Martin from  
cartoonbank.com. All Rights Reserved

376  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
of the possible decisions. The primary 
concern is to maintain group consensus. 
Pressure is put on group members to go 
along with the group’s view and external 
information that disagrees with the group’s 
view is suppressed, which leads to the illu-
sion of unanimity. Groupthink also leads 
to an illusion of infallibility—the belief that 
the group cannot make mistakes.
Given such illusory thinking, it is not 
surprising that groupthink often leads to 
very bad decisions and poor solutions to 
problems (Janis, 1972, 1983). The failure 
to anticipate Pearl Harbor, the disastrous 
Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba, and the 
space shuttle Challenger disaster are a few 
examples of real-world bad decisions that 
have been linked to groupthink. In the case 
of the Challenger disaster, for example, the engineers who made the shuttle’s rocket 
boosters opposed the launch because of dangers posed by the cold temperatures 
to the seals between the rocket segments (Esser & Lindoerfer, 1989). However, the 
engineers were unsuccessful in arguing their case with the group of NASA officials, 
who were suffering from an illusion of infallibility. To maintain an illusion of una-
nimity, these officials didn’t bother to make the top NASA executive who made 
the final launch decision aware of the engineers’ concerns. The result was tragedy.
Sadly, the NASA groupthink mentality reared its head again with the 
space shuttle Columbia disaster. It appears that NASA management again 
ignored safety warnings from engineers about probable technical problems. 
The Columbia accident investigation board strongly recommended that NASA 
change its “culture of invincibility.” To prevent groupthink from impacting 
your group decisions, make your group aware of groupthink and its dangers, 
and then take explicit steps to ensure that minority opinions, critiques of pro-
posed group actions, and alternative courses of action are openly presented and 
fairly evaluated.
Section Summary
In this section, we discussed many types of social influence, how people and the 
social forces they create influence a person’s thinking and behavior. Conformity—a 
change in behavior, belief, or both to conform to a group norm as a result of real 
or imagined group pressure—is usually due to either normative social influence or 
informational social influence. Normative social influence leads people to conform 
to gain the approval and avoid the disapproval of others. Informational social influ-
ence leads people to conform to gain information from others in an uncertain situ-
ation. Several situational factors impact the amount of conformity that is observed. 
The Challenger Explosion | Groupthink has been 
linked to the Challenger disaster. NASA officials, who were 
suffering from an illusion of infallibility, ignored the warn-
ings of engineers who opposed the launch because of  
dangers posed by the cold temperatures to the seals 
between the rocket segments.
AP Photo/Bruce Weaver

how OThERs INfluENcE OuR BEhavioR  |  377
For example, nonconsensus among group members reduces the amount of confor-
mity, and responding aloud versus anonymously increases conformity. In addition, 
culture and gender impact the amount of conformity observed. Collectivist cultures 
tend to lead to more conformity than individualistic cultures, and women conform 
more than men.
In conformity, people change their behavior or attitudes to adhere to a group 
norm, but in compliance, people act in accordance with a direct request from 
another person or group. We discussed four techniques used to obtain compliance. 
Each technique involves two requests, and it is always the second request for which 
compliance is desired. In the foot-in-the-door technique, a small request is followed 
by the desired larger request. In the door-in-the-face technique, a large first request 
is followed by the desired second smaller request. In the low-ball technique, an 
attractive first request is followed by the desired and less attractive second request. 
In the that’s-not-all technique, the desired and more attractive second request is 
made before a response can be made to an initial request. The foot-in-the-door 
and low-ball techniques work mainly because the person has committed to the first 
request and complies with the second in order to remain consistent. The door-in-
the-face and that’s-not-all techniques work mainly because of reciprocity. Because 
the other person has made a concession on the first request, we comply with the 
second in order to reciprocate.
Obedience, following the commands of a person in authority, was the subject of 
Stanley Milgram’s controversial experimental studies done at Yale University in the 
early 1960s. The studies are controversial because they demonstrate our tendency 
toward destructive obedience, bringing harm to others through our obedient behav-
ior. Milgram identified numerous situational factors that determine the amount of  
obedience observed. For example, a very high rate of obedience is observed when 
the direct responsibility for one’s acts is removed. Less obedience is observed when 
we view models of disobedience, or when another authority commands us not to 
obey. The “Astroten” study and a survey study with nurses found high rates of 
obedience in the real world, indicating that it was not just a feeling of experimental 
obligation that led to Milgram’s results. The varying amounts of obedience in rela-
tion to varying situational factors in his experiments also argue against a feeling 
of experimental obligation leading to Milgram’s findings. In addition, Milgram’s 
baseline obedience finding has recently been replicated, demonstrating that people 
today react in the laboratory obedience situation like Milgram’s participants did 
almost 50 years ago.
Even the mere presence of other people can influence our behavior. This is 
demonstrated in social facilitation, an improvement in simple or well-learned tasks 
but worse performance on complex or unlearned tasks when other people are 
observing us. Some group influences occur when the responsibility for a task is dif-
fused across all members of the group. For example, social loafing is the tendency 
for people to exert less effort when working in a group toward a common goal than 
when individually accountable. Social loafing increases as the size of the group 
increases and decreases when each group member feels more responsible for his 
contribution to the group effort. Diffusion of responsibility also contributes to the 
bystander effect, the greater probability of an individual helping in an emergency 
when there is only one bystander versus when there are many bystanders. Diffusion 
of responsibility also contributes to deindividuation, the loss of self-awareness and 
self-restraint in a group situation that promotes arousal and anonymity. The results 
of deindividuation can be tragic, such as mob violence and rioting.

378  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
Two other group influences, group polarization and groupthink, apply to more 
structured, task-oriented situations, and refer to effects on the group’s decision making.  
Group polarization is the strengthening of a group’s prevailing opinion following 
group discussion of the topic. Like-minded group members reinforce their shared 
beliefs, which leads to more extreme attitudes and behavior among all group mem-
bers. Groupthink is a mode of group thinking that impairs decision making. It stems 
from the group’s illusion of infallibility and its desire for group harmony, which over-
ride a realistic appraisal of decision alternatives, often leading to bad decisions.
 ConceptCheck | 1
➤	 explain the difference between normative social influence and informational 
social influence.
➤	 explain how both the door-in-the-face technique and the that’s-not-all tech-
nique involve reciprocity.
➤	 Milgram found that zero percent of the participants continued in the experi-
ment when one of two experimenters said to stop. Based on this finding, 
predict what he found when he had two experimenters disagree, but the 
one who said to stop was substituting for a participant and serving as the 
learner. explain the rationale for your prediction.
➤	 according to the bystander effect, explain why you would be more likely to 
be helped if your car broke down on a little-traveled country road than on an 
interstate highway.
How We Think About Our Own  
and Others’ Behavior
Social thinking is concerned with how we view our own attitudes and behavior 
and those of others. We will discuss two of the major areas of research on social 
thinking—attributions and attitudes. First, we will examine attribution, the 
process (briefly discussed in Chapter 8) by which we explain our own behavior 
and the behavior of others. In other words, what do we perceive to be the causes 
of our behavior and that of others? Is the behavior due to internal causes (the 
person) or external causes (the situation)? Remember, we show a self-serving bias 
when it comes to explaining our own behavior. In this section, we will revisit this 
bias and examine two other biases in the attribution process (the fundamental 
attribution error and the actor-observer bias). The second major topic to be dis-
cussed is the relationship between our attitudes and our behavior. For example, 
do our attitudes drive our behavior, does our behavior 
determine our attitudes, or is it some of both? We will 
also consider the impact of role-playing on our attitudes 
and behavior.
➤  attribution  The process by which we 
explain our own behavior and that of 
others.

how WE ThiNK AbouT OuR OwN aNd OThERs’ BEhavioR  |  379
How We Make Attributions
Imagine it’s the first cold day in the fall, and you’re 
standing in a long line for coffee at the student union 
coffee shop. All of a sudden, a person at the head of the 
line drops her cup of coffee. You turn to your friend 
and say “What a klutz!” inferring that this behavior is 
characteristic of that person. You are making an internal 
(dispositional) attribution, attributing the cause of drop-
ping the cup of coffee to the person. But what if it had 
been you who had dropped the cup of coffee? Chances 
are you would have said something like, “Boy was that 
cup hot!” making an external (situational) attribution by inferring that dropping 
the cup wasn’t your fault. We have different biases in the attributions we make for 
behavior we observe versus our own behavior. Let’s look first at being an observer.
Attributions for the behavior of others.  As an observer, we tend to commit 
the fundamental attribution error (Ross, 1977). The fundamental attribution 
error is the tendency as an observer to overestimate internal dispositional influ-
ences and underestimate external situational influences on others’ behavior. 
Simply put, observers are biased in that they tend to attribute others’ behavior to 
them and not the situation they are in. In the coffee example, we tend to make an 
internal attribution (the person is a klutz) and ignore possible external situational 
factors, such as the cup being really hot or slippery. The fundamental attribution 
error tends to show up even in experiments in which the participants are told that 
people are only faking a particular type of behavior. For example, in one experi-
ment participants were told that a person was only pretending to be friendly  
or to be unfriendly (Napolitan & Goethals, 1979). Even with this knowledge, 
participants still inferred that the people were actually like the way they acted, 
either friendly or unfriendly.
Think about the participants in Milgram’s obedience experiments. On first 
learning of their destructive obedient behavior, didn’t you think the teachers 
were horrible human beings? How could they treat fellow humans in that way? 
Or consider the teachers themselves in these experiments. When the learners kept 
making mistakes, the teachers may have thought the learners were incredibly 
stupid and so deserved the shocks. People who have been raped are sometimes 
blamed for provoking the rape, and people who are homeless are often blamed for 
their poverty-stricken state. Placing blame in this manner involves the just-world 
hypothesis, the assumption that the world is just and that people get what they 
deserve (Lerner, 1980). Beware of just-world reasoning. It is not valid, but is often 
used to justify cruelty to others.
The fundamental attribution error impacts our impressions of other people. 
There are two related concepts that you should also be aware of when forming 
impressions of others—the primacy effect and the self-fulfilling prophecy. In the 
primacy effect, early information is weighted more heavily than later information  
➤  fundamental attribution error  The ten-
dency as an observer to overestimate 
dispositional influences and underesti-
mate situational influences on others’ 
behavior.
➤  just-world hypothesis  The assumption 
that the world is just and that people get 
what they deserve.
➤  primacy effect  Information gathered 
early is weighted more heavily than 
information gathered later in forming an 
impression of another person.

380  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
in forming an impression of another person. Beware of 
this effect when meeting someone new. Develop your 
impression slowly and carefully by gathering more infor-
mation across time and from many different situations. 
Also be careful about the initial impressions that you 
make on people. Given the power of the primacy effect, 
your later behavior may not be able to change their 
initial impression of you. Try to be your true self when 
you first meet someone so that the primacy effect will be 
more accurate.
In the self-fulfilling prophecy, our expectations of a person elicit behavior 
from that person that confirms our expectations. In other words, our behavior 
encourages the person to act in accordance with our expectations (Jones, 1977; 
Rosenthal & Jacobson, 1968). For example, if you think someone is uncoopera-
tive, you may act hostile and not be very cooperative in your interactions with 
that person. Given your hostile behavior, the person responds by being uncoop-
erative, confirming your expectations. The person may not really be uncoopera-
tive, however, and may only act this way in response to your behavior. However, 
your expectations will have been confirmed, and you will think that the person 
is uncooperative. Self-fulfilling prophecy is related to our tendency toward con-
firmation bias in hypothesis testing (see Chapter 6). Rather than acting in a 
manner that confirms your expectations, act in the opposite way (in the example, 
instead of being uncooperative, be cooperative) and see what happens. You may 
be surprised.
Attributions for our own behavior.  Now let’s consider our own behavior 
and making attributions. Our attribution process is biased in a different way 
when we are actors and not observers. Think about the example where you 
dropped the cup of coffee (you were the actor). You don’t make a dispositional 
attribution (“I’m clumsy”). You make a situational attribution (“The cup was slip-
pery”). As actors we tend to have what’s called the actor-observer bias, the ten-
dency to attribute our own behavior to situational influences, but to attribute the 
behavior of others to dispositional influences. Why this difference in attribution-
al bias? As observers, our attention is focused on the person, so we see him as the 
cause of the action. As actors, our attention is focused on the situation, so we see 
the situation as the cause of the action. We are more aware of situational factors 
as actors than as observers. This explanation is supported by the fact that we are 
less susceptible to the bias toward dispositional attributions with our friends and 
relatives, people whom we know well.
We described another attribution bias in the last chapter, the self-serving 
bias—the tendency to make attributions so that one can perceive oneself favor-
ably. As actors, we tend to overestimate dispositional influences when the out-
come of our behavior is positive and to overestimate situational influences when 
the outcome of our behavior is negative. In the last chapter, we were discussing 
this bias’s role as a defense mechanism against depression. In this chapter, let’s 
➤  self-fulfilling prophecy  Our behavior 
leads a person to act in accordance 
with our expectations for that person.
➤  actor-observer bias  The tendency to 
overestimate situational influences on our 
own behavior, but to overestimate disposi-
tional influences on the behavior of others.
➤  self-serving bias  The tendency to make 
attributions so that one can perceive 
oneself favorably.

how WE ThiNK AbouT OuR OwN aNd OThERs’ BEhavioR  |  381
look at how self-serving bias qualifies the actor-observer bias. It defines the type of 
attribution we make as actors based on the nature of the outcome of our actions. 
Think about our reaction to a test grade. If we do well, we think that we studied 
hard and knew the material, both dispositional factors. If we don’t do well, then 
we may blame the test and the teacher (“What a tricky exam,” Or “That test was 
not a good indicator of what I know”). We take credit for our successes but not 
our failures. Teachers also have this bias. For example, if the class does poorly 
on a test, the teacher thinks that the test she made up was just fine, but that the 
students weren’t motivated or didn’t study. It is important to realize that the self-
serving bias and the other attribution biases do not speak to the correctness of the 
attributions we make, but only to the types of attributions we tend to make. This 
means that our attributions will sometimes be correct and sometimes incorrect.
The self-serving bias also leads us to see ourselves as “above average” when 
we compare ourselves to others on positive dimensions, such as intelligence 
and attractiveness. This tendency is exemplified in Garrison Keillor’s fictional 
Lake Wobegon community, where, “All the women are strong, all the men are 
good-looking, and all the children are above average.” We tend to rate ourselves 
unreasonably high on dimensions that we value (Mezulis, Abramson, Hyde, & 
Hankin, 2004). Think about it. If you were asked to compare yourself to other 
people on intelligence, what would you say? If you respond like most people, 
you would say “above average.” However, most people cannot be “above aver-
age.” Many of us have to be average or below average. Intelligence, like most 
human traits, is normally distributed with half of us below average and half of 
us above average.
The self-serving bias also influences our estimates of the extent to which other 
people think and act as we do. This leads to two effects—the false consensus effect 
and the false uniqueness effect (Myers, 2013). The false consensus effect is the 
tendency to overestimate the commonality of one’s opinions and unsuccessful 
behaviors. Let’s consider two examples. If you like classical music, you tend to 
overestimate the number of people who also like classical music, or if you fail all 
of your midterm exams, you tend to overestimate the number of students who 
also failed all of their midterms. You tend to think that your opinion and your 
negative behavior are the consensus opinion and behavior.
The false uniqueness effect is the tendency to underestimate the commonal-
ity of one’s abilities and successful behaviors. For example, if you are a good pool 
player, you tend to think that few other people are. Or, if you just aced your psy-
chology exam, you think few students did so. You think your abilities and success-
ful behaviors are unique. The false consensus effect and 
the false uniqueness effect relate to the self-protective 
function of the self-serving bias. We want to protect and 
enhance our view of ourselves, our self-esteem.
All three major attributional biases (the fundamental 
attribution error, the actor-observer bias, and the self-
serving bias) are summarized in Table 9.4 on page 382.
➤  false consensus effect  The tendency to 
overestimate the commonality of one’s 
opinions and unsuccessful behaviors.
➤  false uniqueness effect  The tendency 
to underestimate the commonality of 
one’s abilities and successful behaviors.

382  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
How Our Behavior Affects Our Attitudes
In this section, we are going to consider our attitudes. In simple terms, attitudes 
are evaluative reactions (positive or negative) toward things, events, and other 
people. Our attitudes are our beliefs and opinions. What do you think of the 
Republican political party, abortion, President Barack Obama, Twitter, or rap 
music? Have you changed any of your attitudes during your life, especially since 
you have been in college? Most of us do. Our attitudes often determine our behav-
ior, but this is not always the case.
When our behavior contradicts our attitudes.  Our attitudes tend to guide 
our behavior when the attitudes are ones that we feel strongly about, when we are 
consciously aware of our attitudes, and when outside influences on our behavior 
are not strong. For example, you may think that studying is the top priority for a 
student. If you do, you will likely get your studying done before engaging in other 
activities. However, if there is a lot of pressure from your roommates and friends 
to stop studying and go out partying, you may abandon studying for partying. 
But what happens when our attitudes don’t guide our behavior and there isn’t a 
lot of outside influence on our behavior? To help you understand the answer to 
this question, we’ll consider a classic study (Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959).
Imagine that you are a participant in an experiment. You show up at the laboratory 
at the assigned time, and the experiment turns out to be incredibly boring. For an 
hour, you perform various boring tasks, such as turning pegs on a pegboard over and 
over again or organizing spools in a box, dumping them 
out, and then organizing them again. When the hour is 
over, the experimenter explains to you that the experiment 
is concerned with the effects of a person’s expectations on 
Table 9.4   Attributional Biases
Bias
Description
Fundamental attribution error
The tendency to overestimate dispositional 
influences and to underestimate situational 
influences on others’ behavior
Actor-observer bias
The tendency to overestimate situational influ-
ences on our own behavior but to overestimate 
dispositional influences on others’ behavior 
(Note: This bias is qualified by self-serving bias 
when explaining our own behavior)
Self-serving bias
The tendency to make attributions so that one 
can perceive oneself favorably; we tend to 
overestimate dispositional influences on our 
behavior when the outcome is positive and to 
overestimate situational influences when the 
outcome is negative
➤  attitudes  Evaluative reactions (positive 
or negative) toward objects, events, and 
other people.

how WE ThiNK AbouT OuR OwN aNd OThERs’ BEhavioR  |  383
their task performance and that you were in the control group. The experimenter is 
upset because his student assistant hasn’t shown up. She was supposed to pose as 
a student who has just participated in the experiment and tell the next participant 
who is waiting outside that this experiment was really enjoyable. The experimenter 
asks if you can help him out by doing this, and for doing so, he can pay you. His 
budget is small, though, so he can only pay you $1. Regardless, you agree to help 
him out and go outside and tell the waiting participant (who is really a confederate 
of the experimenter and not a true participant) how enjoyable and interesting the 
experiment was.
Before you leave, another person who is studying students’ reactions to experi-
ments asks you to complete a questionnaire about how much you enjoyed the ear-
lier experimental tasks. How would you rate these earlier incredibly boring tasks? 
You are probably thinking that you would rate them as very boring, because they 
were. However, this isn’t what researchers observed. Participants’ behavior (rating 
the tasks) did not follow their attitude (the tasks were boring). Participants who 
were paid only $1 for helping out the experimenter (by lying about the nature of 
the experimental tasks to the next supposed participant) rated the tasks as fairly 
enjoyable. We need to compare this finding with the results for another group of 
participants who received $20 for lying about the experiment. Their behavior did 
follow their attitude about the tasks. They rated the tasks as boring. This is what 
researchers also found for another group of participants who were never asked to 
help out the experimenter and lie. They also rated the tasks as boring. So why did 
the participants who lied for $1 not rate the tasks as boring?
Before answering this question, let’s consider another part of this experi-
ment. After rating the task, participants met again with the experimenter to be 
debriefed, and were told the true nature of the study. Following the debriefing, 
the experimenter asks you to give back the money he paid you. What would you 
do if you were in the $20 group? You are probably saying, “No way,” but remem-
ber the studies on obedience and the high rates of obedience that were observed. 
What actually happened? Just like all of the participants agreed to lie (whether 
for $1 or $20), all of the participants gave back the money, showing once again 
our tendency to be obedient and comply with requests of those in authority. Now 
let’s think about why the $1 group rated the tasks differently than the $20 group.
Festinger’s cognitive dissonance theory.  Their beha­vior can be explained 
by Leon Festinger’s cognitive dissonance theory, which proposes that people 
change their attitudes to reduce the cognitive discomfort created by inconsisten-
cies between their attitudes and their behavior (Festinger, 1957). Let’s consider a 
real-life example before applying this theory to the participants who were paid $1 
for lying. Think about people who smoke. Most smokers 
have the attitude (believe) that smoking is dangerous to 
their health, but they continue to smoke. Cognitive dis-
sonance theory says that smokers feel cognitive discom-
fort because of the inconsistency between their attitude 
about smoking (dangerous to their health) and their 
➤  cognitive dissonance theory  A theory 
developed by Leon Festinger that assumes 
people have a tendency to change their 
attitudes to reduce the cognitive discom-
fort created by inconsistencies between 
their attitudes and their behavior.

384  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
behavior (continuing to smoke). To reduce this cognitive 
disharmony, either the attitude or the behavior has to 
change. According to the cognitive dissonance theory, many 
smokers change their attitude so that it is no longer incon-
sistent with their behavior. For example, a smoker may now 
believe that the medical evidence isn’t really conclusive. The 
change in the attitude eliminates the inconsistency and the 
dissonance it created. So now let’s apply cognitive dissonance 
theory to the participants in the boring task study who lied 
for $1. Why did they rate the task as enjoyable? Their 
attitude was that the tasks were incredibly boring, but this 
was inconsistent with their behavior, lying about the tasks for only $1. This 
inconsistency would cause them to have cognitive dissonance. To reduce this dis-
sonance, the participants changed their attitude to be that the tasks were fairly 
enjoyable. Now the inconsistency and resulting dissonance are gone.
A key aspect of cognitive dissonance theory is that we don’t suffer dissonance 
if we have sufficient justification for our behavior (the participants who were 
paid $20 in the study) or our behavior is coerced. Also, cognitive dissonance 
sometimes changes the strength of an attitude so that it is consistent with past 
behavior. Think about important decisions that you have made in the past, for 
example, which college to attend. Cognitive dissonance theory says that once 
you make such a tough decision, you will strengthen your commitment to that 
choice in order to reduce cognitive dissonance. Indeed, the attractiveness of the 
alternate choices fades with the dissonance (you don’t understand why you ever 
were attracted to the other schools) as you find confirming evidence of the cor-
rectness of your choice (you like your classes and teachers) and ignore evidence to 
the contrary (such as your school not being as highly rated as the other schools). 
Carol Tavris and Elliot Aronson (2007) provide numerous real-world examples of 
this cognitive dissonance–driven justification of our decisions, beliefs, and actions 
in their illuminating book, Mistakes Were Made (But Not By Me). Recent research by 
Egan, Santos, and Bloom (2007) indicates that such decision rationalization even 
appears in children and nonhuman primates (Egan, Santos, & Bloom, 2007).
Bem’s self-perception theory.  There have been hundreds of studies on cog-
nitive dissonance, but there is an alternative theoretical explanation for the 
results of some of these studies—Daryl Bem’s self-perception theory, which pro-
poses that when we are unsure of our attitudes we infer them by examining our 
behavior and the context in which it occurs (Bem, 1972). According to Bem, we 
are not trying to reduce cognitive dissonance, but are merely engaged in the nor-
mal attribution process that we discussed earlier in this 
chapter. We are making self-attributions. Self-perception 
theory would say that the participants who lied for $1 in 
the boring tasks experiment were unsure of their atti-
tudes toward the tasks. They would examine their behav-
ior (lying for $1) and infer that the tasks must have been 
Leon Festinger
AP Photo/New School for Social Research
➤  self-perception theory  A theory devel-
oped by Daryl Bem that assumes that 
when we are unsure of our attitudes, we 
infer them by examining our behavior 
and the context in which it occurs.

how WE ThiNK AbouT OuR OwN aNd OThERs’ BEhavioR  |  385
fairly enjoyable and interesting or else they would not have said that they were for 
only $1. Those paid $20 for lying would not be unsure about their attitude toward 
the boring tasks, because they were paid so much to lie about them. According to 
self-perception theory, people don’t change their attitude because of their behav-
ior but rather use their behavior to infer their attitude. People are motivated to 
explain their behavior, not to reduce dissonance. According to self-perception 
theory, there is no dissonance to be reduced.
So which theory is better? Neither is really a better theory than the other. Both 
theories have merit and both seem to operate—but in different situations. This 
is similar to our earlier discussion of color vision theories, the trichromatic-color 
theory and the opponent-process theory in Chapter 3. Remember that trichromatic-
color theory operates at the receptor cell level and opponent-process theory at the 
post-receptor cell level in the visual pathways. Cognitive dissonance theory seems to 
be the best explanation for behavior that contradicts well-defined attitudes. Such 
behavior creates mental discomfort, and we change our attitudes to reduce it. Self-
perception theory explains situations in which our attitudes are not well-defined; we 
infer our attitudes from our behavior. As with the color vision theories, both cognitive  
dissonance theory and self-perception theory operate, but at different times.
The impact of role-playing.  Now let’s consider one final factor that impacts 
the complex relationship between our attitudes and our behavior—role-playing. 
We all have various social roles that we play—student, teacher, friend, son or 
daughter, parent, employee, and so on. Each role is defined by a socially expected 
pattern of behavior, and these definitions have an impact on both our behavior 
and our attitudes. Given the power of roles on behavior, think about how each of 
the various roles you play each day impacts your own attitudes and behavior. 
They are powerful influences. As social psychologist David Myers has observed, 
“we are likely not only to think ourselves into a way of acting but also to act our-
selves into a way of thinking” (Myers, 2002, p. 136).
The Stanford Prison Experiment (SPE) conducted in the early 1970s at Stanford 
University by Philip Zimbardo has been viewed as a dramatic example of this power 
of roles (Haney, Banks, & Zimbardo, 1973; Zimbardo, 2007; Zimbardo, Maslach, &  
Haney, 1999). Zimbardo recruited male college students to participate in the study 
and renovated the basement in the Stanford psychology building to be a mock pris-
on. Any volunteers with prior arrests or any with medical or mental problems were 
eliminated. Following psychological assessments and in-depth interviews, 24 volun-
teers were chosen and then randomly assigned to the roles of prisoner and guard. 
The guards were given uniforms and billy clubs and instructed to enforce the rules 
of the mock prison. The prisoners were locked in cells and had to wear humiliating 
clothing (smocks with no undergarments). Such clothing was used in an attempt to 
simulate the emasculating feeling of being a prisoner. How did the roles of prisoner 
and prison guard impact the attitudes and behavior of the participants?
Some of the participants began to take their respective roles too seriously. After 
only one day of role-playing, some of the guards started treating the prisoners cruelly.  

386  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
Some of the prisoners rebelled, and others began to break down. What was only 
supposed to be role-playing became reality. The guards’ treatment of the prisoners 
became both harsh and degrading. For example, some prisoners were made to clean 
out toilets with their bare hands. Some prisoners began to hate the guards, and some 
of them were on the verge of emotional collapse. The situation worsened to such a 
degree that Zimbardo had to stop the study after six days. According to Zimbardo 
and his colleagues, due to the power of their situational roles, the participating college 
students had truly “become” guards and prisoners. The roles transformed their atti-
tudes and behavior. In sum, the abusive guards were not “bad apples.” It was the “bad 
barrel” of the Stanford prison (the situation) that temporarily transformed them.
It is worth noting that in 1973, the American Psychological Association published 
its comprehensive “Ethical Principles in the Conduct of Research with Human 
Participants” and in 1975, the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare 
issued a regulation requiring that all research with human subjects be reviewed by 
an institutional review board to screen prospective projects to ensure the well-being 
of subjects (Blass, 2004). Given the ethical storms created by Zimbardo’s SPE and 
Milgram’s earlier obedience experiments, both very likely played prominent roles in 
the development of these documents. It is also worth noting that these two renowned 
social psychologists who conducted such controversial research were high school 
classmates at James Monroe High School in the Bronx in the late 1940s. It is highly 
unlikely that anyone back then could have predicted that Zimbardo and Milgram 
would become two of the most famous psychologists of the twentieth century.
The SPE was conducted over 40 years ago, but new interest in this study was 
gene­rated by the recent abuse of prisoners at Abu Ghraib, the U.S. military prison 
in Iraq. Like Zimbardo’s college-student guards, the American soldiers serving as 
prison guards engaged in dehumanizing and sadistic acts toward the prisoners. 
A guard harassing a prisoner in the Stanford Prison 
Experiment.
A guard mistreating a prisoner at Abu Ghraib prison  
in Iraq.
Philip G. Zimbardo, Inc.
AP Images

how WE ThiNK AbouT OuR OwN aNd OThERs’ BEhavioR  |  387
Zimbardo actually served as an expert witness in the trial of one of these soldiers 
and argued that situational pressures led the soldier to commit the abusive acts. 
His argument, however, failed, and the soldier was sentenced to a military prison. 
In his book, The Lucifer Effect (2007), Zimbardo details the SPE, applies the find-
ings to the behavior of the Abu Ghraib guards and some other recent incidents, 
and describes a 10-step program to build up our resilience to combat pressures 
that lead us to act abusively toward others. The Web site www.prisonexp.org 
also provides detailed coverage of the SPE and links to other recent writings by 
Zimbardo on the Abu Ghraib prison abuses.
Recently, however, much criticism of Zimbardo’s situationist explanation of 
the SPE has surfaced (e.g., Banyard, 2007; Haslam & Reicher, 2012; Reicher & 
Haslam, 2006) and cast doubt on the conclusions that have been drawn from the 
SPE. In addition, a new prison study, the BBC Prison Study, has been conducted 
(Haslam & Reicher, 2005; Reicher & Haslam, 2006), and results different from 
those of the SPE were found. We will consider some of the criticisms, and then 
we will briefly describe the BBC Prison Study and its results.
First, it is not clear whether the SPE participants behaved in ways consistent 
with their roles because of their natural acceptance of situational role requirements  
as Zimbardo claims or because of the active leadership provided by Zimbardo 
(e.g., Banyard, 2007; Haslam & Reicher, 2012). Zimbardo served as prison super-
intendent and gave the guards an orientation that seems, in retrospect, to provide 
clear guidance about how they should behave. Zimbardo (2007) recounted the 
following from this orientation:
We can create boredom. We can create a sense of frustration. We can create 
fear in them, to some degree. We can create a notion of the arbitrariness that 
governs their lives, which are totally controlled by us, by the system, by you, 
me. . . . They’ll have no privacy at all, there will be constant surveillance—
nothing they do will go unobserved. They will have no freedom of action. They 
will be able to do nothing and say nothing that we don’t permit. We’re going 
to take away their individuality in various ways. . . . In general, what all this 
should create in them is a sense of powerlessness. We have total power in the 
situation. They have none. (p. 55)
As Banyard (2007) points out, notice the use of pronouns in this orientation. 
Zimbardo puts himself with the guards (“we”) and gives clear instructions for the 
hostile environment that “we” are going to create for “them.” Thus, Zimbardo’s 
leadership may have legitimized oppression in the SPE. Banyard concludes that, 
“It is not, as Zimbardo suggests, the guards who wrote their own scripts on the 
blank canvas of the SPE, but Zimbardo who creates the script of terror. . . .” (2007, 
p. 494). That Zimbardo’s guidance may have been critical to the SPE outcome is 
supported by some findings for simulated prison environments in a study con-
ducted in Australia by Lovibond, Mithiran, and Adams (1979). These research-
ers found that changes in the experimental prison regime produced dramatic 
changes in the relations between guards and prisoners. In a more liberal prison 
condition in which security was maintained in a manner that allowed prisoners to 

388  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
retain their self-respect and in a participatory condition in which prisoners were 
treated as individuals and included in the decision-making process, the behavior 
of the guards and prisoners was rather benign and very dissimilar from the dra-
matic behavioral outcomes observed in the SPE.
Furthermore, what is surprising when you compare Zimbardo’s orientation  
and guidance to the findings of the SPE is that only a few of the guards were “bad”  
guards (Zimbardo, 2007). However, the “strict but fair” guards and the “good” 
guards (those that sided with the prisoners) were complicit participants, in that 
they did not challenge the abusive actions of the “bad” guards (those who harassed 
and humiliated the prisoners). The fact that only a few of the guards were “bad” 
guards is at odds with a pure situationist explanation of the SPE and indicates that 
an explanation involving the interaction of situational factors with dispositional 
factors, such as personality, attitudes, and expectations, is necessary. Given that 
only some of the guards were abusive, is it possible that there could have been some 
“bad apples” in the SPE? Carnahan and McFarland’s (2007) findings suggest that 
this is a distinct possibility. They recruited students in two ways: 1) for a psychologi-
cal study of prison life using a virtually identical newspaper advertisement as used 
in the SPE, and 2) for just a psychological study, an identical ad but without the 
mention of prison life. Carnahan and McFarland found that those who volunteered 
to participate in the prison life study tended to be more aggressive, authoritarian, 
socially dominant, and Machiavellian and less empathetic and altruistic than those 
who volunteered for the more innocuous experiment.
In a related fashion, Banuazizi and Movahedi (1975) provided data that indicate 
that the SPE may have been confounded by demand characteristics (Orne, 1962). 
Demand characteristics are cues in the experimental environment that make par-
ticipants aware of what the experimenters expect to find (their hypothesis) and how 
participants are expected to act. Demand characteristics can impact the outcome 
of an experiment, because participants may alter their behavior to conform to the 
experimenter’s expectations. Banuazizi and Movahedi mailed students a question-
naire that included a brief description of the procedures followed in the SPE and 
some open-ended questions to determine their awareness of the experimental 
hypothesis and their expectancies regarding the outcomes of the experiment. Of the 
150 students responding, a vast majority determined the experiment’s hypothesis 
(81 percent) and predicted that the behavior of the guards toward prisoners would 
be oppressive, hostile, etc. (89.9 percent). Collectively, these results and the other 
various findings that we have discussed would seem to indicate that a simple situ-
ationist account of the SPE is probably just that, too simple.
Two British social psychologists, Alexander Haslam and Stephen Reicher, in 
collaboration with the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) re-created the SPE,  
but with ethical procedures that ensured that the study would not harm par-
ticipants (Haslam & Reicher, 2005, Haslam & Reicher, 2012; Reicher & Haslam, 
2006). This study has become known as the BBC Prison Study. It was filmed by 
the BBC and televised in 2002. As in the SPE, the male volunteer participants were 
randomly assigned to the roles of guards and prisoners within a custom-built 
prison setting. However, unlike Zimbardo and his colleagues, Haslam and Reicher 

how WE ThiNK AbouT OuR OwN aNd OThERs’ BEhavioR  |  389
did not assume roles within the prison and 
were less prescriptive about how the guards 
should act. What happened? Contrary to what 
happened in the SPE, the guards failed to 
identify with their role and were reluctant to 
impose their authority. The prisoners, howev-
er, did form a cohesive group identity, leading 
them to rebel and overthrow the established 
regime after six days. Hence, rather than bru-
tal guards and passive prisoners, ambivalent 
guards and rebellious prisoners materialized. 
The guards and the prisoners then formed a 
single self-governing, egalitarian commune, 
but the commune fell apart after a short time, 
because again some participants did not want 
to discipline those who broke the commune’s 
rules. Following the collapse of the commu-
nal system, some former prisoners and former 
guards proposed a coup in which they would become the new guards, creating a 
more hard-line prisoner–guard divide and using force, if necessary, to maintain it. 
At this point, Haslam and Reicher brought the study to a close on the eighth day. 
Haslam and Reicher interpreted their findings in terms of social identity theory, in 
that power resides in the ability of a group to establish a sense of shared identity. 
This group power can be used for a positive purpose, as illustrated by the prison-
ers in the BBC prison study, or for a negative one, as illustrated by the guards in 
the SPE. They concluded that people do not automatically assume roles that are 
given to them, as was suggested by the situationist account of the SPE, and that 
it is powerlessness and the failure of groups to form identities that may lead to 
tyranny. As with the SPE, there is far more to the BBC prison study than can be 
discussed here. More information can be found in the articles cited here and at the 
BBC prison study Web site, www.bbcprisonstudy.org.
Section Summary
In this section, we considered social thinking by examining how we make attribu-
tions, explanations for our own behavior and the behavior of others, and the rela-
tionship between our attitudes and our behavior. Attribution is a biased process. As 
observers, we commit the fundamental attribution error, tending to overestimate 
dispositional influences and underestimate situational influences upon others’ 
behavior. This error seems to stem from our attention being focused on the person, 
so we see her as the cause of the action. When we view our own behavior, however, 
we fall prey to the actor-observer bias, the tendency to attribute our own behavior to 
situational influences, and not dispositional influences, as we do when we observe 
the behavior of others. The actor-observer bias stems from focusing our attention, 
as actors, on the situation and not on ourselves.
The guards and prisoners who participated in the BBC Prison 
Study.
Alexander Haslam and Stephen Reicher

390  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
The actor-observer bias, however, is qualified by the self-serving bias, the ten-
dency to make attributions so that we can perceive ourselves favorably and protect 
our self-esteem. As actors, we tend to overestimate dispositional influences when 
the outcome of our behavior is positive and to overestimate situational influences 
when the outcome is negative. Self-serving bias also leads us to rate ourselves as 
“above average” in comparison to others on positive dimensions, such as intel-
ligence and attractiveness. It also leads to two other effects—the false consensus 
effect (overestimating the commonality of one’s attitudes and unsuccessful behav-
iors) and the false uniqueness effect (underestimating the commonality of one’s 
abilities and successful behaviors).
Attitudes are our evaluative reactions (positive or negative) toward objects, 
events, and other people. They are most likely to guide our behavior when we feel 
strongly about them, are consciously aware of them, and when outside influences 
on our behavior are minimized. Sometimes, however, our behavior contradicts our 
attitudes, and this situation often leads to attitudinal change. A major explanation 
for such attitudinal change is cognitive dissonance theory—we change our attitude 
to reduce the cognitive dissonance created by the inconsistency between the atti-
tude and the behavior. Such change doesn’t occur if we have sufficient justification 
for our behavior, however. A competing theory, self-perception theory, argues 
that dissonance is not involved. Self-perception theory proposes that we are just 
unsure about our attitude, so we infer it from our behavior. We are merely making 
self-attributions. Both theories seem to operate but in different situations. For well-
defined attitudes, cognitive dissonance theory seems to be the better explanation; 
for weakly defined attitudes, self-perception theory is the better explanation.
Both our attitudes and our behavior also seem to be greatly affected by the roles 
we play. These roles are defined, and the definitions greatly influence our actions 
and our attitudes. The impact of the roles of guard and prisoner on the behavior and 
attitudes of male college students was dramatically demonstrated in Zimbardo’s 
SPE. However, criticism of Zimbardo’s situationist explanation for these findings 
has recently surfaced, leading to a new prison study—Haslam and Reicher’s BBC 
Prison Study. This criticism and the results of the BBC Prison Study suggest that 
both situational and dispositional factors are necessary to explain the results of the 
SPE and that it is the failure of groups to form identities that may lead to tyranny.
 ConceptCheck | 2
➤	 explain how the actor-observer bias qualifies the fundamental attribution 
error and how self-serving bias qualifies the actor-observer bias.
➤	 explain the difference between the false consensus effect and the false 
uniqueness effect.
➤	 explain when cognitive dissonance theory is a better explanation of the  
relationship between our behavior and our attitudes and when self-perception 
theory is a better explanation of this relationship.

Study Guide
391
Chapter Key Terms
You should know the definitions of the following key terms from the chapter. they 
are listed in the order in which they appear in the chapter. For those you do not know, 
return to the relevant section of the chapter to learn them. When you think that you 
know all of the terms, complete the matching exercise based on these key terms.
social psychology
conformity
informational social influence
normative social influence
compliance
foot-in-the-door technique
door-in-the-face technique
low-ball technique
that’s-not-all technique
obedience
social facilitation
social loafing
diffusion of responsibility
bystander effect
deindividuation
group polarization
groupthink
attribution
fundamental attribution error
just-world hypothesis
primacy effect
self-fulfilling prophecy
actor-observer bias
self-serving bias
false consensus effect
false uniqueness effect
attitudes
cognitive dissonance theory
self-perception theory
Key Terms Exercise
Identify the correct term for each of the 
following definitions. the answers to this 
exercise follow the answers to the Concept 
Checks at the end of the chapter.
	  1.	 Compliance to a large request is gained 
by preceding it with a very small request.
	 	
 
	  2.	 Influence stemming from the need for 
information in situations in which the 
correct action or judgment is uncertain.
	 	
 
	  3.	 The tendency to underestimate the com-
monality of one’s abilities and successful 
behaviors.
	 	
 
	  4.	 A mode of group thinking that impairs deci-
sion making because the desire for group 
harmony overrides a realistic appraisal of 
the possible decision alternatives.
	 	
 
	  5.	 The loss of self-awareness and self-
restraint in a group situation that fosters 
arousal and anonymity.
	 	
 
	  6.	 The tendency to exert less effort when 
working in a group toward a goal than 
when individually working toward a goal.
	 	
 
	  7.	 Following the commands of a person in 
authority.
	 	
 
	  8.	 The probability of a person helping in 
an emergency is greater when there are 
no other bystanders than when there are 
other bystanders.
	 	
 
	  9.	 The tendency as an observer to overesti-
mate internal dispositional influences and 
underestimate situational influences upon 
others’ behavior.
	 	
 

392  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
	10.	 A theory developed by Festinger that 
assumes people have a tendency 
to change their attitudes to reduce 
the cognitive discomfort created by 
inconsistencies between their attitudes 
and their behavior.
	 	
 
	11.	 The assumption that the world is just and 
that people get what they deserve.
	 	
 
	12.	 In impression formation, information 
gathered early is weighted more heavily 
than information gathered later in form-
ing an impression of another person.
	 	
 
	13.	 Compliance to a costly request is gained 
by first getting compliance to an attractive, 
less costly request but then reneging on it.
	 	
 
	14.	 The lessening of individual responsibility 
for a task when responsibility for the task 
is spread across the members of a group.
	 	
 
	15.	 A change in behavior, belief, or both to 
conform to a group norm as a result of 
real or imagined pressure.
	 	
 
Practice Test Questions
the following are practice multiple-choice test 
questions on some of the chapter content. the 
answers are given after the Key terms exercise 
answers at the end of the chapter. If you 
guessed or incorrectly answered a question, 
restudy the relevant section of the chapter.
	  1.	 The conformity demonstrated in Sherif’s 
study using the autokinetic effect stems 
from ______ .
a.	 actor-observer bias
b.	self-serving bias
c.	 informational social influence
d.	normative social influence
	  2.	 Which of the following factors increases 
conformity?
a.	 group is not unanimous
b.	responding secretly
c.	 correct action is not clear
d.	being of higher status than other 
group members
	  3.	 Which of the following compliance tech-
niques involves gaining compliance to a 
much larger request by preceding it with 
a much smaller request?
a.	 that’s-not-all technique
b.	door-in-the-face technique
c.	 low-ball technique
d.	foot-in-the-door technique
	  4.	 Which of the following situational factors 
in Milgram’s shock experiments led to the 
highest maximum obedience rate?
a.	 experiment conducted in a rundown 
office building
b.	two co-teachers disobey experimenter
c.	 experimenter not present
d.	teacher has to force learner’s hand 
onto shock plate
	  5.	 ______ is the strengthening of a group’s 
prevailing opinion on a topic following 
group discussion of the topic.
a.	 Deindividuation
b.	Group polarization
c.	 Groupthink
d.	Social facilitation
	  6.	 Facilitation of a dominant response on a 
task due to social arousal is called ______.
a.	 deindividuation
b.	social facilitation
c.	 social loafing
d.	the bystander effect
	  7.	 When committing the fundamental attri-
bution error, we tend to ______ the influ-
ence of dispositional factors and ______ 
the influence of situational factors.
a.	 overestimate; overestimate
b.	overestimate; underestimate

STudy GuidE  |  393
c.	 underestimate; overestimate
d.	underestimate; underestimate
	  8.	 With the self-serving bias, we tend to 
make ______ attributions for our failures 
and ______ attributions for our successes.
a.	 dispositional; dispositional
b.	dispositional; situational
c.	 situational; dispositional
d.	situational; situational
	  9.	 Bill likes country music; therefore, he 
thinks that most people like country music. 
Bill’s behavior is an example of the ______.
a.	 fundamental attribution error
b.	actor-observer bias
c.	 false consensus effect
d.	false uniqueness effect
	10.	 Two groups of children are told to not 
play with a very attractive toy in a play-
room. One group is threatened very 
severely, while the other group is only 
threatened mildly. Neither group played 
with the toy. According to cognitive  
dissonance theory, which group(s) 
should later still rate the toy as very 
attractive?
a.	 severe threat group
b.	mild threat group
c.	 neither group
d.	both groups
11.	 Which two compliance techniques 
involve the rule of reciprocity?
a.	 foot-in-the-door and door-in-the-face
b.	low-ball and that’s-not-all
c.	 foot-in-the-door and low-ball
d.	door-in-the-face and that’s-not-all
12.	 Conformity is higher for a person when 
the group ______ the person’s responses 
and when the person is of ______ status 
than the other group members.
a.	 hears; lesser
b.	does not hear; lesser
c.	 hears; higher
d.	does not hear; higher
13.	 The bystander effect refers to the finding 
that an observer of an emergency is less 
likely to help if the ______.
a.	 emergency takes place in a big city
b.	emergency is being observed by other 
people
c.	 observer has just endured a frustrating 
experience
d.	observer has been exposed to many 
similar emergencies in the past
14.	 Which of the following comments is most 
likely to be made by the leader of a group 
characterized by groupthink?
a.	 “We have been united on matters in the 
past, and I hope that will continue.”
b.	“We will need some outside experts to 
critique our decisions.”
c.	 “It’s important for each of us individu-
ally to think critically about this issue.”
d.	“We should probably divide into  
subgroups and arrive at independent 
decisions.”
15.	 When our expectations of a person elicit 
behavior from that person that confirms 
our expectations, this is a case of ______.
a.	 self-serving bias
b.	actor-observer bias
c.	 deindividuation
d.	self-fulfilling prophecy
Chapter Concept Check Answers
Concept Check | 1
• The main difference between normative 
social influence and informational social 
influence concerns the need for information. 
When normative social influence is operating, 
information is not necessary for the judgment 
task. The correct answer or action is clear. 
People are conforming to gain the approval 
of others in the group and avoid their disap-
proval. When informational social influence is 
operating, however, people conform because 
they need information as to what the correct 
answer or action is. Conformity in this case 
is due to the need for information, which we 
use to guide our behavior.

394  |  Chapter 9  |  SOCIAL PSyChOLOGy
• In the door-in-the-face technique, the other 
person accepts your refusal to the first 
request, so you reciprocate by agreeing to 
her second smaller request, the one she 
wanted you to comply with. In the that’s-
not-all technique, you think that the other 
person has done you a favor by giving 
you an even better deal with the second 
request, so you reciprocate and do her a 
favor and agree to the second request.
• If you predicted that the result was the  
same (zero percent maximum obedience), 
you are wrong. The result was the same as  
in Milgram’s baseline condition, 65 percent  
maximum obedience. An explanation 
involves how we view persons of authority 
who lose their authority (being demoted). In 
a sense, by agreeing to serve as the learner, 
the experimenter gave up his authority, and 
the teachers no longer viewed him as an 
authority figure. He had been demoted.
• According to the bystander effect, you 
would be more likely to receive help on 
the little-traveled country road, because 
any passing bystander would feel the 
responsibility for helping you. She would 
realize that there was no one else avail-
able to help you, so she would do so. On 
a busy interstate highway, however, the 
responsibility for stopping to help is dif-
fused across hundreds of people passing 
by, each thinking that someone else  
would help you.
Concept Check | 2
• The actor-observer bias qualifies the fun-
damental attribution error because it says 
that the type of attribution we tend to make 
depends upon whether we are actors mak-
ing attributions about our own behavior or 
observers making attributions about others’ 
behavior. The actor-observer bias leads us 
as actors to make situational attributions; the 
fundamental attribution error leads us, as 
observers, to make dispositional attributions. 
The actor-observer bias is qualified, however, 
by the self-serving bias, which says that the 
type of attribution we make for our own 
actions depends upon whether the outcome 
is positive or negative. If positive, we tend to 
make dispositional attributions; if negative, 
we tend to make situational attributions.
• The false consensus effect pertains to situa-
tions in which we tend to overestimate the 
commonality of our opinions and unsuccess-
ful behaviors. The false uniqueness effect 
pertains to situations in which we tend to 
underestimate the commonality of our  
abilities and successful behaviors. According 
to these effects, we think others share our 
opinions and unsuccessful behaviors but 
do not share our abilities and successful 
behaviors. These effects both stem from the 
self-serving bias, which helps to protect our 
self-esteem.
• Cognitive dissonance theory seems to be 
the better explanation for situations in 
which our attitudes are well-defined. With 
well-defined attitudes, our contradictory 
behavior creates dissonance; therefore, we 
tend to change our attitude to make it fit 
with our behavior. Self-perception theory 
seems to be the better explanation for situ-
ations in which our attitudes are weakly 
defined. We make self-attributions using 
our behavior to infer our attitudes.
Answers to Key Terms Exercise
	  1.	 foot-in-the-door technique
	  2.	 informational social influence
	  3.	 false uniqueness effect
	  4.	 groupthink
	  5.	 deindividuation
	  6.	 social loafing
	  7.	 obedience
	  8.	 bystander effect
	  9.	 fundamental attribution error
10.	 cognitive dissonance theory
11.	 just-world hypothesis
12.	 primacy effect
13.	 low-ball technique
14.	 diffusion of responsibility
15.	 conformity

STudy GuidE  |  395
Answers to Practice Test Questions
	  1.	 c; informational social influence
	  2.	 c; correct action is not clear
	  3.	 d; foot-in-the-door technique
	  4.	 a; experiment conducted in a rundown 
office building
	  5.	 b; Group polarization
	  6.	 b; social facilitation
	  7.	 b; overestimate; underestimate
	  8.	 c; situational; dispositional
	  9.	 c; false consensus effect
	10.	 a; severe threat group
	11.	 d; door-in-the-face and that’s-not-all
	12.	 a; hears; lesser
	13.	 b; emergency is being observed by  
other people
	14.	 a; “We have been united on matters  
in the past, and I hope that will  
continue.”
	15.	 d; self-fulfilling prophecy

Abnormal Psychology
 THE DIAGNOSIS AND 
CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL 
DISORDERS
The diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental disorders
The Perceptual Bias of Labeling
 SIX MAJOR CATEGORIES 
OF MENTAL DISORDERS
Anxiety disorders
Obsessive-Compulsive and 
Related disorders
depressive disorders
Bipolar and Related disorders
Schizophrenia Spectrum and 
Other Psychotic disorders
Personality disorders
 THE TREATMENT OF 
MENTAL DISORDERS
Biomedical Therapies
Psychotherapies
10

397
T
he scientific study of mental disorders and their 
treatment is called abnormal psychology. In this 
chapter, we will detail some of the major types of 
disorders and then describe the various types of therapy 
available to treat them. We will also consider the impor-
tant question of whether these therapies are truly effective in treating disorders. 
First, however, we need to consider the diagnosis and classification processes so 
that you understand how disordered behavior and thinking are identified.
The Diagnosis and Classification 
of Mental Disorders
When psychologists say that the behavior and thinking of someone with a dis-
order are “abnormal,” what do they mean? How do psychologists decide when 
someone’s behavior or thinking has crossed over the line from normal to abnor-
mal? Psychologists use four key criteria. It is important to realize that if a person’s 
behavior or thinking meets one or more of these criteria, this does not necessarily 
mean that the person is suffering from a disorder. This will become clear as we 
discuss each of the criteria, which can be posed as questions.
First, is the behavior or thinking atypical (statistically infrequent)? Of course, 
not all statistically infrequent behavior or thinking is abnormal. Consider skydiv-
ing. That’s an atypical behavior in our society, but it does not mean that a person 
who skydives has a disorder. Having hallucinations, however, is an atypical behav-
ior that likely does reflect a disorder.
Second, is the behavior or thinking maladaptive? Maladaptive behavior or 
thinking prevents the person from successfully functioning and adapting to 
life’s demands. Thus, a disordered person is not able to function in daily life. For 
example, being afraid to leave one’s home is atypical and maladaptive behavior 
that would interfere with daily functioning.
Third, is the person or are others distressed by the behavior or thinking? Perhaps 
a young man is attempting, but failing, to make a living doing odd street stunts. His 
behavior is atypical and maladaptive (he will soon be penniless), but if he is not dis-
turbed and if his stunts are not disturbing others, then he is not considered disordered.
Fourth, is the behavior or thinking rational? For example, a fear of birds might 
be so strong that even thinking about them causes great anxiety. The person may 
realize that this atypical, maladaptive, disturbing fear is not rational but still be 
unable to suppress the anxiety, and he would therefore be considered disordered.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual  
of Mental Disorders
These criteria help to determine whether a person’s behavior and thinking may 
be “abnormal,” but how do we know exactly what disorder the person has? The 
➤	 abnormal psychology  The scientific 
study of mental disorders and their 
treatment.

398  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), 
published in 2013 by the American Psychiatric Association (APA), is the most 
widely used diagnostic system for mental disorders, informally referred to as “the 
bible of mental disorders.” The intent of the DSM-5 is to serve both as a guide 
and an aid in the accurate diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders. It bases 
the classification of each disorder upon behavioral and psychological symptoms 
and defines the diagnostic guidelines for each disorder. The APA published the 
DSM-5 in print and also plans to publish it as a “living document” that can be 
updated as new research emerges. These incremental updates will be online and 
identified with decimals; i.e., DSM-5.1, DSM-5.2, and so on. Previous editions 
of the DSM were labeled using Roman numerals (e.g., DSM-IV), but the APA 
changed to Arabic numerals to facilitate the labeling of the versions of the living 
document.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) first appeared 
in 1952, was only 86 pages long, and described about 60 disorders (Cordón, 
2005), whereas the DSM-5 is almost 1,000 pages long and describes approxi-
mately 400 disorders. Why has the number of disorders in the DSM increased 
so dramatically, causing the DSM to go from a thin, spiral-bound book to 
a weighty tome across its five editions? A major reason is that over the last 
60 years or so, we have learned a lot about various disorders and how to dif-
ferentiate them, leading to more and more disorder classifications over succes-
sive versions of the DSM. This ability to make better differentiations between 
disorders has also led to more diagnostic reliability. In fact, the framers of the 
DSM-5 followed procedures in the development of the manual that would lead 
to it having greater reliability than previous editions (Regier, Narrow, Kuhl, & 
Kupfer, 2011). For example, they conducted extensive reviews of research, con-
sulted with numerous clinicians about diagnostic difficulties, and developed 
new categories and diagnostic criteria for categories that in the past have not 
been reliable. Thus, a major strength of the DSM-5 is that clinicians using it 
should be able to make more reliable classifications, which means that clini-
cians should more frequently agree on a particular diagnosis for a particular 
patient.
Regardless of this possible gain in reliability, the DSM-5 has been heavily 
criticized, causing quite a kerfuffle among mental health professionals (e.g., 
Frances, 2013; Greenberg, 2013). A major criticism is that disorder classification 
in the DSM-5 is out of control, leading many aspects of normal behavior and 
ordinary life to fit the criteria for diagnosis of a mental disorder. For example, 
mental decline that goes a bit beyond normal aging may 
now be given the new DSM-5 diagnosis of “mild neu-
rocognitive disorder” (giving “senior moments” clinical 
significance) and children who have recurrent temper 
outbursts may be given the new DSM-5 diagnosis of 
“disruptive mood dysregulation disorder.” The DSM-5 
has also eliminated the bereavement exclusion for the 
➤	 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition 
(DSM-5)   The current version of the 
American Psychiatric Association’s 
diagnostic and classification guidelines 
for mental disorders.

ThE dIagnosIs and ClassIfIcatIon of MEntal dIsordErs  |  399
diagnosis of major depressive disorder. Past versions of the DSM excluded people 
who had lost a loved one from receiving this diagnosis for the first two months 
of their bereavement. Thus, many people undergoing a normal grief reaction to 
the loss of a loved one may now receive a diagnosis of major depressive disorder. 
Allen Frances, who served as chairman of the DSM-IV task force, argues that the 
new diagnoses in the DSM-5 turn “everyday anxiety, eccentricity, forgetting, and 
bad eating habits into mental disorders” (Frances, 2013, pp. xv–xvi). According 
to Frances, such overdiagnosis will lead not only to a bonanza for the pharma-
ceutical industry but also to great costs (e.g., unnecessary and possibly harmful 
drug therapy) for all of the false positive patients (people falsely diagnosed to 
have a mental disorder). Remember, we discussed the costs of false positives in 
the context of medical screening tests in Chapter 6. According to critics such as 
Frances, the DSM-5 with its excessively wide diagnostic net creates an analogous 
situation in psychiatric diagnosis. 
In spite of its possible flaws, the DSM-5 reflects the current state of our knowl-
edge about mental disorders and serves very important functions, both in clinical 
practice and in research. It provides a common language and useable classification 
system for clinicians and clinical researchers to describe, discuss, evaluate, treat, 
and conduct research on mental disor-
ders. It also serves an important practi-
cal purpose—health insurance companies 
require a DSM-5 disorder classification 
before paying for therapy. The DSM-5 
should be thought of as a work in prog-
ress. As our knowledge about mental 
disorders evolves, so will the DSM.
The DSM-5 has abandoned the mul-
tiaxial diagnostic system used in the 
DSM-IV and moved to a nonaxial 
assessment system in which a diagnosis 
requires a clinician to identify the disor-
der (or disorders) indicated by the per-
son’s symptoms along with dimensional 
judgments on the severity of the person’s 
present symptoms and impairment. The 
DSM-5 provides specific diagnostic cri-
teria, the key clinical features, and back-
ground information (such as prevalence 
rates) for approximately 400 disorders. 
Some disorders share certain symptoms, 
so the DSM-5 clusters these disorders 
into a major category. For example, sever-
al disorders that share anxiety as a symp-
tom, such as phobic and panic disorders, 
This is a disorder that the framers of the DSM-5 seem to 
have missed.
Dan Thompson/Universal Press UClick
BreVItY By Guy & Rodd

400  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
are categorized as anxiety disorders. There are 20 major categories in the DSM-5. 
We will consider some disorders from six of these categories—Anxiety Disorders, 
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders, Depressive Disorders, Bipolar and 
Related Disorders, Schizophrenia Spectrum and other Psychotic Disorders, and 
Personality Disorders. It is important to remember that the DSM-5 classification 
system applies to a pattern of symptoms and not to the person, so it refers, for 
example, to “a person with schizophrenia” and not a “schizophrenic.”
The Perceptual Bias of Labeling
The downside to classifying a mental disorder, regardless of the system used, is 
that labels are attached to people, and this biases our perception of these people 
in terms of the labels. Our perception is no longer objective. Think about the 
words that are often used to describe people with mental disorders—for example, 
“crazy,” “lunatic,” “deranged,” “insane,” or “mad.” These words have strong nega-
tive connotations. Similarly, diagnostic disorder labels tend to lead to negative 
perceptions and interpretations of a person’s behavior in terms of the label. The 
label guides our perception.
There is a famous study that we briefly mentioned in Chapter 1 that dem-
onstrates the perceptual biasing effect of labeling (Rosenhan, 1973). Between 
1969 and 1972, David L. Rosenhan, then a psychology professor at Swarthmore 
College, and seven others (a psychology graduate student, three psychologists, 
a pediatrician, a housewife, and a painter) went to several different hospitals 
in five states and tried to gain admission. They each faked a major symptom 
of schizophrenic disorders, auditory hallucinations (hearing voices). The voice 
in these cases was saying the words “empty,” “hollow,” and “thud.” Other than 
this sole symptom, the researchers acted normal and only lied about their true 
identities. First, they wanted to see whether they would be admitted given this 
singular symptom. Second, they wanted to see what would happen after they 
were admitted if they acted normal and said that they no longer heard the voic-
es and that they were feeling normal again. Here’s what happened. In brief, all 
of the pseudopatients (fake patients) were admitted with a diagnosis of schizo-
phrenia and were stuck in psychiatric wards for between 8 and 52 days. Their 
subsequent normal behavior was misinterpreted in terms of their diagnoses. 
For example, one person’s excessive note taking was interpreted as a function 
of his illness when, in fact, he was just trying to take notes to document the 
study. What kind of treatment did they receive? For the most part, they were 
given antipsychotic medications—an estimated 2,100 pills, though only two 
were taken. The pseudopatients just pretended to take the pills, pocketed 
them, and flushed them down the toilet. Ironically, some of the true patients 
realized that the pseudopatients were not true patients; but the staff, guided 
by the diagnostic labels, did not. Even when the pseudopatients were released 
(which took a while for some of them), they carried the label “schizophrenia 
in remission.”

ThE dIagnosIs and ClassIfIcatIon of MEntal dIsordErs  |  401
There was a secondary study included that is not often mentioned, but it is 
interesting because it provides a clear demonstration of perceptual bias. The staff 
of a hospital, which was aware of the primary study, was falsely informed that 
one or more pseudopatients would attempt to gain admission to the hospital 
over the next three months. Rosenhan did not send any pseudopatients, but of 
the 193 real patients who came to the hospital for admittance with symptoms 
of a disorder, 83 (43%) were either suspected or confidently judged to be a pseu-
dopatient by at least one psychiatrist or staff member. Remember from Chapter 3, 
seeing is believing, but it isn’t always believing correctly. 
Perceptual biasing is further complicated by the misrepresentation of disor-
dered people on television and in other media. They are often depicted as violent 
and dangerous to others when the vast majority of people with disorders are not 
a threat to anyone except maybe themselves (Applebaum, 2004; Lilienfeld, Lynn, 
Ruscio, & Beyerstein, 2010; Teplin, 1985). Most people with mental disorders are 
experiencing a troubled period in their lives and are finding it difficult to adjust. 
Remember to distinguish between the person and the label. We need labels in 
order to know how to treat people with problems and to conduct research on 
these problems, but there is much more to a person than a label.
Now that we have a general understanding of the diagnostic classification 
system and its strengths and weaknesses, we will consider some of the mental 
disorders (labels) that are identified in the DSM-5.
Section Summary
In this section, we first discussed the criteria for classifying behavior and thinking 
as abnormal and then how mental disorders are diagnosed and classified. The 
criteria for abnormality are that one’s behavior and thinking are atypical, mal-
adaptive, cause distress, and are not rational. The most widely used diagnostic 
system is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition 
(DSM-5). The DSM-5 bases classification upon behavioral and psychological 
symptoms and provides diagnostic guidelines for about 400 disorders. Because 
some disorders share certain symptoms, the DSM-5 clusters the disorders into 
20 major categories, such as Anxiety Disorders and Depressive Disorders. The 
DSM-5 should be viewed as a work in progress and will also be published as 
a living document, with future versions such as DSM-5.1, DSM-5.2, etc. as new 
research findings emerge. 
A major strength of the DSM-5 is that it was developed to be more reliable than 
previous editions. Regardless of its reliability, the DSM-5 has been criticized for cast-
ing too wide of a diagnostic net, possibly leading to normal behavior being classi-
fied as abnormal. In spite of its possible flaws, the DSM-5 reflects the current state of 
our knowledge about mental disorders and serves very important functions, both in 
clinical practice and in research. It provides a common language and useable classi-
fication system for clinicians and clinical researchers to describe, discuss, evaluate, 
treat, and conduct research on mental disorders. It also serves an important practi-
cal purpose—health insurance companies require a DSM-5 disorder classification 
before paying for therapy.

402  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
Six Major Categories of Mental Disorders
As you read this section, beware of the “medical school syndrome”—the tendency 
to think that you have a disease (disorder in our case) when you read about its 
symptoms. Symptoms are behaviors or mental processes that indicate the pres-
ence of a disorder. The symptoms of many disorders often involve behavior and 
thinking that we all experience, which may lead us to think we have the disor-
ders. To prevent such misdiagnoses, remember the criteria that we discussed for 
distinguishing abnormal behavior and thinking. For example, we all get anxious 
or depressed (symptoms of several different disorders) at different times in our 
lives for understandable reasons, such as an upcoming presentation or a death in 
the family. These feelings of anxiety and depression only become symptoms of a 
disorder when they prevent us from functioning normally. We are suffering from 
a disorder only if our reactions to life’s challenges become atypical, maladaptive, 
disturbing to ourselves or others, and irrational.
What causes such abnormal behavior and thinking? Most causal explana-
tions for mental disorders are tied to the four major research approaches—
biological, behavioral, cognitive, and sociocultural. None of these approaches 
has proven consistently better at explaining all of the various disorders, though 
particular approaches are sometimes better for specific disorders. Even in these 
cases, however, it appears best to formulate an explanation in terms of more 
than one kind of cause. This is usually referred to as the biopsychosocial 
approach—explaining abnormality as the result of the interaction among bio-
logical, psychological (behavioral and cognitive), and 
sociocultural factors. As we consider various disorders, 
we will provide some examples of this type of explana-
tion. Table 10.1 outlines the six major categories of dis-
orders, along with the specific mental disorders within 
each category that we will consider.
The downside to disorder classification is that labels are attached to people, 
thereby biasing our perception of these people in terms of their labels. Such per-
ceptual biasing is further complicated by the misrepresentation of people with dis-
orders by the media as violent and dangerous when most are not a threat to anyone 
except possibly themselves. Although labeling does lead to such perceptual bias, 
we need to use labels to both diagnose and treat people with disorders.
➤	 biopsychosocial approach  Explaining 
abnormality as the result of the 
interaction among biological, 
psychological (behavioral and cognitive), 
and sociocultural factors.
ConceptCheck | 1
➤	 explain what the DSM-5 is.
➤	 explain the negative effect of attaching labels to disorders and why we need 
labels even though we know they have such effects.

SIX MaJor CatEgorIEs of MEntal dIsordErs  |  403
Anxiety Disorders
We all have experienced anxiety. Don’t you get anxious at exam times, especially at 
final exam time? Most students do. How do you feel when you are about to give 
an oral presentation? Anxiety usually presents itself again. These are normal reac-
tions, not signs of a disorder. Anxiety disorders are disorders that share features 
of excessive fear and anxiety and related behavioral disturbances, such as avoid-
ance behaviors (APA, 2013). In anxiety disorders, the anxiety and fear often occur 
inexplicably and are so intense that they prevent the person from functioning 
normally in daily life. The specific anxiety disorders differ from one another in the 
types of objects and situations that induce the excessive fear and anxiety. Because 
anxiety disorders are some of the most common disorders in the United States 
(Hollander & Simeon, 2011; cf. Horwitz & Wakefield, 2012), we’ll discuss several 
different anxiety disorders—specific phobia, social anxiety disorder (social phobia), 
agoraphobia, panic disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder.
Specific phobia.  According to the DSM-5, a specific 
phobia is indicated by a marked and persistent fear of 
specific objects or situations (such as snakes or heights) 
that is excessive and unreasonable. In the United States, 
the overall prevalence rate for specific phobia ranges 
from 7 to 9 percent, with a higher prevalence rate in teen-
agers and a lower prevalence rate in older adults (APA, 
2013). More than 12 percent of people in the United 
States develop a specific phobia at some point during 
Table 10.1     Six Major Categories of Mental Disorders and the 
Specific Disorders to Be Considered in Each Category
Major Category
Specific Disorder(s) Within Category
Anxiety disorders
Specific phobia, social anxiety disorder (social 
phobia), agoraphobia, panic disorder, generalized 
anxiety disorder
Obsessive-compulsive and 
related disorders
Obsessive-compulsive disorder, hoarding disorder, 
excoriation (skin-pulling) disorder, trichotillomania 
(hair-pulling disorder)
Depressive disorders
Major depressive disorder
Bipolar and related disorders
Bipolar disorder
Schizophrenia spectrum and 
other psychotic disorders
Schizophrenia
Personality disorders
Avoidant personality disorder, schizoid personality 
disorder, antisocial personality disorder
➤	 anxiety disorders  Disorders that share 
features of excessive fear and anxiety 
and related behavioral disturbances, 
such as avoidance behaviors. 
➤	 specific phobia  An anxiety disorder 
indicated by a marked and persistent 
fear of specific objects or situations that 
is excessive and unreasonable.

404  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
their lives, and having a specific phobia is about twice as prevalent in women ver-
sus men and in African and Hispanic Americans (born in the United States) versus 
White Americans (Comer, 2014). A selection of specific phobias is given in 
Table 10.2. A person with a specific phobia realizes that the fear is excessive and 
unreasonable but cannot control it. Both the avoidance of the object or situation 
and the anxious anticipation of encountering the object or situation interfere 
with the person’s daily life. This is important. Many of us have fears of such 
things as heights, snakes, and spiders, but we do not have a disorder. The anxiety 
and fear are not to the degree that they interfere with normal functioning and 
lead us to behave in maladaptive and irrational ways.
To emphasize this difference, consider this brief description of a case of a 
woman with a specific phobia of birds. She became housebound because of 
her fear of encountering a bird. Any noises that she heard within the house she 
thought were birds that had somehow gotten in. Even without encountering an 
actual bird, the dreaded anticipation of doing so completely controlled her behav-
ior. When she did leave her house, she would carefully back out of her driveway 
so that she did not hit a bird; she feared that the birds would retaliate if she did. 
Table 10.2     A Selection of Specific Phobias
Phobia
Specific Fear
Acrophobia
Fear of heights
Aerophobia
Fear of flying
Agyrophobia
Fear of crossing streets
Arachnophobia
Fear of spiders
Claustrophobia
Fear of closed spaces
Cynophobia
Fear of dogs
Gamophobia
Fear of marriage
Gephyrophobia
Fear of crossing bridges
Hydrophobia
Fear of water
Ophidiophobia
Fear of snakes
Ornithophobia
Fear of birds
Pyrophobia
Fear of fire
Thanatophobia
Fear of death
Xenophobia
Fear of strangers
Zoophobia
Fear of animals

SIX MaJor CatEgorIEs of MEntal dIsordErs  |  405
She realized that such cognitive activity was 
beyond the capabilities of birds, but she 
could not control her fear. Her behavior and 
thinking were clearly abnormal.
What causes a specific phobia? One 
biopsychosocial answer involves both behav-
ioral and biological factors. We learn pho-
bias through classical conditioning and 
are biologically predisposed to learn some 
fears more easily than others. We are con-
ditioned to fear a specific object or situa-
tion. Remember Watson and Rayner’s study 
described in Chapter 4 in which they classi-
cally conditioned Little Albert to fear white 
rats? Behavioral psychologists believe that 
the fears in specific phobias are learned 
the same way, but through stressful experi-
ences in the real world, especially during early 
childhood. For example, a fear of birds might 
be due to the stressful experience of seeing 
Alfred Hitchcock’s movie The Birds (in which birds savagely attack humans) at a 
young age. You should also remember from Chapter 4 that biological prepared-
ness constrains learning. Certain associations (such as taste and sickness) are easy 
to learn, while others (such as taste and electric shock) are very difficult. This 
biological preparedness shows up with specific phobias in that fears that seem to 
have more evolutionary survival value (such as fears of heights and animals) are 
more frequent than ones that do not (McNally, 1987). It is also more difficult to 
extinguish fears that have more evolutionary survival value (Davey, 1995).
Social anxiety disorder (social phobia) and agoraphobia.  Most phobias 
are classified as specific phobias, but the DSM-5 describes two broader types of 
phobias: social anxiety disorder (previously labeled social phobia in the DSM-IV) 
and agoraphobia. Social anxiety disorder is a marked, irrational, and persistent 
fear of one or more social performance situations in which embarrassment may 
occur and in which there is exposure to unfamiliar people or scrutiny by others. 
Again this is more than the normal anxiety before giving a presentation. The fear 
is excessive, unreasonable, and interferes with the person’s normal functioning. 
For example, the person may fear eating in public and will have great difficulty 
managing lunch at work; she will reject all lunch 
and  dinner invitations, greatly limiting her social 
opportunities. The fear may be specific to one particular 
social situation (such as eating in public) or more general 
(such as functioning inadequately with respect to all 
behavior in front of others), leading to the avoidance of 
most social situations.
➤	 social anxiety disorder  An anxiety 
disorder indicated by a marked and 
persistent fear of one or more social 
performance situations in which 
embarrassment may occur and in which 
there is exposure to unfamiliar people or 
scrutiny by others.
Naf/Cartoonstock.com
“Stephen’s fear of heights is particularly bad today.”

406  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
Social anxiety disorder is different from 
agoraphobia, the fear of being in places or 
situations from which escape may be dif-
ficult or embarrassing. The name of this 
disorder literally means fear of the market-
place; in Greek, “agora” means marketplace, 
and “phobia” means fear. In addition to the 
marketplace, situations commonly feared in 
agoraphobia include being in a crowd, stand-
ing in a line, and traveling in a crowded bus 
or train or in a car in heavy traffic. To avoid 
these situations, people with agoraphobia 
usually won’t leave the security of their home. 
Surveys reveal that about 7 percent of people 
in the United States suffer from social anxi-
ety disorder in any given year but only about 
2 percent from agoraphobia (Kessler, Ruscio, 
Shear, & Wittchen, 2010; NIMH, 2011). 
Just as for specific phobias, a behavioral-
evolutionary explanation seems indicated for agoraphobia. However, the leading 
explanation for social anxiety disorder is cognitive—people with this disorder have 
negative social beliefs about themselves, such as that they are socially inadequate 
and that their behavior in social situations will inevitably lead to disasters (e.g., 
Heimberg, Brozovich, & Rapee, 2010; Rosenberg, Ledley, & Heimberg, 2010). 
Anticipating that such disasters will occur, people with social anxiety disorder 
try to avoid social situations; and when they are in a social situation, they suffer 
increased anxiety, which leads to a negative assessment of how poorly they have 
acted, increasing their fear of future social situations. 
Panic disorder.  Panic disorder is a condition in which a person experiences 
recurrent panic attacks—sudden onsets of intense fear. A panic attack includes 
symptoms such as trembling, sweating, heart palpitations, chest pain, shortness 
of breath, and feelings of choking and dizziness. The person is overrun with anx-
iety and fear. Some panic attacks occur when a person is faced with a dreaded 
situation (such as going to the dentist), but others occur without any apparent 
reason. Only about 2 to 3 percent of adolescents and adults suffer from panic 
disorder each year, and it is twice as common in women as in men (APA, 2013).
Biological explanations of panic disorder involve 
abnormal neurotransmitter activity, especially that of 
norepinephrine, and improper functioning of a panic 
brain circuit, which includes the amygdala, hypothala-
mus, and some other areas in the brain. Cognitive explana-
tions involve panic-prone people who are overly sensitive 
to bodily sensations. Such people misinterpret these 
sensations as signs of a medical catastrophe, plunging 
➤	 agoraphobia  An anxiety disorder 
indicated by a marked and persistent fear 
of being in places or situations from which 
escape may be difficult or embarrassing.
➤	 panic disorder  An anxiety disorder in 
which a person experiences recurrent 
panic attacks.
Sidney Harris/ScienceCartoonsPlus.com

SIX MaJor CatEgorIEs of MEntal dIsordErs  |  407
them into a panic attack. Panic disorder is also often 
accompanied by agoraphobia. One explanation of panic 
disorder with agoraphobia is the fear-of-fear hypothesis: 
Agoraphobia is the result of the fear of having a panic 
attack in a public place. According to this hypothesis, 
agoraphobia is a case of classical conditioning in which 
the fear-avoidance response is a conditioned response to 
the initial panic attack.
Generalized 
anxiety 
disorder.  Panic 
attacks occur suddenly in panic disorder. In gen-
eralized anxiety disorder, the anxiety is chronic 
and lasts for months. Generalized anxiety dis-
order is a disorder in which a person has exces-
sive, global anxiety that he cannot control, 
occurring more days than not for at least six 
months (APA, 2013). The person just cannot 
stop worrying, and the anxiety is general—it is 
not tied to specific objects or situations as it is 
in a phobic disorder. The problem is sometimes 
described as free-floating anxiety. About 
6 percent of us will develop a generalized anxiety 
disorder in our lifetimes, and it is diagnosed 
twice as often in women than men (APA, 2013). 
Recent biological research has indicated that 
generalized anxiety disorder may be related to a 
biochemical dysfunction in the brain involving 
GABA, a neurotransmitter that we discussed in 
Chapter 2. Remember, GABA is the major inhib-
itory neurotransmitter, which means that it 
causes neurons to stop generating impulses. In 
anxiety and fear situations, more and more neu-
rons get excited. After a while, this state of excit-
ability in a normal person triggers the release of 
GABA to reduce the level of neuronal firing back 
to normal, which reduces the feelings of anxiety. 
A person with generalized anxiety disorder may 
have problems activating GABA, and therefore 
the feelings of anxiety are not reduced.
Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders
This is a new major category in the DSM-5. In the DSM-IV, obsessive-compulsive 
disorder was classified as an anxiety disorder. In this new category, obsessive-
compulsive disorder is grouped with some related disorders, such as excoriation 
The Scream by Edvard Munch. This painting is typically 
interpreted as illustrating the intense terror in a panic 
attack. According to the text Munch carved into the 
work’s gilded frame for the second of the four colored 
versions that he painted, the painting stems from an 
actual incident in Munch’s life. Munch and two friends 
were walking on a bridge at sunset when Munch actually 
experienced the enormous anxiety and melancholy that 
he brought to life in the painting. He said that he was 
trembling with fright and felt the great scream in nature.
Album / Oronoz / Album / SuperStock
➤	 generalized anxiety disorder  An 
anxiety disorder in which a person has 
excessive, global anxiety and worries 
that he cannot control, occurring more 
days than not for at least a period of 
6 months. 

408  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
(skin-picking) disorder and trichotillomania (hair-pull-
ing) disorder. These disorders are related to obsessive-
compulsive disorder because of the compulsive nature 
of the behaviors involved and the obsessive-like concerns 
that trigger these behaviors. We will focus our discus-
sion on obsessive-compulsive disorder and then briefly 
describe a few of the related disorders. None of the 
disorders in this category is as prevalent as the anxiety 
disorders that we discussed. 
Obsessive-compulsive disorder.  A person with 
obsessive-compulsive disorder experiences recurrent 
obsessions or compulsions that are recognized by the person as excessive or unrea-
sonable, but consume considerable time and cause significant distress and disrup-
tion in the person’s daily life. Some people with obsessive-compulsive disorder 
experience only obsessions or only compulsions, but most suffer both. An obses-
sion is a persistent intrusive thought, idea, impulse, or image that causes anxiety. 
A compulsion is a repetitive and rigid behavior that a person feels compelled to 
perform in order to reduce anxiety. The most common obsessions are concerned 
with contamination through germs, dirt, or other toxic substances, and the fear 
that something terrible, such as death or illness, is going to occur; the most fre-
quent compulsions are excessive hand washing, bathing, and grooming (Rapoport, 
1989). The 12-month prevalence of obsessive-compulsive disorder is only 1.2 per-
cent (APA, 2013).
It is important to realize that many people experience minor obsessions (e.g., 
a pervasive worry about upcoming exams) or compulsions (e.g., arranging their 
desks in a certain way), but they do not have this disorder. People with obsessive-
compulsive disorder cannot function in their daily lives, because their obsessions 
and compulsions consume most of the day and 
prevent a normal life. People who don’t have this 
disorder might go back to check to make sure that 
the stove was turned off once (or even twice), but a 
person with an obsessive-compulsive disorder might 
check 50 times and in a very ritualistic manner. This 
is a checking compulsion—the person checks the 
same thing over and over again, usually a set num-
ber of times and in a particular manner. Similarly, 
people who suffer from a cleaning compulsion feel 
compelled to keep cleaning themselves. Such people 
might spend their day washing their hands, taking 
showers, and engaging in other cleaning activities. 
Compulsions are usually tied to obsessions. For 
example, the cleaning compulsion is usually tied 
to a contamination obsession in which people are 
➤	 obsessive-compulsive disorder  A 
disorder in which the person experienc-
es recurrent obsessions or compulsions 
that are perceived by the person as 
excessive or unreasonable, but cause 
significant distress and disruption in the 
person’s daily life.
➤	 obsession  A persistent intrusive 
thought, idea, impulse, or image that 
causes anxiety.
➤	 compulsion  A repetitive and rigid 
behavior that a person feels compelled 
to perform in order to reduce anxiety.
© Jason Love

SIX MaJor CatEgorIEs of MEntal dIsordErs  |  409
overly concerned with avoiding contamination. To reduce the anxiety stemming 
from the fear of contamination, they feel compelled to keep cleaning themselves.
It is not known for sure what causes obsessive-compulsive disorder, but recent 
research suggests that a neurotransmitter imbalance involving serotonin may be 
involved. Antidepressant drugs that only increase serotonin activity (SSRIs) help 
many patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder (Rapoport, 1991). Serotonin 
activity has also been linked to parts of the brain that may be related to the 
disorder—the orbital region of the frontal cortex (the cortical area just above the 
eyes), the caudate nuclei (areas in the basal ganglia), the thalamus, the amygdala, 
and the cingulate cortex (the communication conduit between the prefrontal 
lobes and the limbic system). These parts comprise a brain circuit that is involved 
in filtering out irrelevant information and disengaging attention, which are 
certainly central aspects of obsessive-compulsive disorder (Seligman, Walker, & 
Rosenhan, 2001). One explanation may be that serotonin works to stabilize activ-
ity in these areas. One truly bizarre case of obsessive-compulsive disorder high-
lights the importance of the frontal lobe region. A man with obsessive-compulsive 
disorder became severely depressed and attempted suicide. He shot himself in 
the head, but fortunately survived and was cured of his disorder. The bullet had 
removed some of his orbital frontal cortex and his disorder with it.
Obsessive-compulsive related disorders.  We will briefly describe three of 
these disorders—hoarding disorder, excoriation (skin-picking) disorder, and tricho-
tillomania (hair-pulling disorder). At present, explanations for these related disor-
ders are similar to those we discussed for obsessive-compulsive disorder. It is hoped 
that by being grouped with obsessive-compulsive disorder in the DSM-5, these 
disorders will be researched more, leading to more disorder-specific explanations.
Hoarding disorder reflects a persistent difficulty in discarding or parting with 
possessions due to a perceived need to save the items and the distress associated 
with discarding them. This need to save items results in an extraordinary accumu-
lation of clutter. Parts of the home may become inaccessible because of the stacks 
of clutter occupying those areas. Sofas, beds, and other pieces of furniture may be 
unusable, because they are filled with stacks of hoarded items. Such clutter may 
not only impair personal and social functioning but also result in fire hazards 
and unhealthy sanitary conditions. Prevalence rates for hoarding disorder are not 
available, but it appears to be more prevalent in older adults than younger adults 
(APA, 2013). About 75 percent of individuals with hoarding disorder also have 
an anxiety or depressive disorder, with the most common being major depressive 
disorder (APA, 2013). Having another disorder is important, because it may often 
be the main reason for consultation. Individuals with hoarding disorder seldom 
seek consultation for hoarding symptoms.
People with excoriation (skin-picking) disorder keep picking at their skin, lead-
ing to sores and other skin problems, as well as, in some cases, lesions. Most peo-
ple with this disorder pick with their fingers and center their focus on one area of 
the body, most often the face. However, other areas, such as the arms and legs, are 
also common focal points for this disorder. The skin-picking is usually triggered 

410  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
and accompanied by anxiety and stress. People with excoriation disorder often 
spend significant amounts of time on their picking behavior, sometimes several 
hours per day. The lifetime prevalence for excoriation is only 1 to 2 percent, and 
75 percent or more of the people with this disorder are women (APA, 2013).
People with trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder) continually pull out 
hair from the scalp or other areas of the body. The hair-pulling typically is only 
focused on one body part, most often the scalp, eyebrows, or eyelids, and done 
one hair at a time, sometimes in a ritualistic manner. Like excoriation, trichotil-
lomania is triggered and accompanied by anxiety or stress. The hair-pulling may 
occur in brief episodes throughout the day or during less frequent but more sus-
tained periods that can continue for hours. Women are more frequently affected 
with trichotillomania than men, at a ratio of approximately 10 to 1 (APA, 2013).
Depressive Disorders
Depressive disorders involve the presence of sad, empty, or irritable mood, 
accompanied by somatic and cognitive changes that significantly affect the 
individual’s capacity to function. Major depressive disorder (sometimes called 
unipolar depression) represents the classic condition in this category, so it is the 
depressive disorder that we will discuss.
Major depressive disorder.  When people say that they are depressed, they 
usually are referring to their feelings of sadness and downward mood following a 
stressful life event (such as the breakup of a relationship or the loss of a job). Such 
mood changes are understandable and over time usually right themselves. A 
major depressive disorder, however, is debilitating, has an impact on every part of 
a person’s life, and usually doesn’t right itself. To be classified as having a major 
depressive disorder, a person must have experienced one or more major 
depressive episodes. A major depressive episode is char-
acterized by symptoms such as feelings of intense hope-
lessness, low self-esteem, and worthlessness; extreme 
fatigue; dramatic changes in eating and sleeping behav-
ior; inability to concentrate; and greatly diminished 
interest in family, friends, and activities for a period of 
two weeks or more. Such people are not just down in the 
dumps, but rather are in a snowballing downward spiral 
that lasts for weeks. They lose interest in everything, even 
their life. Suicide is strongly related to depression and 
can occur at any point during or after a major depressive 
episode. Any comments about suicide made by people 
suffering a major depression should be taken seriously.
The 12-month prevalence is 7 percent, but this preva-
lence in the 18 to 29 age group is three times greater than 
that in individuals age 60 years or older (APA, 2013). 
Major depressive disorder is also more common among 
➤	 depressive disorders  Disorders that 
involve the presence of sad, empty, or 
irritable mood, accompanied by somatic 
and cognitive changes that signifi-
cantly affect the individual’s capacity to 
function. 
➤	 major depressive disorder  A depressive 
disorder in which the person has expe-
rienced one or more major depressive 
episodes.
➤	 major depressive episode  An episode 
characterized by symptoms such as 
feelings of intense hopelessness, low 
self-esteem and worthlessness, extreme 
fatigue, dramatic changes in eating 
and sleeping behavior, inability to 
concentrate, and greatly diminished 
interest in family, friends, and activities 
for a period of 2 weeks or more.

SIX MaJor CatEgorIEs of MEntal dIsordErs  |  411
poor people than wealthy people (Sareen, Afifi, McMillan, & Asmundson, 2011). 
About 19 percent of all adults suffer a major depressive disorder at some point in 
their lives. Women suffer from major depressive disorders about twice as often as 
men (Kessler et al., 2003), and this gender difference seems to be true worldwide 
(Weissman et al., 1996). Recent research suggests that this gender difference for 
depression may be due to biological differences (Westly, 2010). The sex hormones 
estrogen and testosterone have different effects on the neurotransmitters involved 
in mood (serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine), leading to a difference in 
both emotional reaction and symptomology in women and men. The primary 
emotional symptom for women is sadness; but for men, it is anger often paired 
with irritability. Thus, female depression will be seen as depression, but male 
depression may be mistakenly seen as some other emotional problem, such as 
general frustration, and not the serious disorder that it is. This difference, along 
with the fact that women are more likely than men to seek help, almost certainly 
contributes to the gender difference in the clinical prevalence rates for depression.
There is also a recent argument that the high prevalence rate for depression is 
spurious, in that it is due to overdiagnosis caused by insufficient diagnostic criteria 
(Horwitz & Wakefield, 2007). True mental disorders are usually rare, with very low 
prevalence rates, but depression has a high prevalence rate. According to Andrews 
and Thomson (2009, 2010), the fact that depression has a high prevalence rate 
poses an evolutionary paradox, because the pressures of evolution should have led 
our brains to resist such a high rate of malfunction. Andrews and Thomson pro-
pose that much of what is diagnosed as depression should not be thought of as a 
true mental disorder (a brain malfunction) but rather as an evolutionary mental 
adaptation (stress response mechanism) that focuses the mind to better solve the 
complex life problems that brought about the troubled state. This is an intriguing 
hypothesis with implications not only for the diagnostic criteria for this disorder 
but also for the therapeutic approaches to treat it.
Traditional explanations of major depressive disorder propose both biological 
and psychological factors as causes. A leading biological explanation involves 
neurotransmitter imbalances, primarily inadequate serotonin and norepineph-
rine activity. Antidepressant drugs (to be discussed later in the chapter) are the 
most common treatment for such imbalances. There is also evidence of a genetic 
predisposition for this disorder. The likelihood of one identical twin getting a 
disorder given that the other identical twin has the disorder is the concordance 
rate for identical twins for the disorder. For major depressive disorder, the con-
cordance rate for identical twins is about 50 percent (Tsuang & Faraone, 1990), 
much higher than the concordance rate for fraternal twins and the base rate of 
occurrence in the general population.
If the disorder were totally genetic in origin, however, this rate would be 
100  percent. Because it isn’t, nongenetic factors are also seen as causes in major 
depressive disorder. Cognitive factors have been found to be important. The 
person’s perceptual and cognitive processes are assumed to be faulty, causing 
the depression. We discussed an example of such faulty cognitive processing 

412  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
in Chapter 8. Remember the pessimistic explanatory style in which a person 
explains negative events in terms of internal (her own fault), stable (here to stay), 
and global (applies to all aspects of her life) causes. Such a style, paired with a 
series of negative events in a person’s life, will lead to learned helplessness and 
depression. Thus, the cause of the person’s depression is her own thinking, in 
this case how she makes attributions. Cognitive therapies, which we will discuss 
later in this chapter, attempt to replace such maladaptive thinking with more 
adaptive thinking that will not lead to depression. These therapies have been 
shown to be just as effective as drug therapy in treating depression (DeRubeis 
et al., 2005).
Bipolar and Related Disorders
Major depressive disorder is often referred to as unipolar depression or a unipolar 
disorder to contrast it with bipolar disorder, another disorder in which the person’s 
mood takes dramatic mood swings between depression and mania. Such disorders 
used to be called “manic-depressive” disorders. Experiencing a mania is not just 
having an “up” day. A manic episode is a period 
of at least a week of abnormally elevated mood 
in which the person experiences such symptoms 
as inflated self-esteem with grandiose delusions, 
a decreased need for sleep, constant talking, 
distractibility, restlessness, and poor judgment. 
The person’s behavior becomes maladaptive and 
interferes with daily functioning.
Consider the following behavior of a person 
experiencing a manic episode. A postal worker 
stayed up all night and then went off normally 
to work in the morning. He returned later that 
morning, however, having quit his job, with-
drawn all of the family savings, and spent it on 
fish and aquariums. He told his wife that, the 
night before, he had discovered a way to keep 
fish alive forever. He then ran off to canvass the 
neighborhood for possible sales. This person 
showed poor judgment and a decreased need for sleep, 
and his behavior disrupted his normal functioning (he 
quit his job). In the beginning, milder stages of a manic 
episode, some people become not only more energetic 
but also more creative, until the episode accelerates and 
their behavior deteriorates.
There is no diagnosis for mania alone. It is part of a 
bipolar disorder in which recurrent cycles of depressive 
and manic episodes occur. A bipolar disorder is an emo-
tional roller coaster, with the person’s mood swinging 
➤	 manic episode  An episode 
characterized by abnormally elevated 
mood in which the person experiences 
symptoms such as inflated self-esteem 
with grandiose delusions, a decreased 
need for sleep, constant talking, 
distractibility, restlessness, and poor 
judgment for a period of at least a week.
➤	 bipolar disorder  A disorder in which 
recurrent cycles of depressive and 
manic episodes occur.
The New Yorker Collection © 1992 J. B. Handelsman from 
cartoonbank.com. All Rights Reserved
“Now that I’ve swung back to depression, I’m truly 
sorry for what I did when I was manic.”

SIX MaJor CatEgorIEs of MEntal dIsordErs  |  413
from manic highs to depressive lows. There are two types of bipolar disorder. In 
Bipolar I disorder, the person has both major manic and depressive episodes. In 
Bipolar II disorder, the person has full-blown depressive episodes, but the manic 
episodes are milder. Bipolar I disorder is more common than Bipolar II disorder, 
but both disorders are rare and only affect less than 1 percent of the population 
(APA, 2013; Kessler et al., 1994).
Because the concordance rate for identical twins for bipolar disorder is so 
strong, 70 percent (Tsuang & Faraone, 1990), biological causal explanations are 
the most common. In fact, researchers are presently working on identifying the 
specific genes that make a person vulnerable to bipolar disorder. As with major 
depressive disorder, the biological predisposition shows up as neurotransmit-
ter imbalances. In this case, the imbalances swing between inadequate activity 
(depression) and too much activity (mania). The most common treatment is drug 
therapy, and the specific drugs used will be discussed later in the chapter.
Schizophrenia Spectrum and Other 
Psychotic Disorders
We will only be discussing schizophrenia from this category. It is the disorder 
that people are usually thinking of when they use words such as “insane” and 
“deranged.” More people are institutionalized with schizophrenia than with any 
other disorder, and schizophrenia is much more difficult to successfully treat 
than other mental disorders. Thankfully, only about 1 percent of the population 
suffers from this disorder (Gottesman, 1991). The onset of schizophrenia is usu-
ally in late adolescence or early adulthood. Men and women are equally likely 
to develop schizophrenia, but it tends to strike men earlier and more severely 
(Lindenmayer & Khan, 2012). Schizophrenia is more common in the lower socio-
economic classes than in the higher ones, and also for those who are single, sepa-
rated, or divorced (Sareen, Afifi, McMillan, & Asmundson, 2011). In addition, 
people with schizophrenia have an increased risk of suicide with an estimated 
25 percent attempting suicide (Kasckow, Felmet, & Zisook, 2011).
Schizophrenia is referred to as a psychotic disorder, because it is characterized 
by a loss of contact with reality. The word “schizophrenia” is Greek in origin and 
literally means “split mind.” This is not a bad description; in a person with schizo-
phrenia, mental functions become split from each other and the person becomes 
detached from reality. The person has trouble distinguishing reality from his own 
distorted view of the world. This splitting of mental functions, however, has led to 
the confusion of schizophrenia with “split personality” or multiple personality disor-
der (now called dissociative identity disorder in the DSM-5), but these are very differ-
ent disorders. In schizophrenia, the split is between the mental functions and their 
contact with reality; in multiple personality disorder, one’s 
personality is split into two or more distinct personalities.
The symptoms of schizophrenia.  The symptoms of 
schizophrenia vary greatly, but they are typically divided 
➤	 psychotic disorder  A disorder 
characterized by a loss of contact 
with reality.

414  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
into three categories—positive, negative, and disorga-
nized. This use of the terms “positive” and “negative” is 
consistent with their use in Chapter 4, on learning. 
Positive means that something has been added, and 
negative means that something has been removed.
Positive symptoms are the more active symptoms 
that reflect an excess or distortion of normal thinking or 
behavior, including hallucinations (false sensory percep-
tions) and delusions (false beliefs). Hallucinations are 
usually auditory, hearing voices that aren’t really there. 
Remember, the fake patients in Rosenhan’s study said that they heard voices and 
were admitted and diagnosed as having a schizophrenic disorder. Delusions fall 
into several categories, such as delusions of persecution (for example, believing 
that one is the victim of conspiracies) or delusions of grandeur (for example, believ-
ing that one is a person of great importance, such as Jesus Christ or Napoleon). 
Hallucinations and delusions are referred to as positive symptoms because they 
refer to things that have been added. Negative symptoms refer to things that have 
been removed. These are deficits or losses in emotion, speech, energy level, social 
activity, and even basic drives such as hunger and thirst. For example, many people 
with schizophrenia suffer a flat affect in which there is a marked lack of emotional 
expressiveness. Their faces show no expression, and they speak in a monotone. 
Similarly, there may be a serious reduction in their quantity and quality of speech. 
People suffering from schizophrenia may also lose their energy and become 
extremely apathetic—not able to start a task, much less finish one.
Disorganized symptoms include nonsensical speech and behavior and inap-
propriate emotion. Disorganized speech sounds like a “word salad,” with uncon-
nected words incoherently spoken together and a shifting from one topic to 
another without any apparent connections. One thought does not follow the 
other. Those who show inappropriate emotion may smile when given terrible 
news. Their emotional reactions seem unsuited to the situation.
Behavior may also be catatonic—physical actions that do not appear to be goal-
directed, such as assuming and maintaining postures and remaining motionless 
for a long period of time. Catatonic behavior takes extreme forms ranging from 
immobility to hyperactivity (such as rocking constantly).
According to the DSM-5, schizophrenia is the presence, most of the time during at 
least a one-month period, of at least two of the following symptoms—hallucinations, 
delusions, disorganized speech, grossly abnormal psychomotor activity (including 
catatonic behavior), or any negative symptom (such as loss of emotion). In addition, 
functioning in daily life is markedly below that prior to the onset of the symptoms, 
and the signs of this disturbance must occur for at least six months, including the 
period of at least one month when at least two of the symptoms are present.
Clinicians have used the various types of symptoms of schizophrenia and their 
course of development to make distinctions between types of schizophrenia. 
One such distinction between chronic and acute schizophrenia deals with how 
➤	 hallucination  A false sensory perception.
➤	 delusion  A false belief.
➤	 schizophrenia  A psychotic disorder 
in which at least two of the following 
symptoms are present most of the time 
during a 1-month period—hallucinations, 
delusions, disorganized speech, 
disorganized or catatonic behavior, or 
negative symptoms such as loss of  
emotion.

SIX MaJor CatEgorIEs of MEntal dIsordErs  |  415
quickly the symptoms developed. In chronic schizophrenia, there is a long period 
of development, over years, and the decline in the person’s behavior and thinking 
occurs gradually. In acute schizophrenia, there is a sudden onset of symptoms 
that usually can be attributed to a crisis in the person’s life, and the person func-
tioned normally before the crisis with no clinical signs of the disorder. Acute 
schizophrenia is more of a reactive disorder, and recovery is much more likely.
Another distinction is between Type I and II schizophrenia (Crow, 1985). 
Type I is characterized by positive symptoms, and Type II by negative symptoms. 
Type  I is similar to acute schizophrenia: The person has usually functioned 
relatively normally before the disorder strikes, and there is a higher likelihood of 
recovery. People with Type I schizophrenia respond better to drug therapy than 
do those with Type II. This difference may be because the positive symptoms of 
Type I result from neurotransmitter imbalances, which are affected by drugs, 
whereas the more permanent structural abnormalities in the brain that produce 
the negative symptoms of Type II are not as affected by drugs.
The causes of schizophrenia.  Schizophrenia seems to have many different 
causes, and we do not have a very good understanding of any of them. Hypothesized 
causes inevitably involve a genetic or biological predisposition factor. There defi-
nitely appears to be a genetic predisposition to some schizophrenia; it seems to run 
in families, with the concordance rate for identical twins similar to that for a major 
depression, about 50 percent (DeLisi, 1997; Gottesman, 1991). This is significantly 
greater than the 17 percent concordance rate for fraternal twins. No particular genes 
have yet been identified, but it is possible that different genes might be involved in 
the different types of schizophrenia or that schizophrenia is a polygenic disorder 
caused by a combination of gene defects (e.g., Sanders, Duan, & Gejman, 2012).
The concordance rate for identical twins could also be partially due to prenatal 
factors (Brown, 2006). One hypothesis involves prenatal viral infections. Research 
has found that people are at increased risk for schizophrenia if there was a flu epi-
demic during the middle of their fetal development (Takei, Van Os, & Murray, 1995; 
Wright, Takei, Rifkin, & Murray, 1995). There is even a birth month effect for schizo-
phrenia. People born in the winter/spring months (January to April) following the 
fall/winter flu season are more likely to develop schizophrenia, because it is more 
likely that they were exposed to a flu virus during fetal development (Torrey, Miller, 
Rawlings, & Yolken, 1997). According to the viral hypothesis, the invading virus 
impairs fetal brain development, making people more susceptible to developing 
schizophrenia later in life. The viral hypothesis is further supported by the finding 
that the 50 percent concordance rate in identical twins is the result of a 60 percent 
chance for identical twins that share the same placenta (about two-thirds of identi-
cal twins), but only a 10 percent chance for identical twins with separate placentas 
(Davis & Phelps, 1995). It is certainly more likely that a viral infection would affect 
both twins in the same placenta rather than twins in separate placentas.
Prenatal or early postnatal exposure to several other viruses (e.g., herpes sim-
plex virus) has also been associated with the later development of schizophrenia 
(Yolken & Torrey, 1995). Even exposure to house cats has been proposed as a risk 

416  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
factor for the development of schizophrenia (Torrey, Rawlings, & Yolken, 2000; 
Torrey & Yolken, 1995; Yolken, Dickerson, & Torrey, 2009). Infectious parasites 
hosted by cats, Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii), are transmitted through ingestion or 
inhalation of the parasite’s eggs that are shed with the infected cat’s feces into 
litter boxes and elsewhere. For example, this could occur through hand-to-mouth 
contact following gardening or cleaning a cat’s litter box. According to this 
viral zoonosis hypothesis, the T. gondii invade the brain and upset its chemistry, 
creating the psychotic behaviors recognized as schizophrenia. This may sound 
far-fetched to you, but many significant correlational findings supporting this 
hypothesis have been observed. For example, individuals with schizophrenia have 
an increased prevalence of antibodies to T. gondii in their blood (Torrey, Bartko, 
Lun, & Yolken, 2007; Torrey, Bartko, & Yolken, 2012; Torrey & Yolken, 2003). 
This increased prevalence has been observed for both prenatal and early postnatal 
exposure to T. gondii (Mortensen et al., 2007). Should cat owners panic? Probably 
not, but keeping basic hygienic precautions in mind is highly recommended.
Given these possible genetic, prenatal, and postnatal factors, what might be 
the organic problems that the person is predisposed to develop? There are two 
good answers—neurotransmitter imbalances and brain abnormalities. People with 
schizophrenia have elevated levels of dopamine activity in certain areas in the brain 
(Davis, Kahn, Ko, & Davidson, 1991). Autopsy and brain scan research indicate 
that the brains of people with schizophrenia have an excess of dopamine receptors. 
In addition, drugs that decrease dopamine activity reduce schizophrenic symp-
toms, and drugs that increase dopamine activity seem to heighten the symptoms 
of people with schizophrenia and produce schizophrenic symptoms in people who 
do not have schizophrenia. Such findings led to the development of antipsychotic 
drugs that are dopamine antagonists (reduce the level of dopamine activity) and 
help control the symptoms in many people with schizophrenia, especially those 
with Type I. We will discuss these antipsychotic drugs later in the chapter.
Two psychedelic drugs, phencyclidine (PCP) and ketamine, have also provided 
some insight into the neurochemistry of schizophrenia (Julien, 2011). These two 
drugs produce schizophrenia-type symptoms, such as a general motor slowing and 
reduced speech and other cognitive deficits. The underlying neurochemical action 
for these drugs is antagonistic, the blocking of glutamate receptors, especially 
one type of receptor that plays a critical role in brain development and neural 
processing in general (Javitt & Coyle, 2007). Remember from Chapter 2, gluta-
mate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in our nervous system. The ability 
of PCP and ketamine to induce schizophrenia-type symptoms suggests that the 
actions of these drugs replicate disturbances in the brains of people with schizo-
phrenia. Thus, a glutamate dysfunction has been proposed as a contributor to the 
development of schizophrenia, especially the negative symptoms and cognitive 
impairments that are observed (Goff & Coyle, 2001). According to this hypothesis, 
excessive release of glutamate destroys neurons, especially in the frontal lobes, 
leading to cortical damage and triggering the mental deterioration observed in 
schizophrenia. Hence, glutamate neurotransmission has become a promising 

SIX MaJor CatEgorIEs of MEntal dIsordErs  |  417
target for antipsychotic drug development, and antipsychotic drugs that impact 
glutamate activity levels are presently undergoing clinical trials (Stone, 2011).
Various structural brain abnormalities have also been found in people with 
schizophrenia, especially those suffering from Type II and chronic schizophrenia 
(Buchanan & Carpenter, 1997; Weyandt, 2006). I’ll mention a few. For example, 
brain scans of people with schizophrenia often indicate shrunken cerebral tis-
sue and enlarged fluid-filled areas. Some brain areas (the thalamus) seem to be 
smaller than normal, and the frontal lobes less active. Because structural brain 
abnormalities have not been observed in the nonpsychotic siblings of people 
with schizophrenia using multiple imaging methods, these abnormalities for 
the most part must be due to nongenetic factors (Boos et al., 2012). Prenatal 
factors, such as the viral infections we discussed, and postnatal factors, such as 
oxygen deprivation arising from birth complications, likely play a major role in 
the development of these brain abnormalities (Cannon, 1997; Wright, Takei, 
Rifkin, & Murray, 1995).
Even given all of this biological evidence, biopsychosocial explanations are 
necessary to explain all of the evidence accumulated about schizophrenia. 
A popular biopsychosocial explanation is the vulnerability–stress model—
genetic, prenatal, and postnatal biological factors render a person vulnerable to 
schizophrenia, but environmental stress determines whether it develops or not 
(Gottesman, 1991). According to the vulnerability–stress model, we vary in our 
vulnerability to schizophrenia. A person’s level of vulnerability interacts with the 
stressful social-cognitive events in his life to determine the likelihood of schizo-
phrenia. Remember that schizophrenia typically strikes in late adolescence/early 
adulthood, periods of unusually high stress levels. There is also some evidence 
that dysfunctional family environments may be a contributing stress factor 
(Fowles, 1992).
In summary, there has been much research on the causes of schizophrenia, but 
we still do not have many clear answers. The only certainty is that schizophrenia is 
a disabling disorder with many causes. As pointed out in the DSM-5, schizophre-
nia is a heterogeneous mental disorder and people with schizophrenia will vary 
substantially in their symptomology. Explanations inevitably involve a biologi-
cal component, making drug therapy the predominant 
treatment for schizophrenia. Given the person’s loss of 
contact with reality, psychotherapies are usually diffi-
cult, if not impossible, to institute. 
Personality Disorders
A personality disorder is characterized by inflexible, 
long-standing personality traits that lead to behavior 
that deviates from cultural norms and results in distress 
or impairment. The DSM-5 identifies 10 personal-
ity disorders divided into three clusters based on their 
➤	 vulnerability–stress model  A 
biopsychosocial explanation of 
schizophrenia that proposes that genetic, 
prenatal, and postnatal biological factors 
render a person vulnerable to schizo-
phrenia, but environmental stress deter-
mines whether it develops or not.
➤	 personality disorder  A disorder 
characterized by inflexible, longstanding 
personality traits that lead to behavior 
that impairs social functioning and 
deviates from cultural norms.

418  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
symptoms (APA, 2013). One cluster of three disorders (the avoidant, dependent, 
and obsessive-compulsive personality disorders) involves highly anxious or fearful 
behavior patterns. For example, a person with an avoidant personality disorder is 
so overwhelmed by feelings of inadequacy and rejection that social situations are 
avoided. A second cluster of three (the paranoid, schizoid, and the schizotypal 
personality disorders) involves eccentric or odd behavior patterns. For example, a 
person with a schizoid personality disorder totally avoids social relationships and 
contact. The last cluster of four disorders (the antisocial, borderline, histrionic, 
and narcissistic personality disorders) involves excessively dramatic, emotional, 
or erratic behavior patterns. For example, a person with an antisocial personality 
disorder shows total disregard for the rights of others and the moral rules of the 
culture. A person with antisocial personality disorder used to be referred to as a 
psychopath or sociopath. If you would like to learn more about these disorders, 
Millon, Millon, Meagher, and Grossman (2004) provide detailed coverage of all 
10 personality disorders and their development.
Personality disorders usually begin in childhood or adolescence and persist in a 
stable form throughout adulthood. It has been estimated that 9 to 13 percent of 
adults in the United States have a personality disorder (Comer, 2014). Personality 
disorders are fairly resistant to treatment and change. They need to be diagnosed, 
however, because they give the clinician a more complete understanding of the 
patient’s behavior and may complicate the treatment for a patient with another 
mental disorder. In addition, because the symptoms of the 10 personality disor-
ders overlap so much, clinicians sometimes diagnose a person to have more than 
one personality disorder. This symptom overlap also leads clinicians to disagree 
about which personality disorder is the correct diagnosis, questioning the reli-
ability of the DSM-5 definitions of these disorders.
Section Summary
In this section, we discussed six major categories of mental disorders—anxiety dis-
orders, obsessive-compulsive and related disorders, depressive disorders, bipolar 
and related disorders, schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders, and 
personality disorders. Anxiety disorders involve excessive fear and anxiety. For 
each of the anxiety disorders, anxiety is involved in a different way. Panic attacks 
(being overwhelmed by anxiety and fear) occur suddenly in panic disorder, but the 
anxiety is chronic and global in generalized anxiety disorder. In specific phobia 
disorder, there is a marked and persistent fear of specific objects or situations that 
is excessive and unreasonable. There are two broader types of phobias, however—
social anxiety disorder and agoraphobia. Social anxiety disorder involves a fear of 
social performance situations in which there is exposure to unfamiliar people or 
scrutiny by others. Causal explanations of anxiety disorders typically involve both 
behavioral and biological factors.
In obsessive-compulsive disorder, the person experiences recurrent obsessions 
(persistent thoughts that cause anxiety) and compulsions (repetitive and rigid 
behaviors that have to be performed to alleviate anxiety). It is not known what 

SIX MaJor CatEgorIEs of MEntal dIsordErs  |  419
causes obsessive-compulsive disorder, but recent research indicates a biochemical 
lack of serotonin activity in several parts of the brain. Obsessive-compulsive related 
disorders include hoarding disorder, excoriation (skin-picking) disorder, and tricho-
tillomania (hair-pulling) disorder.
Depressive disorders involve the presence of sad, empty, or irritable mood 
that impacts the individual’s capacity to function. The changes in the person’s 
emotional mood are excessive and unwarranted. The most common depressive 
disorder is major depressive disorder, which involves at least one major depres-
sive episode. It is twice as frequent in women as in men. Sometimes this disorder 
is referred to as unipolar depression in order to contrast it with bipolar disorder, 
in which the person has recurrent cycles of depressive and manic (elevated mood) 
episodes. The concordance rate (the likelihood that one identical twin will get the 
disorder if the other twin has it) is substantial for both disorders, about 50 percent 
for depression and 70 percent for bipolar disorder. Neurotransmitter imbalances 
seem to be involved in both disorders, and cognitive factors are involved in major 
depressive disorder.
Schizophrenia is the most serious disorder discussed in this chapter. It is a psy-
chotic disorder, which means that the person loses contact with reality. Clinicians 
divide schizophrenic symptoms into three categories—positive, negative, and dis-
organized. Schizophrenia seems to be a very heterogeneous disorder with many 
possible causes. Biological abnormalities in people with schizophrenia range from 
elevated dopamine activity levels to shrunken cerebral tissue, and there is also 
evidence that prenatal viral infections and birth complications may be involved. 
A popular biopsychosocial explanation of schizophrenia is the vulnerability–stress 
model, which proposes that genetic, prenatal, and postnatal biological factors 
render a person vulnerable to schizophrenia, but environmental stress determines 
whether it develops or not.
Personality disorders are characterized by inflexible, long-standing personality 
traits that lead to behavior that impairs social functioning and deviates from cultural 
norms. The DSM-5 identifies 10 personality disorders. They fall into three clusters, 
each characterized by a group of problematic personality symptoms. One cluster 
of disorders involves highly anxious or fearful behavior patterns, one involves 
eccentric or odd behavior patterns, and the third involves excessively dramatic, 
emotional, or erratic behavior patterns. Personality disorders are fairly resistant to 
treatment and change.
ConceptCheck | 2
➤	 explain what is meant by the biopsychosocial approach and then describe a 
biopsychosocial explanation for specific phobic disorders.
➤	 explain how the two anxiety disorders, specific phobia and generalized anxi-
ety disorder, are different.
➤	 explain how the concordance rates for identical twins for a major depressive 
disorder and for schizophrenia indicate that more than biological causes are 
responsible for these disorders.
➤	 explain the difference between schizophrenia and “split personality.”

420  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
The Treatment of Mental Disorders
Before discussing treatment for disorders (types of therapy), we need to describe the 
various types of mental health professionals who treat disorders. Table 10.3 lists 
most of the major types of mental health professionals, along with the type of cre-
dential and the typical kinds of problems they treat. States have licensing require-
ments for these various mental health professionals, and it is important to verify 
that a therapist is licensed. There is also one major difference between psychiatrists 
and the other health professionals. Psychiatrists are medical doctors. This means 
that psychiatrists can write prescriptions for medical treatment of patients. This is 
especially important because drug therapy is the major type of treatment for many 
disorders. To circumvent this prescription-writing problem, nonpsychiatrist mental 
health professionals typically work in a collaborative practice with medical doctors.
There are two major types of therapy: biomedical and psychological. Biomedical 
therapy involves the use of biological interventions, such as drugs, to treat disorders. 
Psychotherapy involves the use of psychological interventions to treat disorders. 
Psychotherapy is what we normally think of as therapy. 
There is a dialogue and interaction between the person 
and the therapist. They talk to each other. This is why 
psychotherapies are sometimes referred to as “talk thera-
pies.” The nature of the “talk” varies with the approach 
of the therapist. The behavioral, cognitive, psychoanalytic, 
and humanistic approaches all lead to different styles of 
Table 10.3     Different Types of Mental Health Professionals
Type
Credential and Job Description
Clinical psychologist
Doctoral degree in clinical psychology; provides 
therapy for people with mental disorders
Counseling psychologist
Doctoral degree in psychological or educational coun-
seling; counsels people with milder problems such as 
academic, job, and relationship problems
Psychiatrist
Medical degree with residency in mental health; 
provides therapy for people with mental disorders and 
is the only type of therapist who can prescribe drugs 
or other biomedical treatment
Psychoanalyst
Any of the above types of credential, but with training 
in psychoanalysis from a psychoanalytic institute; 
provides psychoanalytic therapy for psychological 
disorders
Clinical social worker
Master’s or doctoral degree in social work with 
specialized training in counseling; provides help with 
social problems, such as family problems
➤	 biomedical therapy  The use of 
biological interventions, such as drugs, 
to treat mental disorders.
➤	 psychotherapy  The use of psycho-
logical interventions to treat mental 
disorders.

ThE TrEatmEnt of MEntal dIsordErs  |  421
psychotherapy. In biomedical therapy, however, a drug or some other type of biologi-
cal intervention is used to treat disorders. The interaction is biological, not interper-
sonal. As with psychotherapies, there are different types of biomedical therapy—drug 
therapy, electroconvulsive therapy, and psychosurgery. We must remember though 
that this either-or distinction between biomedical therapy and psychotherapy is 
somewhat obscured by the fact that psychotherapy does lead to changes that take 
place in the brain. So the end result (changes in the brain) is the same for both types 
of therapy, but the means for achieving this result are different. We will first consider 
biomedical therapies and then the major types of psychotherapy.
Biomedical Therapies
Biomedical therapies for disorders have a long history, reaching back hundreds 
of years. Looking back, these earlier treatments may seem inhumane and cruel, 
but remember that we are assessing these treatments given our current state of 
medical and psychological knowledge, which is far superior to that available when 
such treatments were used. Let’s consider a couple of examples.
Primitive Biological Therapy | The 
two holes in this ancient skull illustrate  
trephining—cutting away sections of a 
person’s skull to let evil spirits exit the 
body, thus freeing the person from a 
disorder.
John W. Verano
The Tranquilizing Chair | This treatment 
device was designed by Benjamin Rush, the 
“father of American psychiatry,” in the early 
1800s. Supposedly the restriction of the patient’s 
activity and stimulation would have a calm-
ing effect by restricting the blood flow to the 
patient’s brain. Although it seems barbaric today, 
it was intended as a humane alternative to the 
straightjacket at that time. In actuality, it did 
neither harm nor good.
The Granger Collection

422  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
Possibly the earliest biological treatment was trephining, which was done 
in the Middle Ages. In this primitive treatment, a trephine (stone tool) was 
used to cut away a section of the person’s skull, supposedly to let evil spirits 
exit the body, thus freeing the person from the disorder. A treatment device 
from the early 1800s was called the “tranquilizing chair.” This device was 
designed by Benjamin Rush, the “father of American psychiatry,” who actually 
instituted many humane reforms in the treatment of mental patients (Gamwell 
& Tomes, 1995). The treatment called for patients to be strapped into a tran-
quilizing chair, with the head enclosed inside a box, for long periods of time. 
The restriction of activity and stimulation was supposed to have a calming 
effect by restricting the flow of blood to the patient’s brain. Such “therapies” 
seem absurd to us today, as does the fact that well into the nineteenth century, 
many mental patients were still being kept in chains in asylums, untreated. The 
history of therapy is a rather sad one.
Even the more contemporary biomedical treatments exist in an atmo-
sphere of controversy. Most people have strong, negative feelings about shock 
therapy, and the most frequently used biomedical treatment, drug therapy, is 
shrouded in conflict (Barber, 2008; Moncrieff, 2009; Valenstein, 1988). Why? 
Biomedical treatments are very different from undergoing psychotherapy. 
Direct biological interventions have a more powerful downside, because they 
involve possibly serious medical side effects. For example, high levels of some 
drugs in the blood are toxic and may even be fatal. Careful monitoring is 
essential. As we discuss the major types of biomedical treatments, we will 
include discussion of some of these potential problems. We start with drug 
therapy.
Drug therapy.  The drugs used to treat mental disorders are referred to as 
psychotropic drugs, and they are among the very best sellers for drug compa-
nies, with about 300 million prescriptions written for them yearly in the 
United States (Frances, 2013). Leading the way are antipsychotic drugs with 
sales of $18 billion a year and antidepressant drugs with sales of $12 billion a 
year. Surprisingly, primary care providers, not psychiatrists, write the major-
ity of these prescriptions (Du Bosar, 2009). In addition to antipsychotic and 
antidepressant drugs, other major psychotropic medications used in drug 
therapy are antianxiety drugs and lithium. We will discuss all of these, begin-
ning with lithium.
Lithium is not a drug, but rather a naturally occurring metallic element 
(a mineral salt) that is used to treat bipolar disorder. Lithium was actually 
sold as a substitute for table salt in the 1940s, but was taken off the market 
when reports of its toxicity and possible role in some deaths began to circulate 
(Valenstein, 1988). The discovery of lithium’s effec-
tiveness in combating bipolar disorder was accidental 
(Julien, 2011). Around 1950, John Cade, an Australian 
psychiatrist, injected guinea pigs with uric acid, which 
he thought was the cause of manic behavior, and 
➤	 lithium  A naturally occurring element  
(a mineral salt) that is used to treat 
bipolar disorder.

ThE TrEatmEnt of MEntal dIsordErs  |  423
mixed lithium with it so that the acid was more easily 
liquefied. Instead of becoming manic, the guinea pigs 
became lethargic. Later tests in humans showed that 
lithium stabilized the mood of patients with bipolar 
disorder. It is not understood exactly how lithium works (Lambert & Kinsley, 
2005; Paulus, 2007), but within a rather short period of time, one to two weeks, 
it stabilizes mood in the majority of patients. Lithium levels in the blood must 
be monitored carefully, however, because of possible toxic effects—nausea, sei-
zures, and even death (Moncrieff, 1997). Because of these possibly toxic side 
effects, anticonvulsants (drugs used to control epileptic seizures) are now 
sometimes prescribed instead for people with bipolar disorder. Anticonvulsants 
seem to reduce bipolar disorder symptoms but have less dangerous potential 
side effects.
Antidepressant drugs are drugs used to treat depressive disorders. There 
are many different types. The first antidepressants developed were monoamine 
oxidase (MAO) inhibitors and tricyclics (this name refers to the three-ring 
molecular structure of these drugs). MAO inhibitors increase the availability of 
the neurotransmitters norepinephrine, serotonin, and dopamine (which affect 
our mood) by preventing their breakdown (Julien, 2011). Tricyclics make the 
neurotransmitters norepinephrine and serotonin more available by blocking 
their reuptake during synaptic gap activity (Julien, 2011). Like lithium, the 
effects of both types of antidepressants were discovered accidentally when they 
were being tested for their impact on other problems (Comer, 2014). An MAO 
inhibitor was being tested as a possible treatment for tuberculosis when it was 
found to make the patients happier. In the case of tricyclics, their impact on 
depression was discovered when they were being tested as possible drugs for 
schizophrenia.
Research indicates that MAO inhibitors are fairly successful in combating 
depressive symptoms, but they are not used very often because of a potentially 
very dangerous side effect. Their interaction with several different foods and 
drinks may result in fatally high blood pressure. Tricyclics are prescribed more 
often than MAO inhibitors, because they are not subject to this potentially 
dangerous interaction. The most prescribed antidepressants by far, however, 
are the more recently developed selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). 
Remember from Chapter 2 that their name describes how they achieve their 
effect—they selectively block the reuptake of serotonin in the synaptic gap, 
keeping the serotonin active and increasing its availability. The well-known 
antidepressant drugs Prozac, Zoloft, and Paxil are all SSRIs. The success rate 
of SSRIs in treatment is about the same as tricylics, but they are prescribed 
more often because of their milder side effects. Millions of prescriptions have 
been written for SSRIs, resulting in billions of dollars of sales. Prescriptions 
for the more recently developed selective serotonin and norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitors (SSNRIs), such as Cymbalta and Effexor, which we dis-
cussed in Chapter 2, are also on the increase. None of these various types 
➤	 antidepressant drugs  Drugs used to 
treat depressive disorders.

424  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
of antidepressants, however, have immediate 
effects. It typically takes three to six weeks to 
see improvement.
A recent survey study of about 12,000 peo-
ple by the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention found some interesting results with 
respect to the use of antidepressants (Pratt, 
Brody, & Gu, 2011). First, the use of antide-
pressant drugs has soared nearly 400 percent 
since 1988, making antidepressants the most 
frequently used drugs by people ages 18–44. 
About 1 in 10 Americans aged 12 years and 
older were taking antidepressants during the 
period of the study, 2005–2008. As expected, 
because women are twice as likely to suffer 
from depression as men, women were more likely to be taking antidepressants 
than were men, and this was true for every level of depression severity. The sur-
vey also found that nearly one in four women ages 40 to 59 were taking antide-
pressants, more than in any other age-sex group. Of concern, it was found that 
less than one-third of persons taking an antidepressant and less than one-half 
of those taking multiple antidepressants had seen a mental health professional 
in the past year, indicating a lack of follow-up care. This is further complicated 
by the fact that people who take antidepressants are usually taking them long 
term. About 60 percent of those taking antidepressants had taken them for 
2 years or longer, and 14 percent had taken them for more than a decade.
There is a controversy about the effectiveness of antidepressant drugs, with 
some researchers arguing that antidepressants are just expensive, overused pla-
cebos. Indeed, some recent research indicates that much of their effectiveness 
can be accounted for by placebo effects— improvements due to the expectation 
of getting better (Kirsch, 2010; Kirsch et al., 2008). Remember from Chapter 1 
that a placebo is an inert substance or treatment that is given to patients who 
believe that it is a real treatment for their problem. An especially intriguing 
finding is that placebos that lead to actual physical side effects also lead to 
larger placebo effects. These placebo effects have sometimes been found to be 
comparable to the improvement effects of antidepressant drugs (Kirsch, 2010). 
Some researchers believe that this means much, if not most, of the effect found 
with antidepressant drugs may be due to placebo effects. However, the dif-
ference between drug and placebo effects may vary as a function of symptom 
severity (Khan, Brodhead, Kolts, & Brown, 2005). A recent meta-analysis of 
antidepressant drug effects and depression severity found that the magnitude 
of benefit of antidepressant medication compared to placebo increases with 
severity of depression symptoms and is significant with very severe depression 
(Fournier et al., 2010). The benefit may be minimal or nonexistent, on average, 
© 2003 The New Yorker Collection from Cartoonbank.com
“Of course your daddy loves you. He’s on Prozac—he 
loves everybody.”

ThE TrEatmEnt of MEntal dIsordErs  |  425
in patients with mild or moderate symptoms, but it is 
significant for patients with very severe depression.
How can we make sense of these placebo effects? 
One possibility involves neurogenesis, which we dis-
cussed in Chapter 2. Remember, neurogenesis, the 
growth of new neurons, has been observed in the 
hippocampus in the adult brain (Jacobs, van Praag, 
& Gage, 2000a, 2000b). The neurogenesis theory of 
depression assumes that neurogenesis in the hippo-
campus stops during depression, and when neurogen-
esis resumes, the depression lifts (Jacobs, 2004). The question, then, is how 
do we get neurogenesis to resume? There are many possibilities. Research has 
shown that SSRIs lead to increased neurogenesis in other animals. Both rats 
and monkeys given Prozac make more neurons than rats and monkeys not 
given Prozac (Perera et al., 2011). This also seems to be the case for humans 
taking antidepressants (Boldrini et al., 2009; Malberg & Schechter, 2005). 
The time frame for neurogenesis also fits the time frame for SSRIs to have an 
impact on mood. It takes three to six weeks for new cells to mature, the same 
time it typically takes SSRIs to improve the mood of a patient. This means that, 
in the case of the SSRIs, the increased serotonin activity may be responsible for 
getting neurogenesis going again and lifting mood.
Remember, however, what we said about disorders being biopsychosocial 
phenomena. It is certainly plausible that psychological factors could also have an 
impact on neurogenesis. Positive thinking, in the form of a strong placebo effect, 
might also get neurogenesis going again, but possibly not sufficiently enough to 
deal with very severe depression. A similar claim could be made for the effective-
ness of cognitive psychotherapies in which therapists turn the patient’s negative 
thinking into more positive thinking. The neurogenesis theory is only in its 
formative stage, but it does provide a coherent framework for the many diverse 
improvement effects due to drugs, placebos, and psychotherapies.
Antianxiety drugs are drugs that treat anxiety problems and disorders. The 
best known antianxiety drugs, such as Valium and Xanax, are in a class of drugs 
called benzodiazepines. Benzodiazepines reduce anxiety by increasing the activ-
ity of the major inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA (Julien, 2011). When GABA’s 
activity is increased, it reduces anxiety by slowing down and inhibiting neural 
activity, getting it back to normal levels. Unfortunately, recent evidence has 
shown that benzodiazepines have potentially dangerous side effects, such as 
physical dependence or fatal interactions with alcohol; but other types of non-
benzodiazepine antianxiety drugs have been developed with milder side effects. 
In addition, some antidepressant drugs, especially the SSRIs, have been very 
successful in treating anxiety disorders.
Antipsychotic drugs are drugs that reduce psychotic symptoms. The first 
antipsychotic drugs appeared in the 1950s and, as we discussed in Chapter 2, 
➤	 neurogenesis theory of depression  An 
explanation of depression that proposes 
that neurogenesis, the growth of new 
neurons, in the hippocampus stops 
during depression, and when it resumes, 
the depression lifts.
➤	 antianxiety drugs  Drugs used to treat 
anxiety problems and disorders.
➤	 antipsychotic drugs  Drugs used to treat 
psychotic disorders.

426  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
worked antagonistically by globally blocking receptor 
sites for dopamine, thereby reducing its activity. These 
drugs greatly reduced the positive symptoms of schizo-
phrenia but had little impact on the negative symptoms. 
Antipsychotic drugs revolutionized the treatment of 
schizophrenia and greatly reduced the number of people 
with schizophrenia in mental institutions. These early drugs, along with those 
developed through the 1980s, are referred to as “traditional” antipsychotic drugs 
to distinguish them from the more recently developed “new generation” antipsy-
chotic drugs.
The traditional drugs (for example, Thorazine and Stelazine) produce side 
effects in motor movement that are similar to the movement problems of 
Parkinson’s disease. In addition, there is a long-term-use side effect of traditional 
antipsychotic drugs called tardive dyskinesia in which the patient has uncon-
trollable facial tics, grimaces, and other involuntary movements of the lips, jaw, 
and tongue. The new generation antipsychotic drugs (for example, Clozaril and 
Risperdal) are more selective about where in the brain they reduce dopamine 
activity; therefore, they do not produce the severe movement side effects such as 
tardive dyskinesia. They also have the advantage of helping some patients’ nega-
tive schizophrenic symptoms. This may be due to the fact that these drugs also 
decrease the level of serotonin activity. 
Regrettably, the new generation antipsychotic drugs have other potentially dan-
gerous side effects and have to be monitored very carefully (Folsom, Fleisher, & 
Depp, 2006). Such monitoring is expensive; therefore, traditional drugs are often 
prescribed instead. In addition, the initial optimism for the new generation drugs 
has been tempered by recent evidence that they do not lead to as much improve-
ment as originally thought (Jones et al., 2006; Lieberman, Stroup, et al., 2005). A 
recent study of long-term antipsychotic treatment and brain volume also found 
a negative effect for both traditional and new generation antipsychotic drugs 
(Ho, Andreasen, Ziebell, Pierson, & Magnotta, 2011). Longer-term antipsychotic 
treatment was associated with smaller volumes of both brain tissue and gray mat-
ter. Other studies have found similar decreases in gray matter in the short term 
(Dazzan et al., 2005; Lieberman, Tollefson, et al., 2005). Thus, antipsychotic drugs 
may lead to loss of brain tissue or exacerbate declines in brain volume caused by 
schizophrenia. 
A different type of new generation antipsychotic drug, trade name Abilify, 
is sometimes referred to as a “third generation” antipsychotic drug because of 
its neurochemical actions. It achieves its effects by stabilizing the levels of both 
dopamine and serotonin activity in certain areas of the brain. It blocks recep-
tor sites for these two neurotransmitters when their activity levels are too high 
and stimulates these receptor sites when their activity levels are too low. Thus, 
it works in both antagonistic and agonistic ways, depending upon what type of 
effect is needed. This is why it is also sometimes called a “dopamine-serotonin 
system stabilizer.” Clinical research thus far indicates that it is as effective as other 
➤	 tardive dyskinesia  A side effect of 
long-term use of traditional antipsy-
chotic drugs causing the person to have 
uncontrollable facial tics, grimaces, and 
other involuntary movements of the lips, 
jaw, and tongue.

ThE TrEatmEnt of MEntal dIsordErs  |  427
new generation antipsychotic drugs and may 
have less severe side effects (DeLeon, Patel, & 
Crismon, 2004; Rivas-Vasquez, 2003). Given 
its neurochemical properties, Abilify is also 
used as treatment for bipolar disorder for 
those who have not responded to lithium and 
as an add-on to antidepressant therapy for 
major depressive disorder (Julien, 2011).
Electroconvulsive therapy.  Another type 
of biomedical therapy is electroconvulsive 
therapy (ECT), a last-resort treatment for the 
most severe cases of depression. ECT involves 
electrically inducing a brief brain seizure and is 
informally referred to as “shock therapy.” ECT 
was introduced in 1938 in Italy by Ugo Cerletti 
as a possible treatment for schizophrenia, but it was later discovered to be effective 
only for depression (Impastato, 1960). The first use of ECT in the United States was 
in 1940, a couple of years later (Pulver, 1961). How is ECT administered? Electrodes 
are placed on one or both sides of the head, and a very brief electrical shock is 
administered, causing a brain seizure that makes the patient convulse for a few 
minutes. Patients are given anesthetics so that they are not conscious during the 
procedure, as well as muscle relaxants to minimize the convulsions.
About 80 percent of depressed patients improve with ECT (Glass, 2001), 
and they show improvement somewhat more rapidly with the use of ECT than 
with antidepressant drugs (Seligman, 1994). This more rapid effect makes ECT 
a valuable treatment for suicidal, severely depressed patients, especially those 
who have not responded to any other type of treatment. Strangely, after more 
than 50 years we still do not know how ECT works in treating depression. 
One explanation is that, like antidepressant drugs, the electric shock increases 
the activity of serotonin and norepinephrine, which improves mood. ECT’s 
effects also fit the speculative neurogenesis theory of depression. Like SSRIs, 
electroconvulsive shock increases neurogenesis in rats (Scott, Wojtowicz, & 
Burnham, 2000). This means that ECT may have an impact on neurogen-
esis and may do so a little more quickly than antidepressant drugs. Current 
research seems to indicate that ECT does not lead to any type of detectable 
brain damage or long-term cognitive impairment, but there is a memory-loss 
side effect for events just prior to and following the therapy (Calev, Guadino, 
Squires, Zervas, & Fink, 1995). Regardless of its clear success in treating severe 
depression, perhaps saving thousands of lives, ECT 
remains a controversial therapeutic technique because 
of its perceived barbaric nature. Interestingly, patients 
who have undergone ECT do not see it in such a nega-
tive light, and the vast majority report that they would 
➤	 electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)  A 
biomedical treatment for severe 
depression that involves electrically 
inducing a brief brain seizure.
Electroconvulsive Therapy | The patient is given 
an anesthetic so that she is not conscious during the 
procedure, as well as muscle relaxants to minimize the 
convulsions.
Will McIntyre/Photo Researchers

428  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
undergo it again if their depression recurred 
(Goodman, Krahn, Smith, Rummans, & Pileggi, 
1999; Pettinati, Tamburello, Ruetsch, & Kaplan, 
1994). Much of the general public’s sordid 
misconception of ECT likely stems from its 
inaccurate coverage in the entertainment media 
(Lilienfeld, Lynn, Ruscio, & Beyerstein, 2010).
Because of the general public’s negative image 
of ECT, alternative neurostimulation therapies 
for the severely depressed are being developed. 
One promising alternative is transcranial mag-
netic stimulation (TMS). In contrast with ECT, 
which transmits electrical impulses, TMS stimu-
lates the brain with magnetic pulses via an elec-
tromagnetic coil placed on the patient’s scalp 
above the left frontal lobe. This area is stimu-
lated because brain scans of depressed patients 
show that it is relatively inactive. Typically a 
patient receives five treatments a week for four to 
six weeks. Unlike ECT, the patient is awake dur-
ing TMS, and TMS does not produce any mem-
ory loss or other major side effects. Like ECT, it 
is not exactly clear how TMS works to alleviate 
depression, but it seems to do so by energizing 
neuronal activity in a depressed patient’s rela-
tively inactive left frontal lobe. Although some 
research has shown that it may be as effective 
as ECT in treating severely depressed patients 
for whom more traditional treatments have not helped (Grunhaus, Schreiber, 
Dolberg, Polak, & Dannon, 2003) and its use for this purpose has been approved, 
more research on this relatively new therapy and its 
effects is clearly needed.
Psychosurgery.  An even more controversial biomedi-
cal therapy is psychosurgery, the destruction of specific 
areas in the brain. The most famous type of psychosur-
gery is the lobotomy, in which the neuronal connec-
tions of the frontal lobes to lower areas in the brain are 
severed. Egas Moniz, a Portuguese neurosurgeon who 
coined the term “psychosurgery,” pioneered work on 
lobotomies for the treatment of schizophrenia 
(Valenstein, 1986). In fact, he won a Nobel prize in 1949 
for his work. No good scientific rationale for why lobot-
omies should work, or scientific evidence that they did 
work, was ever put forth, however. Regardless, led by  
Bonnie Weller/Philadelphia Inquirer/MCT/Newscom
This man is undergoing transcranial magnetic stim­
ulation (TMS) therapy for depression. The electro-
magnetic coil above his left frontal lobe is transmit-
ting magnetic pulses to stimulate neuronal activity in 
that area of his brain.
➤	 transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(TMS)  A neurostimulation therapy in 
which the left frontal lobe is stimulated 
with magnetic pulses via an electromag-
netic coil placed on the patient’s scalp. 
It is only cleared for use in cases of 
severe depression for which traditional 
treatment has not helped.
➤	 psychosurgery  A biomedical treatment 
in which specific areas of the brain are 
destroyed.
➤	 lobotomy  A type of psychosurgery in 
which the neuronal connections of the 
frontal lobes to lower brain areas are 
severed.

ThE TrEatmEnt of MEntal dIsordErs  |  429
Dr. Walter Freeman, tens of thou-
sands of lobotomies were done in 
the United States in the 1940s and 
1950s (El-Hai, 2005). In 1945, 
Freeman developed the transor-
bital lobotomy technique—gaining 
access to the frontal lobes through 
the eye socket behind the eyeball 
with an ice-pick-like instrument, 
and then swinging the instrument 
from side to side, cutting the fiber 
connections to the lower brain 
(Valenstein, 1986). Freeman didn’t 
even do the lobotomies in hospital 
operating rooms. He would travel 
directly to the mental institutions 
with his bag and do several in one 
day. Because it renders the patient 
unconscious, ECT was often used 
as the anesthetic. Freeman trav-
eled thousands of miles on psy-
chosurgical road trips to over 20 states and performed nearly 3,500 lobotomies 
(El-Hai, 2001). The arrival of antipsychotic drugs in the 1950s thankfully 
replaced the lobotomy as the main treatment for schizophrenia. Unfortunately, 
these primitive procedures had already left thousands of victims in a zombielike, 
deteriorated state.
Psychosurgery is still around, but it is very different from the earlier primi-
tive lobotomies (Vertosick, 1997). For example, cingulotomies, in which dime-
sized holes are surgically lesioned (burnt) in specific areas of the cingulate 
gyrus in the frontal lobes, are sometimes performed on patients who are 
severely depressed or have obsessive-compulsive disorder and who have not 
responded to other types of treatment. The cingulate gyrus is part of the path-
way between the frontal lobes and the limbic system structures that govern 
emotional reactions. These new procedures bear no resemblance to the ear-
lier lobotomies. They are done in operating rooms, using magnetic resonance 
imaging to guide the surgery and computer-guided electrodes with minute 
precision to perform the surgery. Because it involves irreversible brain injury, 
psychosurgery is done very infrequently today. These procedures are used only 
in cases of serious disorders when all other treatments have failed, and only 
with the patient’s permission.
Psychotherapies
In Chapter 8, one type of psychotherapy, psychoanalysis, developed by 
Sigmund Freud in the early 1900s, was briefly discussed. When thinking about 
A Transorbital Lobotomy | Neurosurgeon Walter Freeman 
is performing a transorbital lobotomy in 1949. He is entering the 
patient’s brain through his eye socket. Once he gains access to the 
brain, he will rotate the ice-pick-like instrument from side to side in 
order to destroy the targeted brain tissue.
Bettmann Archives/Corbis

430  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
psychoanalysis, we usually think of a patient lying on a couch with the therapist 
sitting behind the patient and taking notes about the patient’s dreams and free 
associations. This is actually a fairly accurate description of classical psychoanaly-
sis, but most types of psychotherapy are nothing like this. We’ll discuss psycho-
analysis first and then the other three major types of psychotherapy—humanistic, 
behavioral, and cognitive. Sometimes these four types of psychotherapy are 
divided according to their emphasis on insight or action. Psychoanalysis and 
humanistic therapies are usually referred to as insight therapies—they focus on 
the person achieving insight into (conscious awareness and understanding of) the 
causes of his behavior and thinking. In contrast, behavioral and cognitive thera-
pies are usually referred to as action therapies—they focus on the actions of the 
person in changing his behavior or ways of thinking.
Psychoanalysis.  Psychoanalysis is a style of psychotherapy, originally devel-
oped by Sigmund Freud, in which the therapist helps the person gain insight into 
the unconscious sources of his or her problems. Classical psychoanalysis, as devel-
oped by Freud, is very expensive and time consuming. A patient usually needs 
multiple sessions each week for a year or two to get to the source of her problems. 
Remember from Chapter 8 that Freud proposed that problems arise from 
repressed memories, fixations, and unresolved conflicts, mainly from early child-
hood. Such problems are repressed in the unconscious but continue to influence 
the person’s behavior and thinking. The task for the psychoanalyst is to discover 
these underlying unconscious problems and then help the patient to gain insight 
into them. The difficulty with this is that the patient herself is not even privy to 
these unconscious problems. This means that the therapist has to identify con-
scious reflections of the underlying problems and interpret them. The major task 
of the psychoanalyst, then, is to interpret many sources of input—including free 
associations, resistances, dreams, and transferences—in order to find the uncon-
scious roots of the person’s problem.
Free association is a technique in which the patient spontaneously describes, 
without editing, all thoughts, feelings, or images that come to mind. For psycho-
analysts, free association is like a verbal projective test. Psychoanalysts assume 
that free association does not just produce random thoughts but will provide 
clues to the unconscious conflicts leading to the patient’s 
problems. This is especially true for resistances during 
free association. A resistance is a patient’s unwilling-
ness to discuss particular topics. For example, a patient 
might be free associating and say the word “mother.” A 
resistance to this topic (his mother) would be indicated 
by the patient abruptly halting the association process 
and falling silent. The patient might also miss a therapy 
appointment to avoid talking about a particular topic 
(such as his mother) or change the subject to avoid 
discussion of the topic. The psychoanalyst must detect 
these resistances and interpret them.
➤	 psychoanalysis  A style of psychother-
apy, originally developed by Sigmund 
Freud, in which the therapist helps the 
person gain insight into the unconscious 
sources of his or her problems.
➤	 free association  A person spontane-
ously describes, without editing, all 
thoughts, feelings, or images that come 
to mind.
➤	 resistance  A person’s unwillingness 
to discuss a particular topic during 
therapy.

ThE TrEatmEnt of MEntal dIsordErs  |  431
The psychoanalyst also interprets the patient’s 
dreams, which may provide clues to the underlying 
problem. According to Freud, psychological defenses 
are lowered during sleep; therefore, the unconscious 
conflicts are revealed symbolically in one’s dreams. 
This means that dreams have two levels of meaning—
the manifest content, the literal surface meaning of 
a dream, and the latent content, the underlying true 
meaning of a dream. It is the latent content that is 
important. For example, a king and queen in a dream 
could really represent the person’s parents, or having a 
tooth extracted could represent castration. Another tool 
available to the therapist is the process of transference, 
which occurs when the patient acts toward the therapist 
as she did or does toward important figures in her life, 
such as her parents. For example, if the patient hated her father when she was a 
child, she might transfer this hate relationship to the therapist. In this way trans-
ference is a reenactment of earlier or current conflicts with important figures in 
the patient’s life. The patient’s conflicted feelings toward these important figures 
are transferred to the therapist, and the therapist must detect and interpret these 
transferences.
Classical psychoanalysis requires a lot of time, because the therapist has to use 
these various indirect clues to build an interpretation of the patient’s problem. 
It’s similar to a detective trying to solve a case without any solid clues, such as 
the weapon, fingerprints, or DNA evidence. There’s only vague circumstantial 
evidence. Using this evidence, the therapist builds an interpretation that helps 
the patient to gain insight into the problem. This classical style of psychoanaly-
sis has been strongly criticized and has little empirical evidence supporting its 
efficacy. However, contemporary psychoanalytic therapy, usually referred to as 
psychodynamic therapy, has proved successful (Shedler, 2010). It is very dif-
ferent than Freud’s psychoanalysis. The patient sits in a chair instead of lying 
on a couch, sessions are only once or twice a week, and the therapy may finish 
in months, instead of years. In addition, patients who receive psychodynamic 
therapy seem to maintain their therapeutic gains and continue to improve after 
the therapy ends.
Client-centered therapy.  The most influential humanistic therapy is Carl 
Rogers’s client-centered therapy, which is sometimes called person-centered 
therapy (Raskin & Rogers, 1995; Rogers, 1951). Client-centered therapy is a 
style of psychotherapy in which the therapist uses unconditional positive regard, 
genuineness, and empathy to help the person to gain insight into his true self-
concept. Rogers and other humanists preferred to use the words “client” or “per-
son” rather than “patient”; they thought that “patient” implied sickness, while 
“client” and “person” emphasized the importance of the clients’ subjective views 
of themselves. Remember from Chapter 8 that Rogers assumed that conditions 
➤	 manifest content  Freud’s term for the 
literal surface meaning of a dream.
➤	 latent content  Freud’s term for the 
underlying true meaning of a dream.
➤	 transference   A person undergoing 
therapy acts toward the therapist as 
he or she did or does toward important 
figures in his or her life, such as his or 
her parents.
➤	 client-centered therapy  A style of psy-
chotherapy, developed by Carl Rogers, 
in which the therapist uses uncondi-
tional positive regard, genuineness, 
and empathy to help the person to gain 
insight into his or her true self-concept.

432  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
of worth set up by other people in the client’s life have led the troubled person 
to develop a distorted self-concept, and that a person’s perception of his self is 
critical to personality development and self-actualization (the fullest realization 
of one’s potential). The therapeutic goal of client-centered therapy is to get the 
person on the road to self-actualization. To achieve this goal, the therapist is 
nondirective; she doesn’t attempt to steer the dialogue in a certain direction. 
Instead, the client decides the direction of each session. The therapist’s main task 
is to create the conditions that allow the client to gain insight into his true feel-
ings and self-concept.
These conditions are exactly the same as those for healthy personality growth 
that were discussed in Chapter 8. The therapist should be accepting, genuine, 
and empathic. The therapist establishes an environment of acceptance by giving 
the client unconditional positive regard (accepting the client without any condi-
tions upon his behavior). The therapist demonstrates genuineness by honestly 
sharing her own thoughts and feelings with the client. To achieve empathic 
understanding of the client’s feelings, the therapist uses active listening to gain 
a sense of the client’s feelings, and then uses mirroring to echo these feelings 
back to the client, so that the client can then get a clearer image of his true feel-
ings. It is this realization of his true feelings that allows the client to get back 
on the road to personal growth and self-actualization. By creating a supportive 
environment, this style of therapy is very successful with people who are not suf-
fering from a clinical disorder but who are motivated toward greater personal 
awareness and growth.
Behavioral therapy.  Behavioral therapy is a style of psychotherapy in 
which the therapist uses the principles of classical and operant conditioning to 
change the person’s behavior from maladaptive to adaptive. The assumption is 
that the behavioral symptoms (such as the irrational behavior of the woman 
with the specific phobia of birds) are the problem. Maladaptive behaviors have 
been learned, so they have to be unlearned, and more adaptive behaviors need 
to be learned instead. Behavioral therapies are based on either classical or oper-
ant conditioning. We’ll first describe an example of one based on classical 
conditioning.
Remember the Little Albert classical conditioning study by Watson and 
Rayner that we mentioned earlier in this chapter when we were discussing phobic 
disorders. As we pointed out in Chapter 4, Albert’s fear of white rats was never 
deconditioned, but one of Watson’s former students, Mary Cover Jones, later 
showed that such a fear could be unlearned and replaced with a more adaptive 
relaxation response (Jones, 1924). Jones eliminated the fear of rabbits in a 3-year-
old boy named Peter by gradually introducing a rabbit 
while Peter was eating. Peter’s pleasure response while 
eating was incompatible with a fear response. Over time, 
Peter learned to be relaxed in the presence of a rabbit. 
Some consider this to be the first case of behavioral 
therapy. Jones’s work led to the development of a set 
➤	 behavioral therapy  A style of psycho-
therapy in which the therapist uses 
the principles of classical and operant 
conditioning to change the person’s 
behavior from maladaptive to adaptive.

ThE TrEatmEnt of MEntal dIsordErs  |  433
of classical conditioning therapies called counterconditioning techniques. In 
counterconditioning, a maladaptive response is replaced by an incompatible 
adaptive response. Counterconditioning therapies, such as systematic desensiti-
zation, virtual reality therapy, and flooding, have been especially successful in the 
treatment of anxiety disorders. These three counterconditioning therapies are 
referred to as exposure therapies because the patient is exposed at some point to 
the source of his anxiety.
Using Jones’s idea that fear and relaxation are incompatible responses, Joseph 
Wolpe developed a behavioral therapy called systematic desensitization that is 
very effective in treating phobias (Wolpe, 1958). Systematic desensitization is a 
counterconditioning procedure in which a fear response to an object or situation 
is replaced with a relaxation response in a series of progressively increasing fear-
arousing steps. The patient first develops a hierarchy of situations that evoke a 
fear response, from those that evoke slight fear on up to those that evoke tremen-
dous fear. For example, a person who had a specific phobia of spiders might find 
that planning a picnic evoked slight fear because of the possibility that a spider 
might be encountered on the picnic. Seeing a picture of a spider would evoke 
more fear, seeing a spider on a wall 20 feet away even more. Having actual spiders 
crawl on her would be near the top of the hierarchy. These are just a few situations 
that span a possible hierarchy. Hierarchies have far more steps over which the fear 
increases gradually.
Once the hierarchy is set, the patient is then taught how to use various tech-
niques to relax. Once this relaxation training is over, the therapy begins. The 
patient starts working through the hierarchy and attempts to relax at each step. 
First the patient relaxes in imagined situations in the hierarchy and later in the 
actual situations. With both imagined and actual situations, the anxiety level of the 
situation is increased slowly. At some of the latter stages in the hierarchy, a model 
of the same sex and roughly same age may be brought in to demonstrate the behav-
ior before the patient attempts it. For example, the model will touch the picture 
of a bird in a book before the patient is asked to do so. In brief, systematic desen-
sitization teaches the patient to confront increasingly  
fear-provoking situations with the relaxation response.
Virtual reality therapy is similar to systematic desen-
sitization, but the patient is exposed to computer simu-
lations of his fears in a progressively anxiety-provoking 
manner. Wearing a motion-sensitive display helmet 
that projects a three-dimensional virtual world, the 
patient experiences seemingly real computer-generated 
images rather than imagined and actual situations as in 
systematic desensitization. When the patient achieves 
relaxation, the simulated scene becomes more fearful 
until the patient can relax in the simulated presence of 
the feared object or situation. Virtual reality therapy has 
been used successfully to treat specific phobias, social 
➤	 counterconditioning  A type of behav-
ioral therapy in which a maladaptive 
response is replaced by an incompatible 
adaptive response.
➤	 systematic desensitization  A counter-
conditioning exposure therapy in which 
a fear response to an object or situation 
is replaced with a relaxation response 
in a series of progressively increasing 
fear-arousing steps.
➤	 virtual reality therapy  A countercondi-
tioning exposure therapy in which the 
patient is exposed in graduated steps to 
computer simulations of a feared object 
or situation.

434  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
anxiety disorder, and some other anxiety disorders 
(Krijn, Emmelkamp, Olafsson, & Biemond, 2004).
Another counterconditioning exposure therapy, 
flooding, does not involve such gradual confrontation. 
In flooding, the patient is immediately exposed to the 
feared object or situation. For example, in the case of 
the spider phobia, the person would immediately have 
to confront live spiders. Flooding is often used instead 
of systematic desensitization when the fear is so strong 
that the person is unable to make much progress in sys-
tematic desensitization.
Behavioral therapies using operant conditioning 
principles reinforce desired behaviors and extinguish 
undesired behaviors. A good example is the token economy that we discussed 
in Chapter 4. A token economy is an environment in which desired behaviors 
are reinforced with tokens (secondary reinforcers such as gold stars or stickers) 
that can be exchanged for rewards such as candy and television privileges. This 
technique is often used with groups of institutionalized people, such as those in 
mental health facilities. As such, it has been fairly successful in managing autistic, 
retarded, and some schizophrenic institutionalized populations. For example, if 
making one’s bed is the desired behavior, it will be reinforced with tokens that 
can be exchanged for treats or privileges. A token economy is more of a way to 
manage the daily behavior of such people than a way to cure them, but we must 
remember that a behavioral therapist thinks that the maladaptive behavior is the 
problem.
Cognitive therapy.  Behavioral therapies work to change the person’s behav-
ior; cognitive therapies work on the person’s thinking. Cognitive therapy is a 
style of psychotherapy in which the therapist changes the person’s thinking from 
maladaptive to adaptive. The assumption is that the person’s thought processes 
and beliefs are maladaptive and need to change. The cognitive therapist identi-
fies the irrational thoughts and unrealistic beliefs that need to change and then 
helps the person to execute that change. Two prominent cognitive 
therapies are Albert Ellis’s rational-emotive therapy (Ellis, 1962, 
1993, 1995) and Aaron Beck’s cognitive therapy (Beck, 1976; Beck & 
Beck, 1995).
In Ellis’s rational-emotive therapy, the therapist directly con-
fronts and challenges the patient’s unrealistic thoughts and beliefs 
to show that they are irrational. These irrational, unrealistic beliefs 
usually involve words such as “must,” “always,” and “every.” Let’s 
consider a simple example. A person might have the unrealistic 
belief that he must be perfect in everything he does. This is an unre-
alistic belief. He is doomed to failure, because no one can be perfect 
at everything they do. Instead of realizing that his belief is irrational, 
➤	 flooding  A counterconditioning 
exposure therapy in which the patient is 
immediately exposed to a feared object 
or situation.
➤	 cognitive therapy  A style of psycho-
therapy in which the therapist attempts 
to change the person’s thinking from 
maladaptive to adaptive.
➤	 rational-emotive therapy  A type of cog-
nitive therapy, developed by Albert Ellis, 
in which the therapist directly confronts 
and challenges the person’s unrealistic 
thoughts and beliefs to show that they 
are irrational.
Albert Ellis
Bettmann/Corbis

ThE TrEatmEnt of MEntal dIsordErs  |  435
he will blame himself for the failure and become 
depressed. A rational-emotive therapist will show him 
the irrationality of his thinking and lead him to change 
his thinking to be more realistic. This is achieved by 
Ellis’s ABC model. A refers to the Activating event (fail-
ure to be perfect at everything); B is the person’s Belief 
about the event (“It’s my fault; I’m a failure”); and C 
is the resulting emotional Consequence (depression). 
According to Ellis, A does not cause C; B causes C. 
Through rational-emotive therapy, the person comes 
to realize that he controls the emotional consequences 
because he controls the interpretation of the event.
Rational-emotive therapists are usually very direct 
and confrontational in getting their clients to see the 
errors of their thinking. Ellis has said that he does not 
think that a warm relationship between therapist and 
client is essential to effective therapy. Aaron Beck’s 
form of cognitive therapy has the same therapeutic goal 
as Ellis’s rational-emotive therapy, but the therapeutic style is not as confron-
tational. A therapist using Beck’s cognitive therapy works to develop a warm 
relationship with the person and has a person carefully consider the objective 
evidence for his beliefs in order to see the errors in his thinking. For example, to 
help a student who is depressed because he thinks he has blown his chances to 
get into medical school by not having a perfect grade point average, the thera-
pist would have the student examine the statistics on how few students actually 
graduate with a perfect average and the grade point averages of students actu-
ally accepted to medical school. The therapist is like a good teacher, helping the 
person to discover the problems with his thinking. Regardless of the style differ-
ences, both types of cognitive therapy have been especially effective at treating 
major depressive disorders.
Is psychotherapy effective?  Now that you understand the four major 
approaches to psychotherapy, let’s consider this question: Is psychotherapy effec-
tive? To assess the effectiveness of psychotherapy we 
must consider spontaneous remission. Spontaneous 
remission is when a person gets better with the passage 
of time without receiving any therapy. In order to be 
considered effective, improvement from psychotherapy 
must be significantly (statistically) greater than that due 
to spontaneous remission. To answer the question, 
researchers have used meta-analysis, a statistical tech-
nique discussed in Chapter 1 in which the results from 
many separate experimental studies on the same ques-
tion are combined into one analysis to determine 
➤	 Beck’s cognitive therapy  A type of 
cognitive therapy, developed by Aaron 
Beck, in which the therapist works to 
develop a warm relationship with the 
person and has the person carefully 
consider the evidence for his or her 
beliefs in order to see the errors in his or 
her thinking.
➤	 spontaneous remission  Getting better 
with the passage of time without 
receiving any therapy.
Aaron T. Beck
Courtesy of Aaron T. Beck, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center

436  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
whether there is an overall effect. The results of a meta-analysis that included the 
results of 475 studies involving many different types of psychotherapy and thou-
sands of participants revealed that psychotherapy is effective (Figure 10.1). The 
average psychotherapy client is better off than about 80 percent of people not 
receiving any therapy (Smith, Glass, & Miller, 1980). A more recent meta-analysis 
of psychotherapy effectiveness studies also confirms that psychotherapy helps 
(Shadish, Matt, Navarro, & Phillips, 2000).
No one particular type of psychotherapy, is superior to all of the others. Some 
types of psychotherapy do, however, seem to be more effective in treating particu-
lar disorders. For example, behavioral therapies have been very successful in treat-
ing phobias and other anxiety disorders. Also, cognitive therapies tend to be very 
effective in treating depressive disorders. None of the psychotherapies, however, 
are very successful in treating schizophrenia.
m Figure 10.1 | 
Psychotherapy Versus 
No Treatment | These two 
normal distributions sum-
marize the data of a meta-
analysis of 475 studies on 
the effectiveness of psycho-
therapy. They show that psy-
chotherapy is effective—the 
average psychotherapy client 
was better off than 80 per-
cent of the people not receiv-
ing therapy. (Adapted from 
Smith, Glass, & Miller, 1980.)
Poor
outcome
Frequency
Good
outcome
80 percent of untreated people
have poorer outcomes than
the average treated person
Average
untreated
person
Average
psychotherapy
client
© 1977 King Features Syndicate, Inc.
INSIDe WOODY aLLeN

ThE TrEatmEnt of MEntal dIsordErs  |  437
Section Summary
There are two major categories of therapy: biomedical and psychological. 
Biomedical therapy involves the use of biological interventions, such as drugs, 
to treat disorders. Psychotherapy involves the use of psychological interventions 
to treat disorders. Psychotherapy is what we normally think of as therapy. In 
psychotherapy, there is an interaction between the person and the therapist. In 
biomedical therapy, the interaction is biological. There are three major types of 
biomedical therapy—drug therapy, shock therapy, and psychosurgery. There are 
four major types of psychotherapy—psychoanalytic, humanistic, behavioral, and 
cognitive.
The major medications are lithium, antidepressant drugs, antianxiety drugs, and 
antipsychotic drugs. Lithium, a naturally occurring mineral salt, is the main treat-
ment for bipolar disorder. There are four types of antidepressants—MAO inhibi-
tors, tricyclics, SSRIs, and SSNRIs. SSRIs, which work by selectively blocking the 
reuptake of serotonin, are prescribed most often. Antianxiety drugs are in a class 
of drugs called benzodiazepines; they reduce anxiety by stimulating GABA activity 
that inhibits the anxiety.
There are two types of antipsychotic drugs—traditional (those developed from 
the 1950s through the 1980s) and new generation (developed since the 1990s). 
The traditional antipsychotic drugs block receptor sites for dopamine, which glob-
ally lowers dopamine activity. Because of this, these traditional drugs produce 
side effects in motor movement that are similar to the movement problems of 
Parkinson’s disease. In addition, there is a long-term-use side effect of traditional 
antipsychotic drugs, tardive dyskinesia, in which the person has uncontrollable 
facial movements. The new generation drugs do not have these side effects, but 
they do have to be monitored very carefully because of other dangerous side effects. 
Such monitoring is expensive; therefore, traditional antipsychotic drugs are often 
prescribed instead.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) that involves electrically inducing a brief brain 
seizure is used almost exclusively to treat severe depression. We do not know how 
or why this therapy works, but it is a valuable treatment for severely depressed peo-
ple who have not responded to other types of treatment because it leads to some-
what faster improvement than antidepressant drugs. Given its nature, however, ECT 
remains shrouded in controversy. An alternative neurostimulation therapy for the 
severely depressed, transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), is not as controversial 
as ECT and does not produce any major side effects, but more research on its effec-
tiveness is needed.
Even more controversial is psychosurgery, in which specific areas in the brain 
are actually destroyed. The most famous type of psychosurgery is the lobotomy, 
in which the neuronal connections of the frontal lobes to lower areas in the brain 
are severed. No good evidence for why such operations should work or that they 
did was ever put forth. The arrival of antipsychotic drugs in the 1950s replaced the 
lobotomy as the main treatment for schizophrenia. Psychosurgery is still around, 
but it is very different from what it once was and is used very infrequently, only 
when all other treatments have failed.
Psychotherapies can be categorized into two types—insight or action. 
Psychoanalytic and humanistic therapies are insight therapies; they focus on the 
person achieving insight into the causes of her behavior and thinking. Behavioral 
and cognitive therapies are action therapies; they focus on the actions of the person 

438  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
in changing her behavior and ways of thinking. The main goal of psychoanalysis, 
as developed by Freud, is for the therapist to uncover the unconscious sources 
of the person’s problems by interpreting the person’s free associations, dreams, 
resistances, and transferences. The therapist then helps the person to gain insight 
into the unconscious sources of her problem with this interpretation. Such classical 
psychoanalysis takes a long time; therefore, contemporary psychoanalytic thera-
pists take a more direct and interactive role, emphasizing the present more than the 
past in order to shorten the period of therapy.
The most influential humanistic therapy is Rogers’s client-centered therapy in 
which the therapist uses unconditional positive regard, genuineness, and empathy 
to help the person to gain insight into her true self-concept and get on the path to 
self-actualization. The therapy is client-centered, and the client decides the direction 
of each session. The therapist’s main task is to create the conditions that allow the 
client to discover her true feelings and self-concept.
In behavioral therapies, the therapist uses the principles of classical and operant 
conditioning to change the person’s behavior from maladaptive to adaptive. The 
assumption is that the behavioral symptoms are the problem. These behaviors were 
learned; therefore, they need to be unlearned and more adaptive behaviors learned. 
Counterconditioning exposure therapies, such as systematic desensitization, virtual 
reality therapy, and flooding, have been especially effective in treating anxiety dis-
orders such as phobias. Instead of changing the person’s behavior, the cognitive 
therapist attempts to change the person’s thinking from maladaptive to adaptive. 
Two major kinds of cognitive therapy are Ellis’s rational-emotive therapy and Beck’s 
cognitive therapy. Both have the same therapeutic goal—changing the person’s 
thinking to be more rational—but the therapeutic styles are very different. Rational-
emotive therapy is far more confrontational and direct in its approach. Regardless, 
both have been very successful in treating major depressive disorders.
Using meta-analysis, a statistical technique that pools the results from many 
separate experimental studies on the same question into one analysis to determine 
whether there is an overall effect, researchers have concluded that psychotherapy 
is more effective than no therapy. There is no one particular type of psychotherapy 
that is best for all disorders, however. Rather, some types of psychotherapy seem 
more effective in treating particular disorders. For example, behavioral therapies 
tend to be effective in treating anxiety disorders, and cognitive therapies more 
effective in treating depression.
ConceptCheck | 3
➤	 explain the difference between biomedical therapy and psychotherapy.
➤	 explain how the neurogenesis theory of depression could be considered a 
biopsychosocial explanation.
➤	 explain why the psychoanalyst can be thought of as a detective.
➤	 explain the difference between behavioral therapy and cognitive therapy.
➤	 explain why a control for spontaneous remission must be included in any 
assessment of the effectiveness of psychotherapy.

Study Guide
439
Key Terms Exercise
Identify the correct term for each of the 
following definitions. the answers to this 
exercise follow the answers to the Concept 
Checks at the end of the chapter.
  1.	 A repetitive and rigid behavior that a 
person feels compelled to perform in 
order to reduce anxiety.
	 	
 
  2.	 An anxiety disorder indicated by a 
marked and persistent fear of being in 
places or situations from which escape 
might be difficult or embarrassing.
	 	
 
Chapter Key Terms
You should know the definitions of the following key terms from the chapter. they 
are listed in the order in which they appear in the chapter. For those you do not know, 
return to the relevant section of the chapter to learn them. When you think that you 
know all of the terms, complete the matching exercise based on these key terms.
abnormal psychology
Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, 
Fifth Edition (DSM-5)
biopsychosocial approach
anxiety disorders
specific phobia
social anxiety disorder
agoraphobia
panic disorder
generalized anxiety disorder
obsessive-compulsive 
disorder
obsession
compulsion
depressive disorders
major depressive disorder
major depressive episode
manic episode
bipolar disorder
psychotic disorder
hallucination
delusion
schizophrenia
vulnerability–stress model
personality disorder
biomedical therapy
psychotherapy
lithium
antidepressant drugs
neurogenesis theory of 
depression
antianxiety drugs
antipsychotic drugs
tardive dyskinesia
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
transcranial magnetic therapy 
(TMS)
psychosurgery
lobotomy
psychoanalysis
free association
resistance
manifest content
latent content
transference
client-centered therapy
behavioral therapy
counterconditioning
systematic desensitization
virtual reality therapy
flooding
cognitive therapy
rational-emotive therapy
Beck’s cognitive therapy
spontaneous remission
  3.	 An explanation of schizophrenia that 
proposes that genetic, prenatal, and 
postnatal biological factors render a 
person vulnerable to schizophrenia, but 
environmental stress determines whether 
it develops or not.
	 	
 
  4.	 A style of psychotherapy, developed  
by Carl Rogers, in which the therapist 
uses unconditional positive regard,  
genuineness, and empathy to help the 
person to gain insight into his true  
self-concept.
	 	
 

440  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
  5.	 A counterconditioning exposure therapy 
in which a fear response to an object or 
situation is replaced with a relaxation 
response in a series of progressively 
increasing fear-arousing steps.
	 	
 
  6.	 Getting better with the passage of time 
without receiving any therapy.
	 	
 
  7.	 A type of cognitive therapy, developed by 
Albert Ellis, in which the therapist directly 
confronts and challenges the person’s 
unrealistic thoughts and beliefs to show 
that they are irrational.
	 	
 
  8.	 A disorder characterized by inflexible, 
long-standing personality traits that lead 
to behavior that impairs social function-
ing and deviates from cultural norms.
	 	
 
  9.	 A false sensory perception.
	 	
 
10.	 A disorder in which recurrent cycles of 
depressive and manic episodes occur.
	 	
 
	11.	 The current version of the American 
Psychiatric Association’s diagnostic 
and classification guidelines for mental 
disorders.
	 	
 
12.	 Explaining abnormality as the result of 
the interaction among biological, psycho-
logical (behavioral and cognitive), and 
social or cultural factors.
	 	
 
13.	 An explanation of depression that 
proposes that the growth of new neu-
rons in the hippocampus stops during 
depression, and when it resumes, the 
depression lifts.
	 	
 
14.	 A person undergoing therapy acts toward 
the therapist as he or she did or does 
toward important figures in his or her life, 
such as parents.
	 	
 
15.	 A side effect of long-term use of 
traditional antipsychotic drugs caus-
ing the person to have uncontrollable 
facial tics, grimaces, and other invol-
untary movements of the lips, jaw, and 
tongue.
	 	
 
Practice Test Questions
the following are practice multiple-choice 
test questions on some of the chapter 
content. the answers are given after the 
answers to the Key terms exercise at 
the end of the chapter. If you guessed or 
incorrectly answered a question, restudy the 
relevant section of the chapter.
  1.	 Which of the following is a personality 
disorder?
a.	 schizophrenia
b.	antisocial personality
c.	 bipolar disorder
d.	generalized anxiety disorder
  2.	
 
 is the fear of being in places or situ-
ations from which escape may be difficult 
or embarrassing.
a.	 A specific phobia
b.	Agoraphobia
c.	 Social anxiety disorder
d.	Panic disorder
  3.	 Which of the following disorders has the 
highest concordance rate for identical 
twins?
a.	 bipolar disorder
b.	schizophrenia
c.	 major depressive disorder
d.	The concordance rates for all of the 
above are the same.

Study GuIdE  |  441
  4.	 Which of the following disorders is a (are) 
psychotic disorder(s)?
a.	 obsessive-compulsive disorder
b.	major depressive disorder
c.	 schizophrenia
d.	all of the above
  5.	 A false sensory perception is a(n) 
 
, 
and a false belief is a(n) 
 
.
a.	 obsession; compulsion
b.	compulsion; obsession
c.	 hallucination; delusion
d.	delusion; hallucination
  6.	 Which of the following is (are) most often 
used to treat bipolar disorder?
a.	 SSRIs
b.	lithium
c.	 new generation antipsychotic drugs
d.	MAO inhibitors
  7.	 Tardive dyskinesia is a side effect of long-
term use of 
 
.
a.	 SSRIs
b.	traditional antipsychotic drugs
c.	 lithium
d.	tricyclics
  8.	 A 
 
 therapist interprets resistances 
and transferences to discover a person’s 
underlying problems.
a.	 psychoanalytic
b.	client-centered
c.	 behavioral
d.	cognitive
  9.	 Maladaptive behavior is to maladaptive 
thinking as 
 
 is to 
 
.
a.	 psychoanalysis; client-centered therapy
b.	client-centered therapy; psychoanalysis
c.	 behavioral therapy; cognitive therapy
d.	cognitive therapy; behavioral therapy
10.	 Which of the following psychothera-
pies is most effective in treating phobic 
disorders?
a.	 psychoanalysis
b.	cognitive therapy
c.	 behavioral therapy
d.	client-centered therapy
11.	
 
 is a disorder in which the person 
has excessive global anxiety and worry 
that they cannot control for a period of at 
least six months.
a.	 Agoraphobia
b.	Social phobia
c.	 Generalized anxiety disorder
d.	Panic disorder
12.	 Which of the following is a part of 
rational-emotive therapy?
a.	 ABC model
b.	token economy
c.	 free association
d.	flooding
13.	 Unconditional positive regard and empa-
thy are to resistance and transference as 
 
 is to 
 
.
a.	 rational-emotive therapy; Beck’s 
cognitive therapy
b.	Beck’s cognitive therapy; rational-
emotive therapy
c.	 psychoanalysis; client-centered 
therapy
d.	client-centered therapy; 
psychoanalysis
14.	 Which of the following is the best exam-
ple of a biopsychosocial explanation of a 
mental disorder?
a.	 the ABC model
b.	the vulnerability–stress model
c.	 counterconditioning
d.	meta-analysis
15. Which of the following disorders is classi-
fied as an obsessive-compulsive related 
disorder?
a.	 panic disorder
b.	trichotillomania
c.	 agoraphobia
d.	social anxiety disorder

442  |  Chapter 10  |  ABNORMAL PSyChOLOGy
Chapter Concept Check Answers
Concept Check | 1
• The DSM-5 is the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition, 
published by the American Psychiatric 
Association. It is the most widely used 
diagnostic system for classifying mental 
disorders. Basing its classification upon 
behavioral and psychological symptoms, 
it provides reliable diagnostic guidelines 
for approximately 400 disorders, grouped 
into major categories that share particular 
symptoms.
• Labels attached to people bias our percep-
tion of these people in terms of their labels. 
Labels for mental disorders are especially 
problematic, because they tend to lead to 
negative perceptions and interpretations 
of a person’s behavior in terms of the 
label. In brief, labels guide our perception. 
Therefore, it is important to realize that 
there is much more to a person than a 
label. However, we need labels in order to 
know how to treat people with disorders 
and to conduct research on these disorders. 
This is why labels are necessary.
Concept Check | 2
•	 A biopsychosocial explanation of a disorder 
entails explaining the problem as the result 
of the interaction of biological, psychologi-
cal (behavioral and cognitive), and sociocul-
tural factors. A good example is the expla-
nation of specific phobia disorders in terms 
of a behavioral factor (classical condition-
ing) along with a biological predisposition 
to learn certain fears more easily. Thus, 
a psychological factor is involved in the 
learning of the fear but a biological factor 
determines which fears are easier to learn. 
Another good example is the vulnerability–
stress model explanation of schizophrenia 
in which one’s level of vulnerability to 
schizophrenia is determined by biological 
factors, but how much stress one experi-
ences and how one copes psychologically 
with the stress determines whether or not 
one suffers from the disorder.
•	 The anxiety and fear in the specific phobia 
disorder are exactly as the label indicates. 
They are specific to a certain class of 
objects or situations. However, the anxiety 
and fear in generalized anxiety disorder are 
not specific, but rather global. The person 
has excessive anxiety and worries most 
of the time, and the anxiety is not tied to 
anything in particular.
•	 The concordance rates for identical twins 
for major depressive disorder and schizo-
phrenia are only about 1 in 2 (50 percent). 
If only biological genetic factors were 
responsible for these disorders, these con-
cordance rates would be 100 percent. Thus, 
psychological and sociocultural factors 
must play a role in causing these disorders.
•	 Schizophrenia is a psychotic disorder. This 
means the person loses contact with real-
ity. Thus, the split is between the person’s 
mental functions (perception, beliefs, and 
speech) and reality. In “split personality,” 
which used to be called multiple personal-
ity disorder and is now called dissociative 
identity disorder in the DSM-5, one’s per-
sonality is split into two or more distinct 
personalities.
Concept Check | 3
• In biomedical therapy, there is a direct 
biological intervention—via drugs or ECT, 
which has an impact on the biochemistry 
of the nervous system, or psychosurgery, 
in which part of the brain is actually 
destroyed. There is no direct impact on 
the client’s biology in psychotherapy. 
Psychological interventions (talk therapies) 
are used to treat disorders. However, suc-
cessful psychotherapy may indirectly lead 
to biological changes in the client’s neuro-
chemistry through more positive thinking.
• The neurogenesis theory of depression 
can be considered a biopsychosocial 
explanation, because both biologi-
cal and psychological factors can have 
an impact on the neurogenesis pro-
cess that is assumed to eliminate the 
depression. Antidepressant drugs with 

Study GuIdE  |  443
their antagonistic effects on serotonin and 
norepinephrine are good examples of pos-
sible biological factors, and the positive 
thinking produced by cognitive psychother-
apy is a good example of a psychological 
factor.
• A psychoanalyst can be thought of as 
a detective, because she has to inter-
pret many clues to the client’s problem. 
Discovering the client’s problem is like 
solving a case. The sources of the psycho-
analyst’s clues are free association data, 
resistances, dream analysis, and transfer-
ences. The therapist uses these clues to 
interpret the person’s problem (solve the 
case) and then uses this interpretation to 
help the person gain insight into the source 
of his problem.
• Both of these types of psychotherapies are 
very direct in their approach. However, 
behavioral therapies assume that the cli-
ent’s behavior is maladaptive and needs to 
be replaced with more adaptive behavior. 
Cognitive therapies instead hold that the 
client’s thinking is maladaptive and needs 
to be replaced with more adaptive thinking. 
In brief, the behavioral therapist works to 
change the client’s behavior, and the cogni-
tive therapist works to change the client’s 
thinking.
• Spontaneous remission is when a per-
son gets better with the passage of time 
without receiving any therapy. Thus, if it 
were not considered when the effective-
ness of psychotherapy is being evaluated, 
the researcher might incorrectly assume 
that the improvement was due to the 
psychotherapy and not to spontaneous 
remission. This is why the improvement 
in wellness for the psychotherapy group 
must be significantly (statistically) greater 
than the improvement for the spontaneous 
remission control group. If it is, then the 
psychotherapy has produced improvement 
that cannot be due to just spontaneous 
remission.
Answers to Key Terms Exercise
  1.	 compulsion
  2.	 agoraphobia
  3.	 vulnerability–stress model
  4.	 client-centered therapy
  5.	 systematic desensitization
  6.	 spontaneous remission
  7.	 rational-emotive therapy
  8.	 personality disorder
  9.	 hallucination
10.	 bipolar disorder
11.	 Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5)
12.	 biopsychosocial approach
13.	 neurogenesis theory of depression
14.	 transference
15.	 tardive dyskinesia
Answers to Practice Test Questions
  1.	 b; antisocial personality
  2.	 b; Agoraphobia
  3.	 a; bipolar disorder
  4.	 c; schizophrenia
  5.	 c; hallucination; delusion
  6.	 b; lithium
  7.	 b; traditional antipsychotic drugs
  8.	 a; psychoanalytic
  9.	 c; behavioral therapy; cognitive therapy
10.	 c; behavioral therapy
11.	 c; Generalized anxiety disorder
12.	 a; ABC model
13.	 d; client-centered therapy; psychoanalysis
14.	 b; the vulnerability–stress model
15.	 b; trichotillomania


abnormal psychology  The scientific study of men-
tal disorders and their treatment.
absolute threshold  The minimum amount of energy 
in a sensory stimulus detected 50 percent of the time.
accommodation  (1) In vision, the focusing of light 
waves from objects of different distances directly on 
the retina. (2) In Piagetian theory, Piaget’s term for 
the modification of present schemas to fit with new 
experiences.
acetylcholine (ACh)  A neurotransmitter involved 
in learning, memory, and muscle movement.
acquisition  (1) In classical conditioning, acquiring 
a new response (the conditioned response) to the 
conditioned stimulus. (2) In operant conditioning, 
the strengthening of a reinforced operant response.
actor-observer bias  The tendency to overestimate 
situational influences on our own behavior, but to 
overestimate dispositional influences on the behav-
ior of others.
additive mixtures  Direct mixtures of different 
wavelengths of light in which all of the wavelengths 
reach the retina and are added together.
agonist  A drug or poison that increases the activity 
of one or more neurotransmitters.
agoraphobia  An anxiety disorder indicated by a 
marked and persistent fear of being in places or 
situations from which escape may be difficult or 
embarrassing.
algorithm  A step-by-step problem-solving proce-
dure that guarantees a correct answer to a problem.
amnesic  A person with severe memory deficits fol-
lowing brain surgery or injury.
amplitude  The amount of energy in a wave, its 
intensity, which is the height of the wave at its crest.
amygdala  A part of the brain that is involved in 
emotions by influencing aggression, anger, and 
fear and by providing the emotional element of 
our memories and the interpretation of emotional 
expressions in others.
anal stage of psychosexual development  The 
second stage in Freud’s theory (from 18 months to 
3 years), in which the erogenous zone is the anus, 
and the child derives pleasure from stimulation of 
the anal region through having and withholding 
bowel movements.
anchoring and adjustment heuristic  A heuristic 
for estimation problems in which one uses his 
or her initial estimate as an anchor estimate 
and then adjusts the anchor up or down (often 
insufficiently).
antagonist  A drug or poison that decreases the 
activity of one or more neurotransmitters.
anterograde amnesia  The inability to form 
new explicit long-term memories for events 
following surgery or trauma to the brain. Explicit 
memories formed before the surgery or trauma 
are left intact.
antianxiety drugs  Drugs used to treat anxiety 
problems and disorders.
antidepressant drugs  Drugs used to treat depres-
sive disorders.
antipsychotic drugs  Drugs used to treat psychotic 
disorders.
anxiety disorders  Disorders that share features 
of excessive fear and anxiety and related behavioral 
disturbances, such as avoidance behaviors.
appetitive stimulus  A stimulus that is pleasant.
arousal theory  A theory of motivation that pro-
poses that our behavior is motivated to maintain an 
optimal level of physiological arousal.
assimilation   Piaget’s term for the interpretation 
of new experiences in terms of present schemas.
association cortex  All of the cerebral cortex except 
those areas devoted to primary sensory process-
ing or motor processing. This is where all the 
higher-level cognitive processing that requires the 
association (integration) of information, such as 
perception and language, occurs.
Glossary
G-1

G-2  |  Glossary
attachment  The lifelong emotional bond between 
infants and their mothers or other caregivers, 
formed during the first six months of life.
attitudes  Evaluative reactions (positive or negative) 
toward objects, events, and other people.
attribution  The process by which we explain our 
own behavior and that of others.
authoritarian parenting  A style of parenting in 
which the parents are demanding, expect unques-
tioned obedience, are not responsive to their 
children’s desires, and communicate poorly with 
their children.
authoritative parenting  A style of parenting in 
which the parents are demanding, but set rational 
limits for their children and communicate well with 
their children.
automatic processing  Memory processing that 
occurs subconsciously and does not require attention.
autonomic nervous system  The part of the 
peripheral nervous system that regulates the 
functioning of our internal environment (glands 
and organs like the heart, lungs, and stomach).
availability heuristic  A heuristic for judging the 
probability of an event by how available examples 
of the event are in memory (the more available, the 
more probable).
aversive stimulus  A stimulus that is unpleasant.
axon  The long, singular fiber projecting out of the 
cell body of a neuron whose function is to conduct 
the neural impulse from the cell body to the axon 
terminals triggering chemical communication with 
other neurons.
babbling  The rhythmic repetition of various 
syllables including both consonants and vowels.
baby talk (parentese)  The different format of 
speech that adults use when talking with babies 
that involves the use of shorter sentences with a 
higher, more melodious pitch.
basal ganglia  A part of the brain that is involved 
in the initiation and execution of movements.
Beck’s cognitive therapy  A type of cognitive 
therapy, developed by Aaron Beck, in which the 
therapist works to develop a warm relationship with 
the person and has the person carefully consider 
the evidence for his or her beliefs in order to see the 
errors in his or her thinking.
behavior modification  The application of classical 
and operant conditioning principles to eliminate 
undesirable behavior and to teach more desirable 
behavior.
behavioral perspective  A research perspective 
whose major explanatory focus is how external envi-
ronmental events condition observable behavior.
behavioral therapy  A style of psychotherapy in 
which the therapist uses the principles of classical 
and operant conditioning to change the person’s 
behavior from maladaptive to adaptive.
belief perseverance  The tendency to cling to one’s 
beliefs in the face of contradictory evidence.
biological perspective  A research perspective 
whose major explanatory focus is how the brain, 
nervous system, and other physiological mecha-
nisms produce behavior and mental processes.
biomedical therapy  The use of biological 
interventions, such as drugs, to treat mental disorders.
biopsychosocial approach  Explaining abnormality 
as the result of the interaction among biological, 
psychological (behavioral and cognitive), and 
sociocultural factors.
bipolar disorder  A disorder in which recurrent 
cycles of depressive and manic episodes occur.
blindsight  A condition in which a blind person 
has some spared visual capacities in the absence of 
any visual awareness.
blood–brain barrier  A protective mechanism by 
which the blood capillaries supplying the brain 
create a barrier that prevents dangerous substances 
access to the brain.
bottom-up processing  The processing of incoming 
sensory information as it travels up from the sen-
sory structures to the brain.
Broca’s area  An area in the cerebral cortex respon-
sible for fluent speech production. It is in the left 
frontal lobe of the majority of people, regardless of 
handedness.
bystander effect  The probability of a person’s help-
ing in an emergency is greater when there are no other 
bystanders than when there are other bystanders.

Glossary  |  G-3
Cannon-Bard theory  A theory of emotion 
proposing that an emotion is determined from 
simultaneously occurring physiological arousal, 
behavioral responses, and cognitive appraisal.
case study  A descriptive research method in which 
the researcher studies an individual in depth over 
an extended period of time.
cell body  The part of the neuron that contains its 
nucleus and the other biological machinery to keep 
the cell alive and that decides whether or not to 
generate a neural impulse in order to pass incoming 
information on to other neurons.
central nervous system (CNS)  The brain and 
spinal cord.
centration  The tendency to focus on only one 
aspect of a problem at a time.
cerebellum  A part of the brain involved in the 
coordination of our movements, sense of balance, 
and motor learning.
cerebral cortex  The layers of interconnected cells 
covering the brain’s two hemispheres. This is the 
control and information-processing center for the 
nervous system and where perception, memory, 
language, decision making, and all other higher-
level cognitive processing occur.
chromosomes  Molecules of DNA that hold the 
genetic instructions for every cell in the body.
chunk  A meaningful unit in a person’s memory.
classical conditioning  Acquiring a new response 
(the conditioned response) to a previously neutral 
stimulus (the conditioned stimulus) that reliably 
signals the arrival of an unconditioned stimulus.
client-centered therapy  A style of psychotherapy, 
developed by Carl Rogers, in which the therapist 
uses unconditional positive regard, genuineness, 
and empathy to help the person to gain insight into 
his or her true self-concept.
closure  The Gestalt perceptual organizational 
principle that the brain completes (closes) incom-
plete figures to form meaningful objects.
cognitive dissonance theory  A theory, developed 
by Leon Festinger, that assumes people have a 
tendency to change their attitudes to reduce the 
cognitive discomfort created by inconsistencies 
between their attitudes and their behavior.
cognitive perspective  A research perspective whose 
major explanatory focus is how mental processes, 
such as perception, memory, and problem solving, 
work and impact behavior.
cognitive therapy  A style of psychotherapy in 
which the therapist attempts to change the person’s 
thinking from maladaptive to adaptive.
cohort effects  People of a given age (cohorts) 
are affected by factors unique to their generation, 
leading to differences in performance between 
generations.
complementary colors  Wavelengths of light that 
when added together produce white.
compliance  Acting in accordance with a direct 
request from another person or group.
compulsion  A repetitive and rigid behavior that 
a person feels compelled to perform in order to 
reduce anxiety.
concrete operational stage  The third stage in 
Piaget’s theory of cognitive development, from 
age 6 to 12, during which children gain a fuller 
understanding of conservation and other mental 
operations that allow them to think logically, but 
only about concrete events.
conditioned response (CR)  The response that 
is elicited by the conditioned stimulus in classical 
conditioning.
conditioned stimulus (CS)  The stimulus that 
comes to elicit a new response (the conditioned 
response) in classical conditioning.
conditions of worth  The behaviors and attitudes 
for which other people, starting with our parents, 
will give us positive regard.
conduction deafness  Hearing loss created by dam-
age to one of the structures in the ear responsible 
for mechanically conducting the auditory informa-
tion to the inner ear.
cones  Receptor cells in the retina that are princi-
pally responsible for bright light and color vision.
confirmation bias  The tendency to seek evidence 
that confirms one’s beliefs.
conformity   A change in behavior, belief, or both 
to conform to a group norm as a result of real or 
imagined group pressure.

G-4  |  Glossary
conjunction fallacy  Incorrectly judging the 
overlap of two uncertain events to be more probable 
than either of the two events.
conscious mind  Freud’s term for what we are 
presently aware of.
consciousness  An individual’s subjective  
awareness of their inner thinking and feeling and 
their external environment.
conservation   The knowledge that the quantitative 
properties of objects (such as mass and number) 
remain the same despite changes in appearance.
contextual effect  The use of the present context of 
sensory information to determine its meaning.
continuous schedule of reinforcement  In operant 
conditioning, reinforcing the desired operant 
response each time it is made.
control group  In an experiment, the group not 
exposed to the independent variable.
conventional level of moral reasoning  The second 
level of reasoning in Kohlberg’s theory of moral 
development in which moral reasoning is based on 
social rules and laws.
corpus callosum  The bridge of neurons that 
connects the two cerebral hemispheres.
correlation coefficient  A statistic that tells us 
the type and the strength of the relationship 
between two variables. The sign of the coefficient 
(+ or –) indicates the type of correlation—positive 
or negative, respectively. The absolute value of the 
coefficient (0.0 to 1.0) represents the strength of the 
correlation, with 1.0 being the maximum strength.
correlational study  A research study in which 
two variables are measured to determine if they are 
related (how well either one predicts the other).
counterconditioning  A type of behavioral therapy 
in which a maladaptive response is replaced by an 
incompatible adaptive response.
cross-sectional study  A study in which the perfor-
mances of groups of participants of different ages 
are compared to one another.
cue-dependent theory  A theory of forgetting that 
proposes that forgetting is due to the unavailability 
of the retrieval cues necessary to locate the informa-
tion in long-term memory.
cumulative record  A record of the total number 
of operant responses over time that visually depicts 
the rate of responding.
dark adaptation  The process by which the rods 
and cones through internal chemical changes 
become more and more sensitive to light in dim 
light conditions.
defense mechanism  A process used by the ego to 
distort reality and protect a person from anxiety.
deindividuation  The loss of self-awareness and 
self-restraint in a group situation that fosters 
arousal and anonymity.
delayed conditioning  A classical conditioning pro-
cedure in which the conditioned stimulus precedes 
the unconditioned stimulus and remains present 
until after the unconditioned stimulus is presented 
so that the two stimuli occur together.
delusion  A false belief.
dendrites  Fibers projecting out of the cell body of 
a neuron whose function is to receive information 
from other neurons.
dependent variable  In an experiment, a variable 
that is hypothesized to be affected by the indepen-
dent variable and thus is measured by the experi-
menter.
depressive disorders  Disorders that involve the 
presence of sad, empty, or irritable mood, accom-
panied by somatic and cognitive changes that 
significantly affect the individual’s capacity to 
function.
depth perception  Our ability to perceive the 
distance of objects from us.
descriptive methods  Research methods whose 
main purpose is to provide objective and detailed 
descriptions of behavior and mental processes.
descriptive statistics  Statistics that describe the 
results of a research study in a concise fashion.
developmental psychology  The scientific study of 
biological, cognitive, social, and personality devel-
opment across the life span.
deviation IQ score  100 plus or minus 
(15 3 the number of standard deviations the  
person is from the raw score mean for their  
standardization group).

Glossary  |  G-5
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5)  The current 
version of the American Psychiatric Association’s 
diagnostic and classification guidelines for mental 
disorders.
difference threshold  The minimum difference 
between two sensory stimuli detected 50 percent of 
the time. The difference threshold is also sometimes 
referred to as the just noticeable difference, or jnd.
diffusion of responsibility  The lessening of  
individual responsibility for a task when 
responsibility for the task is spread across the 
members of a group.
discriminative stimulus  In operant conditioning, 
the stimulus that has to be present for the operant 
response to be reinforced.
distractor task  A memory task in which a small 
amount of information is briefly presented and 
then the participant is distracted from rehearsing 
the information for a variable period of time, after 
which the participant has to recall the information.
door-in-the-face technique  Compliance is gained 
by starting with a large, unreasonable request that 
is turned down and following it with a more rea-
sonable, smaller request.
dopamine  A neurotransmitter involved in arousal 
and mood states, thought processes, and physical 
movement.
double-blind procedure  A control measure in an 
experiment in which neither the experimenters nor 
the participants know which participants are in the 
experimental and control groups.
drive-reduction theory  A theory of motivation 
that proposes that our behavior is motivated to 
reduce drives (bodily tension states) created by 
unsatisfied bodily needs in order to return the body 
to a balanced internal state.
effortful processing  Memory processing that 
occurs consciously and requires attention.
ego  The part of the personality that starts devel-
oping in the first year or so of life in order to find 
realistic outlets for the id’s instinctual drives.
egocentrism  The inability to distinguish one’s own 
perceptions, thoughts, and feelings from those of 
others.
elaborative rehearsal  A type of rehearsal in short-
term memory in which incoming information is 
related to information from long-term memory to 
encode it into long-term memory.
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)  A biomedical 
treatment for severe depression that involves electri-
cally inducing a brief brain seizure.
emotion  A complex psychological state that 
involves a state of physiological arousal, an outward 
behavioral expression of the emotion, and a 
cognitive appraisal of the situation to determine the 
specific emotion and its intensity.
encoding  The process of moving information from 
one memory stage to the next (from sensory mem-
ory into short-term memory or from short-term 
memory to long-term memory).
encoding failure theory  A theory of forgetting 
that proposes that forgetting is due to the failure 
to encode the information into long-term  
memory.
encoding specificity principle  The principle that 
the environmental cues (both internal and external) 
present at the time information is encoded into 
long-term memory serve as the best retrieval cues 
for the information.
endocrine glandular system  The body’s other 
major communication system. Communication is 
achieved through hormones that are secreted by 
the endocrine glands and travel through the blood-
stream to their target sites.
endorphins  A group of neurotransmitters that are 
involved in pain relief and feelings of pleasure.
episodic memory  Explicit memory for personal 
experiences.
erogenous zone  The area of the body where 
the id’s pleasure-seeking energies are focused 
during a particular stage of psychosexual 
development.
experiment  A research method in which the 
researcher manipulates one or more independent 
variables and measures their effect on one or more 
dependent variables while controlling other poten-
tially relevant variables.
experimental group  In an experiment, the group 
exposed to the independent variable.

G-6  |  Glossary
explicit (declarative) memory  Long-term memory 
for factual knowledge and personal experiences. 
This type of memory requires a conscious effort to 
remember and entails making declarations about 
the information remembered.
external locus of control  The perception that 
chance or external forces beyond one’s personal 
control determine one’s fate.
extinction  (1) In classical conditioning, the 
diminishing of the conditioned response when the 
unconditioned stimulus no longer follows the con-
ditioned stimulus. (2) In operant conditioning, the 
diminishing of the operant response when it is no 
longer reinforced.
extrinsic motivation  The desire to perform a 
behavior for external reinforcement.
factor analysis  A statistical technique that identi-
fies clusters of test items that measure the same 
ability (factor).
false consensus effect  The tendency to overes-
timate the commonality of one’s opinions and 
unsuccessful behaviors.
false memory  An inaccurate memory that feels as 
real as an accurate memory.
false uniqueness effect  The tendency to underes-
timate the commonality of one’s abilities and suc-
cessful behaviors.
farsightedness  A visual problem in which the light 
waves from nearby objects come into focus behind 
the retina, blurring the images of these objects.
fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS)  A syndrome 
affecting infants whose mothers consumed large 
amounts of alcohol during pregnancy, resulting in a 
range of severe effects including mental retardation 
and facial abnormalities.
figure-and-ground principle  The Gestalt perceptual 
organizational principle that the brain organizes  
sensory information into a figure or figures (the 
center of attention) and ground (the less distinct 
background).
fixation  (1) In problem solving, the inability to 
create a new interpretation of a problem. (2) In 
Freudian theory, some of the id’s pleasure-seeking 
energies remaining stuck in a psychosexual stage 
due to excessive gratification or frustration of 
instinctual needs.
fixed-interval schedule  A partial schedule of rein-
forcement in which a reinforcer is delivered after 
the first response is given once a set interval of time 
has elapsed.
fixed-ratio schedule  A partial schedule of 
reinforcement in which a reinforcer is delivered 
each time a fixed number of responses is made. The 
fixed number can be any number greater than one. 
flooding  A counterconditioning exposure therapy 
in which the patient is immediately exposed to a 
feared object or situation.
Flynn effect  The finding that the average intel-
ligence test score in the United States and other 
industrialized nations has improved steadily over 
the last century.
foot-in-the-door technique  Compliance to a large 
request is gained by preceding it with a very small 
request.
formal operational stage  The last stage in Piaget’s 
theory of cognitive development, starting at age 12 
or so, during which a child gains the capacity for 
hypothetical-deductive thought.
fovea  A tiny pit in the center of the retina filled 
with cones.
fraternal (dizygotic) twins  Twins that originate 
from the fertilization of two eggs at approximately 
the same time (two zygotes).
free association  A person spontaneously describes, 
without editing, all thoughts, feelings, or images 
that come to mind.
free recall task  A memory task in which a list of 
items is presented one at a time and then the par-
ticipant is free to recall them in any order.
frequency  The number of times a wave cycles in 
one second.
frequency distribution  A depiction, in a table or 
figure, of the number of participants (frequency) 
receiving each score for a variable.
frequency theory  A theory of pitch perception that 
assumes that the frequency of the sound wave is mim-
icked by the firing rate of the entire basilar membrane.

Glossary  |  G-7
frontal lobe  The area in each cerebral hemisphere 
in front of the central fissure and above the lateral 
fissure. The motor cortex is in this lobe.
functional fixedness  The inability to see that an 
object can have a function other than its typical one 
in solving a problem.
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)  
A computerized image of the activity levels of 
various areas in the brain generated by detecting  
the amount of oxygen brought to each area.
fundamental attribution error  The tendency as 
an observer to overestimate dispositional influences 
and underestimate situational influences on others’ 
behavior.
GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)  The main 
inhibitory neurotransmitter in the nervous system. 
It is involved in lowering arousal and anxiety and 
regulating movement.
gambler’s fallacy  Incorrectly believing that a chance 
process is self-correcting in that an event that has 
not occurred for a while is more likely to occur.
gene  The basic unit of genetic instruction.
generalized anxiety disorder  An anxiety disorder 
in which a person has excessive, global anxiety and 
worries that he cannot control, occurring more days 
than not for at least a period of 6 months.
genital stage of psychosexual development  The 
fifth stage in Freud’s theory (from puberty through 
adulthood), in which the erogenous zone is at the  
genitals, and the child develops sexual relationships, 
moving toward intimate adult relationships.
glial cells (glia)  Cells in the nervous system that 
comprise the support system for the neurons.
glutamate  The main excitatory neurotransmitter 
in the nervous system. It is involved in memory stor-
age, pain perception, strokes, and schizophrenia.
group polarization  The strengthening of a group’s 
prevailing opinion about a topic following group 
discussion about the topic.
groupthink  A mode of group thinking that 
impairs decision making, because the desire for 
group harmony overrides a realistic appraisal of the 
possible decision alternatives.
habituation  A decrease in the physiological 
responding to a stimulus once it becomes familiar.
hair cells  The receptor cells for hearing. They line 
the basilar membrane inside the cochlea.
hallucination  A false sensory perception.
heritability  An index of the degree that variation 
of a trait within a given population is due to  
heredity.
heuristic  A problem-solving strategy that seems 
reasonable given one’s past experience with solving 
problems, especially similar problems, but does not 
guarantee a correct answer to a problem.
hierarchy of needs  The motivational component 
in Maslow’s theory of personality, in which our 
innate needs that motivate our behavior are hierar-
chically arranged in a pyramid shape. From bottom 
to top, the needs are physiological, safety, belonging 
and love, esteem, and self-actualization.
hindsight bias (I-knew-it-all-along phenomenon)  
The tendency, after learning about an outcome, 
to be overconfident in one’s ability to have 
predicted it.
hippocampus  A part of the brain involved in the 
formation of memories.
holophrase  A word used by an infant to express a 
complete idea.
hormone  A chemical messenger that is produced 
by an endocrine gland and carried by the blood-
stream to target tissues throughout the body.
hypothalamus  A part of the brain that is involved 
in regulating basic drives such as eating, drinking, 
and having sex. It also directs the endocrine glandu-
lar system through its control of the pituitary gland 
and the autonomic nervous system to maintain the 
body’s internal environment.
iconic memory  The visual sensory register that 
holds an exact copy of the incoming visual input  
but only for a brief period of time, less than  
1 second. 
id  The part of the personality that a person is 
born with, where the biological instinctual drives 
reside, and that is located totally in the uncon-
scious mind.

G-8  |  Glossary
identical (monozygotic) twins  Twins that origi-
nate from the same zygote.
identification  The process by which children 
adopt the characteristics of the same-sex parent and 
learn their gender role and sense of morality.
ill-defined problem  A problem lacking clear speci-
fication of either the start state, goal state, or the 
processes for reaching the goal state.
illusory correlation  The erroneous belief that two 
variables are statistically related when they actually 
are not.
implicit (nondeclarative) memory  Long-term 
memory for procedural tasks, classical condition-
ing, and primary effects. This type of memory 
does not require conscious awareness or the need 
to make declarations about the information 
remembered.
incentive theory  A theory of motivation that pro-
poses that our behavior is motivated by incentives, 
external stimuli that we have learned to associate 
with reinforcement.
independent variable  In an experiment, the vari-
able that is a hypothesized cause and thus is manip-
ulated by the experimenter.
infantile/child amnesia  Our inability as adults to 
remember events that occurred in our lives before 
about 3 years of age.
inferential statistical analyses  Statistical analyses 
that allow researchers to draw conclusions about 
the results of a study by determining the prob-
ability that the results are due to random variation 
(chance). The results are statistically significant if 
this probability is .05 or less.
informational social influence  Influence stem-
ming from the need for information in situations in 
which the correct action or judgment is uncertain.
information-processing approach to cognitive 
development  An approach to studying cognitive 
development that assumes cognitive development is 
continuous and improves as children become more 
adept at processing information (taking in, storing, 
and using information).
insecure-ambivalent attachment  The type of 
attachment indicated by the infant not explor-
ing but seeking closeness to the mother in the 
Ainsworth strange situation procedure, showing 
high levels of distress when the mother leaves, 
and ambivalent behavior when she returns—by 
alternately clinging to and pushing away from her.
insecure-avoidant attachment  The type of attach-
ment indicated by the infant exploring with little 
interest in the mother in the Ainsworth strange situa-
tion procedure, showing only minimal distress when 
the mother leaves, and avoiding her when she returns.
insecure-disorganized (disoriented) attachment  
The type of attachment indicated by the infant’s 
confusion when the mother leaves and returns in 
the Ainsworth strange situation procedure. The 
infant acts disoriented, seems overwhelmed by the 
situation, and does not demonstrate a consistent 
way of coping with it.
insight  A new way to interpret a problem that 
immediately yields the solution.
instinctual drift  The tendency for an animal to 
drift back from a learned operant response to an 
innate, instinctual response to an object.
intelligence quotient (IQ)  (mental age/
chronological age) 3 100.
interference theory  A theory of forgetting that 
proposes that forgetting is due to other informa-
tion in memory interfering and thereby making the 
to-be-remembered information inaccessible.
internal locus of control  The perception that we 
control our own individual fate.
interneurons  Neurons that integrate information 
within the central nervous system through their 
communication with each other and between sen-
sory and motor neurons in the spinal cord.
interposition  A monocular depth cue referring to 
the fact that if one object partially blocks our view 
of another, we perceive it as closer to us.
intrinsic motivation  The desire to perform a 
behavior for its own sake.
James-Lange theory  A theory of emotion propos-
ing that an emotion is determined from a cognitive 
appraisal of the physiological arousal and behav-
ioral responses, which occur first.
just-world hypothesis  The assumption that the 
world is just and that people get what they deserve.

Glossary  |  G-9
L-dopa  A drug for Parkinson’s disease that con-
tains the precursors to dopamine so that once it is 
in the brain, it will be converted to dopamine.
latency stage of psychosexual development  The 
fourth stage in Freud’s theory (from 6 years old 
to puberty), in which there is no erogenous zone, 
sexual feelings are repressed, and the focus is on 
cognitive and social development.
latent content  Freud’s term for the underlying 
true meaning of a dream.
latent learning  Learning that occurs but is not 
demonstrated until there is incentive to do so.
law of effect  A principle developed by Edward 
Thorndike that says that any behavior that results 
in satisfying consequences tends to be repeated and 
that any behavior that results in unsatisfying conse-
quences tends not to be repeated.
learned helplessness  A sense of hopelessness in 
which a person thinks that he is unable to prevent 
aversive events.
left-skewed distribution  An asymmetric frequency 
distribution in which there are some unusually low 
scores that distort the mean to be less than the median.
levels-of-processing theory  A theory of infor-
mation processing in memory that assumes that 
semantic processing, especially elaborative semantic 
processing, leads to better long-term memory.
limbic system  A group of brain structures (hypo-
thalamus, hippocampus, and amygdala) that play an 
important role in our survival, memory, and emotions.
linear perspective  A monocular depth cue refer-
ring to the fact that as parallel lines recede away 
from us, they appear to converge—the greater 
the distance, the more they seem to converge. 
Sometimes referred to as perspective convergence.
lithium  A naturally occurring element (a mineral 
salt) that is used to treat bipolar disorder.
lobotomy  A type of psychosurgery in which the 
neuronal connections of the frontal lobes to lower 
brain areas are severed.
long-term memory (LTM)  The memory stage in 
which information is stored for a long period of 
time (perhaps permanently) and whose capacity is 
essentially unlimited.
longitudinal study  A study in which performance 
of the same group of participants is examined at 
different ages.
low-ball technique  Compliance to a costly request 
is gained by first getting compliance to an attrac-
tive, less costly request but then reneging on it.
maintenance rehearsal  A type of rehearsal in short-
term memory in which the information is repeated 
over and over again in order to maintain it.
major depressive disorder  A depressive disorder 
in which the person has experienced one or more 
major depressive episodes.
major depressive episode  An episode charac-
terized by symptoms such as feelings of intense 
hopelessness, low self-esteem and worthlessness, 
extreme fatigue, dramatic changes in eating and 
sleeping behavior, inability to concentrate, and 
greatly diminished interest in family, friends, and 
activities for a period of 2 weeks or more.
manic episode  An episode characterized by abnor-
mally elevated mood in which the person experi-
ences symptoms such as inflated self-esteem with 
grandiose delusions, a decreased need for sleep, con-
stant talking, distractibility, restlessness, and poor 
judgment for a period of at least a week.
manifest content  Freud’s term for the literal sur-
face meaning of a dream.
mean  The numerical average of a distribution of 
scores.
means–end analysis heuristic  A problem-solving 
heuristic in which the distance to the goal state is 
decreased systematically by breaking the problem 
down into subgoals and achieving these subgoals.
median  The score positioned in the middle of a 
distribution of scores when all of the scores are 
arranged from lowest to highest.
medulla  A brain stem structure involved in many 
essential body functions, such as heartbeat, breath-
ing, blood pressure, digestion, and swallowing.
memory span  The average number of items an 
individual can remember across a series of memory 
span trials.
memory span task  A memory task in which the 
participant is given a series of items one at a time 

G-10  |  Glossary
and then has to recall the items in the order in 
which they were presented.
mental set  The tendency to use previously successful 
problem-solving strategies without considering others 
that are more appropriate for the current problem.
meta-analysis  A statistical technique that com-
bines the results of a large number of studies on 
one experimental question into one analysis to 
arrive at an overall conclusion.
method of loci  A mnemonic in which sequential 
pieces of information to be remembered are encoded 
by associating them with sequential locations in a very 
familiar room or place and then the pieces of informa-
tion are retrieved by mentally going around the room 
(place) and retrieving the piece at each location.
mirror neurons  Neurons that fire both when 
performing an action and when observing another 
person perform that same action.
misinformation effect  The distortion of a memory 
by exposure to misleading information.
mnemonic  A memory aid.
mode  The most frequently occurring score in a 
distribution of scores.
mood-congruence effect  Tendency to retrieve 
experiences and information that are congruent 
with a person’s current mood.
mood-dependent memory  Long-term memory 
retrieval is best when a person’s mood state at the 
time of encoding and retrieval of the information is 
the same.
motivation  The set of internal and external factors 
that energize our behavior and direct it toward goals.
motor cortex  The strip of cortex in each cerebral 
hemisphere in the frontal lobe directly in front of 
the central fissure, which allows us to move differ-
ent parts of our body.
motor neurons  Neurons in the peripheral nervous 
system that carry movement commands from the 
central nervous system out to the rest of the body.
myelin sheath  An insulating layer covering an 
axon that allows for faster neural impulses.
naturalistic observation  A descriptive research 
method in which the behavior of interest is 
observed in its natural setting, and the researcher 
does not intervene in the behavior being observed.
nearsightedness  A visual problem in which the light 
waves from distant objects come into focus in front of 
the retina, blurring the images of these objects.
negative correlation  An inverse relationship 
between two variables.
negative punishment  Punishment in which an 
appetitive stimulus is removed.
negative reinforcement  Reinforcement in which 
an aversive stimulus is removed.
nerve deafness  Hearing loss created by damage to the 
hair cells or the auditory nerve fibers in the inner ear.
neurogenesis theory of depression  An explana-
tion of depression that proposes that neurogenesis, 
the growth of new neurons, in the hippocampus 
stops during depression, and when it resumes, the 
depression lifts.
neurons  Cells that transmit information within 
the nervous system.
neurotransmitter  A naturally occurring chemical 
in the nervous system that specializes in transmit-
ting information between neurons.
nocebo effect  A negative placebo effect due to the 
expectation of adverse consequences from receiving 
treatment.
normal distribution  A frequency distribution that 
is shaped like a bell. About 68 percent of the scores 
fall within 1 standard deviation of the mean, about 
95 percent within 2 standard deviations of the 
mean, and over 99 percent within 3 standard devia-
tions of the mean.
normative social influence  Influence stemming 
from our desire to gain the approval and to avoid 
the disapproval of others.
obedience  Following the commands of a person in 
authority.
object permanence  The knowledge that an object 
exists independent of perceptual contact with it.
observational learning (modeling)  Learning by 
observing others and imitating their behavior.
obsession  A persistent intrusive thought, idea, 
impulse, or image that causes anxiety.

Glossary  |  G-11
obsessive-compulsive disorder  A disorder in 
which the person experiences recurrent obsessions 
or compulsions that are perceived by the person as 
excessive or unreasonable, but cause significant dis-
tress and disruption in the person’s daily life.
occipital lobe  The area located in the lower back 
of each cerebral hemisphere. The primary visual 
cortex is in this lobe.
Oedipus conflict  A phallic stage conflict for a boy 
in which the boy becomes sexually attracted to his 
mother and fears his father will find out and cas-
trate him.
operant conditioning  Learning to associate 
behaviors with their consequences. Behaviors that 
are reinforced (lead to satisfying consequences) 
will be strengthened, and behaviors that are pun-
ished (lead to unsatisfying consequences) will be 
weakened.
operational definition  A description of the opera-
tions or procedures that a researcher uses to manip-
ulate or measure a variable.
opponent-process theory  A theory of color vision 
that assumes that there are three opponent-process 
cell systems (red-green, blue-yellow, and black-
white) that process color information after it has 
been processed by the cones. The colors in each 
system oppose one another in that if one color is 
stimulated, the other is inhibited.
oral stage of psychosexual development  The first 
stage in Freud’s theory (from birth to 18 months), 
in which the erogenous zones are the mouth, 
lips, and tongue, and the child derives pleasure 
from oral activities such as sucking, biting, and 
chewing.
overextension  The application of a newly learned 
word to objects that are not included in the mean-
ing of the word.
overjustification effect  A decrease in an intrin-
sically motivated behavior after the behavior is 
extrinsically reinforced and then the reinforcement 
is discontinued.
panic disorder  An anxiety disorder in which a per-
son experiences recurrent panic attacks.
parasympathetic nervous system  The part of the 
autonomic nervous system that returns the body 
to its normal resting state after having been highly 
aroused, as in an emergency.
parietal lobe  The area in each cerebral hemisphere 
in back of the central fissure and above the lateral 
fissure. The somatosensory cortex is in this lobe.
Parkinson’s disease  A disease in which the person 
has movement problems such as muscle tremors, 
difficulty initiating movements, and rigidity of 
movement. These movement problems stem from a 
scarcity of dopamine in the basal ganglia.
partial-reinforcement effect  The finding that 
operant responses that are reinforced on partial 
schedules are more resistant to extinction than 
those reinforced on a continuous schedule.
partial schedule of reinforcement  In operant 
conditioning, reinforcing the desired operant 
response only part of the time.
participant observation  A descriptive research 
method in which the observer becomes part of the 
group being observed.
peg-word system  A mnemonic in which the items 
in a list to be remembered are associated with the 
sequential items in a memorized jingle and then 
the list is retrieved by going through the jingle and 
retrieving the associated items.
percentile rank  The percentage of scores below a 
specific score in a distribution of scores.
perception  The interpretation by the brain of 
sensory information.
perceptual constancy  The perceptual stability of 
the size, shape, brightness, and color for familiar 
objects seen at varying distances, different angles, 
and under different lighting conditions.
perceptual set  The interpretation of ambiguous 
sensory information in terms of how our past expe-
riences have set us to perceive it.
peripheral nervous system (PNS)  The part of 
the nervous system that links the central nervous 
system with the body’s sensory receptors, muscles, 
and glands.
permissive parenting  A style of parenting in 
which the parents make few demands and are overly 
responsive to their children’s desires, letting their 
children do pretty much as they please.

G-12  |  Glossary
person-who reasoning  Questioning a well-
established research finding because one knows a 
person who violates the finding.
personality  A person’s internally based characteris-
tic ways of acting and thinking.
personality disorder  A disorder characterized by 
inflexible, long-standing personality traits that lead 
to behavior that impairs social functioning and 
deviates from cultural norms.
personality inventory  An objective personality 
test that uses a series of questions or statements 
for which the test taker must indicate whether they 
apply to her or not.
phallic stage of psychosexual development  The 
third stage in Freud’s theory (from 3 to 6 years), in 
which the erogenous zone is located at the geni-
tals, and the child derives pleasure from genital 
stimulation.
phonemes  The smallest distinctive speech sounds 
in a language.
pituitary gland  The most influential gland in the 
endocrine glandular system. It releases hormones 
for human growth and hormones that direct other 
endocrine glands to release their hormones.
place theory  A theory of pitch perception which 
assumes that there is a specific location along the 
basilar membrane that will maximally respond to 
a particular frequency, thereby indicating the pitch 
to the brain. As this location goes down the basilar 
membrane from the oval window, the pitch goes 
down from 20,000 Hz to 20 Hz.
placebo  An inactive pill or a treatment that has no 
known effects.
placebo effect  Improvement due to the expectation 
of improving because of receiving treatment.
placebo group  A control group of participants 
who believe they are receiving treatment, but who 
are only receiving a placebo.
pleasure principle  The principle of seeking imme-
diate gratification for instinctual drives without 
concern for the consequences.
pons  A brain stem structure that serves as a bridge 
between the cerebellum and the rest of the brain 
and is involved in sleep and dreaming.
population  The entire group of people that a 
researcher is studying.
positive correlation  A direct relationship between 
two variables.
positive punishment  Punishment in which an 
aversive stimulus is presented. 
positive reinforcement  Reinforcement in which 
an appetitive stimulus is presented.
positron emission tomography (PET) scans  A 
visual display of the activity levels in various areas 
in the brain generated by detecting the amount of 
positron emission created by the metabolization of 
radioactive glucose in each area.
postconventional level of moral reasoning  The 
last level of reasoning in Kohlberg’s theory of moral 
development in which moral reasoning is based on 
self-chosen universal ethical principles (with human 
rights taking precedence over laws) and the avoidance 
of self-condemnation for violating such principles.
preconscious mind  Freud’s term for what is stored 
in one’s memory that one is not presently aware of 
but can access.
preconventional level of moral reasoning  The 
first level of reasoning in Kohlberg’s theory of 
moral development in which moral reasoning is 
based on avoiding punishment and looking out for 
your own welfare and needs.
Premack principle  The principle that the oppor-
tunity to perform a highly frequent behavior can 
reinforce a less frequent behavior.
preoperational stage  The second stage in Piaget’s 
theory of cognitive development, from age 2 to 
6, during which the child’s thinking becomes 
more symbolic and language-based, but remains 
egocentric and lacks the mental operations that 
allow logical thinking.
primacy effect  (1) In memory, the superior recall 
of the early portion of a list relative to the middle 
of the list in a one-trial free recall task. (2) In 
impression formation, information gathered early 
is weighted more heavily than information gathered 
later in forming an impression of another person.
primary reinforcer  A stimulus that is innately 
reinforcing. 

Glossary  |  G-13
priming  The implicit influence of an earlier pre-
sented stimulus on the response to a later stimulus. 
This influence is independent of conscious memory 
for the earlier stimulus.
proactive interference  The disruptive effect of 
prior learning on the retrieval of new information.
procedural memory  Implicit memory for cognitive 
and motor tasks that have a physical procedural 
aspect to them.
projective test  A personality test that uses a series 
of ambiguous stimuli to which the test taker must 
respond about her perceptions of the stimuli.
psychoanalysis  A style of psychotherapy, originally 
developed by Sigmund Freud, in which the thera-
pist helps the person gain insight into the uncon-
scious sources of his or her problems.
psychology  The science of behavior and mental 
processes.
psychosurgery  A biomedical treatment in which 
specific areas of the brain are destroyed.
psychotherapy  The use of psychological interven-
tions to treat mental disorders.
psychotic disorder  A disorder characterized by a 
loss of contact with reality.
punisher  A stimulus that decreases the probability 
of a prior response.
punishment  The process by which the probability of a 
response is decreased by the presentation of a punisher. 
random assignment  A control measure in which 
participants are randomly assigned to groups in 
order to equalize participant characteristics across 
the various groups in an experiment.
random sampling  A sampling technique that 
obtains a representative sample of a population by 
ensuring that each individual in a population has 
an equal opportunity to be in the sample.
range  The difference between the highest and low-
est scores in a distribution of scores.
rational-emotive therapy  A type of cognitive 
therapy, developed by Albert Ellis, in which the 
therapist directly confronts and challenges the per-
son’s unrealistic thoughts and beliefs to show that 
they are irrational.
reaction range  The genetically determined limits 
for an individual’s intelligence.
reality principle  The principle of finding gratifica-
tion for instinctual drives within the constraints of 
reality (norms of society).
recall  A measure of long-term memory retrieval 
that requires the reproduction of the information 
with essentially no retrieval cues.
recency effect  The superior recall of the latter por-
tion of a list relative to the middle of the list in a 
one-trial free recall task.
recognition  A measure of long-term memory 
retrieval that only requires the identification of the 
information in the presence of retrieval cues.
reflex  A stimulus-response pair in which the stim-
ulus (the unconditioned stimulus) automatically 
elicits the response (the unconditioned response).
reinforcement  The process by which the 
probability of a response is increased by the 
presentation of a reinforcer. 
reinforcer  A stimulus that increases the probabil-
ity of a prior response.
relearning  The savings method of measuring long-
term memory retrieval in which the measure is the 
amount of time saved when learning information 
for the second time.
reliability  The extent to which the scores for a test 
are consistent.
REM (rapid eye movement) sleep  The stage of 
sleep that is characterized by rapid eye movements 
and brain wave patterns that resemble those for an 
awake state and in which most dreaming occurs. 
REM sleep is sometimes referred to as paradoxical 
sleep because the bodily muscles are immobilized 
but much of the brain is highly active.
representativeness heuristic  A heuristic for judg-
ing the probability of membership in a category by 
how well an object resembles (is representative of) 
that category (the more representative, the more 
probable).
resistance  A person’s unwillingness to discuss a 
particular topic during therapy.
reticular formation  A network of neurons  
running up the center of the brain stem that is 

G-14  |  Glossary
responsible for our different levels of arousal and 
consciousness.
retina  The light-sensitive layer of the eye that is 
composed of three layers of cells—ganglion, bipolar, 
and receptor (rods and cones).
retinal disparity  A binocular depth cue referring 
to the fact that as the disparity (difference) between 
the two retinal images of an object increases, the 
distance of the object from us decreases.
retrieval  The process of bringing information stored 
in long-term memory into short-term memory. 
retroactive interference  The disruptive effect of 
new learning on the retrieval of old information.
retrograde amnesia  The disruption of memory for 
the past, especially episodic information for events 
before, especially just before, surgery or trauma to 
the brain.
reversibility  The knowledge that reversing a trans-
formation brings about the conditions that existed 
before the transformation.
right-skewed distribution  An asymmetric 
frequency distribution in which there are some 
unusually high scores that distort the mean to be 
greater than the median.
rods  Receptor cells in the retina that are principally 
responsible for dim light and achromatic vision.
rooting reflex  An innate human reflex that leads 
infants to turn their mouth toward anything that 
touches their cheeks and search for something to 
suck on.
sample  The subset of a population that actually 
participates in a research study.
scaffolding  According to Vygotsky, a style of teach-
ing in which the teacher adjusts the level of help 
in relation to the child’s level of performance while 
orienting the child’s learning toward the upper level 
of his or her zone of proximal development.
scatterplot  A visual depiction of correlational data 
in which each data point represents the scores on 
the two variables for each participant.
Schachter-Singer two-factor theory  A theory of 
emotion proposing that an emotion is determined 
by cognitive appraisal of the physiological arousal 
and the entire environmental situation.
schemas  Frameworks for our knowledge about 
people, objects, events, and actions that allow us 
to organize and interpret information about our 
world.
schizophrenia  A psychotic disorder in which at 
least two of the following symptoms are present 
most of the time during a 1-month period—
hallucinations, delusions, disorganized speech, 
disorganized or catatonic behavior, or negative 
symptoms such as loss of emotion.
secondary reinforcer  A stimulus that gains its 
reinforcing property through learning. 
secure attachment  The type of attachment indicat-
ed by the infant exploring freely in the presence of 
the mother in the Ainsworth strange situation pro-
cedure, displaying distress when the mother leaves, 
and responding enthusiastically when she returns.
selective serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitors (SSNRIs)  Antidepressant drugs that 
achieve their agonistic effect on serotonin and nor-
epinephrine by selectively blocking their reuptake.
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)  
Antidepressant drugs that achieve their agonis-
tic effect on serotonin by selectively blocking its 
reuptake.
self-actualization  The fullest realization of a 
person’s potential.
self-efficacy  A judgment of one’s effectiveness in 
dealing with particular situations.
self-fulfilling prophecy  Our behavior leads a per-
son to act in accordance with our expectations for 
that person.
self-perception theory  A theory, developed by 
Daryl Bem, that assumes that when we are unsure 
of our attitudes, we infer them by examining our 
behavior and the context in which it occurs.
self-reference effect  The superior long-term mem-
ory for information related to oneself at time of 
encoding into long-term memory.
self-serving bias  The tendency to make attribu-
tions so that one can perceive oneself favorably.
self-system  The set of cognitive processes by which 
a person observes, evaluates, and regulates her 
behavior.

Glossary  |  G-15
semantic memory  Explicit memory for factual 
knowledge.
sensation  The initial information gathering and 
recoding by the sensory structures.
sensorimotor stage  The first stage in Piaget’s the-
ory of cognitive development, from birth to about 
age two, during which infants learn about the world 
through their sensory and motor interactions with 
it and develop object permanence.
sensory adaptation  Our sensitivity to unchanging 
and repetitious stimuli disappears over time.
sensory memory (SM)  The set of sensory registers, 
one for each of our senses, that serve as holding 
places for incoming sensory information until it 
can be attended to, interpreted, and encoded into 
short-term memory.
sensory neurons  Neurons in the peripheral 
nervous system that carry information to the 
central nervous system from sensory receptors, 
muscles, and glands.
serotonin and norepinephrine  Neurotransmitters 
involved in levels of arousal and mood, sleep, and 
eating.
shaping  Training a human or animal to make an 
operant response by reinforcing successive approxi-
mations of the desired response.
short-term memory (STM)  The memory stage 
with a small capacity (7 6 2 chunks) and brief dura-
tion (,30 seconds) that we are consciously aware of 
and in which we do our problem solving, reasoning, 
and decision making.
signal detection theory  A theory that assumes 
that the detection of faint sensory stimuli 
depends not only upon a person’s physiological 
sensitivity to a stimulus but also upon his deci-
sion criterion for detection, which is based on 
nonsensory factors.
social anxiety disorder  An anxiety disorder indi-
cated by a marked and persistent fear of one or 
more social performance situations in which embar-
rassment may occur and in which there is exposure 
to unfamiliar people or scrutiny by others.
social facilitation  Facilitation of a dominant 
response on a task due to social arousal, leading to 
improved performance on simple or well-learned 
tasks and worse performance on complex or 
unlearned tasks when other people are present.
social loafing  The tendency to exert less effort 
when working in a group toward a common goal 
than when individually working toward the goal.
social psychology  The scientific study of how we 
influence one another’s behavior and thinking.
sociocultural perspective  A research perspective 
whose major explanatory focus is how other people 
and the cultural context impact behavior and men-
tal processes.
somatic (skeletal) nervous system  The part of the 
peripheral nervous system that carries sensory input 
from receptors to the central nervous system  and 
relays commands from the central nervous system  
to skeletal muscles to control their movement.
somatosensory cortex  The strip of cortex in each 
cerebral hemisphere in the parietal lobe directly in 
back of the central fissure, which allows us to sense 
pressure, temperature, and pain in different parts of 
our body as well as the position of our body parts.
source misattribution  Attributing a memory to 
the wrong source, resulting in a false memory.
spacing (distributed study) effect  Superior long-
term memory for spaced study versus massed study 
(cramming).
specific phobia  An anxiety disorder indicated by 
a marked and persistent fear of specific objects or 
situations that is excessive and unreasonable.
Sperling’s full-report procedure  An experimental 
procedure in which, following the brief presentation 
of a matrix of unrelated consonants, the participant 
has to attempt to recall all of the letters in the matrix.
Sperling’s partial-report procedure An 
experimental procedure in which, following 
the brief presentation of a matrix of unrelated 
consonants, the participant is given an auditory  
cue about which row of the matrix to recall. 
spinal cord  The conduit between the brain and the 
peripheral nervous system for incoming sensory data 
and outgoing movement commands to the muscles.
spinal reflex  A simple automatic action of the 
spinal cord not requiring involvement of the brain, 
such as the knee-jerk reflex.

G-16  |  Glossary
spontaneous recovery  (1) In classical condition-
ing, a partial recovery in strength of the conditioned 
response following a break during extinction training. 
(2) In operant conditioning, the temporary recovery of 
the operant response following a break during extinc-
tion training.
spontaneous remission  Getting better with the 
passage of time without receiving any therapy.
standard deviation  The average extent that the 
scores vary from the mean for a distribution of scores.
standardization  The process that allows test 
scores to be interpreted by providing test norms.
state-dependent memory  Long-term memory 
retrieval is best when a person’s physiological state 
at the time of encoding and retrieval of the infor-
mation is the same.
Stevens’s power law  The perceived magnitude of 
a stimulus is equal to its actual physical intensity 
raised to some constant power. The constant power 
is different for each type of sensory judgment.
stimulus discrimination  (1) In classical conditioning, 
the elicitation of the conditioned response only by 
the conditioned stimulus or only by a small set of 
highly similar stimuli that includes the conditioned 
stimulus. (2) In operant conditioning, learning to 
give the operant response only in the presence of 
the discriminative stimulus.
stimulus generalization  (1) In classical conditioning, 
the elicitation of the conditioned response to stimuli 
that are similar to the conditioned stimulus. The more 
similar the stimulus is to the conditioned stimulus, 
the stronger the response. (2) In operant conditioning, 
giving the operant response in the presence of stimuli 
similar to the discriminative stimulus. The more 
similar the stimulus is to the discriminative stimulus, 
the higher the operant response rate.
storage  The process of maintaining information in 
a memory stage.
storage decay theory  A theory of forgetting that 
proposes that forgetting is due to the decay of the 
biological representation of the information and 
that periodic usage of the information will help to 
maintain it in storage.
subjective contour  A line or shape that is per-
ceived to be present but does not really exist. The 
brain creates it during perception.
subtractive mixtures  Mixtures of wavelengths 
of light in which some wavelengths are absorbed 
(subtracted) and so do not get reflected from the 
mixtures to the retina.
sucking reflex  An innate human reflex that leads 
infants to suck anything that touches their lips.
superego  The part of the personality that represents 
one’s conscience and idealized standards of behavior.
survey research  A descriptive research method 
in which the researcher uses questionnaires and 
interviews to collect information about the behavior, 
beliefs, and attitudes of particular groups of people.
sympathetic nervous system  The part of the auto-
nomic nervous system that is in control when we 
are highly aroused, as in an emergency, and need to 
prepare for defensive action.
synaptic gap (synapse)  The microscopic gap 
between neurons across which neurotransmitters 
travel to carry their messages to other neurons.
systematic desensitization  A countercondition-
ing exposure therapy in which a fear response to 
an object or situation is replaced with a relaxation 
response in a series of progressively increasing fear-
arousing steps.
tardive dyskinesia  A side effect of long-term use of 
traditional antipsychotic drugs causing the person to 
have uncontrollable facial tics, grimaces, and other 
involuntary movements of the lips, jaw, and tongue.
telegraphic speech  Using two-word sentences with 
mainly nouns and verbs.
temperament  The set of innate tendencies or dispo-
sitions that lead a person to behave in certain ways.
temporal integration procedure  An experimental 
procedure in which two meaningless visual patterns 
that produce a meaningful pattern if integrated are 
presented sequentially with the time delay between 
their presentations varied. 
temporal lobe  The area in each cerebral hemi-
sphere located beneath the lateral fissure. The pri-
mary auditory cortex is in this lobe.
teratogens  Environmental agents such as drugs 
and viruses, diseases, and physical conditions that 
impair prenatal development and lead to birth 
defects and sometimes death.

Glossary  |  G-17
thalamus  A part of the brain that serves as a relay 
station for incoming sensory information.
that’s-not-all technique  Compliance to a planned 
second request with additional benefits is gained 
by presenting this request before a response can be 
made to a first request.
theory of mind  The understanding of the mental 
and emotional states of both ourselves and others.
thinking  The processing of information to solve 
problems and make judgments and decisions.
third-variable problem  An explanation of a cor-
relation between two variables in terms of another 
(third) variable that could possibly be responsible for 
the observed relationship between the two variables.
tip-of-the-tongue (TOT) phenomenon  The failure 
to recall specific information from memory com-
bined with partial recall and the feeling that recall 
is imminent.
top-down processing  The brain’s use of knowl-
edge, beliefs, and expectations to interpret sensory 
information.
trace conditioning  A classical conditioning pro-
cedure in which the conditioned stimulus precedes 
the unconditioned stimulus but is removed before 
the unconditioned stimulus is presented so that the 
two stimuli do not occur together.
traits  The relatively stable internally based charac-
teristics that describe a person.
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)  A 
neurostimulation therapy in which the left frontal 
lobe is stimulated with magnetic pulses via an elec-
tromagnetic coil placed on the patient’s scalp. It is 
only cleared for use in cases of severe depression for 
which traditional treatment has not helped.
transduction  The conversion of physical energy 
into neural signals that the brain can understand.
transference   A person undergoing therapy acts 
toward the therapist as he or she did or does toward 
important figures in his or her life, such as his or 
her parents.
trichromatic theory  A theory of color vision 
that assumes that there are three types of cones, 
each only activated by wavelength ranges of light 
corresponding roughly to blue, green, and red. 
It further assumes that all of the various colors 
that we can see are mixtures of various levels of 
activation of the three types of cones. If all three 
are equally activated, we see white.
unconditional positive regard  Unconditional 
acceptance and approval of a person by others.
unconditioned response (UCR)  The response in a 
reflex that is automatically elicited by the uncondi-
tioned stimulus.
unconditioned stimulus (UCS)  The stimulus in 
a reflex that automatically elicits an unconditioned 
response.
unconscious mind  Freud’s term for the part of our 
mind that we cannot become aware of.
underextension  The failure to apply a new word 
more generally to objects that are included within 
the meaning of the word.
uninvolved parenting  A style of parenting in 
which the parents minimize both the time they 
spend with their children and their emotional 
involvement with them and provide for their chil-
dren’s basic needs, but little else.
validity  The extent to which a test measures what 
it is supposed to measure or predicts what it is sup-
posed to predict.
variable  Any factor that can take on more than 
one value.
variable-interval schedule  A partial schedule of 
reinforcement in which the time that must elapse 
on each trial before a response will lead to the deliv-
ery of a reinforcer varies from trial to trial but aver-
ages to a set time across trials.
variable-ratio schedule  A partial schedule of 
reinforcement in which the number of responses it 
takes to obtain a reinforcer varies on each trial but 
averages to a set number across trials.
virtual reality therapy  A counterconditioning 
exposure therapy in which the patient is exposed 
in graduated steps to computer simulations of a 
feared object or situation.
volley principle  Cells taking turns firing will 
increase the maximum firing rate for a group of cells.
vulnerability–stress model  A biopsychosocial 
explanation of schizophrenia that proposes that 

G-18  |  Glossary
genetic, prenatal, and postnatal biological factors ren-
der a person vulnerable to schizophrenia, but environ-
mental stress determines whether it develops or not.
wavelength  The distance in one cycle of a wave, 
from one crest to the next.
Weber’s law  For each type of sensory judgment 
that we can make, the measured difference thresh-
old is a constant fraction of the standard stimulus 
value used to measure it. This constant fraction is 
different for each type of sensory judgment.
well-defined problem  A problem with clear speci-
fications of the start state, goal state, and the pro-
cesses for reaching the goal state.
Wernicke’s area  An area in the cerebral cortex 
responsible for comprehension of speech and text. 
It is in the left temporal lobe of the majority of 
people, regardless of handedness.
working backward heuristic  A problem-solving 
heuristic in which one attempts to solve a problem 
by working from the goal state back to the start 
state.
Yerkes-Dodson law  A law describing the relation-
ship between the amount of arousal and the perfor-
mance quality on a task—increasing arousal up to 
some optimal level increases performance quality 
on a task, but increasing arousal past this point is 
detrimental to performance. 
zone of proximal development  According to 
Vygotsky, the difference between what a child can 
actually do and what the child could do with the 
help of others.
zygote  The fertilized egg that is formed from 
the union of the sperm and egg cells in human 
reproduction.

R-1
Abraham, C. (2001). Possessing genius: The bizarre odyssey 
of Einstein’s brain. Cambridge, England: Icon Books Ltd.
Ackerman, D. (2004). An alchemy of mind: The marvel 
and mystery of the brain. New York: Scribner.
Adams, J. L. (1986). Conceptual blockbusting (3rd ed.). 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Ainsworth, M. D. S. (1979). Infant-mother 
attachment. American Psychologist, 34, 932–937.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & 
Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of attachment: A psychological 
study of the Strange Situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Allen, C. T., & Shimp, T. A. (1990). On using classi-
cal conditioning methods for researching the impact 
of ad-evoked feelings. In S. J. Agnes, J. A. Edell, & T. M. 
Dubitsky (Eds.), Emotion in advertising: Theoretical and 
practical explanations (pp. 19–34). New York: Quorum 
Books.
Allport, G. W., & Odbert, H. S. (1936). Trait-names: 
A psycholexical study. Psychological Monographs, 47 
(Whole No. 1).
Allyon, T., & Azrin, N. H. (1968). The token economy. 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
American Academy of Pediatrics. (2009). Policy 
statement—Media violence. Pediatrics, 124, 1495–1503. 
doi:10.1542/peds.2009.2146
American Psychiatric Association. (1952). Diagnostic 
and statistical manual of mental disorders. Washington, 
DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic 
and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed.). 
Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic 
and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). 
Washington, DC: Author.
Andersen, A. N., Wohlfahrt, J., Christens, P., 
Olsen, J., & Melbe, M. (2000). Maternal age and fetal 
loss: Population based linkage study. British Medical 
Journal, 320, 1708–1712.
Anderson, C. (2008). The long tail: Why the future of busi-
ness is selling less of more. New York: Hyperion.
Anderson, C. A., Berkowitz, L., Donnerstein, 
E., Huesmann, L. R., Johnson, J. D., Linz, D.,…
Wartella, E. (2003). The influence of media violence 
on youth. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 4(3) 
[Whole issue].
Anderson, C. A., Lepper, M. R., & Ross, L. 
(1980). Perseverance of social theories: The role 
of explanations in the persistence of discredited 
information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
39, 1037–1049.
Anderson, C. A., Shibuya, A., Ihori, N., Swing, 
E. L., Bushman, B. J., Sakamoto, A.,…Saleem, 
M. (2010). Violent video game effects on aggression, 
empathy, and prosocial behavior in Eastern and 
Western countries. Psychological Bulletin, 136, 151–173.
Andrews, P. W., & Thomson, J. A. (2009). The 
bright side of being blue: Depression as an adaptation 
for analyzing complex problems. Psychological Review, 
116, 620–654.
Andrews, P. W., & Thomson, J. A. (2010, January/
February). Depression’s evolutionary roots. Scientific 
American MIND, 20, 56–61.
Anthes, E. (2009). The instant egghead guide to the mind. 
New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Applebaum, P. S. (2004). One madman keeping 
loaded guns: Misconceptions of mental illness and their 
legal consequences. Psychiatric Services, 55, 1105–1106.
Asch, S. E. (1955, November). Opinions and social 
pressure. Scientific American, 193, 31–35.
Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence and 
conformity: A minority of one against a unanimous 
majority. Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 
70(9,Whole No. 416).
Asendorpf, J. B., & Wilpers, S. (1998). Personality 
effects on social relationships. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 74, 1531–1544.
Asher, S. R. (1983). Social competence and peer 
status: Recent advances and future directions. Child 
Development, 54, 1427–1434.
Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human 
memory: A proposed system and its control processes. 
references

R-2  |  References
In K. W. Spence & J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psychology of 
learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory 
(Vol. 2, pp. 89–195). New York: Academic Press.
Azvedo, F. A., Carvalho, L. R. B., Grinberg, L. 
T., Farfel, J. M., Ferretti, R. E., Leite, R. E.,…
Herculano-Houzel, S. (2009). Equal numbers of neu-
ronal and nonneuronal cells make the human brain 
an isometrically scaled-up primate brain. Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 513, 532–541.
Baddeley, A. D. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255, 
556–569.
Baddeley, A. D. (2001). Is working memory still 
working? American Psychologist, 56, 849–864.
Baddeley, A. D. (2003). Working memory: Looking 
backward and forward. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 
829–839.
Bahrick, H. P. (1984). Semantic memory content in 
permastore: Fifty years of memory for Spanish learned 
in school. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 
113, 1–29.
Baillargeon, R. (1987). Object permanence in 3.5- and 
4.5-month-old infants. Developmental Psychology, 23, 
655–664.
Baillargeon, R. (1993). The object-concept revisited: 
New directions in the investigation of infants’ physi-
cal knowledge. In C. E. Granrud (Ed.), Visual perception 
and cognition in infancy (pp. 265–315). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Baillargeon, R. (2002). The acquisition of physical 
knowledge in infancy: A summary in eight lessons. In 
U. Goswami (Ed.), Handbook of childhood cognitive devel-
opment (pp. 47–83). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Baldwin, D. A., & Moses, L. J. (2001). Links 
between social understanding and early word learning: 
Challenges to current accounts. Social Development, 10, 
309–329.
Bandura, A. (1965). Influences of models’ reinforce-
ment contingencies on the acquisition of imitative 
responses. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1, 
589–593.
Bandura, A. (1973). Social learning theory. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social functions of thought and action: A 
social-cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The exercise of control. 
New York: W. H. Freeman.
Bandura, A., Ross, D., & Ross, S. A. (1961). 
Transmission of aggression through imitation of 
aggressive models. Journal of Abnormal and Social 
Psychology, 63, 575–582.
Bandura, A., Ross, D., & Ross, S. A. (1963a). 
Imitation of film-mediated aggressive models. Journal 
of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 66, 3–11.
Bandura, A., Ross, D., & Ross, S. A. (1963b). 
Vicarious reinforcement and imitative learning. Journal 
of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67, 601–607.
Bangasser, D. A., Waxler, D. E., Santollo, J., 
& Shors, T. J. (2006). Trace conditioning and the 
hippocampus: The importance of contiguity. The 
Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 8702–8706.
Banuazizi, A., & Movahedi, S. (1975). 
Interpersonal dynamics in a simulated prison: A 
methodological analysis. American Psychologist, 30, 
152–160.
Banyard, P. (2007). Tyranny and the tyrant: From 
Stanford to Abu Ghraib. [Review of the book The 
Lucifer effect: Understanding how good people turn evil, 
by P. Zimbardo]. The Psychologist, 20, 494–495.
Bar, M., & Biederman, I. (1998). Subliminal visual 
priming. Psychological Science, 9, 464–469.
Barber, C. (2008). Comfortably numb: How psychiatry is 
medicating a nation. New York: Pantheon Books.
Bard, P. (1934). On emotional expression after 
decortication with some remarks on certain theoretical 
views. Psychological Review, 41, 309–329.
Baron-Cohen, S. (2000). Theory of mind and 
autism: A fifteen year review. In S. Baron-Cohen, H. 
Tager-Flusberg, & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Understanding 
other minds: Perspectives from developmental cognitive 
neuroscience (pp. 3–20). New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in 
experimental and social psychology. Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press.
Bartlett, J. C., & Searcy, J. (1993). Inversion and 
configuration of faces. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 281–316.
Bates, S. C. (2004). Coverage: Findings from a 
national survey of introductory psychology syllabi. In 
D. V. Doty (Chair), What to leave in and out of introduc-
tory psychology. Symposium conducted at the 112th 
convention of the American Psychological Association, 
Honolulu, Hawaii.

References  |  R-3
Baumrind, D. (1964). Some thoughts on ethics of 
research: After reading Milgram’s “Behavioral study of 
obedience.” American Psychologist, 19, 421–423.
Baumrind, D. (1971). Current patterns of parental 
authority. Developmental Psychology Monograph, 4, 1–103.
Baumrind, D. (1991). The influence of parenting style 
on adolescent competence and substance abuse. Journal 
of Early Adolescence, 11, 56–95.
Baumrind, D. (1996). The discipline controversy 
revisited. Family Relations, 45, 405–414.
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional 
disorders. New York: International Universities Press.
Beck, J. S., & Beck, A. T. (1995). Cognitive therapy: 
Basics and beyond. New York: Guilford.
Begley, S. (2007). Train your mind, change your brain: 
How a new science reveals our extraordinary potential to 
transform ourselves. New York: Ballantine Books.
Békésy, G. von (1960). Experiments in hearing. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Belmont, L., & Marolla, F. A. (1973). Birth order, 
family size and intelligence. Science, 182, 1096–1101.
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. 
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology 
(Vol. 6, pp. 1–62). New York: Academic Press.
Benedetti, F., Lanotte, M., Lopiano, L., & Colloca, 
L. (2007). When words are painful: Unraveling the 
mechanisms of the nocebo effect. Neuroscience, 147, 
260–271.
Ben-Porath, Y. S., & Butcher, J. N. (1989). The com-
parability of MMPI and MMPI-2 scales and profiles. 
Psychological Assessment: A Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 1, 345–347.
Berger, K. S. (2006). The developing person through child-
hood (4th ed.). New York: Worth.
Berns, G. S., Chappelow, J., Zin, C. F., Pagnoni, 
G., Martin-Skurski, M. E., & Richards, J. (2005). 
Neurobiological correlates of social conformity and 
independence during mental rotation. Biological 
Psychiatry, 58, 245–253.
Besson, M., Faita, F., Peretz, L., Bonnel, A. M., & 
Requin, J. (1998). Singing in the brain: Independence 
of lyrics and tunes. Psychological Science, 9, 494–498.
Binkofski, F., & Buccino, G. (2007, June/July). 
Therapeutic reflection. Scientific American MIND, 18, 
78–81.
Birdsong, D., & Molis, M. (2001). On the evidence 
for maturational constraints in second-language 
acquisition. Journal of Memory and Language, 44, 235–249.
Blakeslee, S. (2005). What other people say may change 
what you see. New York Times, online: www.nytimes 
.com/2005/06/28/science/28brai.html, June 28, 2005.
Blakeslee, S., & Blakeslee, M. (2008). The body has a 
mind of its own. New York: Random House.
Blank, H., Musch, J., & Pohl, R. F. (2007). 
Hindsight bias: On being wise after the event. Social 
Cognition, 25, 1–9.
Blass, T. (1999). The Milgram paradigm after 35 
years: Some things we now know about obedience to 
authority. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 29, 955–978.
Blass, T. (2004). The man who shocked the world: The life 
and legacy of Stanley Milgram. New York: Basic Books.
Blass, T. (2009). From New Haven to Santa Clara: 
A historical perspective on the Milgram obedience 
experiments. American Psychologist, 64, 37–45.
Blastland, M., & Dilnot, A. (2009). The numbers game: 
The commonsense guide to understanding numbers in the 
news, in politics, and in life. New York: Gotham Books.
Bogg, T., & Roberts, B. W. (2004). Conscientiousness 
and health-related behaviors: A meta-analysis of 
the leading behavioral contributors to mortality. 
Psychological Bulletin, 130, 887–919.
Boldrini, M., Underwood, M. D., Hen, R., 
Rosoklija, G. B., Dwork, A. J., Mann, J. J., & 
Arango, V. (2009). Antidepressants increase neu-
ral progenitor cells in the human hippocampus. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 34, 2376–2389.
Bond, C. E., Jr., & Titus, L. J. (1983). Social 
facilitation: A meta-analysis of 24 studies. Psychological 
Bulletin, 94, 265–292.
Bond, R., & Smith, P. B. (1996). Culture and 
conformity: A meta-analysis of studies using Asch’s 
(1952b, 1956) line judgment task. Psychological Bulletin, 
119, 111–137.
Boos, H. B., Cahn, W., van Haren, N. E., Derks, 
E. M., Brouwer, R. M., Schnack, H. G.,…Kahn, 
R. S. (2012). Focal and global brain measurements in 
siblings of patients with schizophrenia. Schizophrenia 
Bulletin, 38, 814–825.
Botwinick, J. (1961). Husband and father-in-law: 
A reversible figure. American Journal of Psychology, 74, 
312–313.

R-4  |  References
Bouchard, T. J., Jr., & McGue, M. (1981). Familial 
studies of intelligence: A review. Science, 212, 
1055–1059.
Bouchard, T. J., Jr., & McGue, M. (2003). 
Genetic and environmental influences on human 
psychological differences. Journal of Neurobiology, 
54, 4–45.
Bouchard, T. J., Jr., Lykken, D. T., McGue, M., 
Segal, N. L., & Tellegen, A. (1990). Sources of human 
psychological differences: The Minnesota Study of 
Twins Reared Apart. Science, 250, 223–228.
Bouton, M. E. (1994). Context, ambiguity, and 
classical conditioning. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 13, 148–151.
Bower, J. M., & Parsons, L. M. (2007). Rethinking 
the “lesser brain.” In F. E. Bloom (Ed.), Best of the 
brain from Scientific American: Mind, matter, and 
tomorrow’s brain (pp. 90–101). New York: Dana Press.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. 
Attachment. New York: Basic Books.
Boynton, R. M. (1988). Color vision. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 39, 69–100.
Bradley, D. R., Dumais, S. T., & Petry, H. M. 
(1976). Reply to Cavonius. Nature, 261, 78.
Brang, D., & Ramachandran, V. S. (2011). Survival 
of the synesthesia gene: Why do people hear colors and 
taste words? PLoS Biology 9(11): e1001205. doi:10.1371/
journal.pbio.1001205
Bregman, E. O. (1934). An attempt to modify the 
emotional attitudes of infants by the conditioned 
response technique. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 45, 
169–198.
Breland, K., & Breland, M. (1961). The misbehavior 
of organisms. American Psychologist, 16, 681–684.
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1993). The ecology of cognitive 
development: Research models and fugitive findings. 
In R. H. Wozniak & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Development in 
context (pp. 3–44). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2008). Infant gaze 
following and pointing predict accelerated vocabu-
lary growth through two years of age: A longitudinal, 
growth curve modeling study. Journal of Child Language, 
35, 207–220.
Brown, A. S. (2006). Prenatal infection as a risk 
factor for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32, 
200–202.
Brown, J. (1958). Some tests of the decay theory of 
immediate memory. Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 10, 12–21.
Brown, R., & McNeill, D. (1966). The “tip-of-the-
tongue” phenomenon. Journal of Verbal Learning and 
Verbal Behavior, 5, 325–337.
Brynie, F. H. (2009). Brain sense: The science of the 
senses and how we process the world around us. New York: 
AMACOM.
Buchanan, R. W., & Carpenter, W. T. (1997). The 
neuroanatomies of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 
23, 367–372.
Buckley, K. W. (1989). Mechanical man: John Broadus 
Watson and the beginning of behaviorism. New York: 
Guilford.
Buhs, E., & Ladd, G. (2001). Peer rejection as an 
antecedent of young children’s school adjustment: 
An examination of mediating processes. Developmental 
Psychology, 37, 550–560.
Buonomano, D. (2011). Brain bugs: How the brain’s 
flaws shape our lives. New York: W. W. Norton.
Burger, J. M. (1986). Increasing compliance by 
improving the deal: The that’s-not-all technique. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 277–283.
Burger, J. M. (2009). Replicating Milgram: Would 
people still obey today? American Psychologist, 64, 1–11.
Bushman, B. J., & Huesmann, L. R. (2001). Effects 
of televised violence on aggression. In D. Singer & 
J. Singer (Eds.), Handbook of children and the media 
(pp. 223–254). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Buss, A. H. (2001). Psychological dimensions of the self. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Butcher, J. N., Dahlstrom, W. G., Graham, J. R., 
Tellegen, A., & Kaemmer, B. (1989). Manual for the 
restandardized Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory: 
MMPI-2. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Calev, A., Gaudino, E. A., Squires, N. K., Zervas, 
I. M., & Fink, M. (1995). ECT and non-memory 
cognition: A review. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 
34, 505–515.
Campos, J., Anderson, D., Barbu-Roth, M., 
Hubbard, E., Hertenstein, M., & Witherington, D. 
(2000). Travel broadens the mind. Infancy, 1, 149–219.
Canli, T. (2006). Biology of personality and individual 
differences. New York: Guilford Press.

References  |  R-5
Cannon, T. D. (1997). On the nature and mechanisms 
of obstetric influence in schizophrenia: A review and 
synthesis of epidemiologic studies. International Review 
of Psychiatry, 9, 387–397.
Cannon, W. B. (1927). The James-Lange theory of 
emotions: A critical examination and an alternative 
theory. American Journal of Psychology, 39, 106–124.
Carnahan, T., & McFarland, S. (2007). Revisiting 
the Stanford Prison Experiment: Could participants 
self-selection have led to the cruelty? Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 603–614. 
Cattaneo, L., & Rizzolatti, G. (2009). The mirror 
neuron system. Archives of Neurology, 66, 557–560.
Cattell, R. B. (1950). Personality: A systematic, theoretical, 
and factual study. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Cattell, R. B. (1965). The scientific analysis of personality. 
Baltimore, MD: Penguin.
Cattell, R. B. (1987). Intelligence: Its structure, growth and 
action. Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
Cepeda, N. J., Pashler, H., Vul, E., Wixted, J. T., 
& Rohrere, D. (2006). Distributed practice in ver-
bal recall tasks: A review and quantitative synthesis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 132, 354–380.
Chapman, G. B., & Bornstein, B. H. (1996). The 
more you ask for, the more you get: Anchoring in 
personal injury verdicts. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 10, 
519–540.
Chapman, L. J. (1967). Illusory correlation in obser-
vational report. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal 
Behavior, 6, 151–155.
Chapman, L. J., & Chapman, J. P. (1967). Genesis of 
popular but erroneous psychodiagnostic observations. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 72, 193–204.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in 
chess. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55–81.
Cheetham, M., Pedroni, A. F., Antley, A., Slater, 
M., & Jäncke, L. (2009). Virtual Milgram: Empathic 
concern or personal distress? Evidence from functional 
MRI and dispositional measures. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 3, 29. doi:10.3389/neuro.09.029.2009
Chi, R. P., & Snyder, A. W. (2011). Facilitate insight 
by non-invasive brain stimulation. PLoS ONE 6(2), 
e16655. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016655
Chi, R. P., & Snyder, A. W. (2012). Brain stimulation 
enables the solution of an inherently difficult problem. 
Neuroscience Letters, 515, 121–124.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Churchland, P. S., & Ramachandran, V. S. (1996). 
Filling in: Why Dennett is wrong. In K. Atkins (Ed.), 
Perception (pp. 132–157). Oxford, England: Oxford 
University Press.
Cialdini, R. B. (1993). Influence: Science and practice 
(3rd ed.). New York: HarperCollins.
Cialdini, R. B., Cacioppo, J. T., Bassett, R., & 
Miller, J. A. (1978). Lowball procedure for producing 
compliance: Commitment then cost. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 463–476.
Cialdini, R. B., Vincent, J. E., Lewis, S. K., Catalan, 
J., Wheeler, D., & Danby, B. L. (1975). Reciprocal 
concession procedure for inducing compliance: The 
door-in-the-face technique. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 31, 206–215.
Clark, R. E., & Squire, L. R. (1998). Classical con-
ditioning and brain systems: The role of awareness. 
Science, 280, 77–91.
Cohen, L. B., & Marks, K. S. (2002). How infants 
process addition and subtraction events. Developmental 
Science, 5, 186–201.
Cohen, N. J., & Eichenbaum, H. (1993). Memory, 
amnesia, and the hippocampal system. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Comer, R. J. (2014). Fundamentals of abnormal psychol-
ogy (7th ed.). New York: Worth.
Corballis, M. C. (2007). The dual-brain myth. In 
S. Della Sala (Ed.), Tall tales about the mind and brain: 
Separating fact from fiction (pp. 291–314). New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Cordón, L. A. (2005). Popular psychology: An 
encyclopedia. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Coren, S. (1993). Sleep thieves: An eye-opening explora-
tion into the science and mysteries of sleep. New York: Free 
Press.
Coren, S., Ward, L. M., & Enns, J. T. (2004). 
Sensation and perception (6th ed.). New York: Wiley.
Corina, D. P. (1998). The processing of sign 
language: Evidence from aphasia. In B. Stemmer & 
H. A. Whittaker (Eds.), Handbook of neurolinguistics 
(pp. 313–329). San Diego: Academic Press.
Corkin, S. (1968). Acquisition of a motor skill 
after bilateral medial temporal lobe excision. 
Neuropsychologia, 6, 255–265.

R-6  |  References
Corkin, S. (1984). Lasting consequences of bilateral 
and medial temporal lobectomy: Clinical course and 
experimental findings in H. M. Seminars in Neurology, 4, 
249–259.
Corkin, S. (2002). What’s new with the amnesic 
patient H. M.? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 3, 153–160.
Corkin, S. (2013). Permanent present tense: The 
unforgettable life of the amnesic patient, H. M. New York: 
Basic Books.
Corkin, S., Amaral, D., Gonzalez, A., Johnson, K., 
& Hyman, B. (1997). H. M.’s medial temporal lobe 
lesion: Findings from magnetic resonance imaging. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 3964–3979.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1985). The NEO 
Personality Inventory manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological 
Assessment Resources.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1988). Personality 
in adulthood: A six-year longitudinal study of self-
reports and spouse ratings on the NEO Personality 
Inventory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 
853–863.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Revised 
NEO Personality Inventory (NEO PI) and NEO Five Factor 
Inventory (NEO FFI) professional manual. Odessa, FL: 
Psychological Assessment Resources.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (1993). Bullish on 
personality psychology. The Psychologist, 6, 302–303.
Costa, P. T., Jr., & McCrae, R. R. (2008). The 
NEO inventories. In R. P. Archer & S. R. Smith 
(Eds.). Personality assessment (pp. 213–246). New York: 
Routledge.
Cowey, A. (2010). The blindsight saga. Experimental 
Brain Research, 200, 3–24.
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of 
processing: A framework for memory research. Journal 
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 671–684.
Craik, F. I. M., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of 
processing and the retention of words in episodic 
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 104, 
268–294.
Crow, T. J. (1985). The two-syndrome concept: 
Origins and current status. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 11, 
471–485.
Dallenbach, K. M. (1951). A puzzle-picture with 
a new principle of concealment. American Journal of 
Psychology, 64, 431–433. 
Damasio, A. R., Grabowski, T. J., Bechara, A., 
Damasio, H., Ponto, L., Parvizi, J., & Hichma, 
R. D. (2000). Subcortical and cortical brain activity 
during the feeling of self-generated emotions. Nature 
Neuroscience, 3, 1049–1056.
Dambrun, M., & Vatiné, E. (2010). Reopening 
the study of extreme social behaviors: Obedience to 
authority within an immersive video environment. 
European Journal of Social Psychology, 40, 760–773.
Dapretto, M., Davies, M. S., Pfeifer, J. H., Scott, 
A. A., Sigman, M., Bookheimer, S. Y., & Iacoboni, 
M. (2006). Understanding emotions in others: Mirror 
neuron dysfunction in children with autism spectrum 
disorders. Nature Neuroscience, 9, 28–30.
Darley, J. M., & Latané, B. (1968). Bystander inter-
vention in emergencies: Diffusion of responsibility. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 8, 377–383.
Darwin, C. J., Turvey, M. T., & Crowder, R. G. 
(1972). An auditory analogue of the Sperling partial-
report procedure. Cognitive Psychology, 3, 255–267.
Dasen, P. R. (1994). Culture and cognitive develop-
ment from a Piagetian perspective. In W. J. Lonner & 
R. S. Malpass (Eds.), Psychology and culture (pp. 145–
149). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Davey, G. C. L. (1995). Classical conditioning and the 
acquisition of human fears and phobias: A review and 
synthesis of the literature. Advances in Behavior Research 
and Therapy, 14, 29–66.
Davis, J. O., & Phelps, J. A. (1995). Twins with 
schizophrenia: Genes or germs? Schizophrenia Bulletin, 
21, 13–18.
Davis, K. L., Kahn, R. S., Ko, G., & Davidson, M. 
(1991). Dopamine in schizophrenia: A review and 
reconceptualization. American Journal of Psychiatry, 148, 
1474–1486.
Dawes, R. M. (1994). House of cards: Psychology and psy-
chotherapy built on myth. New York: Free Press.
Dawson, E., Gilovich, T., & Regan, D. T. (2002). 
Motivated reasoning and performance on the Wason 
selection task. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
28, 1379–1387.
Dazzan, P., Morgan, K. D., Orr, K., Hutchinson, 
G., Chitnis, X., Suckling, J.,…Murray, R. M. 
(2005). Different effects of typical and atypical anti-
psychotics on grey matter in first episode psycho-
sis: The Aesop study. Neuropsychopharmacology, 30, 
765–774.

References  |  R-7
DeCasper, A. J., & Fifer, W. P. (1980). Of human 
bonding: Newborns prefer their mothers’ voices. 
Science, 208, 1174–1176.
DeCasper, A. J., & Spence, M. J. (1986). Prenatal 
maternal speech influences newborns’ perception 
of speech sounds. Infant Behavior and Development, 9, 
133–150.
Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. (1999). A 
meta-analytic review of experiments examining the 
effect of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. 
Psychological Bulletin, 125, 637–668.
DeLeon, A., Patel, N. C., & Crismon, M. L. 
(2004). Aripiprazole: A comprehensive review of its 
pharmacology, clinical efficacy, and tolerability. Clinical 
Therapeutics, 26, 649–666.
Delis, D. C., Robertson, L. C., & Efron, R. (1986). 
Hemispheric specialization of memory for visual 
hierarchical stimuli. Neuropsychologica, 24, 205–214.
DeLisi, L. E. (1997). The genetics of schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia Research, 28, 163–175.
Dement, W. C. (1999). The promise of sleep. New York: 
Delacorte Press.
DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S., Amsterdam, J., 
Shelton, R., Young, P., Salomon, R.,…Gallop, 
R. (2005). Cognitive therapy vs medications in the 
treatment of moderate to severe depression. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 62, 409–416.
DeValois, R. L., & DeValois, K. K. (1975). Neural 
coding of color. In E. C. Carterette & M. P. Friedman 
(Eds.), Handbook of perception (Vol. 5, pp. 117–166). New 
York: Academic Press.
DeYoung, C. G., Hirsh, J. B., Shane, M. S., 
Papadermetris, X., Rajeevan, N., & Gray, J. 
R. (2010). Testing predictions from personality 
neuroscience: Brain structure and the Big Five. 
Psychological Science, 2, 820–828.
Diamond, M. C., Scheibel, A. B., Murphy, 
G. M., & Harvey, T. (1985). On the brain of a 
scientist: Albert Einstein. Experimental Neurology, 88, 
198–204.
Digman, J. M. (1990). Personality structure: 
Emergence of the five-factor model. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 41, 417–440.
Dinberg, U., & Thunberg, M. (1998). Rapid facial 
reactions to emotional facial expressions. Psychological 
Science, 11, 86–89.
Dirix, C. E. H., Nijhuis, J. G., Jongsma, H. W., & 
Hornstra, G. (2009). Aspects of fetal learning and 
memory. Child Development, 80, 1251–1258.
Domhoff, G. W. (1996). Finding meaning in dreams: A 
quantitative approach. New York: Plenum.
Domhoff, G. W. (2003). The scientific study of dreams: 
Neural networks, cognitive development, and content 
analysis. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Domhoff, G. W. (2011). The neural substrate for 
dreaming: Is it a subsystem of the default network? 
Consciousness and Cognition, 20, 1163–1174.
Dougherty, R. F., Koch, V. M., Brewer, A. A., 
Fischer, B., Modersitzki, J., & Wandell, B. A. 
(2003). Visual field representations and locations of 
visual areas V1/2/3 in human visual cortex. Journal of 
Vision, 3, 586–598.
Dowling, J. E. (1998). Creating mind: How the brain 
works. New York: Norton.
Druckman, D., & Swets, J. A. (1988). Enhancing 
human performance: Issues, theories, and techniques. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
DuBosar, R. (2009, November). Psychotropic 
drug prescriptions by medical specialty. ACP 
Internist. Retrieved from www.acpinternist.org/
archives/2009/11/national-trends.htm
DuJardin, J., Guerrien, A., & LeConte, P. (1990). 
Sleep, brain activation, and cognition. Physiology and 
Behavior, 47, 1271–1278.
Duncker, K. (1945). On problem solving. Psychological 
Monographs, 58 (Whole No. 270).
Dyk, P. H., & Adams, G. R. (1990). Identity and 
intimacy: An initial investigation of three theoretical 
models using cross-lag panel correlations. Journal of 
Youth and Adolescence, 19, 91–100.
Eagleman, D. (2011). Incognito: The secret lives of the 
brain. New York: Pantheon Books.
Eagly, A. H., & Carli, L. L. (1981). Sex of researchers 
and sex-typed communication as determinants of sex 
differences in influenceability: A meta-analysis of social 
influence studies. Psychological Bulletin, 90, 1–20.
Ebbinghaus, H. (1964). Memory: A contribution 
to experimental psychology (H. A. Ruger & C. E. 
Bussenius, Trans.). New York: Dover. (Original work 
published 1885).

R-8  |  References
Eddy, D. M. (1982). Probabilistic reasoning in 
clinical medicine: Problems and opportunities. In D. 
Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment 
under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases (pp. 249–267). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Egan, L. C., Santos, L. R., & Bloom, P. (2007). The 
origins of cognitive dissonance: Evidence from children 
and monkeys. Psychological Science, 18, 978–983.
Eich, E. (1995). Searching for mood dependent 
memory. Psychological Science, 6, 67–75.
Eisenberger, R., & Cameron, J. (1996). Detrimental 
effects of rewards: Reality or myth? American 
Psychologist, 51, 1153–1166.
El-Hai, J. (2001, February). The lobotomist. Washington 
Post Magazine, 124(55), 16–20, 30–31.
El-Hai, J. (2005). The lobotomist: A maverick medical 
genius and his tragic quest to rid the world of mental illness. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. 
New York: Lyle Stuart.
Ellis, A. (1993). Reflections on rational-emotive therapy. 
Journal of Counseling and Clinical Psychology, 61, 199–201.
Ellis, A. (1995). Rational emotive behavior therapy. In 
R. J. Corsini & D. Wedding (Eds.), Current psychothera-
pies (5th ed., pp. 162–196). Itasca, IL: Peacock.
Elman, J. L., Bates, E. A., Johnson, M., Karmiloff-
Smith, A., Paisi, D., & Plunkett, K. (1996). Rethinking 
innateness: A connectionist perspective on development. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Elmes, A. C. (2009). Obedience lite. American 
Psychologist, 64, 32–36.
Engel, S. A. (1999). Using neuroimaging to measure 
mental representations: Finding color-opponent neu-
rons in visual cortex. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 8, 23–27.
Engle, R. W. (2002). Working memory capacity as 
executive attention. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 11, 19–23.
Erel, O., Oberman, Y., & Yirmiya, N. (2000). 
Maternal versus nonmaternal care and seven domains 
of children’s development. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 
727–747.
Eriksen, C. W., & Collins, J. F. (1967). Some 
temporal characteristics of visual pattern recognition. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 74, 476–484.
Erikson, E. H. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: 
Norton.
Erikson, E. H. (1963). Childhood and society (2nd ed.). 
New York: Norton.
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New 
York: Norton.
Erikson, E. H. (1980). Identity and the life cycle. New 
York: Norton.
Eriksson, P. S., Perfilieva, E., Björk-Eriksson, 
T., Alborn, A., Nordborg, C., Peterson, D. 
A., & Gage, F. H. (1998). Neurogenesis in the 
adult human hippocampus. Nature Medicine, 4, 
1313–1317.
Ertelt, D., Small, S., Solodkin, A., Dettmers, C., 
McNamara, A., Binofski, F., & Buccino, G. (2007), 
Action observation has a positive impact on rehabili-
tation of motor deficits after stroke. NeuroImage, 36, 
164–173.
Esser, J. K., & Lindoerfer, J. S. (1989). Groupthink 
and the space shuttle Challenger accident: Toward a 
quantitative case analysis. Journal of Behavioral Decision 
Making, 2, 167–177.
Etscorn, E., & Stephens, R. (1973). Establishment 
of conditioned taste aversions with a 24-hour CS-US 
interval. Physiological Psychology, 1, 251–253.
Evans, J. St B.T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts 
of reasoning, judgment, and social cognition. Annual 
Review of Psychology, 59, 255–278.
Evans, J. St B.T. (2010). Thinking twice: Two minds in 
one brain. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eysenck, H. J. (1982). Personality, genetics, and behavior. 
New York: Praeger.
Eysenck, H. J. (1990). Biological dimensions of 
personality. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of person-
ality: Theory and research (pp. 244–276). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Eysenck, H. J. (1997). Personality and experimental 
psychology: The unification of psychology and the pos-
sibility of a paradigm. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 73, 1224–1237.
Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, M. W. (1985). Personality 
and individual differences. New York: Plenum.
Falk, D., Lepore, F. E., & Noe, A. (2012). The 
cerebral cortex of Albert Einstein: A description and 
preliminary analysis of unpublished photographs. 
Brain. doi:10.1093/brain/aws295 

References  |  R-9
Fancher, R. E. (1985). The intelligence men: Makers of the 
IQ controversy. New York: Norton.
Fantz, R. L. (1961, May). The origin of form 
perception. Scientific American, 204, 66–72.
Fantz, R. L. (1963). Pattern vision in newborn infants. 
Science, 140, 296–297.
Federman, J. (Ed.). (1998). National Television Violence 
Study, Volume 3. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ferguson, C. J., & Kilburn, J. (2009). The public 
health risks of media violence: A meta-analytic review. 
Journal of Pediatrics, 154, 759–763.
Ferguson, C. J., & Kilburn, J. (2010). Much ado 
about nothing: The misestimation and overinterpre-
tation of violent video game effects in Eastern and 
Western nations: Comment on Anderson et al. (2010). 
Psychological Bulletin, 136, 174–178.
Fernald, A. (1993). Approval and disapproval: Infant 
responsiveness to vocal affect in familiar and unfamil-
iar languages. Child Development, 64, 657–674.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Festinger, L., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1959). Cognitive 
consequences of forced compliance. Journal of Abnormal 
and Social Psychology, 38, 203–210.
Field, T. M., Cohen, D., Garcia, R., & Greenberg, 
R. (1984). Mother-stranger face discrimination by the 
newborn. Infant Behavior and Development, 7, 19–25.
Fields, R. D. (2008, March). White matter matters. 
Scientific American, 298, 54–61.
Fields, R. D. (2009). The other brain: From dementia to 
schizophrenia, how new discoveries about the brain are revolu-
tionizing medicine and science. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Fields, R. D. (2011, May/June). The hidden brain. 
Scientific American MIND, 22, 52–59.
Fineman, M. (1996). The nature of visual illusion. 
Mineola, NY: Dover Publications.
Fink, G. R., Halligan, P. W., Marshall, J. C., Frith, 
C. D., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Dolan, R. J. (1996). 
Where in the brain does visual attention select the for-
est and the trees? Nature, 382, 626–628.
Fleischman, J. (2002). Phineas Gage: A gruesome but true 
story about brain science. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Flynn, J. R. (1987). Massive IQ gains in 14 nations: 
What IQ tests really measure. Psychological Bulletin, 101, 
171–191.
Flynn, J. R. (1999). Searching for justice: The dis-
covery of IQ gains over time. American Psychologist, 54, 
5–20.
Flynn, J. R. (2007). What is intelligence?: Beyond the Flynn 
effect. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Flynn, J. R. (2012). Are we getting smarter? Rising IQ in 
the twenty-first century. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Foer, J. (2011). Moonwalking with Einstein: The art 
and science of remembering everything. New York: The 
Penguin Press.
Folsom, D. P., Fleisher, A. S., & Depp, C. A. (2006). 
Schizophrenia. In D. V. Jeste & J. H. Friedman (Eds.), 
Psychiatry for neurologists (pp. 59–66). Totowa, NJ: 
Humana Press.
Fossey, D. (1983). Gorillas in the mist. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin.
Foster, M. (1897). A textbook of physiology, Part III 
(7th ed.). New York: The Macmillan Company.
Fournier, J. C., DeRubeis, R. J., Hollon, S. D., 
Dimidjian, S., Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton, R. C., 
& Fawcett, J. (2010). Antidepressant drug effects 
and depression severity: A patient-level meta-anal-
ysis. Journal of the American Medical Association, 303, 
47–53.
Fowles, D. C. (1992). Schizophrenia: Diathesis-stress 
revisited. Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 303–336.
Frances, A. (2013). Saving normal: An insider’s revolt 
against out-of-control psychiatric diagnosis, DSM-5, big 
pharma, and the medicalization of ordinary life. New York: 
HarperCollins.
Freedman, J. L., & Fraser, S. C. (1966). Compliance 
without pressure: The foot-in-the-door technique. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4, 195–202.
Frenda, S. J., Nichols, R. M., & Loftus, E. F. (2011). 
Current issues and advances in misinformation 
research. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 
20–23.
Freud, A. (1936). The ego and the mechanisms of 
defense (C. Baines, Trans.). New York: International 
Universities Press.
Freud, S. (1953a). The interpretation of dreams. In 
J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The standard edition of the 
complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vols. 
4 & 5). London, England: Hogarth. (Original work 
published 1900)

R-10  |  References
Freud, S. (1953b). Three essays on sexuality. In 
J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The standard edition of 
the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud 
(Vol. 7). London, England: Hogarth. (Original work 
published 1905)
Freud, S. (1960). Psychopathology of everyday life. 
In J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The standard edition of the 
complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 6). 
London, England: Hogarth. (Original work published 
1901).
Freud, S. (1963). Introductory lectures on psycho-
analysis. In J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The standard 
edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud 
(Vols. 15 & 16). London, England: Hogarth. (Original 
work published 1916 & 1917).
Freud, S. (1964). New introductory lectures on 
psycho-analysis. In J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The 
standard edition of the complete psychological works of 
Sigmund Freud (Vol. 22). London, England: Hogarth. 
(Original work published 1933).
Frith, U. (2003). Autism: Explaining the enigma (2nd ed.). 
New York: Wiley-Blackwell.
Fromkin, V., Krasjen, S., Curtiss, S., Rigler, D., & 
Rigler, M. (1974). The development of language in 
Genie: A case of language acquisition beyond the “criti-
cal period.” Brain & Language, 1, 81–107.
Funder, D. C. (2001). Personality. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 52, 197–221.
Furman, W., & Biermam, K. L. (1984). Children’s 
conceptions of friendship: A multi-method study of 
developmental changes. Developmental Psychology, 20, 
925–931.
Gabrieli, J. D. E., Corkin, S., Mickel, S. F., & 
Growdon, J. H. (1993). Intact acquisition and long-
term retention of mirror-tracing skill in Alzheimer’s 
disease and in global amnesia. Behavioral Neuroscience, 
107, 899–910.
Gage, F. H. (2003, September). Brain, repair yourself. 
Scientific American, 289, 46–53.
Galak, J., LeBoeuf, R. A., Nelson, L. D., & 
Simmons, J. P. (2012). Correcting the past: Failures to 
replicate psi. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
103, 933–948.
Galanter, E. (1962). Contemporary psychophysics. 
In R. Brown, E. Galanter, E. H. Hess, & G. Mandler 
(Eds.), New directions in psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 87–156). 
New York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston.
Gamwell, L., & Tomes, N. (1995). Madness in America: 
Cultural and medicinal perceptions of mental illness before 
1914. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Garb, H. N. (1999). Call for a moratorium on the use 
of the Rorschach inkblot test in clinical and forensic 
settings. Assessment, 6, 313–315.
Garcia, J. (2003). Psychology is not an enclave. In R. J. 
Sternberg (Ed.), Defying the crowd: Stories of those who bat-
tled the establishment and won (pp. 67–77). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Garcia, J., Kimeldorf, D. J., Hunt, E. L., & Davies, 
B. P. (1956). Food and water consumption of rats dur-
ing exposure to gamma radiation. Radiation Research, 4, 
33–41.
Garcia, J., & Koelling, R. A. (1966). Relation of cue 
to consequence in avoidance learning. Psychonomic 
Science, 4, 123–124.
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of mul-
tiple intelligences. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1993). Multiple intelligences: The theory in 
practice. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed. New York: 
Basic Books.
Gardner, H., Kornhaber, M. L., & Wake, W. K. 
(1996). Intelligence: Multiple perspectives. Fort Worth, TX: 
Harcourt.
Garry, M., Manning, C. G., Loftus, E. F., & 
Sherman, S. J. (1996). Imagination inflation: 
Imagining a childhood event inflates confidence 
that it occurred. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 3, 
208–214.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (1992). Nature’s mind. New York: 
Basic Books.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (2005). Forty-five years of split-
brain research and still going strong. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 6, 653–659.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (2008). Human: The science behind 
what makes us unique. New York: HarperCollins.
Gazzaniga, M. S., Bogen, J. E., & Sperry, R. W. 
(1962). Some functional effects of sectioning the cere-
bral commissures in man. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 48, 1765–1769.
Gazzaniga, M. S., Fendrich, R., & Wesainger, C. 
M. (1994). Blindsight reconsidered. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 3, 93–95.

References  |  R-11
Gazzaniga, M. S., Ivry, R. B., & Mangun, G. R. 
(2002). Cognitive neuroscience: The biology of the mind 
(2nd ed.). New York: Norton.
Gegenfurtner, K. R., & Kiper, D. C. (2003). Color 
vision. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 26, 181–206.
Gescheider, G. A. (1976). Psychophysics: Method and 
theory. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ghim, H. (1990). Evidence for perceptual organization 
in infants: Perception of subjective contours by young 
infants. Infant Behavior and Development, 13, 221–248.
Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Calculated risks: How to know 
when numbers deceive you. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Gigerenzer, G. (2004). Dread risk, September 11, and 
fatal traffic accidents. Psychological Science, 15, 286–287.
Gigerenzer, G. (2006). Out of the frying pan into 
the fire: Behavioral reactions to terrorist attacks. Risk 
Analysis, 26, 347–351.
Gigerenzer, G., & Edwards, A. G. K. (2003). Simple 
tools for understanding risk: From innumeracy to 
insight. British Medical Journal, 307, 741–744.
Gigerenzer, G., Gaissmaier, W., Kurz-Milcke, E., 
Schwartz, L. M., & Woloshin, S. (2007). Helping 
doctors and patients make sense of health statistics. 
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 8, 53–96.
Gilbert, S. J. (1981). Another look at the Milgram 
obedience studies: The role of the gradated series 
of shocks. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 7, 
690–695.
Gilhooly, K. J. (1996). Thinking: Directed, undirected and 
creative (3rd ed.). London, England: Academic Press.
Gilligan, T. (2009). The new data on prostate cancer 
screening: What should we do now? Cleveland Clinic 
Journal of Medicine, 76, 446–448.
Glanzer, M., & Cunitz, A. R. (1966). Two storage 
mechanisms in free recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and 
Verbal Behavior, 5, 351–360.
Glass, R. M. (2001). Electroconvulsive therapy: Time 
to bring it out of the shadows. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 285, 1346–1348.
Gluck, M. A., Mercado, E., & Myers, C. E. (2011). 
Learning and memory: From brain to behavior (2nd ed.). 
New York: Worth.
Glucksberg, S., & Cowen, G. N., Jr. (1970). Memory 
for nonattended auditory material. Cognitive Psychology, 
1, 149–156.
Godden, D. R., & Baddeley, A. D. (1975). 
Context-dependent memory in two natural 
environments: On land and underwater. British Journal 
of Psychology, 66, 325–331.
Goel, V., & Grafman, J. (1995). Are the frontal lobes 
implicated in “planning” functions? Interpreting 
data from the Tower of Hanoi. Neuropsychologica, 33, 
623–642.
Goff, D. C., & Coyle, J. T. (2001). The emerging role 
of glutamate in the pathophysiology and treatment 
of schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 
1367–1377.
Goff, L. M., & Roediger, H. L., III. (1998). 
Imagination inflation for action events: Repeated 
imaginings lead to illusory recollections. Memory & 
Cognition, 26, 20–33.
Goldberg, L. R. (1990). An alternative “description 
of personality”: The big-five factor structure. Journal of 
Social and Personality Psychology, 59, 1216–1229.
Goldstein, E. B. (2007). Sensation and perception 
(7th ed.). Belmont, CA: Thomson Wadsworth.
Golinkoff, R. M., & Hirsch-Pasek, K. (2006). Baby 
wordsmith: From associationist to social sophisticate. 
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 15, 30–33.
Gonsalves, B., Reber, P. J., Gitelman, D. R., 
Parrish, T. B., Mesulam, M.-M, & Paller, K. A. 
(2004). Neural evidence that vivid imagining can lead 
to false remembering. Psychological Science, 15, 655–659.
Goodall, J. (1986). The chimpanzees of Gombe: Patterns of 
behavior. Boston: Belknap Press of Harvard University 
Press.
Goodman, J. A., Krahn, L. E., Smith, G. E., 
Rummans, T. A., & Pileggi, T. S. (1999, October). 
Patient satisfaction with electroconvulsive therapy. 
Mayo Clinic Proceedings, 74, 967–971.
Gottesman, I. I. (1991). Schizophrenia genesis. New 
York: W. H. Freeman.
Gottfredson, L. S. (1997). Mainstream science on 
intelligence: An editorial with 52 signatories, history, 
and bibliography. Intelligence, 24, 13–23.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2002a). Where and why g matters: 
Not a mystery. Human Performance, 15, 25–46.
Gottfredson, L. S. (2002b). g: Highly general and 
highly practiced. In R. J. Sternberg & E. L. Grigorenko 
(Eds.), The general factor of intelligence: How general is it? 
(pp. 331–380). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

R-12  |  References
Gottfredson, L. S. (2009). Logical fallacies used to 
dismiss evidence on intelligence testing. In R. Phelps 
(Ed.). Correcting fallacies about educational and psychologi-
cal testing (pp. 11–65). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Gould, S. J. (1985, June). The median isn’t the 
message. Discover, 6, 40–42.
Graf, P., Squire, L. R., & Mandler, G. (1984). The 
information that amnesic patients do not forget. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 10, 164–178.
Graziano, W. G., Habashi, M. M., Sheese, B. E., 
& Tobin, R. M. (2007). Agreeableness, empathy, and 
helping: A person 3 situation perspective. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 583–599.
Graziano, W. G., & Tobin, R. M. (2009). 
Agreeableness. In M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle (Eds.), 
Handbook of individual differences in social behavior 
(pp. 46–61). New York: Guilford.
Green, D. M., & Swets, J. A. (1966). Signal detection 
theory and psychophysics. New York: Wiley.
Green, J. T., & Woodruff-Pak, D. S. (2000). Eyeblink 
classical conditioning: Hippocampal formation is 
for neutral stimulus associations as cerebellum is for 
association-response. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 138–158.
Greenberg, G. (2013). The book of woe and the unmaking 
of psychiatry. New York: Penquin.
Greenough, W. T., Black, J. E., & Wallace, C. 
S. (1987). Experience and brain development. Child 
Development, 58, 539–559.
Greenwald, A. G., Draine, S. C., & Abrams, R. L. 
(1996). Three cognitive markers of unconscious seman-
tic activation. Science, 273, 1699–1702.
Greenwald, A. G., Klinger, M. R., & Schuh, 
E. S. (1995). Activation by marginally perceptible 
(“subliminal”) stimuli: Dissociation of unconscious 
from conscious cognition. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General, 124, 22–42.
Greenwald, A. G., Spangenberg, E. R., Pratkanis, 
A. R., & Eskenazi, J. (1991). Double-blind tests of 
subliminal self-help audiotapes. Psychological Science, 2, 
119–122.
Gregory, R. L. (1968, November). Visual illusions. 
Scientific American, 219, 66–76.
Gregory, R. L. (2009). Seeing through illusions. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Greuter, T. (2007, August/September). Forgetting 
faces. Scientific American MIND, 18, 68–73. 
Griggs, R. A. (2003). Helping students gain insight 
into mental set. Teaching of Psychology, 30, 143–145.
Griggs, R. A., & Cox, J. R. (1982). The elusive the-
matic materials effect in Wason’s selection task. British 
Journal of Psychology, 73, 407–420.
Grimes, T., Anderson, J. A., & Bergen, L. (2008). 
Media violence and aggression: Science and ideology. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Grossman, R. P., & Till, B. D. (1998). The persis-
tence of classically conditioned brand attitudes. Journal 
of Advertising, 27, 23–31.
Gruneberg, M. M., & Herrmann, D. J. (1997). Your 
memory for life. London, England: Blanford.
Grunhaus, L., Schreiber, S., Dolberg, O. T., Polak, 
D., & Dannon, P. N. (2003). A randomized controlled 
comparison of electroconvulsive therapy and repeti-
tive transcranial magnetic stimulation in severe and 
resistant nonpsychotic major depression. Biological 
Psychiatry, 53, 324–331.
Hadjikhani, N., & de Gelder, B. (2002). Neural 
basis of prosopagnosia: An fMRI study. Human Brain 
Mapping, 16, 176–182.
Hallinan, J. T. (2009). Why we make mistakes: How we 
look without seeing, forget things in seconds, and are all pretty 
sure we are above average. New York: Broadway Books.
Haney, C., Banks, C., & Zimbardo, P. (1973). A 
study of prisoners and guards in a simulated prison. 
Naval Research Reviews, 9, 1–17. Washington, DC: Office 
of Naval Research. [Reprinted in E. Aronson (Ed.), 
Readings about the social animal (3rd ed., pp. 52–67). San 
Francisco, CA: W. H. Freeman.]
Harkins, S. G., & Jackson, J. M. (1985). The role of 
evaluation in eliminating social loafing. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 11, 457–465.
Harlow, H. F. (1959, June). Love in infant monkeys. 
Scientific American, 200, 68–74.
Harlow, H. F., & Harlow, M. K. (1962, November). 
Social deprivation in monkeys. Scientific American, 207, 
136–146.
Harlow, H. F., & Zimmerman, R. R. (1959). 
Affectional responses in the infant monkey. Science, 
130, 421–432.
Harris, B. (1979). Whatever happened to Little Albert? 
American Psychologist, 34, 151–160.

References  |  R-13
Harris, J. R. (1998). The nurture assumption: Why chil-
dren turn out the way they do. New York: Free Press.
Hartigan, J. A., & Wigdor, A. K. (Eds.). (1989). 
Fairness in employment testing: Validity generalization, 
minority issues, and the General Aptitude Test Battery. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Hasan, Y., Bègue, L., Scharkow, M., & Bushman, 
B. J. (2013). The more you play, the more aggressive 
you become: A long-term experimental study of cumu-
lative violent video game effects on hostile expectations 
and aggressive behavior. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 49, 224–227.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1979). Automatic and 
effortful processes in memory. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General, 108, 356–388.
Haslam, S. A., & Reicher, S. (2005, October) The 
psychology of tyranny. Scientific American MIND, 6, 
41–51.
Haslam, S. A., & Reicher, S. (2012). Tyranny: 
Revisiting Zimbardo’s Stanford prison experiment. 
In J. R. Smith & S. A. Haslam (Eds.), Social psychology: 
Revisiting the classic studies (pp. 126–141). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Hathaway, S. R., & McKinley, J. C. (1943). MMPI 
manual. New York: Psychological Corporation.
Häuser, W., Hansen, E., & Enck, P. (2012). 
Nocebo phenomena in medicine. Deutsches Ärzteblatt 
International, 109, 459–465.
Hefferline, R. F., Keenan, B., & Harford, R. A. 
(1959). Escape and avoidance conditioning in human 
subjects without their observation of the response. 
Science, 130, 1338–1339.
Heimberg, R. G., Brozovich, F. A., & Rapee, R. 
M. (2010). A cognitive-behavioral model of social 
anxiety disorder: Update and extension. In S. G. 
Hofmann & P. M. DiBartolo (Eds.), Social anxiety: 
Clinical, developmental, and social perspectives (2nd ed., 
pp. 395–422). New York: Academic Press.
Hellige, J. B. (1993). Unity of thought and action: 
Varieties of interaction between the left and right 
cerebral hemispheres. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 2, 21–25.
Herrnstein, R. J., & Murray, C. (1994). The bell curve: 
Intelligence and class in American life. New York: Free 
Press.
Hill, W. E. (1915, November) My wife and my mother-
in-law. Puck, 16, 1.
Hilts, P. F. (1995). Memory’s ghost: The strange tale of 
Mr. M and the nature of memory. New York: Simon & 
Schuster.
Hite, S. (1987). Women and love: A cultural revolution in 
progress. New York: Knopf.
Ho, B-C., Andreasen, N. C., Ziebell, S., Pierson, 
R., & Magnotta, V. (2011). Long-term antipsychotic 
treatment and brain volumes: A longitudinal study 
of first-episode schizophrenia. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 68, 127–138.
Hobson, J. A. (2003) Dreaming: An introduction to the 
science of sleep. New York: Oxford.
Hobson, J. A., & McCarley, R. W. (1977). The brain 
as a dream generator: An activation-synthesis hypoth-
esis of the dream process. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
134, 1335–1348.
Hobson, J. A., Pace-Scott, E. F., & Stickgold, R. 
(2000). Dreaming and the brain: Toward a cognitive 
neuroscience of conscious states. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 23, 793–842.
Hoffrage, U., & Gigerenzer, G. (1995). How to 
improve Bayesian reasoning without instruction: 
Frequency formats. Psychological Review, 102, 684–704.
Hoffrage, U., & Gigerenzer, G. (1998). Using natural 
frequencies to improve diagnostic inferences. Academic 
Medicine, 73, 538–540.
Hofling, C. K., Brotzman, E., Dalrymple, S., 
Graves, N., & Pierce, C. M. (1966). An experimen-
tal study of nurse-physician relationships. Journal of 
Nervous and Mental Disease, 143, 171–180.
Hoffman, D. D. (1998). Visual intelligence: How we 
create what we see. New York: W. W. Norton.
Hofmann, W., De Houwer, J., Perugini, M., 
Baeyens, F., & Crombez, G. (2010). Evaluative con-
ditioning in humans: A meta-analysis. Psychological 
Bulletin, 136, 390–421.
Hogben, J. H., & Di Lollo, V. (1974). Perceptual 
integration and perceptual segregation of brief visual 
stimuli. Vision Research, 14, 1059–1069.
Hollander, E., & Simeon, D. (2011). Anxiety disorders. 
In R. E. Hales, S. C. Yudofsky, & G. O. Gabbard (Eds.), 
Essentials of psychiatry (3rd ed., pp. 185–228). Arlington, 
VA: American Psychiatric Association.
Holmes, D. S. (1990). The evidence for repression: 
An examination of sixty years of research. In J. L. 
Singer (Ed.), Repression and dissociation: Implications 

R-14  |  References
for personality theory, psychopathology, and health 
(pp. 85–102). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Holsti, L., Grunau, R., & Whitfield, M. (2002). 
Developmental coordination disorder in extremely 
low birth weight children at nine years. Journal of 
Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 23, 9–15.
Hood, B. M. (2009). Supersense: Why we believe in the 
unbelievable. New York: HarperCollins.
Horn, J. (1982). The aging of cognitive abilities. In 
B. B. Wolman (Ed.), Handbook of developmental psychology 
(pp. 847–870). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Horn, J., & Cattell, R. B. (1966). Refinement and 
test of the theory of fluid and crystallized general intel-
ligences. Journal of Educational Psychology, 57, 253–270.
Horn, J. L., & Cattell, R. B. (1967). Age differences in 
fluid and crystallized intelligence. Acta Psychologica, 26, 
107–129.
Horney, K. (1937). The neurotic personality of our time. 
New York: Norton.
Horwitz, A. V., & Wakefield, J. C. (2007). The loss 
of sadness: How psychiatry transformed normal sorrow into 
depressive disorder. New York: Oxford University Press.
Horwitz, A. V., & Wakefield, J. C. (2012). All we have 
to fear: Psychiatry’s transformation of natural anxieties into 
mental disorders. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (2004). Brain and visual 
perception: The story of a 25-year collaboration. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Huesmann, L. R. (2007). The impact of electronic 
media violence: Scientific theory and research. Journal 
of Adolescent Health, 41 (6, Suppl. 1), S6–S13.
Huesmann, L. R. (2010). Nailing the coffin shut on 
doubts that violent video games stimulate aggres-
sion: Comment on Anderson et al. (2010). Psychological 
Bulletin, 136, 179–181.
Huff, D. (1954). How to lie with statistics. New York: 
Norton.
Hunt, M. (1993). The story of psychology. New York: 
Doubleday.
Hurvich, L. M., & Jameson, D. (1957). An opponent-
process theory of color vision. Psychological Review, 63, 
384–404.
Huston, A. C., Donnerstein, E., Fairchild, H., 
Feshbach, N. D., Katz, P. A., & Murray, J. P.,…
Zuckerman, D. (1992). Big world, small screen: The role 
of television in American Society. Lincoln, NE: University 
of Nebraska Press.
Iacoboni, M. (2005). Neural mechanisms of imitation. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 15, 632–637.
Iacoboni, M. (2009a). Imitation, empathy, and mirror 
neurons. Annual Review of Psychology, 60, 653–670.
Iacoboni, M. (2009b). Mirroring people: The science 
of empathy and how we connect with others. New York: 
Picador.
Iacoboni, M., & Dapretto, M. (2006). The 
mirror neuron system and the consequences of its 
dysfunction. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7, 942–951.
Impastato, D. J. (1960). The story of the first elec-
troshock treatment. American Journal of Psychiatry, 116, 
1113–1114.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical 
thinking from childhood to adolescence (A. Parsons & S. 
Milgram, Trans.). New York: Basic Books.
Izard, C. E. (1990). Facial expressions and the regu-
lation of emotions. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 58, 487–498.
Jackson, S. L. (2012). Research methods and statistics: 
A critical thinking approach (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth.
Jacobs, B. L. (2004). Depression: The brain finally gets 
into the act. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 13, 
103–106.
Jacobs, B. L., van Praag, H., & Gage, F. H. (2000a). 
Adult brain neurogenesis and psychiatry: A novel theo-
ry of depression. Molecular Psychiatry, 5, 262–269.
Jacobs, B. L., van Praag, H., & Gage, F. H. (2000b, 
July/August). Depression and the birth and death of 
brain cells. American Scientist, 88, 340–345.
Jacobsen, T., & Hoffman, V. (1997). Children’s 
attachment representations: Longitudinal relations to 
school behavior and academic competency in middle 
childhood and adolescence. Developmental Psychology, 
33, 703–710.
Jang, K. L., Livesley, W. J., Ando, J., Yamagata, 
S., Suzuki, A., Angleitner, A.,…Spinath, F. (2006). 
Behavioral genetics of the higher-order factors of 
the Big Five. Personality and Individual Differences, 41, 
261–272.
Janis, I. L. (1972). Victims of groupthink. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin.

References  |  R-15
Janis, I. L. (1983). Groupthink: Psychological studies of 
policy decisions and fiascoes (2nd ed.). Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin.
Javitt, D. C., & Coyle, J. T. (2007). In F. E. Bloom (Ed.), 
Best of the brain from Scientific American: Mind, matter, and 
tomorrow’s brain (pp. 157–168). New York: Dana Press.
Jiang, X., & Cillessen, A. (2005). Stability of continu-
ous measures of sociometric status: A meta-analysis. 
Developmental Review, 25, 1–25.
John, O. P. (1990). The “Big Five” factor taxonomy: 
Dimensions of personality in the natural language and 
in questionnaires. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of 
personality: Theory and research (pp. 66–100). New York: 
Guilford.
Johnson, J., & Newport, E. (1989). Critical period 
effects in second language learning: The influence of 
maturational state on the acquisition of English as a 
second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 60–99.
Jones, M. C. (1924). A laboratory study of fear: The 
case of Peter. Pedagogical Seminary, 31, 308–315.
Jones, P. B., Davies, L. M., Barnes, T. R. E., Davies, 
L., Dunn, G., Lloyd, H., …Lewis, S. W. (2006). 
Randomized controlled trial of effect on quality of life 
of second generation versus first generation antipsy-
chotic drugs in schizophrenia (CUtLASS 1). Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 63, 1079–1087.
Jones, R. A. (1977). Self-fulfilling prophecies. Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Julien, R. M. (2011). A primer of drug action (12th ed.). 
New York: W. H. Freeman.
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. New 
York: New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Kail, R. (1991). Developmental change in speed of pro-
cessing during childhood and adolescence. Psychological 
Bulletin, 109, 490–501.
Kalat, J. W. (2007). Biological psychology (9th ed.). 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Kanizsa, G. (1976, April). Subjective contours. 
Scientific American, 234, 48–52.
Kanwisher, N. (2006). Neuroscience: What’s in a face? 
Science, 311, 617–618.
Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J., & Chun, M. M. 
(1997). The fusiform face area: A module in human 
extrastriate cortex specialized for face perception. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 17, 4302–4311.
Kanwisher, N., & Yovel, G. (2009). Cortical spe-
cialization for face perception in humans. In G. G. 
Berntson & J. T. Cacioppo (Eds.), Handbook of neurosci-
ence for the behavioral sciences, Volume 2 (pp. 841–851). 
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Kaptchuk, T. J., Friedlander, E., Kelley, J. M., 
Sanchez, M. N., Kokkotou, E., Singer, J. P.,…
Lembo, A. J. (2010). Placebos without deception: 
A randomized controlled trial in irritable bowel 
syndrome. PLoS ONE 5(12), e15591. doi:10.1371/
journal.pone.0015591
Karau, S. J., & Williams, K. D. (1993). Social loafing: 
A meta-analytic review and theoretical integration. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 681–706.
Kasckow, J., Felmet, K., & Zisook, S. (2011). 
Managing suicide risk in patients with schizophrenia. 
CNS Drugs, 25, 129–143.
Kaufman, A. S. (2000). Tests of intelligence. In R. J. 
Sternberg (Ed.), Handbook of intelligence (pp. 445–476). 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kaufman, A. S. (2009). IQ testing 101. New York: 
Springer.
Kazdin, A. E. (2001). Behavior modification in applied set-
tings (6th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Kellman, P. J., & Arterberry, M. E. (1998). The 
cradle of knowledge: Development of perception in infancy. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kellman, P. J., & Banks, M. S. (1998). Infant visual 
perception. In W. Damon (Series Ed.) & R. Siegler & 
D. Kuhn (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 2. 
Cognition, perception, and language (5th ed., pp. 103–146). 
New York: Wiley.
Kempermann, G., & Gage, F. H. (1999, May). New 
nerve cells for the adult brain. Scientific American, 280, 
48–53.
Kennedy, W. P. (1961). The nocebo reaction. Medical 
World, 95, 203–205.
Kern, M. I., & Friedman, H. S. (2008). Do conscien-
tious individuals live longer? A quantitative review. 
Health Psychology, 27, 505–512.
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., 
Koretz, D., Merikangas, K. R.,…Wang, P. S. (2003). 
The epidemiology of major depressive disorder: Results 
from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication 
(NCS-R). JAMA: Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 289, 3095–3105.

R-16  |  References
Kessler, R. C., McGonagle, K. A., Zhao, S., Nelson, 
C. B., Hughes, M., Eshleman, S.,…Kendler, K. 
S. (1994). Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of 
DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the United States. 
Archives of General Psychology, 51, 8–19.
Kessler, R. C., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., & 
Wittchen, H-U. (2010). Epidemiology of anxiety dis-
orders. In M. B. Stein & T. Steckler (Eds.). Behavioral 
neurobiology of anxiety and its treatment: Current topics in 
behavioral neurosciences (pp. 21–35). New York: Springer 
Science + Business Media.
Keysers, C., & Gazzola, V. (2010). Social neurosci-
ence: Mirror neurons recorded in humans. Current 
Biology, 20, R353–R354.
Khan, A., Brodhead, A. E., Kolts, R. L., & Brown, 
W. A. (2005). Severity of depressive symptoms 
and response to antidepressants and placebo in 
antidepressant trials. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 39, 
146–150.
Kingdom, F. A. A., Yoonessi, A., & Gheorghiu, E. 
(2007). The leaning tower illusion: A new illusion of 
perspective. Perception, 36, 475–477.
Kirkpatrick, E. A. (1894). An experimental study of 
memory. Psychological Review, 1, 602–609.
Kirsch, I. (2010). The emperor’s new drugs: Exploding the 
antidepressant myth. New York: Basic Books.
Kirsch, I., Deacon, B. J., Huedo-Medina, T. B., 
Scoboria, A., Moore, T. J., & Johnson, B. T. (2008). 
Initial severity and antidepressant benefits: A meta-
analysis of data submitted to the Food and Drug 
Administration. PLoS Medicine, 5(2), e45.
Klein, S. B., & Kihlstrom, J. F. (1998). On bridg-
ing the gap between social-personality psychology 
and neuropsychology. Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, 2, 228–242.
Klüver, H., & Bucy, P. C. (1939). Preliminary analysis 
of functions of the temporal lobes in monkeys. Archives 
of Neurology and Psychiatry, 42, 979–1000.
Knight, D. C., Nguyen, H. T., & Bandettini, P. A. 
(2003). Expression of conditional fear with and with-
out awareness. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 100, 15280–15283.
Knoblich, G., & Oellinger, M. (2006, October/
November). Aha! The Eureka moment. Scientific 
American MIND, 17, 38–43.
Knowlton, B. J., Squire, L. R., Paulsen, J. S., 
Swerdlow, N. R., Swenson, M., & Butters, N. 
(1996). Dissociations within nondeclarative memory in 
Huntington’s disease. Neuropsychology, 10, 538–548.
Kohlberg, L. (1976). Moral stages and moralization: 
The cognitive-developmental approach. In T. Lickona 
(Ed.), Moral development and behavior: Theory, research, 
and social issues (pp. 31–53). New York: Holt, Rinehart, 
& Winston.
Kohlberg, L. (1984). Essays on moral development, Vol. 2. 
The psychology of moral development: The nature and valid-
ity of moral stages. San Francisco: Harper & Row.
Kolb, B., & Whishaw, I. Q. (2001). An introduction to 
brain and behavior. New York: Worth.
Koop, J. (2009). The root of thought. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Pearson Education.
Krackow, A., & Blass, T. (1995). When nurses 
obey or defy inappropriate physician orders: 
Attributional differences. Journal of Social Behavior, 
10, 585–594.
Krebs, H., Hogan, N., Hening, W., Adamovich, S., 
& Poizner, H. (2001). Procedural motor learning in 
Parkinson’s disease. Experimental Brain Research, 141, 
425–437.
Krijn, M., Emmelkamp, P. M. G., Olafsson, R. 
P., & Biemond, R. (2004). Virtual reality therapy of 
anxiety disorders: A review. Clinical Psychology Review, 
24, 259–281.
Krupa, D. J., Thompson, J. K., & Thompson, R. F. 
(1993). Localization of a memory trace in the mamma-
lian brain. Science, 260, 989–991.
Kuhl, P. K. (2004). Early language acquisition: 
Cracking the speech code. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
5, 831–843.
Kuhl, P. K., Tsao, F.-M., & Liu, H.-M. (2003). 
Foreign-language experience in infancy: Effects of 
short-term exposure and social interaction on phonetic 
learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
100, 9096–9101.
Lachman, M. E., & Weaver, S. L. (1998). The sense 
of control as a moderator of social class differences in 
health and well-being. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 74, 763–773.
Lambert, K., & Kinsley, C. H. (2005). Clinical neurosci-
ence: The neurobiological foundations of mental health. New 
York: Worth.
Lang, P. J. (1994). The varieties of emotional expe-
rience: A meditation on the James-Lange theory. 
Psychological Review, 101, 211–221.

References  |  R-17
Lange, C. G., & James, W. (1922). The emotions (I. A. 
Haupt, Trans.). Baltimore, MD: Williams & Wilkins.
Langer, E. J. (1989). Mindfulness. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley.
Langer, E. J. (1997). The power of mindful learning. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Larsen, R. J., & Buss, D. M. (2000). Personality psychol-
ogy: Domains of knowledge about human nature. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Latané, B., & Darley, J. M. (1968). Group inhibition 
of bystander intervention. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 10, 215–221.
Latané, B., & Darley, J. M. (1970). The unresponsive 
bystander: Why doesn’t he help? New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts.
Latané, B., & Nida, S. (1981). Ten years of research 
on group size and helping. Psychological Bulletin, 89, 
308–324.
Latané, B., & Rodin, J. (1969). A lady in distress: 
Inhibiting effects of friends and strangers on bystander 
intervention. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 5, 
189–202.
Latané, B., Williams, K. D., & Harkins, S. G. 
(1979). Many hands make light work: The causes and 
consequences of social loafing. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 37, 822–832.
LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysteri-
ous underpinnings of emotional life. New York: Simon & 
Schuster.
LeDoux, J. E. (2000). Emotional circuits in the brain. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 23, 155–184.
LeDoux, J. E. (2002). Synaptic self: How our brains 
become who we are. New York: Viking Penquin.
Legrenzi, P., & Umiltà, C. (2011). Neuromania: On 
the limits of brain science. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Lehrer, J. (2007). Proust was a neuroscientist. New York: 
Houghton Mifflin Harcout.
Lehrer, J. (2009). How we decide. New York: Houghton 
Mifflin Harcourt.
Leo, I., & Simion, F. (2009). Face processing at birth: 
A Thatcher illusion study. Developmental Science, 12, 
492–498.
Lepore, F. E. (2001, Winter). Dissecting genius: 
Einstein’s brain and the search for the neural basis of 
intellect. Cerebrum, 3, 11–26. Retrieved from www 
.dana.org/news/cerebrum/detail.aspx?id=3032
Lepper, M. R., Greene, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1973). 
Undermining children’s intrinsic interest with extrinsic 
rewards. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 28, 
129–137.
Lepper, M. R., & Henderlong, J. (2000). Turning 
“play” into “work” and “work” into “play”: 25 years 
of research on intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation. 
In C. Sansone & J. M. Havackiewicz (Eds.), Intrinsic 
and extrinsic motivation: The search for optimal motivation 
and performance (pp. 257–307). San Diego: Academic 
Press.
Lerner, M. J. (1980). The belief in a just world: A funda-
mental delusion. New York: Plenum.
Leung, A. K.-y., Kim, S., Polman, E., Ong, L. S., 
Qiu, L., Goncalo, J. A., & Sanchez-Burks, J. (2012). 
Embodied metaphors and creative “acts.” Psychological 
Science, 23, 502–509.
Levenson, R. W. (1992). Autonomic nervous system 
differences among emotions. Psychological Science, 3, 
23–27.
Levine, R. (2003). The power of persuasion: How we’re 
bought and sold. New York: Wiley.
Li, C. (1975). Path analysis: A primer. Pacific Grove, CA: 
Boxwood Press.
Lichtenstein, S., Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., Layman, 
M., & Combs, B. (1978). Judged frequency of lethal 
events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human 
Learning and Memory, 4, 551–578.
Lieberman, J. A., Stroup, T. S., McEvoy, J. P., 
Swartz, M. S., Rosenheck, R. A., Perkins, D. O.,…
Lewis, S. W. (2005). Effectiveness of antipsychotic 
drugs in patients with chronic schizophrenia. New 
England Journal of Medicine, 353, 1209–1223.
Lieberman, J. A., Tollefson, G. D., Charles, C., 
Zipursky, R., Sharma, T., Kahn, R. S.,…Tohen, 
M. (2005). Antipsychotic drug effects on brain mor-
phology in first-episode psychosis. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 62, 361–370.
Lilienfeld, S. O., Lynn, S. J., Ruscio, J., Beyerstein, 
B. L. (2010). 50 great myths of popular psychology: 
Shattering widespread misconceptions about human behavior. 
Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Lilienfeld, S. O., Wood, J. M., & Garb, H. N. 
(2000). The scientific status of projective techniques. 
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 1, 27–66.

R-18  |  References
Lindenmayer, J. P., & Khan, A. (2012). 
Psychopathology. In J. A. Lieberman, T. S. Stroup, & D. 
O. Perkins (Eds.), Essentials of schizophrenia (pp. 11–54). 
Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Lindner, I., Echterhoff, G., Davidson, P. S. R., & 
Brand, M. (2010). Observation inflation: Your actions 
become mine. Psychological Science, 21, 1291–1299.
Linn, R. L. (1982). Admissions testing on trial. 
American Psychologist, 37, 279–291.
Loehlin, J. C. (1992). Genes and environment in personal-
ity development. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Loehlin, J. C., McCrae, R. R., Costa, P. T., Jr., & 
John, O. P. (1998). Heritabilities of common and 
measure-specific components of the Big Five personality 
factors. Journal of Research in Personality, 32, 431–453.
Loftus, E. F. (2001, November). Imagining the past. 
The Psychologist, 14, 584–587.
Loftus, E. F. (2005). Planting misinformation in the 
human mind: A 30-year investigation of the malleabil-
ity of memory. Learning and Memory, 12, 361–366.
Loftus, E. F., Coan, J., & Pickrell, J. E. (1996). 
Manufacturing false memories using bits of reality. 
In L. Reder (Ed.), Implicit memory and metacognition 
(pp. 195–220). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Loftus, E. F., & Ketcham, K. (1991). Witness for the 
defense. New York: St. Martin’s.
Loftus, E. F., & Ketcham, K. (1994). The myth of 
repressed memory: False memories and accusations of sexual 
abuse. New York: St. Martin’s.
Loftus, E. F., & Palmer, J. C. (1974). Reconstruction 
of automobile destruction: An example of the interac-
tion between language and memory. Journal of Verbal 
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 585–589.
Lourenco, O., & Machado, A. (1996). In defense 
of Piaget’s theory: A reply to 10 common criticisms. 
Psychological Review, 103, 143–164.
Lovibond, S. H., Mithiran, X., & Adams, W. G. 
(1979). The effects of three experimental prison envi-
ronments on the behavior of non-convict volunteer 
subjects. Australian Psychologist, 14, 273–287.
Lynch, G., & Granger, R. (2008). Big brain: The origins 
and future of human intelligence. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
MacFarlane, A. (1975). Olfaction in the develop-
ment of social preferences in the human neonate. 
Parent-infant interaction (CIBA Foundation Symposium, 
No. 33). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Macmillan, M. (2000). An odd kind of fame: Stories of 
Phineas Gage. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Macmillan, M., & Lena, M. L. (2010). Rehabilitating 
Phineas Gage. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation, 20, 
641–658.
MacNeilage, P. F., Rogers, L. J., & Vallortigara, G. 
(2009, July). Origins of the left & right brain. Scientific 
American, 30, 60–67.
Maguire, E. A., Valentine, E. R., Wilding, J. M., 
& Kapur, N. (2003). Routes to remembering: The 
brains behind superior memory. Nature Neuroscience, 
6, 90–95.
Mahler, D. A., Cunningham, L. N., Skrinar, G. 
S., Kraemer, W. J., & Colice, G. L. (1989). Beta-
endorphin activity and hypercapnic ventilatory respon-
siveness after marathon running. Journal of Applied 
Physiology, 66, 2431–2436.
Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1990). Procedures for 
identifying infants as disorganized/disoriented during 
the Ainsworth Strange Situation. In M. T. Greenberg, 
D. Cicchetti, & E. M. Cummings (Eds.), Attachment in 
the preschool years (pp. 121–160). Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Malberg, J. E., & Schechter, L. E. (2005). Increasing 
hippocampal neurogenesis: A novel mechanism for 
antidepressant drugs. Current Pharmaceutical Design, 11, 
145–155.
Manning, R., Levine, M., & Collins, A. (2007). 
The Kitty Genovese murder and the social psychol-
ogy of helping: The parable of 38 witnesses. American 
Psychologist, 62, 555–562.
Marcel, A. (1983). Conscious and unconscious percep-
tion: Experiments on visual masking and word recog-
nition. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 197–237.
Martinez-Conde, S., & Macknik, S. L. (2010, 
Summer). The neuroscience of illusion. Scientific 
American MIND, 20, 4–7.
Maslow, A. H. (1968). Toward a psychology of being 
(2nd ed.). New York: Harper & Row.
Maslow, A. H. (1970). Motivation and personality 
(2nd ed.). New York: Harper & Row.
Matlin, M. W., & Foley, H. J. (1997). Sensation and 
perception (4th ed.). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and 
Bacon.

References  |  R-19
Mazur, J. E. (1998). Learning and behavior (4th ed.). 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
McCrae, R. R. (2011). Personality theories for the 
21st century. Teaching of Psychology, 38, 209–214.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1997). Personality 
trait structure as a human universal. American 
Psychologist, 52, 509–516.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1999). A five-
factor theory of personality. In L. A. Perrin & O. P. 
John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research 
(pp. 139–153). New York: Guilford.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (2001). Trait psy-
chology and culture. Journal of Personality, 69, 819–846.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (2003). Personality 
in adulthood: A five-factor theory perspective (2nd ed.). 
New York: Guilford.
McCrae, R. R., Costa, P. T., Jr., & Martin, T. A. 
(2005). The NEO-PI-3: A more readable revised NEO 
personality inventory. Journal of Personality Assessment, 
84, 261–270.
McCrae, R. R., Costa, P. T., Jr., Martin, T. A., 
Oryol, V. E., Rukavishnikow, A. A., Senin, I. G.,…
Urbanek, T. (2004). Consensual validation of per-
sonality traits across cultures. Journal of Research in 
Personality, 38, 179–201.
McCrae, R. R., & Sutin, A. R. (2009). Openness 
to experience. In M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle (Eds.), 
Handbook of individual differences in social behavior 
(pp. 257–273). New York: Guilford.
McGue, M., Bouchard, T. J., Jr., Iacono, W. G., & 
Lykken, D. T. (1993). Behavioral genetics of cognitive 
ability: A life-span perspective. In R. Plomin & G. E. 
McClearn (Eds.), Nature, nurture, and psychology (pp. 59–76). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
McGurk, H., & MacDonald, J. (1976). Hearing lips 
and seeing voices. Nature, 264, 746–748.
McKinnon, J. W., & Renner, J. W. (1971). Are 
colleges concerned with intellectual development? 
American Journal of Psychology, 39, 1047–1052.
McNally, R. J. (1987). Preparedness and phobias: A 
review. Psychological Bulletin, 101, 283–303.
McNally, R. J. (2003). Remembering trauma. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Messer, W. S., & Griggs, R. A. (1989). Student belief 
and involvement in the paranormal and performance 
in introductory psychology. Teaching of Psychology, 16, 
187–191.
Mezulis, A. H., Abramson, L. Y., Hyde, J. S., & 
Hankin, B. L. (2004). Is there a universal positivity 
bias in attributions? A meta-analytic review of indi-
vidual, developmental, and cultural differences in 
self-serving attributional bias. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 
711–747.
Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral study of obedience. 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 67, 371–378.
Milgram, S. (1964). Issues in the study of obedience: 
A reply to Baumrind. American Psychologist, 19, 848–852.
Milgram, S. (1965). Some conditions of obedience 
and disobedience. Human Relations, 18, 57–76.
Milgram, S. (1974). Obedience to authority. New York: 
Harper & Row.
Miller, B., & Gentile, B. F. (1998). Introductory course 
content and goals. Teaching of Psychology, 25, 89–96.
Miller, G. (2005). How are memories stored and 
retrieved? Science, 309, 92.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus 
or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for process-
ing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81–97.
Miller, G. A. (1962). Psychology: The science of mental life. 
New York: Penguin Books.
Miller, P. H. (2011). Theories of developmental psychology 
(5th ed.). New York: Worth.
Millon, T., Millon, C. M., Meagher, S., & 
Grossman, S. (2004). Personality disorders in modern life 
(2nd ed.). New York: Wiley.
Milton, J., & Wiseman, R. (1999). Does psi exist? 
Lack of replication of an anomalous process of infor-
mation transfer. Psychological Bulletin, 125, 387–391.
Mlodinow, L. (2008). The drunkard’s walk: How ran-
domness rules our lives. New York: Pantheon Books.
Moncrieff, J. (1997). Lithium: Evidence reconsidered. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 171, 113–119.
Moncrieff, J. (2009). The myth of the chemical cure: A 
critique of psychiatric drug treatment (Rev. ed.). New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Moonesinghe, R., Khoury, M. J., & Janssens, A. 
C. J. W. (2007). Most published research findings are 
false—But a little replication goes a long way. PLOS 
Med 4(2), e28. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0040028

R-20  |  References
Moore, T. E. (1988). The case against subliminal 
manipulation. Psychology and Marketing, 5, 297–316.
Moore, T. E. (1992, November/December). Subliminal 
perception: Facts and fallacies. Skeptical Inquirer, 16, 
273–281.
Morgan, C. D., & Murray, H. A. (1935). A 
method for investigating fantasies: The Thematic 
Apperception Test. Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry, 
34, 289–306.
Mori, K., & Arai, M. (2010). No need to fake it: 
Reproduction of the Asch experiment without confed-
erates. International Journal of Psychology, 45, 390–397.
Morris, J. S., Öhman, A., & Dolan, R. J. (1998). 
Conscious and unconscious emotional learning in the 
human amygdala. Nature, 393, 467–470.
Morris, R. G., Miotto, E. C., Feigenbaum, J. D., 
Bullock, P., & Polkey, C. E. (1997). The effect of 
goal-subgoal conflict on planning ability after frontal- 
and temporal-lobe lesions in humans. Neuropsychologica, 
35, 1147–1157.
Mortensen, P. B., Norgaard-Pedersen, B., Waltoft, 
B. L., Sorensen, T. L., Hougaard, D., & Yolken, 
R. H. (2007). Early infections of Toxoplasma gondii and 
the later development of schizophrenia. Schizophrenic 
Bulletin, 33, 741–744.
Moruzzi, G., & Magoun, H. W. (1949). Brain 
stem reticular formation and activation of the EEG. 
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 1, 
455–473.
Moshman, D., & Franks, B. A. (1986). Development 
of the concept of inferential validity. Child Development, 
57, 153–165.
Moyer, V. A. (2012, July). Screening for prostate cancer: 
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation 
statement. Annals of Internal Medicine, 157(2), 1–44.
Mukamel, R., Ekstrom, A. D., Kaplan, J., 
Iacoboni, M., & Fried, I. (2010). Single-neuron 
responses in humans during execution and observation 
of actions. Current Biology, 20, 750–756.
Murray, J. P. (2008). Media violence: The effects are 
both real and strong. American Behavioral Scientist, 51, 
1212–1230.
Myers, D. G. (2001, December). Do we fear the right 
things? American Psychological Society Observer, 14, 3.
Myers, D. G. (2002). Social psychology (7th ed.). New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Myers, D. G. (2013). Social psychology (11th ed.). New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Myers, I. B., & McCaulley, M. H. (1985). Manual: A 
guide to the development and use of the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Napolitan, D. A., & Goethals, G. R. (1979). The 
attribution of friendliness. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 15, 105–113.
Nathan, P. E., & Lagenbucher, J. W. (1999). 
Psychopathology: Description and classification. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 79–107.
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: The prece-
dence of global features in visual perception. Cognitive 
Psychology, 9, 353–383.
Neimark, J. (1996, January). The diva of disclosure, 
memory researcher Elizabeth Loftus. Psychology Today, 
29, 48–80.
Neisser, U. (Ed.). (1998). The rising curve: Long-term 
gains in IQ and related measures. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Neisser, U., Boodoo, G., Bouchard, T. J., Jr., 
Boykin, A. W., Brody, N., Ceci, S. J.,…Urbina, S. 
(1996). Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns. American 
Psychologist, 51, 77–101.
Nettle, D. (2007). Personality: What makes you the way 
you are. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nettle, D., & Liddle, B. (2008). Agreeableness is related 
to social-cognitive, but not social-perceptual, theory of 
mind. European Journal of Personality, 22, 323–335.
Newport, E. (1991). Contrasting concepts of the 
critical period for language. In S. Carey & R. Gelman 
(Eds.), The epigenesis of mind: Essays on biology and cogni-
tion (pp. 111–132). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network. 
(1997). The effects of infant child care on infant-mother 
attachment security: Results of the NICHD Study of 
Early Child Care. Child Development, 68, 860–879.
NICHD Early Child Care Research Network 
(2001). Child-care and family predictors of preschool 
attachment and stability from infancy. Developmental 
Psychology, 37, 347–862.
NIMH (National Institute of Mental Health). (2011). 
Agoraphobia among adults. Bethesda, MD; Author.
Nickerson, R. S. (1998). Confirmation bias: A ubiq-
uitous phenomenon in many guises. Review of General 
Psychology, 2, 175–220.

References  |  R-21
Nickerson, R. S., & Adams, M. J. (1979). Long-term 
memory for a common object. Cognitive Psychology, 11, 
287–307.
Niemi, M. (2009, February/March). Cure in the mind. 
Scientific American MIND, 20, 42–49.
Nir, Y., & Tonino, G. (2010). Dreaming and the 
brain: From phenomenology to neurophysiology. 
Trends in Cognitive Science, 14, 88–100.
Nisbett, R. E., & Ross, L. (1980). Human inference: 
Strategies and shortcomings of social judgment. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Noftle, E. E., & Robins, R. W. (2007). Personality 
predictors of academic outcomes: Big Five correlates 
of GPS and SAT scores. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 93, 116–130.
Noice, T., & Noice, H. (1997). The nature of expertise in 
professional acting: A cognitive view. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Oatley, K., & Duncan, E. (1994). The experience of 
emotions in everyday life. Cognition and Emotion, 8, 
369–381.
Öhman, A., & Mineka, S. (2001). Fear, phobias, and 
preparedness: Toward an evolved module of fear and 
fear learning. Psychology Review, 108, 483–522.
O’Kane, G., Kensinger, E. A., & Corkin, S. (2004). 
Evidence for semantic learning in profound amnesia: 
An investigation with patient H. M. Hippocampus, 14, 
417–425.
Olson, M. A., & Fazio, R. H. (2001). Implicit attitude 
formation through classical conditioning. Psychological 
Science, 12, 413–417.
Olsson, A., & Phelps, E. A. (2004). Learned fear 
of “unseen” faces after Pavlovian, observational, and 
instructed fear. Psychological Science, 15, 822–828.
Orne, M. T. (1962) On the social psychology of the 
psychological experiment: With particular references 
to demand characteristics and their implications. 
American Psychologist, 17, 776–783.
Ornstein, R. (1991). The evolution of consciousness: Of 
Darwin, Freud, and cranial fire—the origins of the way we 
think. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Osherson, D. N., & Markman, E. M. (1975). 
Language and the ability to evaluate contradictions 
and tautologies. Cognition, 2, 213–226.
Otsuka, Y., Yanagi, K., & Watanabe, S. (2009). 
Discriminative and reinforcing stimulus properties of 
music for rats. Behavioural Processes, 80, 121–127.
Packer, D. J. (2008). Identifying systematic disobedience 
in Milgram’s obedience experiments: A meta-analytic 
review. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3, 301–304.
Parents Television Council. (2009, January 10). 
Dying to entertain: Violence on prime time broadcast 
TV, 1998 to 2006 [Special Report]. Retrieved from 
w2.parentstv.org 
Pascual-Leone, J. (1989). Constructive problems for 
constructive theories: The current relevance of Piaget’s 
work and a critique of information-processing simu-
lation psychology. In R. Kluwe & H. Spada (Eds.), 
Developmental models of thinking (pp. 263–296). New 
York: Academic Press.
Paterniti, M. (2000). Driving Mr. Albert: A trip across 
America with Einstein’s brain. New York: Random 
House.
Paulos, J. A. (2003). A mathematician plays the stock mar-
ket. New York: Basic Books.
Paulos, J. A. (2006, August 6). Who’s counting: 
It’s mean to ignore the median. Retrieved from 
www.abcnews.com/Technology/WhosCounting
Paulus, J. (2007, April/May). Lithium’s healing power. 
Scientific American MIND, 18, 70–75.
Pavlov, I. P. (1960). Conditioned reflexes: An investiga-
tion of the physiological activity of the cerebral cortex (G.V. 
Anrep, Trans.). New York: Dover. (Original work pub-
lished 1927)
Payne, D. G., & Wenger, M. J. (1996). Practice effects 
in memory: Data, theory, and unanswered questions. 
In D. Herrmann, C. McEvoy, C. Hertzog, P. Hertel, & 
M. K. Johnson (Eds.), Basic and applied memory research: 
Practical applications (Vol. 2, pp. 123–138). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Peciña, M., Azhar, H., Love, T. M., Lu, T., 
Frederickson, B. L., Stohler, C. S., & Zubieta, J. K. 
(2013). Personality trait predictors of placebo analgesia 
and neurobiological correlates. Neuropsychoharmacology, 
38, 639–646.
Penfield, W., & Boldrey, E. (1937). Somatic motor 
and sensory representation in the cerebral cortex of 
man as studied by electrical stimulation. Brain, 60, 389.
Penfield, W., & Rasmussen, T. (1968). The cerebral 
cortex of man: A clinical study of localization of function. 
New York: Hafner.
Perera, T. D., Dwork, A. J., Keegan, K. A., 
Thirumangalakudi, L., Lipira, C. M., Joyce, 
N.,…Coplan, J. D. (2011). Necessity of 

R-22  |  References
hippocampal neurogenesis for the therapeutic 
action of antidepressants in adult nonhuman pri-
mates. PLoS ONE 6(4), e17600. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0017600
Pert, C. B. (1999). Molecules of emotion. New York: 
Simon & Schuster.
Pert, C. B., & Snyder, S. H. (1973). Opiate recep-
tors: Demonstration in the nervous tissue. Science, 179, 
1011–1014.
Pessiglione, M., Petrovic, P., Daunizeau, J., 
Palminteri, S., Dolan, R. J., & Frith, C. D. (2008). 
Subliminal instrumental conditioning demonstrated 
in the human brain. Neuron, 59, 561–567.
Peterson, C., Maier, S. F., & Seligman, M. E. P. 
(1993). Learned helplessness: A theory for the age of personal 
control. New York: Oxford.
Peterson, C., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1984). Causal 
explanations as a risk factor for depression: Theory 
and evidence. Psychological Review, 91, 347–374.
Peterson, L. R., & Peterson, M. J. (1959). Short-
term retention of individual verbal items. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 58, 193–198.
Pettinati, H. M., Tamburello, B. A., Ruetsch, C. 
R., & Kaplan, F. N. (1994). Patient attitudes toward 
electroconvulsive therapy. Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 
30, 471–475.
Phipps, M., Blume, J., & DeMonner, S. (2002). 
Young maternal age associated with increased risk 
of postneonatal death. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 100, 
481–486.
Piaget, J. (1929). The child’s conception of the world. New 
York: Harcourt, Brace. (Original work published 1926)
Piaget, J. (1932). The moral judgment of the child. New 
York: Harcourt, Brace.
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children. 
New York: International Universities Press. (Original 
work published 1936)
Piaget, J. (1972). Intellectual evolution from adoles-
cence to adulthood. Human Development, 15, 1–12.
Piaget, J. (1983). Piaget’s theory. In P. H. Mussen 
(Series Ed.) and W. Kessen (Vol. Ed.), Handbook of child 
psychology: Vol. 1. History, theory, and methods (4th ed., 
pp. 103–126). New York: Wiley.
Pinker, S. (1994). The language instinct: How the mind 
creates language. New York: William Morrow.
Pliner, P., Hart, H., Kohl, J., & Saari, D. (1974). 
Compliance without pressure: Some further data on 
the foot-in-the-door technique. Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 10, 17–22.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., McClearn, G. E., & Rutter, 
M. (1997). Behavioral genetics. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Plous, S. (1993). The psychology of judgment and decision 
making. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Porter, D., & Neuringer, A. (1984). Musical discrimi-
nations by pigeons. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Animal Behavior Processes, 10, 138–148.
Powell, R. A., Symbaluk, D. G., & MacDonald, S. 
E. (2002). Introduction to learning & behavior. Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth.
Pratkanis, A. R. (1992, Spring). The cargo-cult 
science of subliminal persuasion. Skeptical Inquirer, 16, 
260–272.
Pratkanis, A. R., & Greenwald, A. G. (1988). Recent 
perspectives on unconscious processing: Still no 
marketing applications. Psychology and Marketing, 5, 
337–353.
Pratt, L. A., Brody, D. J., & Gu, Q. (2011, October). 
Antidepressant use in persons aged 12 and over: United 
States, 2005–2008. (NCHS data brief, No. 76). 
Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 
Retrieved from www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/
db76.htm 
Premack, D. (1959). Toward empirical behavior 
laws: I. Positive reinforcement. Psychological Review, 66, 
219–233.
Premack, D. (1965). Reinforcement theory. In D. 
Levine (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation (Vol. 13, 
pp. 123–180). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska.
Ptito, A., & Leh, S. E. (2007). Neural substrates of 
blindsight after hemispherectomy. Neuroscientist, 13, 
506–518.
Pulver, S. E. (1961). The first electroconvulsive 
treatment given in the United States. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 117, 845.
Ramachandran, V. W., & Blakeslee, S. (1998). 
Phantoms in the brain: Probing the mysteries of the 
human mind. New York: William Morrow and 
Company, Inc.
Ramachandran, V. S., & Hubbard, E. M. (2003, 
May). Hearing colors, tasting shapes. Scientific American, 
288, 52–59.

References  |  R-23
Rammstedt, B., & John, O. P. (2007). Measuring 
personality in one minute or less: A 10-item short ver-
sion of the Big Five Inventory in English and German. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 203–212.
Raphael, B. (1976). The thinking computer. San 
Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Rapoport, J. L. (1989, March). The biology of obses-
sions and compulsions. Scientific American, 83–89.
Rapoport, J. L. (1991). Recent advances in obsessive-
compulsive disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 5, 1–10.
Rapport, R. (2005). Nerve endings: The discovery of the 
synapse. New York: W. W. Norton.
Raskin, N. J., & Rogers, C. R. (1995). Person-centered 
therapy. In R. J. Corsini & D. Wedding (Eds.), Current 
psychotherapies (5th ed., pp. 144–149). Itasca, IL: Peacock.
Ratey, J. J. (2001). A user’s guide to the brain: Perception, 
attention, and the four theaters of the brain. New York: 
Pantheon.
Ratiu, P., Talos, I-F., Haker, S., Lieberman, D., & 
Everett, P. (2004). The tale of Phineas Gage, digitally 
remastered. Journal of Neurotrauma, 21, 637–643.
Reber, P. (2010, May/June). Ask the Brains. Scientific 
American MIND, 21, 70.
Redelmeier, D. A., & Tversky, A. (1996). On the 
belief that arthritis pain is related to the weather. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 93, 
2895–2896.
Regier, D. A., Narrow, W. E., Kuhl, E. A., & 
Kupfer, D. J. (Eds.). (2011). The conceptual evolu-
tion of DSM-5. Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric 
Association.
Reicher, S., & Haslam, S. A. (2006). Rethinking the 
psychology of tyranny: The BBC prison study. British 
Journal of Social Psychology, 45, 1–40.
Rescorla, R. A. (1988). Pavlovian conditioning: It’s 
not what you think it is. American Psychologist, 43, 
151–160.
Rescorla, R. A. (1996). Preservation of Pavlovian 
associations through extinction. Quarterly Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 49B, 245–258.
Restak, R., & Kim, S. (2010). The playful brain: The 
surprising science of how puzzles improve your mind. 
New York: Penguin Group.
Restle, F. (1970). Moon illusion explained on the basis 
of relative size. Science, 167, 1092–1096.
Reuter-Lorenz, P. A., & Miller, A. C. (1998). 
The cognitive neuroscience of human laterality: 
Lessons from the bisected brain. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 15, 15–20.
Reverberi, C., Toraldo, A., D’Agostini, S., & 
Skrap, M. (2005). Better without (lateral) frontal cor-
tex? Insight problems solved by frontal patients. Brain, 
128, 2882–2890.
Ridley-Johnson, R., Cooper, H., & Chance, J. 
(1983). The relation of children’s television viewing 
to school achievement and IQ. Journal of Educational 
Research, 76, 294–297.
Rilling, J. K., & Insel, T. R. (1998). Evolution of the 
cerebellum in primates: Differences in relative volume 
among monkeys, apes, and humans. Brain, Behavior, 
and Evolution, 52, 308.
Ritov, I. (1996). Anchoring in simulated competitive 
market negotiation. Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes, 67, 16–25.
Rivas-Vasquez, R. A. (2003). Aripiprazole: A novel 
antipsychotic with dopamine stabilizing properties. 
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 34, 108–111.
Rizzolatti, G., & Arbib, M. A. (1998). Language 
within our grasp. Trends in Neuroscience, 21, 188–194.
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The 
mirror-neuron system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 
27, 169–192.
Roberts, B. W., Smith, J., Jackson, J. J., 
& Edmonds, G. (2009). Compensatory 
conscientiousness and health in older couples. 
Psychological Science, 20, 553–559.
Roediger, H. L., & Karpicke, J. D. (2006). 
Test-enhanced learning: Taking memory tests 
improves long-term retention. Psychological Science, 17, 
249–255.
Roese, N. J., & Vohs, K. D. (2012). Hindsight bias. 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 411–426.
Rogers, C. R. (1951). Client-centered therapy: Its current 
practices, implications, and theory. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person: A therapist’s 
view of psychotherapy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, T. B., Kuiper, N. A., & Kirker, W. S. (1977). 
Self-reference and the encoding of personal informa-
tion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 
677–688.

R-24  |  References
Rohrer, D., & Taylor, K. (2006). The effects of 
overlapping and distributed practise on the retention 
of mathematics knowledge. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 
20, 1209–1224.
Rohrer, J. H., Baron, S. H., Hoffman, E. L., & 
Swander, D. V. (1954). The stability of autokinetic 
judgments. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 49, 
595–597.
Rorschach, H. (1942). Psychodiagnostik (Hans Huber, 
Trans.). Bern, Switzerland: Verlag. (Original work 
published in 1921).
Rosch, E. H. (1973). Natural categories. Cognitive 
Psychology, 4, 328–350.
Rosenberg, A., Ledley, D. R., & Heimberg, R. 
G. (2010). Social anxiety disorder. In D. McKay, J. S. 
Abramowitz & S. Taylor (Eds.), Cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for refractory cases: Turning failure into success 
(pp. 65–88). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Rosenhan, D. L. (1973). On being sane in insane 
places. Science, 179, 250–258.
Rosenthal, A. M. (1964). Thirty-eight witnesses: The Kitty 
Genovese case. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rosenthal, R. (1966). Experimenter effects in behavioral 
research. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Rosenthal, R. (1994). Interpersonal expectancy effects: 
A 30-year perspective. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 3, 176–179.
Rosenthal, R., & Jacobson, L. (1968). Pygmalion in the 
classroom: Teacher expectation and pupils’ intellectual devel-
opment. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Ross, L. (1977). The intuitive psychologist and his 
shortcomings: Distortions in the attribution process. 
In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social 
psychology (Vol. 10, pp. 173–220). New York: Academic 
Press.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for 
internal versus external control of reinforcement. 
Psychological Monographs, 80 (1, Whole No. 609).
Rotter, J. B. (1990). Internal versus external control 
of reinforcement: A case history of a variable. American 
Psychologist, 45, 489–493.
Rubin, E. (2001). Figure and ground. In S. Yantis 
(Ed.), Visual perception: Essential readings (pp. 225–230). 
Philadelphia: Psychology Press. (Original work 
published 1921)
Rubin, N. (2001). Figure and ground in the brain. 
Nature Neuroscience, 4, 857–858.
Rundus, D., & Atkinson, R. C. (1970). Rehearsal 
processes in free recall: A procedure for direct observa-
tion. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 9, 
99–105.
Sabbagh, L. (2006, August/September). The teen 
brain, hard at work. No, Really. Scientific American 
MIND, 17, 20–25.
Sackett, P. R., Bornerman, M. J., & Connelly, B. 
J. (2008). High-stakes testing in higher education and 
employment: Appraising the evidence for validity and 
fairness. American Psychologist, 63, 215–227.
Sackett, P. R., Schmitt, N., Ellingson, J. E., & 
Kabin, M. B. (2001). High-stakes testing in employ-
ment, credentialing, and higher education: Prospects 
in a post-affirmative action world. American Psychologist, 
56, 302–318.
Sanders, A. R., Duan, J., & Gejman, P. V. (2012). 
Schizophrenia genetics: What have learned from 
genomewide association studies? In A. S. Brown 
& P. H. Patterson (Eds.), The origins of schizophrenia 
(pp. 175–209). New York: Columbia University Press.
Sareen, J., Afifi, T. O., McMillan, K. A., & 
Asmundson, G. J. G. (2011). Relationship between 
household income and mental disorders: Findings 
from a population-based longitudinal study. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 68, 419–426.
Satel, S. L., & Lilienfeld, S. O. (2013). Brainwashed: 
The seductive appeal of mindless neuroscience. New York: 
Basic Books.
Saufley, W. H., Otaka, S. R., & Bavaresco, J. L. 
(1985). Context effects: Classroom tests and context 
independence. Memory and Cognition, 13, 522–528.
Schachter, S., & Singer, J. E. (1962). Cognitive, 
social, and physiological determinants of emotional 
state. Psychological Review, 69, 379–399.
Schacter, D. L. (2000). The seven sins of memory: How 
the mind forgets and remembers. New York: Houghton 
Mifflin.
Schafe, G. E., Sollars, S. I., & Bernstein, I. L. 
(1995). The CS-UCS interval and taste aversion 
learning: A brief look. Behavioral Neuroscience, 109, 
799–802.
Schaie, K. W. (1994). The life course of adult intellec-
tual development. American Psychologist, 49, 304–313.

References  |  R-25
Schaie, K. W. (1995). Intellectual development in 
adulthood: The Seattle Longitudinal Study. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans, 
goals, and understanding: An inquiry into human knowledge 
structures. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schmid, M. C., Mrowka, S. W., Turchi, J., 
Saunders, R. C., Wilke, M., Peters, A. J.,…Leopold, 
D. A. (2010). Blindsight depends on the lateral 
geniculate nucleus. Nature, 466, 373–377.
Schmidt, D. P., Allik, J., McCrae, R. R., & Benet-
Martinez, V. (2007). The geographic distribution 
of big five personality traits: Patterns and profiles of 
human self-description across 56 nations. Journal of 
Cross-Cultural Psychology, 38, 173–212.
Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1998). The validity and 
utility of selection methods in personnel psychology: 
Practical and theoretical implications of 85 years of 
research findings. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 262–274.
Schneider, B. H., Atkinson, L., & Tardif, C. (2001). 
Child-parent attachment and children’s peer relations: 
A quantitative review. Developmental Psychology, 37, 
86–100.
Schneider, W. (1993). Domain-specific knowledge 
and memory performance in children. Educational 
Psychology Review, 5, 257–273.
Schultz, D. (2001). Theories of personality (7th ed.). 
Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Schwartz, N. (1999). Self-reports: How the questions 
shape the answers. American Psychologist, 54, 93–105.
Schwartzkopf, D. S., Song, C., & Rees, G. (2011). The 
surface area of human V1 predicts the subjective experi-
ence of object size. Nature Neuroscience, 14, 28–30.
Scott, B. W., Wojtowicz, J. M., & Burnham, W. M. 
(2000). Neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus of the rat 
following electroconvulsive shock seizures. Experimental 
Neurology, 165, 231–236.
Scoville, W. B., & Milner, B. (1957). Loss of recent 
memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions. Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 20, 11–21.
Segall, M. H., Campbell, D. T., & Herskovits, M. 
J. (1963). Cultural differences in the perception of geo-
metric illusions. Science, 193, 769–771.
Segall, M. H., Campbell, D. T., & Herskovits, M. 
J. (1966). The influence of culture on visual perception. 
Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill.
Segall, M. H., Dasen, P. R., Berry, J. W., & 
Poortinga, Y. H. (1990). Human behavior in a global 
perspective: An introduction to cross-cultural psychology. New 
York: Pergamon.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1971). Phobias and preparedness. 
Behavior Therapy, 2, 307–320.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). Helplessness: On depression, 
development, and death. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1994). What you can change and 
what you can’t: The ultimate guide to self-improvement. New 
York: Knopf.
Seligman, M. E. P., Walker, E. F., & Rosenhan, 
D. L. (2001). Abnormal psychology (4th ed.). New York: 
Norton.
Senfor, A. J., Van Petten, C., & Kutas, M. (2002). 
Episodic action memory for real objects: An ERP 
investigation with perform, watch and imagine action 
encoding tasks versus a non-action encoding task. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 14, 402–419.
Senghas, A., & Coppola, M. (2001). Children 
creating language: How Nicaraguan sign language 
acquired a spatial grammar. Psychological Science, 12, 
323–328.
Sergent, J., Ohta, S., & MacDonald, B. (1992). 
Functional neuroanatomy of face and object process-
ing: A positron emission tomography study. Brain, 115, 
15–36.
Seung, S. (2012). Connectome: How the brain’s wiring 
makes us who we are. New York: Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt.
Shadish, W. R., Matt, G. E., Navarro, A. M., & 
Phillips, G. (2000). The effects of psychological 
therapies under clinically representative conditions: A 
meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 512–529.
Sharman, S. J., Garry, M., & Beuke, C. J. (2004). 
Imagination or exposure causes imagination inflation. 
American Journal of Psychology, 117, 157–168.
Sharp, E. S., Reynolds, C. A., Pedersen, N. L., & 
Gatz, M. (2010). Cognitive engagement and cognitive 
aging: Is openness protective? Psychology and Aging, 25, 
60–73.
Shedler, J. (2010). The efficacy of psychodynamic 
psychotherapy. American Psychologist, 63, 98–109.
Shepard, R. N. (1990). Mind sights: Original visual 
illusions, ambiguities, and other anomalies. New York: W. 
H. Freeman.

R-26  |  References
Sherif, M. (1937). An experimental approach to the 
study of attitudes. Sociometry, 1, 90–98.
Sherif, M., & Sherif, C. W. (1969). Social psychology. 
New York: Harper and Row.
Shermer, M. (2008, October/November). Why you 
should be skeptical of brain scans. Scientific American 
MIND, 19, 66–71.
Simpkins, S., Parke, R., Flyr, M., & Wild, M. 
(2006). Similarities in children’s and early adolescents’ 
perceptions of friendship qualities across develop-
ment, gender, and friendship qualities. Journal of Early 
Adolescence, 26, 491–508.
Skinner, B. F. (1938). The behavior of organisms: An 
experimental analysis. New York: Appleton-Century-
Crofts.
Skinner, B. F. (1956). A case history in the scientific 
method. American Psychologist, 45, 1206–1210.
Skotko, B. G., Kensinger, E. A., Locascio, J. J., 
Einstein, G., Rubin, D. C., Tupler, L. A.,…Corkin, 
S. (2004). Puzzling thoughts for H. M.: Can new 
semantic information be anchored to old semantic 
memories? Neuropsychology, 18, 756–769.
Slater, M., Antley, A., Davison, A., Swapp, D., 
Guger, C., Barker, C.,…Sanchez-Vives, M. V. (2006). 
A virtual reprise of the Stanley Milgram obedience 
experiments. PLoS ONE 1(1), e39. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0000039
Slovic, P., & Fischhoff, B. (1977). On the psychology 
of experimental surprises. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 3, 
544–551.
Smith, M. B. (1978). Psychology and values. Journal of 
Social Issues, 34, 181–199.
Smith, C. N., & Squire, L. R. (2009). Medial tempo-
ral lobe activity during retrieval of semantic memory 
is related to the age of the memory. The Journal of 
Neuroscience, 29, 930–938.
Smith, M. L., Glass, G. V., & Miller, T. I. (1980). The 
benefits of psychotherapy. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press.
Smith, S. M., Glenberg, A., & Bjork, R. A. (1978). 
Environmental context and human memory. Memory 
and Cognition, 6, 342–353.
Snarey, J. R. (1985). Cross-cultural universality 
of social-moral development: A critical review of 
Kohlbergian research. Psychological Bulletin, 97, 202–232.
Soussignan, R. (2002). Duchenne smile, emotional 
experience, and autonomic reactivity: A test of the 
facial-feedback hypothesis. Emotion, 2, 52–74.
Spearman, C. (1927). The abilities of man. New York: 
Macmillan.
Spence, M. J., & Freeman, M. S. (1996). Newborn 
infants prefer the low-pass filtered voice, but not 
the maternal whispered voice. Infant Behavior and 
Development, 19, 199–212.
Sperling, G. (1960). The information available in 
brief visual presentations. Psychological Monographs, 74 
(Whole No. 498).
Springer, S. P., & Deutsch, G. (1998). Left brain, right 
brain (5th ed.). New York: W. H. Freeman.
Squire, L. R. (2004). Memory systems of the brain: A 
brief history and current perspective. Neurobiology of 
Learning and Memory, 82, 171–177.
Squire, L. R. (2009). The legacy of patient H. M. for 
neuroscience. Neuron, 61, 6–9.
Squire, L. R., & Cohen, N. J. (1984). Human memory 
and amnesia. In G. Lynch, J. L. McGaugh, & N. M. 
Weinberger (Eds.), Neurobiology of learning and memory 
(pp. 3–64). New York: Guilford Press.
Staddon, J. E. R., & Ettinger, R. H. (1989). Learning: 
An introduction to the principles of adaptive behavior. San 
Diego: Harcourt.
Stanovich, K. E. (2004). How to think straight about 
psychology (7th ed.). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and 
Bacon.
Stanovich, K. E. (2009a, November/December). 
Rational and irrational thought: The thinking that IQ 
tests miss. Scientific American MIND, 20, 34–39.
Stanovich, K. E. (2009b). What intelligence tests miss: 
The psychology of rational thought. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual dif-
ferences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality 
debate. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645–665.
Stern, W. (1914). The psychological methods of testing 
intelligence (G. M. Whipple, Trans.). Baltimore, MD: 
Warrick and York.
Sternberg, R. J. (1985). Beyond IQ: A triarchic theory of 
intelligence. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Sternberg, R. J. (1988). The triarchic mind: A new theory 
of human intelligence. New York: Viking.

References  |  R-27
Sternberg, R. J. (1999). The theory of successful intel-
ligence. Review of General Psychology, 3, 292–316.
Sternberg, R. J., & Davidson, J. E. (1982, June). The 
mind of the puzzler. Psychology Today, 16, 37–44.
Stevens, S. S. (1962). The surprising simplicity of 
sensory metrics. American Psychologist, 17, 29–39.
Stevens, S. S. (1975). Psychophysics: Introduction to its 
perceptual, neural, and social prospects. New York: Wiley.
Stevenson, H. W., Chen, C., & Lee, S. (1993). 
Mathematics achievement of Chinese, Japanese, and 
American schoolchildren: Ten years later. Science, 259, 
53–58.
Stevenson, H. W., & Stigler, J. W. (1992). The learn-
ing gap. New York: Summit.
Stewart, N. (2009). The cost of anchoring. Psychological 
Science, 20, 39–41.
Stewart, V. M. (1973). Tests of the “carpentered 
world” hypothesis by race and environment in America 
and Zambia. International Journal of Psychology, 8, 83–94.
Stewart-Williams, S. (2004). The placebo puzzle: 
Putting together the pieces. Health Psychology, 23, 
198–206.
Stickgold, R., & Ellenbogen, J. M. (2009, August/
September). Quiet! Sleeping brain at work. Scientific 
American MIND, 19, 22–29.
Stickgold, R., Hobson, J. A., Fosse, R., & Fosse, M. 
(2001). Sleep, learning, and dreams: Off-line memory 
reprocessing. Science, 294, 1052–1057.
Stone, J. M. (2011). Glutamatergic antipsychotic 
drugs: A new dawn in the treatment of schizophrenia? 
Therapeutic Advances in Psychopharmacology, 1, 5–18.
Stone, V. E., Nisenson, L., Eliassen, J. C., & 
Gazzaniga, M. S. (1996). Left hemisphere representa-
tions of emotional facial expressions. Neuropsychologica, 
34, 23–29.
Sweeney, M. S. (2009). Brain: The complete mind. 
Washington, DC: National Geographic.
Sweeney, M. S. (2011). Brain works: The mind-bending 
science of how you see, what you think, and who you are. 
Washington, DC: National Geographic.
Swets, J. A. (1964). Signal detection and recognition by 
human observers. New York: Wiley.
Symons, C. S., & Johnson, B. T. (1997). The 
self-reference effect in memory: A meta-analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 121, 371–394.
Takei, N., Van Os, J., & Murray, R. M. (1995). 
Maternal exposure to influenza and risk of schizophre-
nia: A 22 year study from the Netherlands. Journal of 
Psychiatric Research, 29, 435–445.
Talmi, D., Grady, C. L., Goshen-Gottstein, Y., & 
Moscovitch, M. (2005). Neuroimaging the serial posi-
tion curve: A test of single-store versus dual-store mod-
els. Psychological Science, 16, 716–723.
Tammet, D. (2009). Embracing the wide sky: A tour 
across the horizons of the mind. New York: Free Press.
Tang, S., & Hall, V. C. (1995). The overjustification 
effect: A meta-analysis. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9, 
365–404.
Tavris, C., & Aronson, E. (2007). Mistakes were made 
(but not by me): Why we justify foolish beliefs, bad decisions, 
and hurtful acts. New York: Harcourt.
Teghtsoonian, R. (1971). On the exponents in 
Stevens’s law and the constant in Ekman’s law. 
Psychological Review, 78, 71–80.
Teigen, K. H. (1986). Old truths or fresh insights? A 
study of students’ evaluation of proverbs. British Journal 
of Social Psychology, 25, 43–50.
Teplin, L. A. (1985). The criminality of the men-
tally ill: A deadly misconception. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 142, 593–598.
Terman, L. M. (1916). The measurement of intelligence. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Thaler, R., & Sunstein, C. (2008). Nudge: Improving 
decisions about health, wealth, and happiness. New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press.
Thelen, E. (1995). Motor development: A new synthe-
sis. American Psychologist, 50, 79–95.
Thomas, A. K., Bulevich, J. B., & Loftus, E. F. 
(2003). Exploring the role of repetition and sensory 
elaboration in the imagination inflation effect. Memory 
& Cognition, 31, 630–640.
Thompson, P. (1980). Margaret Thatcher: A new illu-
sion. Perception, 9, 483–484.
Thompson, R. F. (2000). The brain: A neuroscience 
primer (3rd ed.). New York: Worth.
Thorndike, E. L. (1898). Animal intelligence: An exper-
imental study of the associative processes in animals. 
Psychological Review Monograph Supplement, 2 (No. 8).
Thorndike, E. L. (1911). Animal intelligence: 
Experimental studies. New York: Macmillan.

R-28  |  References
Thurstone, L. L. (1938). Primary mental abilities. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Tolman, E. C., & Honzik, C. H. (1930a). Degrees of 
hunger, reward and non-reward, and maze learning in 
rats. University of California Publications in Psychology, 4, 
241–256.
Tolman, E. C., & Honzik, C. H. (1930b). “Insight” in 
rats. University of California Publications in Psychology, 4, 
215–232.
Tolman, E. C., & Honzik, C. H. (1930c). 
Introduction and removal of reward, and maze per-
formance in rats. University of California Publications in 
Psychology, 4, 257–275.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A 
usage-based theory of language acquisition. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, M., Strosberg, R., & Akhtar, N. 
(1996). Eighteen-month-old children learn words in 
non-ostensive contexts. Journal of Child Language, 23, 
157–176.
Tong, F., Nakayama, K., Moscovitch, M., Weinrib, 
O., & Kanwisher, N. (2000). Response properties of 
the human fusiform face area. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 
17, 257–279.
Torrey, E. F., Bartko, J. J., Lun, Z-R., & Yolken, R. 
H. (2007). Antibodies to Toxoplasma gondii in patients 
with schizophrenia: A meta-analysis. Schizophrenic 
Bulletin, 33, 729–736.
Torrey, E. F., Bartko, J. J., & Yolken, R. H. 
(2012). Toxoplasma gondii and other risk factors for 
schizophrenia: An update. Schizophrenic Bulletin, 38, 
642–647. 
Torrey, E. F., Miller, J., Rawlings, R., & Yolken, 
R. H. (1997). Seasonality of births in schizophre-
nia and bipolar disorder: A review of the literature. 
Schizophrenia Research, 28, 1–38.
Torrey, E. F., Rawlings, R., & Yolken, R. H. 
(2000). The antecedents of psychoses: A case-control 
study of selected risk factors. Schizophrenic Research, 
46, 17–23.
Torrey, E. F., & Yolken, R. H. (1995). Could schizo-
phrenia be a viral zoonosis transmitted from house 
cats? Schizophrenic Bulletin, 21, 167–171.
Torrey, E. F., & Yolken, R. H. (2003). Toxoplasma 
gondii and schizophrenia. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 9, 
1375–1380.
Tovee, M. J., Rolls, E., & Ramachandran, V. S. 
(1996). Rapid visual learning in neurons in the primate 
visual cortex. Neuroreport, 7, 2757–2760.
Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. R. (1985). Knowledge 
without awareness: An autonomic index of facial 
expression by prosopagnosics. Science, 228, 1453–1454.
Trappey, C. (1996). A meta-analysis of consumer 
choice and subliminal advertising. Psychology and 
Marketing, 13, 517–530.
Tsuang, M. T., & Faraone, S. V. (1990). The genet-
ics of mood disorders. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press.
Tuddenham, R. D. (1948). Soldier intelligence in 
World Wars I and II. American Psychologist, 3, 54–56.
Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and semantic memory. 
In E. Tulving & W. Donaldson (Eds.), Organization of 
memory (pp. 381–403). New York: Academic Press.
Tulving, E. (1974, January/February). Cue-dependent 
forgetting. American Scientist, 62, 74–82.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Tulving, E., Schacter, D. L., & Stark, H. (1982). 
Priming effects in word-fragment completion are inde-
pendent of recognition memory. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 8, 336–342.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1971). Belief in 
the law of small numbers. Psychological Bulletin, 76, 
105–110.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: 
A heuristic for judging frequency and probability. 
Cognitive Psychology, 5, 207–232.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment 
under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 
1124–1131.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983). Extensional 
versus intuitive reasoning: The conjunction fallacy in 
probability judgment. Psychological Review, 90, 293–315.
Twitmyer, E. B. (1974). A study of the knee jerk. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 103, 1047–1066.
Uttal, W. (2003). The new phrenology: The limits of local-
izing cognitive processes in the brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Valenstein, E. S. (1986). Great and desperate cures: The 
rise and decline of psychosurgery and other radical treat-
ments. New York: Basic Books.

References  |  R-29
Valenstein, E. S. (1988). Blaming the brain: The truth 
about drugs and mental health. New York: Free Press.
Valenstein, E. S. (2005). The war of the soups and sparks: 
The discovery of neurotransmitters and the dispute over how 
nerves communicate. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Valenza, E., Simion, F., Cassia, V. M., & Umiltà, C. 
(1996). Face preferences at birth. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Human Perception & Performance, 22, 
892–903.
Van Horn, J. D., Irinia, A., Torgerson, C. M., 
Chambers, M., Kikinis, R., & Toga, A. W. (2012). 
Mapping connectivity damage in the case of Phineas 
Gage. PLoS ONE, 7(5), e37454. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0037454
van Praag, H., Schinder, A. F., Christie, B. R., 
Toni, N., Palmer, T. D., & Gage, F. H. (2002). 
Functional neurogenesis in the adult hippocampus. 
Nature, 415, 1030–1034.
Vasta, R., Miller, S. A., & Ellis, S. (2004). Child psy-
chology (4th ed.). New York: Wiley.
Vertosick, F. T., Jr. (1997, October). Lobotomy’s 
back. Discover, 18, 66–68, 70–72.
von der Heydt, R., Peterhans, E., & Baumgartner, 
G. (1984). Illusory contours and cortical neuron 
responses. Science, 224, 1260–1262.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development 
of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. (Original work published 1930, 1933, 
& 1935)
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986). Thought and language. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. (Original work published 
1934)
Vyse, S. A. (1997). Believing in magic: The psychology of 
superstition. New York: Oxford University Press.
Waber, R. L., Shiv, B., Carmon, Z., & Ariely, D. 
(2008). Commercial features of placebo and therapeu-
tic efficacy. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
299, 1016–1017.
Wald, G. (1964). The receptors of human color vision. 
Science, 145, 1007–1017.
Waldman, M., Nicholson, S., Adilov, N., & 
Williams, J. (2008). Autism prevalence and precipi-
tation rates in California, Oregon, and Washington 
counties. Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 
162, 1026–1034.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate 
hypotheses in a conceptual task. The Quarterly Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 12, 129–140.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss 
(Ed.), New horizons in psychology (pp. 135–151). 
Harmondsworth, England: Penguin. 
Wason, P. C. (1968). Reasoning about a rule. The 
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 20,  
273–281.
Watanabe, S., Sakamoto, J., & Wakita, M. (1995). 
Pigeons’ discrimination of painting by Monet and 
Picasso. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 
63, 165–174.
Watkins, C. E., Campbell, V. L., Nieberding, R., 
& Hallmark, R. (1995). Contemporary practice of 
psychological assessment by clinical psychologists. 
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 26, 54–60.
Watson, J. B. (1913). Psychology as the behaviorist 
views it. Psychological Review, 20, 158–177.
Watson, J. B. (1919). Psychology from the standpoint of 
the behaviorist. Philadelphia: Lippincott.
Watson, J. B., & Rayner, R. (1920). Conditioned 
emotional reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 
3, 1–14.
Weiner, I. B., & Greene, R. L. (2008). Handbook of 
personality assessment. New York: Wiley.
Weisberg, R., & Alba, J. W. (1981). An examination 
of the alleged role of “fixation” in the solution of 
several “insight” problems. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: General, 110, 169–192.
Weiskrantz, L. (2009). Blindsight: A case study 
spanning 35 years and new developments. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Weiskrantz, L., Warrington, E. K., Sanders, M. 
D., & Marshall, J. (1974). Visual capacity in the 
hemianopic field following a restricted occipital 
ablation. Brain, 97, 709–728.
Weissman, M. M., Bland, R. C., Canino, G. J., 
Faravelli, C., Greenwald, S., Hwu, H. G.,…Yeh, 
E. K. (1996). Cross-national epidemiology of major 
depression and bipolar disorder. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 276, 293–299.
Weisstein, E. W. (2009). Young girl-old woman illu-
sion. From MathWorld—A Wolfram Web Resource. 
Retrieved from www.mathworld.wolfram.com/
YoungGirl-OldWomanIllusion.html

R-30  |  References
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). 
Meta-analysis of theory-of-mind development: The 
truth about false belief. Child Development, 72, 655–684.
Westen, D. (1998). The scientific legacy of Sigmund 
Freud: Toward a psychodynamically informed 
psychological science. Psychological Bulletin, 124, 
333–371.
Westly, E. (2010, May/June). Different shades of blue. 
Scientific American MIND, 21, 30–37.
Weyandt, L. L. (2006). The physiological basis of cognitive 
and behavioral disorders. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Whelan, C. (2013). Naked statistics: Stripping the dread 
from the data. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Whitehurst, G. J., & Valdez-Menchaca, M. C. 
(1988). What is the role of reinforcement in early 
language acquisition? Child Development, 59, 430–440.
Wickelgren, W. A. (1974). How to solve problems: 
Elements of a theory of problems and problem solving. 
San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Widiger, T. A. (2005). Classification and diagnosis: 
Historical development and contemporary issues. 
In J. Maddux & B. Winstead (Eds.), Psychopathology: 
Foundations for a contemporary understanding (pp. 63–83). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Widiger, T. A. (2009). Neuroticism. In M. R. Leary & 
R. H. Hoyle (Eds.), Handbook of individual differences in 
social behavior (pp. 129–146). New York: Guilford.
Wigdor, A. K., & Garner, W. R. (Eds.). (1982). 
Ability testing: Uses, consequences, and controversies. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Wiggins, J. S. (Ed.). (1996). The five-factor model of per-
sonality: Theoretical perspectives. New York: Guilford.
Wilcoxon, H. C., Dragoin, W. B., & Kral, P. A. 
(1971). Illness-induced aversions in rats and quail: 
Relative salience of visual and gustatory cues. Science, 
171, 826–828.
Williams, H., Conway, M. A., & Cohen, G. (2008). 
Autobiographical memory. In G. Cohen & M. A. 
Conway (Eds.), Memory in the real world (pp. 21–90). 
New York: Psychology Press.
Williams, J. H., Whiten, A., Suddendorf, T., & 
Perrett, D. I. (2001). Imitation, mirror neurons 
and autism. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Review, 25, 
287–295.
Williams, K. D., Harkins, S. G., & Latané, B. 
(1981). Identifiability as a deterrent to social loafing: 
Two cheering experiments. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 40, 303–311.
Wilmer, J. B., Germine, L., Chabris, C. F., 
Chatterjee, G., Williams, M., Loken, E.,…
Duchaine, B. (2010). Human face recognition abil-
ity is specific and highly heritable. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 107, 5238–5241.
Witelson, S. F., Kigar, D. L., & Harvey, T. (1999). 
The exceptional brain of Albert Einstein. Lancet, 363, 
2149–2158.
Woloshin, S., Schwartz, L. M., & Welch, H. G. 
(2008). Know your chances: Understanding health statistics. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Wolpe, J. (1958). Psychotherapy by reciprocal inhibition. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Wong, K. F. E., & Kwong, J. Y. Y. (2000). Is 7300 m 
equal to 7.3 km? Same semantics but different anchor-
ing effects. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 82, 314–333.
Woodruff-Pak, D. S. (1993). Eyeblink classical condi-
tioning in H. M.: Delay and trace paradigms. Behavioral 
Neuroscience, 107, 911–925.
Wright, P., Takei, N., Rifkin, L., & Murray, R. M. 
(1995). Maternal influenza, obstetric complications, 
and schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152, 
1714–1720.
Wynn, K. (1992). Addition and subtraction by human 
infants. Nature, 358, 749–750.
Yantis, S. (2014). Sensation and perception. New York: 
Worth.
Yates, F. A. (1966). The art of memory. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Yerkes, R. M., & Dodson, J. D. (1908). The relation 
of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation. 
Journal of Comparative and Neurological Psychology, 18, 
459–482.
Yolken, R. H., Dickerson, F. B., & Torrey, E. 
F. (2009). Toxoplasma and schizophrenia. Parasite 
Immunology, 31, 706–715.
Yolken, R. H., & Torrey, E. F. (1995). Viruses, 
schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder. Clinical 
Microbiology Reviews, 8, 131–145.
Yovel, G., Tambini, A., & Brandman, T. (2008). The 
asymmetry of the fusiform face area is a stable charac-
teristic that underlies the left-visual field superiority 
for faces. Neuropsychologia, 46, 3061–3068.

References  |  R-31
Zajonc, R. B. (1965). Social facilitation. Science, 149, 
269–274.
Zimbardo, P. G. (1970). The human choice: 
Individuation, reason, and order versus 
deindividuation, impulse, and chaos. In W. J. Arnold 
& D. Levine (Eds.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 
1969 (pp. 237–307). Lincoln, NE: University of 
Nebraska Press.
Zimbardo, P. (2007). The Lucifer effect: Understanding 
how good people turn evil. New York: Random House.
Zimbardo, P., Maslach, C., & Haney, C. (1999). 
Reflections on the Stanford Prison Experiment: 
Genesis, transformations, consequences. In T. Blass 
(Ed.), Obedience to authority: Current perspectives on the 
Milgram paradigm (pp. 193–237). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zuckerman, M. (1979). Sensation seeking: Beyond the 
optimal level of arousal. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zwislocki, J. J. (1981, March/April). Sound analysis in 
the ear: A history of discoveries. American Scientist, 69, 
184–192.


Note:  Page numbers followed by f 
indicate figures; those followed by t 
indicate tables.
Abelson, R. P., 218
Abraham, C., 76
Abrams, R. L., 98
Abramson, L. Y., 381
Ackerman, D., 44
Adamovich, S., 201
Adams, G. R., 306
Adams, M. J., 214–215, 214f
Adams, W. G., 387–388
Adilov, N., 24
Adler, A., 325, 326, 326f, 327, 342t
Afifi, T. O., 411, 413
Ainsworth, M. D. S., 299–300, 307
Akhtar, N., 281
Alba, J. W., 230
Ali, M., 47
Allen, C. T., 147
Allik, J., 339
Allport, G. W., 336
Allyon, T., 157
Amaral, D., 199
American Academy of Pediatrics, 
179, 180
American Psychiatric Association 
(APA), 398–400, 399f, 403, 
406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 413, 
417–418
American Psychological Association, 
1, 386
Andersen, A. N., 274
Anderson, C., 30, 30f
Anderson, C. A., 179–180, 246
Anderson, D., 275
Anderson, J. A., 180
Andreasen, N. C., 426
Andrews, P. W., 411
Antley, A., 369
APA. See American Psychiatric 
Association
Applebaum, P. S., 401
Arai, M., 358
Arbib, M. A., 181
Arcimboldo, G., 87
Ariely, D., 18
Aronson, E., 384
Arterberry, M. E., 276
Asch, S. E., 354, 355–358, 355f, 356f, 
362–363
Asendorpf, J. B., 337
Asher, S. R., 302
Asmundson, G. J. G., 411, 413
Atkinson, L., 301
Atkinson, R. C., 189, 202
Azevedo, F. A., 63
Azrin, N. H., 157
Bach, J., 162
Baddeley, A. D., 194, 207
Baeyens, F., 147
Bahrick, H. P., 213
Baillargeon, R., 278, 288
Baldwin, D. A., 281
Bandettini, P. A., 158
Bandura, A., 178–179, 178f, 182, 
328–329, 332–333, 335, 342t
Bangasser, D. A., 145
Banks, C., 385
Banks, M. S., 275
Banuazizi, A., 388
Banyard, P., 387
Bar, M., 98
Barber, C., 422
Barbu-Roth, M., 275
Bard, P., 58, 58f, 59f, 61
Barnum, P. T., 73
Baron, S. H., 355
Baron-Cohen, S., 303
Bartko, J. J., 416
Bartlett, F. C., 218
Bartlett, J. C., 277
Bassett, R., 360
Bates, E. A., 281–282
Bates, S. C., xiii
Baumgartner, G., 126
Baumrind, D., 301–302, 302f, 365
Bavaresco, J. L., 207
Beck, A. T., 434, 435, 435f, 438
Beck, J. S., 434
Bègue, L., 180
Békésy, G. von, 117
Belmont, L., 20–21
Bem, D. J., 384–385
Benedetti, F., 19
Benet-Martinez, V., 339
Ben-Porath, Y. S., 342
Bergen, L., 180
Berger, K. S., 290–291
Berns, G. S., 357
Bernstein, I. L., 174
Berry, J. W., 289
Besson, M., 75
Beuke, C. J., 219
Beyerstein, B. L., 95, 256, 401
Biederman, I., 98
Biemond, R., 433–434
Biermam, K. L., 302
Binet, A., 251–252, 252f, 253, 262, 343
Binofski, F., 181
Birdsong, D., 282
Bjork, R. A., 207–208
Black, J. E., 276
Blakeslee, S., 71, 120–121, 357
Blank, H., 6
Blass, T., 362–363, 365, 366, 370, 386
Blastland, M., 31
Blehar, M. C., 299–300
Bloom, P., 384
Blume, J., 274
Bogen, J., 79–80
Bogg, T., 338
Boldrey, E., 69
Boldrini, M., 425
Bonaparte, N., 414
Bond, C. E., Jr., 372
Bond, R., 356, 357–358
Bonnel, A. M., 75
Boos, H. B., 417
Bornerman, M. J., 256
Bornstein, B. H., 235
Botwinick, J., 125
Bouchard, T. J., Jr., 260, 339
Bouton, M. E., 148
Bower, J. M., 62–63
Bowlby, J., 298
Boynton, R. M., 114
Bradley, D. R., 126, 126f
Brand, M., 181, 219
Brandman, T., 79
Brang, D., 71
Braque, G., 162
Bregman, E. O., 146
Name Index
NI-1

NI-2  |  Name Index
Breland, K., 175–176, 175f
Breland, M., 175–176, 175f
Briggs, K., 326
Broca, P., 74–75
Brodhead, A. E., 424
Brody, D. J., 424
Bronfenbrenner, U., 302
Brooks, R., 281
Brotzman, E., 370
Brown, A. S., 415
Brown, J., 195
Brown, R., 216
Brown, W. A., 424
Brozovich, F. A., 406
Brynie, F. H., 67, 107
Buccino, G., 181
Buchanan, R. W., 417
Buckley, K. W., 146, 147
Bucy, P. C., 65
Buhs, E., 302
Bulevich, J. B., 219
Bullock, P., 237
Bundy, Ted, 220
Buonomano, D., 39, 69
Burger, J. M., 361, 367–369
Burnham, W. M., 427
Bushman, B. J., 180
Buss, A. H., 339
Buss, D. M., 322
Butcher, J. N., 340, 342
Byrnes, Pat, 331
Cacioppo, J. T., 360
Cade, J., 422–423
Calev, A., 427
Cameron, J., 171
Campbell, D. T., 131, 344
Campos, J., 275
Canli, T., 339–340
Cannon, T. D., 59f, 417
Cannon, W. B., 58, 58f, 59f, 61
Carli, L. L., 358
Carlsmith, J. M., 382–384
Carmon, Z., 18
Carnahan, T., 388
Carpenter, W. T., 417
Cassia, V. M., 276
Catalan, J., 359
Cattaneo, L., 181
Cattell, R. B., 257, 259t, 337
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), 424
Cepeda, N. J., 211
Cerletti, U., 427
Cézanne, P., 125, 162
Chance, J., 12
Chapman, G. B., 235
Chapman, J. P., 246
Chapman, L. J., 246
Chase, W. G., 195
Chast, R., 344
Cheetham, M., 369
Chen, C., 261
Chi, R. P., 232–233
Chomsky, N., 281
Christens, P., 274
Chun, M. M., 71
Churchland, P. S., 108
Cialdini, R. B., 359, 360, 370–371
Cillessen, A., 302
Claparède, E., 201
Clark, R. E., 144–145, 158
Coan, J., 221
Cohen, D., 276
Cohen, G., 197
Cohen, L. B., 278
Cohen, N. J., 10, 64, 237
Colice, G. L., 49
Collins, A., 5, 353
Collins, J. F., 191f, 192
Colloca, L., 19
Combs, B., 243
Comer, R. J., 403–404, 418, 423
Connelly, B. J., 256
Conway, M. A., 197
Cooper, H., 12
Coppola, M., 282
Corballis, M. C., 81
Cordón, L. A., 398
Coren, S., 84, 122f
Corina, D. P., 75
Corkin, S., 9, 64, 199, 200–201
Costa, P. T., Jr., 338–340,  
339t, 342t
Coverly, D., 216
Cowey, A., 109
Cox, J. R., 245
Coyle, J. T., 48, 416–417
Craighero, L., 181
Craik, F. I. M., 205, 206, 206f, 207
Crismon, M. L., 427
Crombez, G., 147
Cross, D., 303
Crow, T. J., 415
Cunitz, A. R., 203
Cunningham, L. N., 49
Curtiss, S., 282
D’Agostini, S., 232
Dahlstrom, W. G., 340
Dallenbach, K. M., 121f
Dalrymple, S., 370
Damasio, A. R., 59, 72
Dambrun, M., 369
Danby, B. L., 359
Dannon, P. N., 428
Dapretto, M., 181, 303–304
Darley, J. M., 4–5, 373–374
Dasen, P. R., 289
Davey, G. C. L., 405
Davidson, J. E., 236
Davidson, M., 416
Davidson, P. S. R., 181, 219
Davies, B. P., 174
Davis, J. O., 416
Dawes, R. M., 344
Dawson, E., 245–246
Dazzan, P., 426
de Gelder, B., 72
De Houwer, J., 147
DeCasper, A. J., 277
Deci, E. L., 170–171
DeFries, J. C., 260
DeLeon, A., 427
Delis, D. C., 80
DeLisi, L. E., 415
Dement, W. C., 84
DeMonner, S., 274
Depp, C. A., 426
DeRubeis, R. J., 412
Deutsch, G., 75
DeValois, K. K., 113
DeValois, R. L., 113
DeYoung, C. G., 340
Di Lollo, V., 192
Diamond, M. C., 76
Dickerson, F. B., 416
Digman, J. M., 337
Dilnot, A., 31
Dinberg, U., 56–57
Dirix, C. E. H., 277
Dodson, J. D., 169, 170f
Dolan, R. J., 158
Dolberg, O. T., 428
Domhoff, G. W., 85
Dougherty, R. F., 70
Dowling, J. E., 42, 53
Dr. Seuss. See Geisel, Theodor
Dragoin, W. B., 175
Draine, S. C., 98
Druckman, D., 98
Duan, J., 415

Name Index  |  NI-3
DuBosar, R., 422
DuJardin, J., 84
Dumais, S. T., 126, 126f
Duncan, E., 56
Duncker, K., 231
Dyk, P. H., 306
Eagleman, D., 71, 107
Eagly, A. H., 358
Ebbinghaus, H., 212–213, 213f
Echterhoff, G., 181, 219
Eddy, D. M., 247–249, 249f
Edmonds, G., 338
Edwards, A. G. K., 247
Efron, R., 80
Egan, L. C., 384
Eich, E., 208
Eichenbaum, H., 10, 64
Einstein, A., 76–77, 330
Eisenberger, R., 171
Ekstrom, A. D., 181
El-Hai, J., 428–429
Eliassen, J. C., 79
Ellenbogen, J. M., 84
Ellingson, J. E., 256
Ellis, A., 434–435, 434f, 438
Ellis, S., 286, 289
Elman, J. L., 281–282
Elmes, A. C., 368
Emmelkamp, P. M. G., 433–434
Enck, P., 19
Engel, S. A., 113
Engle, R. W., 194
Enns, J. T., 122f
Erel, O., 301
Eriksen, C. W., 191f, 192
Erikson, E. H., 272, 304–306, 304f, 
305t, 307, 325
Eriksson, P. S., 65
Ertelt, D., 181
Eskenazi, J., 98
Esser, J. K., 376
Etscorn, E., 174
Ettinger, R. H., 175
Evans, J. St B.T., 244
Everett, P., 72, 73f
Eysenck, H. J., 336, 337–338, 342t, 
345
Eysenck, M. W., 337
Faita, F., 75
Falk, D., 76–77
Fancher, R. E., 251, 252, 253
Fantz, R. L., 275
Faraone, S. V., 411, 413
Fazio, R. H., 147
Feigenbaum, J. D., 237
Felmet, K., 413
Fendrich, R., 109
Ferguson, C. J., 180
Fernald, A., 280
Festinger, L., 382–384, 384f
Field, T. M., 276
Fields, R. D., 40
Fifer, W. P., 277
Fineman, M., 111
Fink, G. R., 80
Fink, M., 427
Fischhoff, B., 6, 243
Fleischman, J., 72f, 73
Fleisher, A. S., 426
Flynn, J. R., 261–262, 262f, 263
Flyr, M., 302
Foer, J., 210
Foley, H. J., 107, 115
Folsom, D. P., 426
Fosse, M., 84
Fosse, R., 84
Fossey, D., 8, 9
Foster, M., 44
Fournier, J. C., 424
Fowles, D. C., 417
Fox, M. J., 47
Frances, A., 398, 399, 422
Franks, B. A., 288
Fraser, S. C., 359
Freedman, J. L., 359
Freeman, M. S., 277
Freeman, W., 428–429
Frenda, S. J., 220
Freud, A., 319
Freud, S., 1, 84, 304, 316–325, 317f, 
320t, 322t, 326, 327, 331, 332, 
342t, 429, 430, 431, 438
Fried, I., 181
Friedman, H. S., 338
Frith, U., 303
Fromkin, V., 282
Funder, D. C., 338
Furman, W., 302
Gabrieli, J. D. E., 200
Gage, F. H., 64–65, 425
Gage, P., 72–74, 237
Gaissmaier, W., 247
Galak, J., 98
Galanter, E., 97
Gall, F., 315
Galton, F., 251, 251f, 256, 259, 262
Gamwell, L., 422
Garb, H. N., 344, 345
Garcia, J., 174–175, 182
Garcia, R., 276
Gardner, H., 253, 257–258, 258t, 
259t, 263
Garner, W. R., 256
Garry, M., 219
Gates, B., 30–31, 156
Gatz, M., 339
Gaudino, E. A., 427
Gazzaniga, M. S., 44, 77, 78, 79–80, 
79f, 109
Gazzola, V., 181
Gegenfurtner, K. R., 113
Geisel, Theodor (“Dr. Seuss”), 277
Gejman, P. V., 415
Genovese, K., 5, 353–354, 373, 374
Gentile, B. F., xiii
Gescheider, G. A., 101
Gheorgiu, E., 132–133, 133f
Ghim, H., 126
Gigerenzer, G., 243, 247, 247f, 248, 
249f, 250
Gilbert, S. J., 366
Gilhooly, K. J., 229
Gilligan, T., 249
Gilovich, T., 245–246
Glanzer, M., 203
Glasbergen, R., 230
Glass, G. V., 436, 436f
Glass, R. M., 427
Glenberg, A., 207–208
Gluck, M. A., 143, 154
Godden, D. R., 207
Goel, V., 237
Goethals, G. R., 379
Goff, D. C., 48, 416–417
Goff, L. M., 219
Goldberg, L. R., 338
Goldstein, E. B., 102, 116
Golinkoff, R. M., 281
Gonsalves, B., 219
Gonzalez, A., 199
Goodall, J., 8
Goodman, J. A., 427–428
Goro, F., 112
Goshen-Gottstein, Y., 203
Gottesman, I. I., 413, 415, 417
Gottfredson, L. S., 256, 257

NI-4  |  Name Index
Gould, S. J., 31–32
Grady, C. L., 203
Graf, P., 199
Grafman, J., 237
Graham, J. R., 340
Granger, R., 44
Grant, S., 344
Graves, N., 370
Graziano, W. G., 339
Green, D. M., 99
Green, J. T., 201
Greenberg, G., 398
Greenberg, R., 276
Greene, D., 171
Greene, R. L., 340
Greenough, W. T., 276
Greenwald, A. G., 98
Gregory, R. L., 130, 132
Greuter, T., 72
Griggs, R. A., 231, 239, 245
Grimes, T., 180
Grossman, R. P., 147
Grossman, S., 418
Growdon, J. H., 200
Grunau, R., 274
Gruneberg, M. M., 210
Grunhaus, L., 428
Gu, Q., 424
Guerrien, A., 84
Habashi, M. M., 339
Hadjikhani, N., 72
Haker, S., 72, 73f
Hall, V. C., 170–171
Hallinan, J. T., 221
Hallmark, R., 344
Handelsman, J. B., 412f
Haney, C., 385
Hankin, B. L., 381
Hansen, E., 19
Harford, R. A., 157
Harkins, S. G., 372
Harlow, H. F., 298–300, 298f,  
299f, 307
Harlow, M. K., 298
Harris, B., 146f
Harris, J. R., 271
Harris, S., 209, 406f
Hart, H., 359
Hartigan, J. A., 256
Hartung, O., 247f
Harvey, T., 76
Hasan, Y., 180
Hasher, L., 205
Haslam, S. A., 387, 388–389,  
389f, 390
Hathaway, S. R., 340
Häuser, W., 19
Hefferline, R. F., 157
Heimberg, R. G., 406
Hellige, J. B., 81
Henderlong, J., 170–171
Hening, W., 201
Herrmann, D. J., 210
Herrnstein, R. J., 261
Herskovits, M. J., 131
Hertenstein, M., 275
Hertz, H., 105
Heydt, R. von der, 126
Hilgard, E., 144f
Hill, W. E., 124–125
Hilton, J., 220
Hilts, P. F., 199
Hirsch-Pasek, K., 281
Hitchcock, A., 405
Hite, S., 11
H. M. See Molaison, Henry
Ho, B-C., 426
Hobson, J. A., 84–85
Hoffman, D. D., 95, 127
Hoffman, E. L., 355
Hoffman, V., 301
Hoffrage, U., 248
Hofling, C. K., 370
Hofmann, W., 147
Hogan, N., 201
Hogben, J. H., 192
Hollander, E., 403
Holmes, D. S., 324
Holsti, L., 274
Honzik, C. H., 176–177,  
176f, 177f
Hood, B. M., 126
Horn, J., 257, 259t, 292
Horney, K., 325, 326–327,  
326f, 342t
Hornstra, G., 277
Horwitz, A. V., 403, 411
Hubbard, E., 275
Hubel, D. H., 108, 108f
Huesmann, L. R., 180
Huff, D., 31
Hull, C., 143, 144f
Hunt, E. L., 174
Hunter, J. E., 256
Hurvich, L. M., 113
Huston, A. C., 179
Hyde, J. S., 381
Hyman, B., 199
Iacoboni, M., 180, 181, 219, 303
Iacono, W. G., 260
Impastato, D. J., 427
Inhelder, B., 287
Insel, T. R., 63
Ivry, R. B., 44
Izard, C. E., 56
Jacker, E., 144f
Jackson, J. J., 338
Jackson, J. M., 372
Jackson, S. L., 11
Jacobs, B. L., 65, 425
Jacobsen, T., 301
Jacobson, L., 380
James, L., 147
James, W., 57, 57f, 59f, 61
Jameson, D., 113
Jang, K. L., 339
Janis, I. L., 376
Jänke, L., 369
Janssens, A. C. J. W., 18
Javitt, D. C., 48, 416
Jecker, E., 144f
Jefferson, T., 330
Jiang, X., 302
John, O. P., 338, 339, 340, 341t
Johnson, B. T., 207
Johnson, J., 282
Johnson, K., 199
Johnson, M., 281–282
Jones, J., 353–354, 370–371, 371f
Jones, M. C., 146, 432–433
Jones, P. B., 426
Jones, R. A., 380
Jongsma, H. W., 277
Jordan, M., 147
Julien, R. M., 416, 422, 423, 425, 427
Jung, C., 325–326, 325f, 327, 342t
Kabin, M. B., 256
Kaemmer, B., 340
Kahn, R. S., 416
Kahneman, D., 235, 239–242,  
240f, 244
Kail, R., 289
Kalat, J. W., 40, 109, 278
Kandinsky, W., 71
Kanizsa, G., 125
Kanwisher, N., 71–72
Kaplan, F. N., 427–428
Kaplan, J., 181
Kaptchuk, T. J., 19

Name Index  |  NI-5
Kapur, N., 210
Karau, S. J., 372
Karmiloff-Smith, A., 281–282
Karpicke, J. D., 211
Kasckow, J., 413
Kaufman, A. S., 252, 255, 262
Kazdin, A. E., 157
Keane, B., 285
Keenan, B., 157
Keillor, Garrison, 381
Kellman, P. J., 275, 276
Kempermann, G., 64–65
Kennedy, W. P., 19
Kensinger, E. A., 200
Kern, M. I., 338
Kessler, R. C., 406, 411, 413
Ketcham, K., 219, 221, 324
Keysers, C., 181
Khan, A., 413, 424
Khoury, M. J., 18
Kigar, D. L., 76
Kihlstrom, J. F., 73
Kilburn, J., 180
Kim, S., 123–124, 232
Kimeldorf, D. J., 174
Kingdom, F. A. A., 132–133, 133f
Kinsley, C. H., 423
Kiper, D. C., 113
Kirker, W. S., 207
Kirkpatrick, E. A., 202
Kirsch, I., 424
Klein, S. B., 73
Klinger, M. R., 98
Klüver, H., 65
Knight, D. C., 158
Knoblich, G., 232
Knowlton, B. J., 201
Ko, G., 416
Koelling, R. A., 174–175, 182
Koestner, R., 170–171
Kohl, J., 359
Kohlberg, L., 272, 295–298, 296f, 
297t, 306–307
Kolb, B., 66
Kolts, R. L., 424
Koop, J., 40
Kornhaber, M. L., 253
Krackow, A., 370
Kraemer, W. J., 49
Krahn, L. E., 427–428
Kral, P. A., 175
Krasjen, S., 282
Krebs, H., 201
Krijn, M., 433–434
Krupa, D. J., 201
Kuhl, E. A., 398
Kuhl, P. K., 278
Kuiper, N. A., 207
Kupfer, D. J., 398
Kurz-Milke, E., 247
Kutas, M., 219–220
Kwong, J. Y. Y., 235
Lachman, M. E., 334
Ladd, G., 302
Lambert, K., 423
Lang, P. J., 58–59
Lange, C. G., 57, 57f, 59f, 61
Langer, E. J., 233
Lanotte, M., 19
Larsen, R. J., 322
Latané, B., 4–5, 372, 373–374
Layman, M., 243
LeBoeuf, R. A., 98
LeConte, P., 84
Ledley, D. R., 406
LeDoux, J. E., 44, 59, 60, 65, 201
Lee, S., 261
Leen, N., 159f, 298f
Legrenzi, P., 45
Leh, S. E., 109
Lehrer, J., 125, 241
Leite, E., 74
Lena, M. L., 73
Leo, I., 276–277
Lepore, F. E., 76
Lepper, M. R., 170–171, 246
Lerner, M. J., 379
Leung, A. K.-y., 233
Levenson, R. W., 56
Levine, M., 5, 353
Levine, R., 370
Lewis, S. K., 359
Li, C., 15–16
Lichtenstein, S., 243
Liddle, B., 339
Liddy, G. G., 360
Lieberman, D., 72, 73f
Lieberman, J. A., 426
Lilienfeld, S. O., 45, 95, 256, 344, 
345, 401
Lincoln, A., 330
Lindenmayer, J. P., 413
Lindner, I., 181, 219
Lindoerfer, J. S., 376
Linn, R. L., 12
Liu, H.-M., 278
Lockhart, R. S., 205
Loehlin, J. C., 339
Loftus, E. F., 219, 220, 221, 324
Lopiano, L., 19
Lorenz, L., 220, 323
Lourenco, O., 288
Love, J., 408f
Lovibond, S. H., 387–388
Lun, Z-R., 416
Lykken, D. T., 260
Lynch, G., 44
Lynn, S. J., 95, 256, 401
MacDonald, B., 71
MacDonald, J., 70–71
MacDonald, S. E., 143–145
MacFarlane, A., 278
Machado, A., 288
Macknik, S. L., 95
Macmillan, M., 72, 73
MacNeilage, P. F., 80f
Magnotta, V., 426
Magoun, H. W., 62
Maguire, E. A., 210
Mahler, D. A., 48–49
Maier, S. F., 334–335
Main, M., 300
Malberg, J. E., 425
Mandler, G., 199
Mangun, G. R., 44
Mankoff, R., 321
Manning, C. G., 219
Manning, R., 5, 353
Marcel, A., 98
Markman, E. M., 288
Marks, K. S., 278
Marolla, F. A., 20–21
Marshall, J., 109
Martin, H., 375
Martin, T. A., 340
Martinez-Conde, S., 95
Maslach, C., 385
Maslow, A. H., 328, 329–331, 329f, 
335, 342t
Matisse, H., 162
Matlin, M. W., 107, 115
Matt, G. E., 436
Mazur, J. E., 142
McCarley, R. W., 84–85
McCaulley, M. H., 326
McClearn, G. E., 260
McCrae, R. R., 337, 338–340, 339t, 
342t
McDermott, J., 71
McFarland, S., 388
McGue, M., 260, 339

NI-6  |  Name Index
McGurk, H., 70–71
McKinley, J. C., 340
McKinnon, J. W., 289
McMillan, K. A., 411, 413
McNally, R. J., 324, 405
McNeill, D., 216
McPherson, J., 164
Meagher, S., 418
Melbe, M., 274
Meltzoff, A. N., 281
Mercado, E., 143, 154
Merrim, L. J., 345
Messer, W. S., 239
Mezulis, A. H., 381
Mickel, S. F., 200
Milgram, A., 362f, 367f
Milgram, S., 362–369, 362f, 364f, 364t, 
367f, 368t, 372, 377, 379, 386
Miller, A. C., 79–80
Miller, B., xiii
Miller, G., 201
Miller, G. A., 194–195, 252
Miller, J., 415
Miller, J. A., 360
Miller, P. H., 289
Miller, S. A., 286, 289
Miller, T. I., 436, 436f
Millon, C. M., 418
Millon, T., 418
Milner, B., 9, 199
Milton, J., 98
Mineka, S., 174
Miotto, E. C., 237
Mithiran, X., 387–388
Mlodinow, L., 249
Molaison, H. G. (H. M.), 9–10, 64, 
199–201, 237
Molis, M., 282
Moncrieff, J., 422, 423
Monet, C., 162
Moniz, E., 428
Moonsinghe, R., 18
Moore, T. E., 98
Morgan, C. D., 345
Mori, K., 358
Morris, J. S., 158
Morris, R. G., 237
Mortensen, P. B., 416
Moruzzi, G., 62
Moscovitch, M., 71–72, 203
Moses, L. J., 281
Moshman, D., 288
Movahedi, S., 388
Moyer, V. A., 249–250
Mukamel, R., 181
Munch, E., 407f
Murphy, G. M., 76
Murray, C., 261
Murray, H. A., 345
Murray, J. P., 180
Murray, R. M., 415, 417
Musch, J., 6
Myers, C. E., 143, 154
Myers, D. G., 6, 243, 334, 375, 381, 
385
Myers, I. B., 326
Nakayama, K., 71–72
Napolitan, D. A., 379
Narrow, W. E., 398
National Institute of Mental Health 
(NIMH), 406
Navarro, A. M., 436
Navon, D., 80
Neimark, J., 220
Neisser, U., 256, 262
Nelson, L. D., 98
Nettle, D., 338, 339
Neuringer, A., 162
Newport, E., 282
Nguyen, H. T., 158
NICHD Early Child Care Research 
Network, 301
Nichols, R. M., 220
Nicholson, S., 24
Nickerson, R. S., 214–215, 214f, 246, 
247
Nida, S., 373, 374
Nieberding, R., 344
Niemi, M., 18
Nijhuis, J. G., 277
NIMH. See National Institute of 
Mental Health
Nin, Anais, 121
Nir, Y., 85
Nisbett, R. E., 171, 246–247
Nisenson, L., 79
Nishinaga, S., 116
Noe, A., 76
Noftle, E. E., 338, 339
Noice, H., 209
Noice, T., 209
Oatley, K., 56
Obama, B., 382
Oberman, Y., 301
Odbert, H. S., 336
Oellinger, M., 232
Öhman, A., 158, 174
Ohta, S., 71
O’Kane, G., 200
Olafsson, R. P., 433–434
Olsen, J., 274
Olson, M. A., 147
Olsson, A., 158
Orne, M. T., 388
Ornstein, R., 359, 370
Osherson, D. N., 288
Otaka, S. R., 207
Otsuka, Y., 162
Pace-Scott, E. F., 84–85
Packer, D. J., 368
Paisi, D., 281–282
Palmer, J., 220, 221
Parents Television Council, 179
Parke, R., 302
Parsons, L. M., 62–63
Pascual-Leone, J., 289
Pashler, H., 211
Patel, N. C., 427
Paterniti, M., 76
Paulos, J. A., 31, 235
Paulus, J., 423
Pavlov, I. P., 4, 141–143, 144, 147, 
148, 149, 149f, 150, 151, 152
Payne, D. G., 210–211
Pearson, K., 251
Peciña, M., 19
Pedersen, N. L., 339
Pedroni, A. F., 369
Penfield, W., 68f, 69
Perera, T. D., 425
Peretz, L., 75
Perrett, D. I., 303
Pert, C. B., 49
Perugini, M., 147
Pessiglione, M., 158
Peterhans, E., 126
Peterson, C., 334–335
Peterson, L. R., 195, 196f
Peterson, M. J., 195, 196f
Petry, H. M., 126, 126f
Pettinati, H. M., 427–428
Phelps, E. A., 158
Phillips, G., 436
Phipps, M., 274
Piaget, J., 219, 272, 279, 282–289, 
283f, 284t, 291, 294, 295–296, 
297, 304
Picasso, P., 162
Pickrell, J. E., 221

Name Index  |  NI-7
Pierce, C. M., 370
Pierson, R., 426
Pileggi, T. S., 427–428
Pinker, S., 5–6, 281
Piraro, D., 127
Pliner, P., 359
Plomin, R., 260
Plous, S., 234–235, 243
Plunkett, K., 281–282
Pohl, R. F., 6
Poizner, H., 201
Polak, D., 428
Polkey, C. E., 237
Ponzo, M., 129–130, 129f
Poortinga, Y. H., 289
Porter, D., 162
Powell, R. A., 143–144
Pratkanis, A. R., 98
Pratt, L. A., 424
Premack, D., 156
Ptito, A., 109
Pulver, S. E., 427
Ramachandran, V. S., 71, 108, 
120–121
Rammstedt, B., 340, 341t
Ramón y Cajal, S., 44
Randi, J., 98
Rapee, R. M., 406
Raphael, B., 237
Rapoport, J. L., 408, 409
Rapport, R., 44
Raskin, N. J., 431
Rasmussen, T., 68f, 69
Ratey, J. J., 109
Ratiu, P., 72, 73f
Rawlings, R., 415–416
Rayner, R., 145–147, 146f, 149–150, 
152, 405, 432
Reber, P., 197
Redelmeier, D. A., 246
Rees, G., 70
Reeve, C., 52
Regan, D. T., 245–246
Regier, D. A., 398
Reicher, S., 387, 388–389, 389f, 390
Renner, J. W., 289
Renoir, P-A., 162
Rentz, A., 240f
Requin, J., 75
Rescorla, R. A., 143–144, 148
Restak, R., 123–124, 232
Restle, F., 132
Reuter-Lorenz, P. A., 79–80
Reverberi, C., 232
Reynolds, C. A., 339
Ridley-Johnson, R., 12
Rifkin, L., 415, 417
Rigler, D., 282
Rigler, M., 282
Rilling, J. K., 63
Ritov, I., 235
Rizzolatti, G., 180–181
Roberts, B. W., 338
Robertson, L. C., 80
Robins, R. W., 338, 339
Rodin, J., 373
Roediger, H. L., 211, 219
Roese, N. J., 6
Rogers, C. R., 328, 330–332, 331f, 
332f, 335, 340, 342t, 431–432, 
438
Rogers, L. J., 80f
Rogers, T. B., 207
Rohrer, D., 211
Rohrer, J. H., 355
Rolls, E., 120–121
Roosevelt, E., 330
Rorschach, H., 343–345
Rosch, E. H., 3
Rosenberg, A., 406
Rosenhan, D. L., 9, 400–401, 409, 
414
Rosenthal, A. M., 5
Rosenthal, R., 21, 353, 380
Ross, D., 178–179, 178f
Ross, L., 246–247, 379
Ross, S. A., 178–179, 178f
Rotter, J. B., 329, 333–334, 335, 340, 
342t
Rubin, E., 123–124
Rudolf II (Emperor), 87
Ruetsch, C. R., 427–428
Rummans, T. A., 427–428
Rundus, D., 202
Ruscio, A. M., 406
Ruscio, J., 95, 256, 401
Rush, B., 421f, 422
Rutter, M., 260
Ryan, R. M., 170–171
Saari, D., 359
Sabbagh, L., 73
Sackett, P. R., 256
Sakamoto, J., 162
Sanders, A. R., 415
Sanders, M. D., 109
Santollo, J., 145
Santos, L. R., 384
Sareen, J., 411, 413
Satel, S. L., 45
Saufley, W. H., 207
Schachter, S., 58–59, 59f, 60
Schacter, D. L., 199, 208–209, 216
Schafe, G. E., 174
Schaie, K. W., 292
Schank, R. C., 218
Scharkow, M., 180
Schechter, L. E., 425
Scheibel, A. B., 76
Schmid, M. C., 109
Schmidt, D. P., 339
Schmidt, F. L., 256
Schmitt, N., 256
Schneider, B. H., 301
Schneider, W., 289
Schreiber, S., 428
Schuh, E. S., 98
Schultz, D., 331
Schwartz, L. M., 247, 250
Schwartz, N., 10
Schwartzkopf, D. S., 70
Scott, B. W., 427
Scoville, W. B., 9, 199
Searcy, J., 277
Segal, N. L., 260
Segall, M. H., 131, 289
Seligman, M. E. P., 173, 334–335, 
409, 427
Senfor, A. J., 219–220
Senghas, A., 282
Sergent, J., 71
Seung, S., 69
Shadish, W. R., 436
Sharman, S. J., 219
Sharp, E. S., 339
Shear, K., 406
Shedler, J., 431
Sheese, B. E., 339
Sheldon, W., 315
Shepard, R. N., 95, 95f, 131
Sherif, C. W., 355f
Sherif, M., 354–355, 355f
Sherman, S. J., 219
Shermer, M., 45
Sherrington, C., 44
Shiffrin, R. M., 189
Shimp, T. A., 147
Shiv, B., 18
Shors, T. J., 145
Simeon, D., 403
Simion, F., 276–277
Simmons, J. P., 98

NI-8  |  Name Index
Simon, H. A., 195, 240f, 262
Simon, T., 251–252, 282, 343
Simpkins, S., 302
Singer, J. E., 58–59, 59f, 60
Skinner, B. F., 153–154, 159, 159f, 
163, 175
Skotko, B. G., 200
Skrap, M., 232
Skrinar, G. S., 49
Slater, M., 369
Slovic, P., 6, 243
Smith, C. N., 201
Smith, G. E., 427–428
Smith, J., 338
Smith, M. B., 330
Smith, M. L., 436, 436f
Smith, P. B., 356, 357–358
Smith, S. M., 207–208
Snarey, J. R., 297
Snyder, A. W., 232–233
Snyder, S. H., 49
Sollars, S. I., 174
Solomon, J., 300
Song, C., 70
Souders, P., 132
Soussignan, R., 56
Spangenberg, E. R., 98
Spearman, C., 256–257, 259t, 263
Spence, M. J., 277
Sperling, G., 192–193, 192f
Sperry, R., 79–80, 79f, 240f
Springer, S. P., 75
Squire, L. R., 9, 145, 158, 197, 199, 
201, 237
Squires, N. K., 427
Staddon, J. E. R., 175
Stanovich, K. E., 15–16, 244, 247, 
257, 258–259, 259t, 263
Stark, H., 199
Stephens, R., 174
Stern, W., 252
Sternberg, R. J., 236, 257, 258, 259t, 
263
Stevens, S. S., 101–102
Stevenson, H. W., 261
Stewart, N., 235
Stewart, V. M., 131
Stewart-Williams, S., 18
Stickgold, R., 84–85
Stigler, J. W., 261
Stivers, M., 143
Stone, J. M., 48, 417
Stone, V. E., 79
Stravinsky, I., 162
Streeter, B., 98
Streshinsky, T., 304f
Strosberg, R., 281
Stroup, T. S., 426
Suddendorf, T., 303
Sullivan, P., 374f
Sunstein, C., 235
Sutin, A. R., 339
Swander, D. V., 355
Swanson, C., 159
Sweeney, M. S., 39, 125
Swets, J. A., 98, 99
Symbaluk, D. G., 143–145
Symons, C. S., 207
Takei, N., 415, 417
Talmi, D., 203
Talos, I-F., 72, 73f
Tambini, A., 79
Tamburello, B. A., 427–428
Tammet, D., 121
Tang, S., 170–171
Tardif, C., 301
Tavris, C., 384
Taylor, K., 211
Teghtsoonian, R., 101
Teigen, K. H., 6
Tellegen, A., 260, 340
Teplin, L. A., 401
Terman, L. M., 252, 252f, 253
Thaler, R., 235
Thatcher, M., 276–277, 276f
Thelen, E., 275
Thomas, A. K., 219
Thompson, D., 244, 399f
Thompson, J. K., 201
Thompson, P., 276–277, 276f
Thompson, R. F., 39, 201, 278
Thomson, J. A., 411
Thorndike, E. L., 153–154, 153f
Thunberg, M., 56–57
Thurstone, L. L., 257, 259t, 263
Till, B. D., 147
Titus, L. J., 372
Tobin, R. M., 339
Tollefson, G. D., 426
Tolman, E. C., 176–177, 176f, 177f, 
182
Tomasello, M., 5–6, 281
Tomes, N., 422
Tong, F., 71–72
Tononi, G., 85
Toraldo, A., 232
Torrey, E. F., 415–416
Tovee, M. J., 120–121
Tranel, D., 72
Trappey, C., 98
Tsao, F.-M., 278
Tsuang, M. T., 411, 413
Tuddenham, R. D., 261–262
Tulving, E., 197, 199, 206, 206f, 207, 
216
Tversky, A., 235, 239–242, 240f, 246
Tversky, B., 240f
Twitmyer, E. B., 152
Twohy, M., 261
Udomsri, S., 129f
Umiltà, C., 45, 276
Uttal, W., 45
Valdez-Menchaca, M. C., 5–6
Valenstein, E. S., 45, 422, 428, 429
Valentine, E. R., 210
Valenza, E., 276
Vallortigara, G., 80f
Van Horn, J. D., 72, 74
Van Os, J., 415
Van Petten, C., 219–220
van Praag, H., 65, 425
Van Wagenen, W., 77
Vasta, R., 286, 289
Vatiné, E., 369
Verano, J. W., 421f
Vertosick, F. T., Jr., 429
Vincent, J. E., 359
Vohs, K. D., 6
Vul, E., 211
Vygotsky, L. S., 272, 279, 289–291, 
290f, 294, 295, 304
Vyse, S. A., 241–242
Waber, R. L., 18
Wake, W. K., 253
Wakefield, J. C., 403, 411
Wakita, M., 162
Wald, G., 111
Waldman, M., 23
Walker, E. F., 409
Wall, S., 299–300
Wallace, C. S., 276
Ward, L. M., 122f
Warrington, E. K., 109
Washington, G., 197

Name Index  |  NI-9
Wason, P. C., 244–246
Watanabe, S., 162
Waters, E., 299–300
Watkins, C. E., 344
Watson, J., 303
Watson, J. B., 145–147, 146f,  
149–150, 152, 405, 432
Waxler, D. E., 145
Weaver, B., 376f
Weaver, S. L., 334
Weber, E., 100–101
Wechsler, D., 252–254, 252f, 262–263
Weiner, I. B., 340
Weinrib, O., 71–72
Weisberg, R., 230
Weiskrantz, L., 109
Weissman, M. M., 411
Weisstein, E. W., 125
Welch, H. G., 250
Weller, B., 428f
Wellman, H. M., 303
Wenger, M. J., 210–211
Wernicke, K., 74, 75
Wesainger, C. M., 109
West, R. F., 244
Westen, D., 327
Westly, E., 411
Weyandt, L. L., 417
Wheeler, D., 359
Whelan, C., 16, 30–31
Whishaw, I. Q., 66
Whitehurst, G. J., 5–6
Whitfield, M., 274
Wickelgren, W. A., 230, 236
Widiger, T. A., 338
Wiesel, T. N., 108, 108f
Wigdor, A. K., 256
Wiggins, J. S., 338
Wilcoxon, H. C., 175
Wild, M., 302
Wilding, J. M., 210
Wilkinson, J., 175f
Williams, H., 197
Williams, J., 24
Williams, J. H., 303
Williams, K. D., 372
Wilmer, J. B., 72
Wilpers, S., 337
Wiseman, R., 98
Witelson, S. F., 76
Witherington, D., 275
Wittchen, H-U., 406
Wixted, J. T., 211
Wohlfahrt, J., 274
Wojtowicz, J. M., 427
Woloshin, S., 247, 250
Wolpe, J., 433
Wong, K. F. E., 235
Wood, J. M., 344, 345
Woodruff-Pak, D. S., 201
Wright, P., 415, 417
Wynn, K., 278
Yanagi, K., 162
Yantis, S., 124
Yates, F. A., 209
Yerkes, R. M., 169, 170f
Yirmiya, N., 301
Yolken, R. H., 415–416
Yoonessi, A., 132–133, 133f
Yovel, G., 72, 79
Zacks, R. T., 205
Zajonc, R. B., 372
Zervas, I. M., 427
Ziebell, S., 426
Zimbardo, P., 375, 385–389,  
386f, 390
Zimmerman, R. R., 298
Zisook, S., 413
Zuckerman, M., 169
Zwislocki, J. J., 117


Note:  Page numbers followed by f 
indicate figures; those followed by t 
indicate tables.
Abilify, 426–427
abnormal psychology, 396–438.  
See also mental disorders; therapy
absolute threshold, 97–98, 97f, 103
Abu Ghraib prison, 386–387, 386f
accommodation
in Piaget’s theory, 283
in vision, 107
acetylcholine (ACh)
Alzheimer’s disease and, 46
definition and overview of, 46
Huntington’s chorea and, 63
poisons influencing, 46
summary of functions, 49t
acquisition
in classical conditioning, 147–148, 
148f, 151t
of language, 5–6, 279–282, 293–294 
in operant conditioning, 159, 160, 
161, 161f
acrophobia, 404t
activation-synthesis theory of  
dreaming, 84–85
actor-observer bias, 380–381, 382t, 
389–390
acupuncture, endorphins and, 49
acute schizophrenia, 414–415
adaptation
dark, 111
in Piaget’s theory, 283
sensory, 102
additive color mixtures, 112–113, 
112f
Adler’s striving for superiority, 326, 
326f, 327
adolescent(s)
approximate age range, 271t
formal operations in, 287–289
identity crisis of, 306
identity vs. role confusion stage 
and, 305t
adoption studies of intelligence, 
260–261
adrenal glands, 55, 55f
adrenalin, 54
adulthood
intelligence changes in, 257,  
291–293, 293t
late, 271t, 306
middle, 271t, 306
young, 271t, 306
advertising, classical conditioning 
and, 147
aerophobia, 404t
afterimages, 112, 113
aggression
in Eysenck’s three-factor personality 
theory, 338
media violence’s relationship with, 
179–180, 182
modeling of, 178–181
aging
intelligence influenced by, 257, 
291–293, 293t, 294–295
vision and, 107, 275–277
agonist(s), 46, 47, 48
agoraphobia, 406
agreeableness, in Five Factor Model 
of personality, 339, 339t
agyrophobia, 404t
Aha! experience, 232
alcohol 
effect on the brain, 63
and state-dependent memory, 208
as teratogen, 274
algorithms, 233–234, 238
alternate-form reliability, 255
Alzheimer’s disease
acetylcholine and, 46
glial cells and, 40
ambiguous subjective contours, 
126–127, 126f
American Psychiatric Association, 
DSM-5 and, 398–400
American Psychological Association, 1
American schoolchildren, test score 
gap vs. Asian schoolchildren, 
261
amnesia, 9–10, 64, 199–201
anterograde,199–201
infantile/child, 201
retrograde, 200
amnesics, 199, 200, 201, 237
amphetamines, 47
amplitude, of waveforms, 105, 105f
amygdala, 61, 62f, 63, 64, 64f, 64t, 
65, 65t, 83, 357, 406, 409
anal stage, in Freudian theory,  
322–323, 322t
anal-expulsive personality, 323
anal-retentive personality, 323
analytical intelligence, 258
anchoring and adjustment heuristic, 
234–235, 238
antagonist(s), 46, 47
anterior temporal lobes, 232–233
anterograde amnesia, 199–201
practice effect and problem solving 
in, 237
antianxiety drugs, 19, 48, 425, 437
anticonvulsants, 423
antidepressant drugs, 48, 423–425
for major depressive disorder, 411, 
422–425
for obsessive-compulsive  
disorder, 409
antipsychotic drugs, 425–427, 437
anvil (bone), 114, 115f
anxiety
basic, 326
defense mechanisms and, 319–320
GABA and, 48, 407
anxiety disorders
agoraphobia, 406
definition of, 403
drugs treating, 425
generalized, 407
overview of, 403–407, 403t, 404t, 407f
panic disorder, 406–407
social, 405–406
specific phobia, 403–405, 404t
summary of, 418
aphasia, 74–75
appetitive stimulus, 155–156, 155f
arachnophobia, 404
archetypes, Jungian, 325
arousal
emotion and, 56–59
in Eysenck’s three-factor personality 
theory, 337–338
Yerkes-Dodson law and, 169,  
170, 170f
Subject Index
SI-1

SI-2  |  Subject Index
arousal theory of motivation, 169, 
170, 170f, 170t
Asch conformity studies, 355–357, 
355f, 356f
assimilation, in Piaget’s theory, 283
association cortex, 70, 71–77
Astroten study, 369–370
attachment
contact comfort as crucial for, 
298–299, 299f
day care influencing, 301
definition of, 298
Harlow’s monkeys and, 298–300, 
298f, 299f
insecure-ambivalent, 300
insecure-avoidant, 300
insecure-disorganized, 300
overview of, 298–301, 298f, 299f
parenting styles and, 301–302, 
302f, 307
secure, 300–301
summary of, 307
temperament’s importance to, 
300–301
attitudes
behavior influencing, 382–389, 
384f, 386f, 389f
definition of, 382
Festinger’s cognitive dissonance 
theory and, 383–384, 385
role-playing influencing, 385–389, 
386f, 389f
self-perception theory and,  
384–385, 390
in social thinking, 382–389, 384f, 
386f, 389f
attribution, 334, 378–382, 382t
actor-observer bias and, 380, 382t
for behavior of others, 379–380
definition of, 378
false consensus effect and, 381
false uniqueness effect and, 381
fundamental attribution error  
and, 379, 382t
just-world hypothesis and,  
379–380
for our own behavior,  
379–380, 382t
primacy effect and, 379
self-fulfilling prophecies  
and, 380
self-serving bias and, 334, 382t
auditory cortex, 67t, 69–71
auditory processing, 116–118, 118t. 
See also hearing
composite theory and,  
117–118, 118t
frequency theory and, 117, 118t
location of primary, 67t, 70, 70t
pitch distinction in, 116–117, 118t
place theory and, 117, 118t
volley principle and, 117
auditory sensory register, 194
authoritarian parenting, 301
authoritative parenting, 301
autism, 181, 303–304, 307
autokinetic effect, 354–355, 355f
automatic processing, 205, 244, 250
autonomic nervous system
definition of, 53
emotions and, 56–60
overview of, 53, 60
parts of, 51f
autonomy vs. shame and doubt, in 
Erikson’s theory, 305t
availability heuristic, 242–244, 243f, 250
aversive stimulus, 155–156, 155
awareness
classical conditioning without, 158
levels of, 317–318, 317f
operant conditioning without, 
157–158
reinforcement without, 157–158
axons, 40, 41, 41f, 42–43, 43f, 44
babbling, 280
Babinski reflex, 274
baby talk, 280
backward conditioning, 143–144
Bandura’s self-system, 332–333
basal ganglia, 62f, 63, 201
basic anxiety, 326
basilar membrane, 115, 115f, 117
BBC Prison Study, 387, 388–389, 
389f, 390
Beck’s cognitive therapy, 434, 435, 
435f, 438
behavior(s). See also classical condi-
tioning; learning; motivation; 
operant conditioning; social 
thinking
attitudes and, 382–389, 384f,  
386f, 389f
modification, 157
reinforcers as, 156
self-system influencing, 332–333
behavior modification, 157
behavioral approach to personality, 
328–329
behavioral component of emotion, 
56–57
behavioral research perspective,  
3–4, 5t
behavioral therapy, 432–434, 438
belief perseverance, 246–247
beliefs, false, theory of mind and, 
302–303
bell curve, 24, 27–28, 27f, 28f See also 
normal distribution.
Bem’s self-perception theory, 
384–385
benzodiazepines, 425
BFI-10. See Big Five Inventory-10
bias
actor-observer, 380–381, 382t, 
389–390
confirmation, 244–247, 247f, 250
hindsight, 6
perceptual, effect of labeling on, 
400–401, 402
perceptual set and, 121
self-serving, 334, 380–381,  
382t, 390
social desirability, 10
Big Five. See Five Factor Model  
of personality
Big Five Inventory-10 (BFI-10),  
340, 341t
Binet-Simon intelligence test,  
251–252, 252f
binocular depth cues, 128–129, 134
biological preparedness
instinctual drift, 175–176, 175f
in learning, 173–176, 175f,  
182, 405
taste aversion, 174–175, 182
biological research perspective,  
2–3, 5t
biomedical therapies
definition of, 420
drug therapy, 422–427
electroconvulsive therapy, 427–428, 
427f, 428f, 437
overview of, 421–429, 429f
psychosurgery, 428–429, 429f, 437
summary of, 437
tranquilizing chair, 421f, 422
transcranial magnetic  
stimulation, 428
trephining, 421f, 422
biopsychosocial approach, 402
bipolar cells, 106, 106f, 107, 113
bipolar disorder, 412–413,  
422–423

Subject Index  |  SI-3
birth defects, 273–274
bistable perception, 124, 127
black widow spider venom, 46
blind spot(s), 107–108, 108f
blindsight, 109
blood-brain barrier, 47
Bobo doll experiments,  
178–179, 178f
bodily-kinesthetic intelligence, 257, 
258t, 259t
Botox, 46
bottom-up processing, 120
botulinum poison, 46
brain
at birth, 272, 278
blood supply pumped to, 44
central core of, 61–63, 62f
cerebral cortex of, 66–77, 67f,  
68f, 75f
consciousness and, 81–85
delayed conditioning and, 145
emotions, system for, 59–60
gray matter of, 42–43
hemispheric specialization in, 77–81
implicit memory formation in, 201
of infant, 278
insight problems, structures for, 
232–233
limbic system of, 63–65, 65t
memory storage capacity of, 
196–197
of Einstein, 76–77, 76f
overview of, 39, 61–81
oxygen consumed by, 44
perception influenced by, 95
scans, 44–45
schizophrenia and, 417
sleep/dreaming and, 81–85
speech and language centers of, 
74–75, 75t, 79
split, 77–81, 86
structures of, 61–77
theory of mind and, 303
trace conditioning and, 145
white matter of, 42–43
brain damage
aphasia and, 74–75, 75f
personality and, 73–74
brain scans, 44–45
brainwashing, 359
brain waves, sleep stages and,  
81–83, 72f 
BrdU. See bromodeoxyuridine
breathing reflex, 274
Broca’s aphasia, 75
Broca’s area, 74–75, 75f
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU), as  
marker of neurogenesis, 65
bystander effect, 4–5, 373–374
Cannon-Bard theory of emotion, 
58, 59f
caregivers, attachment to, 298–302
case studies, 9–10
catatonic schizophrenia, 414
categorization, 242
category, prototypes for, 3
cause-and-effect relationships
correlational research and, 11–16
descriptive research and, 8–11
in experimental research,  
16–22, 22t
cell body of neuron, 40, 41, 41f, 42
cell(s)
bipolar, 106, 107, 110, 113
ganglion, 106, 107, 110, 113
glial, 40
nerve. See neurons
central core, 61–63, 62f, 64t
central fissure, 66, 67, 68
central nervous system (CNS), 52–53, 
60. See also brain; spinal cord
centration, 286
cerebellum, 62–63, 62f, 64t
delayed conditioning and, 145
implicit memory formation  
and, 201
trace conditioning and, 145
cerebral cortex
definition of, 66
homunculi for, 68, 68f, 69
of Einstein, 76–77
processing in, 66–77
surface area of, 66
cerebral hemispheres
association cortex of, 70, 71–77
auditory cortex of, 69–71, 115f, 
115–116
interaction between, 80–81
joining of, 66
lobes of, 66–67, 67f, 70t
motor cortex of, 67–68, 68f
processing differences between, 
79–81
somatosensory cortex of, 68–69
specializations of, 77–81
speech/language areas of, 74–77
visual cortex of, 69–71, 106f,  
108–109, 125f, 126
Challenger disaster, 376, 376f
child abuse, false memories of, 
220–221
children. See also adolescents;  
development; infants; new-
borns; personality development; 
social development
cognitive development of, 282–289, 
283f, 284t, 287f, 294
concrete operational stage of, 284t, 
286–288, 287f, 294
conservation understood by,  
285–287, 287t
critical period for language, 282
day care and, 301
egocentrism of, 285
formal operational stage of, 284t, 
287–289, 294
language development in, 279–282, 
293–294
media violence effects on, 179–180
moral development of, 295–298, 297t
observational learning of,  
178–179, 178f
overjustification effect  
influencing, 171
preoperational stage of, 284–286, 
284t, 294
reversibility understood by, 286
scaffolding used for, 290–291, 294
sexual abuse of, 220–221, 222
social development in, 298–302
theory of mind for, 302–304, 307
zone of proximal development of, 
290–291, 294
chromosomes, 272–273
chronic schizophrenia, 415, 417
chunk, in memory, 195
cingulate gyrus, 429
cingulotomies, 429
classical conditioning
acquisition and, 147, 148f, 151t
conditioned response (CR) in, 
142–143, 145f, 151–152
conditioned stimulus (CS) in, 
142–145, 145f, 151
counterconditioning and,  
433–434, 438
definition of, 141, 145f
delayed conditioning and, 143–145
elements and procedures of,  
141–147, 142f, 144f, 145f, 146f
extinction and, 147, 148f, 151t
general learning processes in,  
147–151, 148f, 149f, 151t

SI-4  |  Subject Index
classical conditioning (Continued )
in advertising, 147
in behavioral therapy, 432–434, 438
Little Albert study and, 145–147, 
146f, 149–150, 432
overview of, 141–152, 142f, 144f, 
145f, 146f, 148f, 149f, 151t
Pavlov’s research on, 4, 141–144, 
142f, 144f, 149, 149f, 150, 151
phobias and, 405
spontaneous recovery and,  
147–148, 148f, 151–152, 151t
stimulus discrimination and, 149f, 
150, 151t
stimulus generalization and,  
148–150, 149f, 151t
summary of, 151–152
trace conditioning and, 143–145
unconditioned response (UCR) in, 
142, 145f, 151
unconditioned stimulus (UCS) in, 
142–145, 145f, 151
without awareness, 158
claustrophobia, 404
cleaning compulsion, 408–409
client-centered therapy, 331,  
431–432, 438
clinical psychologists, 420t
clinical social workers, 420t
closure, 125–127, 126f
CNS. See central nervous system
cochlea, 115, 115f, 116, 116f
cognitive component of emotion, 57
cognitive development. See also  
children; intelligence; thinking
concrete operational stage of, 284t, 
286–288, 287f, 294
formal operational stage of, 284t, 
287–289, 294
information-processing approach 
to, 289, 294
Piaget’s stage theory of, 282–289, 
283f, 284t, 287f, 294
preoperational stage of, 284–286, 
284t, 294
sensorimotor stage of, 284, 284t, 294
Vygotsky’s approach to, 289–291, 
290f, 294
cognitive dissonance theory,  
383–384, 385, 390
cognitive factors in depression,  
334–335, 411–412
cognitive maps, 178
cognitive research perspective,  
2–3, 5t
cognitive therapy, 434–435, 434f, 
435f, 438
cohort effects, 291–292
collective unconscious, Jungian, 
325–326, 327
collectivism, amount of conformity 
and, 357–358
color vision
composite theory of, 114,  
114t, 119
cones involvement in,  
109–111, 110t
of infants, 276
opponent-process theory of,  
113–114, 113f, 114t, 119
trichromatic theory of, 111–113, 
112f, 114, 114t, 118–119
color(s)
additive mixtures of, 111–112, 112f
afterimages and, 112, 113
complementary, 112
subtractive mixtures of, 112, 112f
Columbia disaster, 376
commonsense theory of emotion, 
57, 59f
communication, neuronal, 41–45
chemical, 43f, 43–44
electrical, 42–43, 43f
complementary colors, 112
afterimages and, 112, 113
compliance
definition of, 358
door-in-the-face technique for, 
358–359, 361–362, 362t, 370
foot-in-the-door technique for, 
358–359, 361, 362t, 370
low-ball technique for, 360–361
that’s-not-all technique for,  
361–362, 362t
composite theory 
of color vision, 114, 114t, 119
of pitch perception, 117–118,  
118t, 119
compulsions, 408–409
concrete operational stage, in 
Piaget’s theory, 284t, 286–288, 
287f, 294
conditional probabilities
medical screening test results and, 
247–249, 249f, 250
overestimation of, 247–248
computation of, using natural  
frequencies, 248–249, 249f
conditioned response (CR), 142–143, 
145f, 151–152
conditioned stimulus (CS), 142–145, 
145f, 151
conditioning. See classical conditioning; 
operant conditioning
conditions of worth, 331
conduction deafness, 116, 119
cones, (of retina), 109–113, 110f, 
110t, 112f, 118–119
confirmation bias, 244–247,  
247f, 250
conformity
Asch’s study of, 355–357, 355f, 
356f
brain activity and, 357
cultural factors influencing, 
357–358
definition of, 354
fMORI technique and, 358
gender factors influencing, 358
Sherif’s study of, 354–355, 355f
situational factors influencing, 357
summary of, 376–377
congenital abnormalities  
(from teratogens), 273–274
conjunction fallacy, 241, 241f
connectome, 39
conscientiousness, in Five Factor 
Model of personality, 338, 339t
conscious mind, in Freud’s theory, 
317–318, 317f
consciousness, 81–85
definition of, 81
sleep and, 81–85
conservation, in preoperational stage, 
285–287, 287t
contact comfort, 298–299, 299f
contamination obsession, 408–409
contextual effects on perception, 
122, 122f
continuous schedules of reinforcement, 
163, 167–168
control, locus of, 333–334
control groups, in experiments, 
17–20f
conventional level of moral  
reasoning, 296, 297,  
297t, 306
cornea, 106, 106f
corpus callosum, 66, 78
correlation
illusory, 246
near-zero, 12, 14f
negative, 12, 14f
positive, 12, 14f
strength of, 12, 14f

Subject Index  |  SI-5
correlation coefficient
definition of, 12
strength of, 12
types of, 12
uses in intelligence testing, 251, 255
correlational studies
correlation coefficient and, 12
definition of, 11
overview of, 11–16
scatterplots and, 13, 14f
third-variable problem in, 13, 15–16
corridor illusion, 129–130, 129f
cortical structures. See cerebral  
cortex; cerebral hemispheres
counseling psychologists, 420
counterconditioning, 432–434, 438
CR. See conditioned response
creative intelligence, 258
critical period, for language, 282
cross-sectional studies, 291–292, 
293t, 294
crystallized intelligence, 257,  
292, 294
CS. See conditioned stimulus
cue-dependent theory of forgetting,  
216–217, 221
cumulative records, for partial- 
reinforcement schedules,  
160–161, 160f, 161f
curare, 46
cynophobia, 404
dark adaptation, 111
data analysis, statistical, inferential, 
20–21
day care, attachment and, 301
deafness
conduction, 116
nerve, 116
declarative memory. See explicit 
memories
defense mechanisms, in Freud’s 
theory, 319–320, 320t
deindividuation, 374–375, 374f
delayed conditioning, 143–145, 158
delta waves, 82
delusions, 414
demand characteristics, 388
dendrites, 40–41, 41f, 42, 44
denial, in Freud’s theory, 319, 320t
dependent variable(s), 17, 20f,  
21–22, 22t
depression
bipolar disorder and, 412–413
cingulotomies treating, 429
cognitive factors in, 334–335, 
411–412
drug therapy for, 48, 411–412, 
423–425
electroconvulsive therapy for,  
427–428, 427f, 428f, 437
gender and, 411
genetic predisposition for, 411–412
learned helplessness and, 334
major depressive disorder, 403t, 
410–412
major depressive episode, 410, 413
memory in, 208–209
neurogenesis theory of, 425, 427
overdiagnosis of, 411
pessimistic explanatory style  
causing, 334–335, 411–412
placebos and, 424–425
psychotherapy for.  
See psychotherapies
suicide and, 410
transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(TMS) for, 428
depressive disorders, 410–412
depth perception, 128–133, 129f, 
131f, 132f, 133f, 275
descriptive research methods, 8–11
case studies, 9–10
observational techniques, 8–9
survey research, 10–11
descriptive statistics
correlation coefficient, 12
measures of central tendency, 25
measures of variability, 25–26
summary of, 26t
types of, 24–26
detection question, in psychophysics, 
96–100, 97f, 99t, 103, 103t
development. See also cognitive  
development; personality  
development; social development
Erikson’s psychosocial stage theory 
of, 304–306, 304f, 305t, 307
general stages of, 271, 271t
moral, 295–298, 296f, 297t, 306–307
motor, 274–275
nature influencing, 271, 273–274
nurture influencing, 271, 273–274
of infants, 274–279, 275f, 276f
of language, 5–6, 279–282, 293–294
prenatal, 272–274, 278–279
sensory-perceptual, 275–278,  
276f, 279
teratogens impairing, 273–274
developmental psychology
adult changes in intelligence and, 
291–293, 293t
attachment and, 298–302
complementary nature of multiple 
research perspectives and, 5–6
definition of, 5, 271
Erikson’s psychosocial stage theory 
and, 304–306, 304f, 305t, 307
Kohlberg’s moral reasoning stage 
theory and, 295–298, 296f, 
297t, 306–307
language acquisition and, 5–6,  
279–282, 293–294
parenting styles and, 301–302, 
302f, 307
Piaget’s stage theory and, 282–289, 
283f, 284t, 287f, 294
prenatal development and,  
272–274, 278–279
theory of mind and, 302–303
Vygotsky’s sociocultural theory 
and, 289–291, 290f, 294
deviation IQ scores, 253–254, 255f, 
262–263
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition 
(DSM-5), 397–400, 401
difference question, in psychophysics 
100–101, 103–104, 103t
difference threshold, 100–101, 
103–104
diffusion of responsibility, 372–375
discrimination, stimulus
in classical conditioning,  
150–151, 151t
in operant conditioning,  
161–163, 163t
discriminative stimulus, in operant 
conditioning, 161–162
disoriented attachment. See insecure-
disorganized attachment
displacement, in Freud’s theory,  
319, 320t
dissociative identity disorder, 413
distance cues, in vision, 128–133, 
129f, 131f, 132f, 133f
distance perception. See depth  
perception.
distractor task, 195–196, 196f
distributed study effect. See  
spacing effect
distributions, frequency, 24, 27–32
normal, 27f, 27–28, 28f, 254, 255f
skewed, 28–32, 29f, 30f

SI-6  |  Subject Index
dizygotic twins. See fraternal twins
door-in-the-face compliance  
technique, 358–359, 361–362, 
362t, 370
dopamine
antipsychotic drugs and, 425–427
definition and overview of, 46–47
Parkinson’s disease and, 46–47
schizophrenia and, 47, 416
stimulants influencing, 47
summary of functions, 49t
dopamine-serotonin system  
stabilizer. See Abilify
double-blind procedure, 21–22
dread risk, 243
dream(s), 83–85, 431
activation-synthesis theory  
of, 84–85
manifest vs. latent content  
of, 431
neurocognitive theory of, 85
psychoanalytic theory of, 431
drive-reduction theory of motivation, 
168–169, 170t
drugs, 48, 423–427
agonistic effects of, 46
antagonistic effects of, 46
antianxiety, 19, 48, 425, 437
anticonvulsant, 423
antidepressant, 48, 423–425, 437
antipsychotic, 47, 48, 416–417, 
425–427, 437
neurotransmitters and, 45–49
psychotropic, 422–427
drug therapy, 422–427, 437
DSM-5. See Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders,  
Fifth Edition
dual processing model of thinking, 
244
dysrationalia, 258–259
ear(s). See also deafness, hearing
operation of, 114–116, 115f, 116f
structure of, 114–115, 115f, 116f
eardrum, 114, 115f, 116
Ebbinghaus’s memory studies, 
212–213
echoic memory, 194
ECT. See electroconvulsive therapy
effortful processing, 205,  
243–244, 250
ego, in Freudian theory, 317f,  
318–321, 320t, 327
egocentrism, in preoperational  
stage, 285
Einstein’s brain, 76–77, 76f
elaborative rehearsal
actors using, 209
definition of, 206
overview of, 206–207
summary of, 209, 211
elderly people. See also aging
integrity vs. despair stage and, 305t, 
305
intelligence in, 257, 291–293
Electra conflict, in Freud’s theory, 
323, 327
electrical impulse, 42–43
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 
427–428, 427f, 428f, 437
electroencephalography (EEG), 81, 82
embryonic development, 273
emotions
amygdala influencing, 65
autonomic nervous system  
and, 56–60
behavioral component of, 56–57
brain system for, 59–60
cognitive component of, 57
commonsense theory of, 57
components of, 56–57, 60
definition of, 56
overview of, 56–60, 59f
physical component of, 56
theories of, 57–60, 59f
encoding 204–211
acoustic, 205–206
definition of, 204
effortful processing in, 205
elaborative rehearsal for, 206–207, 
209, 211
environmental effects on,  
207–209
failure theory, 214–215, 214f
improving, 209–211
interference in, 214, 215
levels-of-processing theory in, 
205–206
memories, information into,  
204–211, 206f
mnemonics improving, 209–210
overview of, 204–211, 206f
specificity principle, 207–208, 211
ways of, 205–211, 206f
endocrine glandular system
definition of, 54
overview of, 54–55, 55f, 60
endorphins, 48–49, 49t
environment
behavior influenced by, 4
development influenced by, 271, 
273–274
encoding, effects on, 207–209
heredity vs. experiences in,  
259–262, 262f, 273–274,  
281–282, 294
intelligence determined by,  
259–262, 262f, 263
language acquisition role of,  
281–282, 294
nature vs. experiences in,  
259–262, 262f, 271, 273–274, 
281–282, 294
obedience influenced by, 370–371, 
371f
studying influenced by, 207–208
virtual, 369
epinephrine, 54
episodic memory, 197–198, 198f, 204
Erikson’s psychosocial stage theory, 
304–306, 304f, 305t, 307
erogenous zone, in Freudian theory, 
321, 322t
ESP. See extrasensory perception
“Ethical Principles in the Conduct 
of Research with Human 
Participants” (American 
Psychological Association), 386
Eureka! experience, 232
excoriation disorder, 409–410
experiment(s), 16–22, 17t
control group in, 18
definition of, 17
dependent variables in, 17
designing, 16–22, 20f, 22t
double-blind procedure in, 20
experimental group in, 17
hypotheses in, 16–17, 239,  
244–250, 249f
independent variables in, 17
with multiple variables, 21–22
operational definitions in, 18
placebo effect in, 18–19
random assignment in, 16
experimental group, 17–18, 19, 20f
experimental research
controls in, 16–17, 17–22, 20f
design, 17–22, 20f
overview of, 16–22
experimenter expectation, 21
explanatory style(s), 334–335, 411–412
explicit memories, 197–198, 198f, 
201, 204, 272

Subject Index  |  SI-7
external attribution, 334
external locus of control, 333, 
334–335
extinction
in classical conditioning, 147–148, 
148f, 151t
in operant conditioning, 160–161, 
161f, 163t, 167–168
extrasensory perception (ESP), 98
extraversion, 325, 326, 339t
in Jungian personality theory,  
325, 326
in Five Factor Model of personal-
ity, 338–339, 339t
in Eysenck’s three-factor personal-
ity theory, 337–338
extraversion-introversion trait, 
337–338
extrinsic motivation, 169–172
extrinsic reinforcement, 169–172
extrinsic reinforcers, 170
eye(s). See also vision
accommodation and, 107
blind spots of, 108, 108f
in brain, 3
cones of, 109–113, 110f, 110t, 112f, 
118–119
cornea of, 106, 106f
fovea of, 110–111
iris of, 106–107, 106f
lens of, 106f, 107
light perception and, 105–107
operation of, 106–111, 106f,  
108f, 110t
pupil of, 106–107, 106f
retina of, 106, 106f, 107–113, 108f, 
110f, 110t, 112f
rods of, 118
eyewitness testimony, 220–221, 222
Eysenck’s three-factor theory of  
personality, 337–338
facial perception, 71–72,  
276–277, 276f
factor analysis, 257, 336
fallacies
conjunction, 241
gambler’s, 241
false belief understanding, in theory 
of mind, 302–303, 307
false consensus effect, 381
false memories, 219–221, 220f, 222
false positives, in medical screening 
tests, 247–250, 247f, 249f, 399
false uniqueness effect, 381
farsightedness, 107
FAS. See fetal alcohol syndrome
fathers, parenting style of, 301–302 
fear-of-fear hypothesis, 407
fears. See also anxiety disorders
attachment and, 299
behavior therapy for, 392–394
biologically predisposed, 405
conditioning of, 145–147, 405
example, 57–58, 59f
extinguishing, 405
learning, 145–147, 146f,  
149–150, 432
unlearning, 432–434
in specific phobias, 403t, 403–405
feature detectors, 108–109
females. See also mother(s)
depression in, 411
lack of bias against, in intelligence 
and standardized testing, 256
moral reasoning in, 297–298
Festinger’s cognitive dissonance 
theory, 383–384, 385, 390
fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS), 274, 
278–279
fetal development, 273
fetus, 273, 274
FFA. See fusiform face area
fight-or-flight system, 51f, 53, 55, 56
figure-and-ground principle, 123–
125, 123f, 124f, 125f
first-letter mnemonic technique, 210
fissure of Rolando, 66
Five Factor Model of personality, 
338–340, 339t, 345
fixation
in problem solving, 230–231
in Freud’s theory, 321–323, 327
fixed-interval schedules, 165–166, 
166f, 167t
fixed-ratio schedules, 163–165,  
165f, 167t
flat affect, in schizophrenia, 414
flooding, 434
fluid intelligence, 257, 292, 294
Flynn effect, 261–262, 263
fMORI technique, 358
fMRI. See functional magnetic reso-
nance imaging
foot-in-the-door compliance  
technique, 358–359, 361, 362t, 
366, 370
forgetting
cue-dependent theory of, 216, 217t
curve, for long-term memory,  
213, 213f
encoding failure theory of,  
214–215, 214f, 217t
interference theory of, 215–216, 
216f, 217t
in long-term memory, 190f,  
213–217, 214f, 216f, 217t
in sensory memory, 190f, 191
in short-term memory, 190f,  
194–196, 196f
storage decay theory of, 215, 217t
summary of, 221
formal operational stage, in Piaget’s 
theory, 284t, 287–289, 294
four-card selection task, 245–246
fovea, 106f, 110–111
fraternal (dizygotic) twins, 260, 273
free association, 430
free recall task, 202–203, 202f, 204
free-floating anxiety. See generalized 
anxiety disorder
frequencies
natural, 248–249, 249f
of waveforms, 105
frequency distribution(s)
definition of, 24
left-skewed, 29–30, 29f, 32
long tail phenomenon in,  
30–32, 30f
normal, 27–28, 27f, 28f
overview of, 27–32, 27f, 28f,  
29f, 30f
right-skewed, 28–29, 29f, 30f,  
31, 32
skewed, 28–32, 29f, 30f
frequency theory of pitch percep-
tion, 117–118, 118t, 119
Freudian theory, 316, 317–325, 317f, 
320t, 322t, 327
defense mechanisms in, 319–321, 
322t, 324
dreams in, 84–85, 431
ego in, 319
iceberg model of mind in, 317f, 
317–318
id in, 318
levels of awareness in, 317f,  
317–318, 324
personality structure in,  
317–321, 322t
psychosexual stages and,  
321–324, 322t
superego in, 319
frontal cortex, 232, 409

SI-8  |  Subject Index
frontal lobes, 66–68, 72–73, 75, 86, 
232–233, 409
Broca’s area in, 75
functions of, 73–74
motor cortex of, 67–68
frontal lobotomy, 428–429
full-report procedure, 192–193, 192f
functional fixedness, 231
functional magnetic resonance  
imaging (fMRI), 45, 69, 357
fundamental attribution error,  
379, 382t
fusiform face area (FFA), 71–72
g factor (general intelligence), 
256–257
GABA. See gamma-aminobutyric acid
Gage, Phineas, 72–74, 237
gambler’s fallacy, 241–242
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 
48, 49t, 63, 407, 425
gamophobia, 404t
ganglion cells, 106, 106f, 107,  
110, 113
Gardner’s multiple intelligences,  
257, 258t
gender, 358, 366, 411
general intelligence (g factor), 
256–257
generalization
in classical conditioning,  
150–151, 151t
in operant conditioning,  
161–163, 163t
generalized anxiety disorder, 407
generativity vs. stagnation stage, in 
Erikson’s theory, 305t, 306
genetic factors. See also heritability; 
nature vs. nurture debate; twin 
studies
in bipolar disorder, 413
in depression, 411
in intelligence, 260–262
in schizophrenia, 415
genetic similarity studies, 260
genital stage, in Freudian theory, 
322t, 324
Genovese, Kitty, 4–5, 353, 373, 374
bystander intervention and, 
373–374
gephyrophobia, 404t
germinal stage, 273
Gestalt psychologists, 122–127, 123f, 
124f, 125f, 126f, 134
glial cells, 40
global processing, 79–81
glutamate, 48, 49t, 416–417
grasping reflex, 274
gray matter, 42–43
group polarization, 375
group(s)
bystander effect caused by, 
373–374
compliance and, 358 
conformity and, 355–358
deindividuation and, 372–375
diffusion of responsibility in, 
372–375
experiments on, 373–374
groupthink and, 375–376
perception changed by, 357
polarization, 375
social facilitation provided by, 
371–372
social influence, 371–376, 376f, 
377–378
social loafing in, 372–373
groupthink, 375–376
habituation, 275
hair cells, 115–116, 115f, 116f, 119
hair-pulling disorder.  
See trichotillomania
hallucinations, 414
hammer (bone), 114, 115f
hearing
auditory processing and,  
116–118, 118t
conduction deafness and, 116
mechanics of, 114–116, 115f
nerve deafness and, 116, 119
in newborn, 277
of pitch, 116–118, 118t
helplessness, learned, 334–335
hemispheric specialization, 77–79, 78f
herd mentality, 370
heredity
development influenced by, 271, 
273–274
environmental experiences vs.,  
259–262, 262f, 273–274,  
281–282, 294
intelligence determined by,  
259–262, 262f, 263
language acquisition role of,  
281–282, 294
nurture vs., 259–262, 262f, 271, 
273–274, 281–282, 294
heritability, 260
heuristic(s)
algorithm vs., 234
anchoring and adjustment,  
234–235, 238
availability, 242–244, 243f, 250
definition of, 233–234
means-end analysis, 236–237, 238
overview of, 234–237
reasons for relying on, 243–244
representativeness, 239–242, 240f, 
241f, 250
summary of, 238
working backward, 236, 238
hierarchy of needs, 329–331,  
329f, 335
hindsight bias, 6
hippocampus, 10, 62f, 63,64–65, 64f, 
65t, 199, 201, 204, 272, 425
hoarding disorder, 409
holophrase, 280
homunculi, 67–68, 68f, 69
hormones, 54
Horney’s need for security theory, 
326–327
humanistic theories of  
personality, 342t
emphasis of, 315
hierarchy of needs and, 329–331,  
329f, 335
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs,  
329–331, 329f, 335
overview of, 328, 329–332, 329f, 
331f, 332f
Rogers’s self theory, 331–332, 332f
summary of, 335
Huntington’s chorea, 63
hypothalamus, 54–55, 55f, 63–64, 
64f, 65t
hypothesis testing
confirmation bias and, 244–247, 
247f, 250
in medical situations, 239,  
247–250, 247f, 249f
overview of, 239, 244–250,  
247f, 249f
summary of, 250
iceberg model of mind, in Freudian 
theory, 317–318, 317f, 324, 327
iconic memory, 190
capacity of, 193
definition of, 191
duration of, 191, 192–194

Subject Index  |  SI-9
Sperling’s full-report procedure 
and, 192–193, 192f
Sperling’s partial-report procedure 
and, 192, 192f, 193
temporal integration procedure 
and, 191–192, 191f
id, in Freudian theory, 317f, 318, 
320–324, 322t, 327
identical (monozygotic) twins,  
260, 273
identification, in Freudian theory, 323
identity crisis, 306
identity vs. role confusion, in 
Erikson’s theory, 305
I-knew-it-all-along phenomenon 
(hindsight bias), 6
ill-defined problems, 229, 238
illusions, 128–133, 129f, 131f, 133f, 
134, 276–277, 276f, 376, 377
illusory correlations, 246, 250
imagination inflation, 219
implicit memory, 198–199, 198f, 
201, 204
classical conditioning and, 198f
priming and, 198–199, 198f
procedural memory and,  
198–199, 198f
impression formation, 242
anchoring and adjustment heuris-
tic and, 235
primacy effect and, 379
incentive theory of motivation,  
169, 170t
incus (bone), 114, 115f
independent variable(s), 17, 20f, 
21–22, 22t
individualism, amount of conformity 
and, 357–358
industry vs. inferiority stage, in 
Erikson’s theory, 305t
infantile/child amnesia, 201
infant(s). See also attachment;  
newborns
brain development in, 278, 279
cognitive abilities of, 278
language development in, 277–278, 
279, 280, 281
motor development of, 274–275
object permanence lacked by,  
284, 288
security need of, 326–327
sensorimotor stage of, 284,  
284t, 294
sensory-perceptual development of, 
275–278, 276f, 279
temperament of, 300–301
Thatcherization and, 276–277, 276f
theory of mind and, 302
trust vs. mistrust stage in, 305t
inferential statistical analyses, 20–21
inferiority complex, 326
influenza, and schizophrenia, 415
information-processing approach to 
cognitive development,  
289, 294
informational social influence, 
354–355, 355f
initiative vs. guilt stage, in Erikson’s 
theory, 305t
insecure-ambivalent attachment, 300
insecure-avoidant attachment, 300
insecure-disorganized attachment, 300
insight
in problem solving, 232–233
in psychoanalysis, 430–431
instinctual drift, 175–176, 175f, 182
integrity vs. despair stage, in 
Erikson’s theory, 305t
intelligence quotient (IQ), 252–254, 
255f, 262–263
intelligence(s)
of adopted children, 260
age decline in, 291–293, 293t, 
294–295
controversies about, 256–262, 258t, 
259t, 262f
crystallized, 257, 292, 294
definition of, 251, 257–259, 258t
fluid, 257, 292, 294
Gardner’s multiple, 257, 258t
general, 256–257
nature determining, 259–262,  
262f, 263
nurture determining, 259–262, 
262f, 263
specific, 256–257
tests, 251–256, 251f, 252f, 254f, 
255f, 262–263
theories of, 256–259, 258t,  
259t, 263
triarchic theory of, 258
intelligence test(s)
Binet-Simon scale, 252 
deviation IQ scores and,  
253–254, 253f
Flynn effect observed for,  
261–262, 263
g factor in, 256–257
history of, 251–253
intelligent quotients (IQs), 252
lack of bias against women and 
minorities, 256, 263
reliability and validity for, 254–256
s factors in, 257
standardization of, 254f, 253–254
Stanford-Binet, 252–253, 252f, 254, 
255, 262
Wechsler, 253–254
interference theory, for forgetting, 
215–216, 216f, 221
internal attribution, 334
internal locus of control, 333–334
interneurons, 52
interpersonal intelligence, 258t, 259t
interposition, 128
interval partial-reinforcement sched-
ules, 165–166, 166f, 167, 167t
intimacy vs. isolation, in Erikson’s 
theory, 305t
intrapersonal intelligence, 258t, 259t
intrinsic motivation, 169–172
intrinsic reinforcers, 170
introversion
in Eysenck’s three-factor personality 
theory, 337–338
in Jungian personality theory,  
325, 326
IQ. See intelligence quotient
iris, 106–107, 106f
James-Lange theory of emotion,  
57, 59f
jnd. See just noticeable difference
Jonestown massacre, 353–354,  
370–371, 371f
Jungian personality theory, 325, 326
just noticeable difference (jnd), 100–101
just-world hypothesis, 379
ketamine, 416
knee-jerk reflex, 52
Kohlberg’s stage theory of moral 
reasoning, 295–298, 296f, 297t, 
306–307
labeling, 400–401
language. See also speech and lan-
guage centers of brain
acquisition, 5–6, 277–278, 279–282, 
293–294

SI-10  |  Subject Index
language. See also speech and  
language centers of brain 
(Continued )
centers in brain, 74–75, 74f, 79
complementary nature of multiple 
research perspectives and, 5–6
critical period for, 282
nature’s role in acquiring,  
281–282, 294
nurture’s role in acquiring,  
281–282, 294
split-brain patients and, 78–79
late adulthood, 271t, 306
latency stage, in Freudian theory, 
322t, 324
latent content, of dreams, 431
latent learning, 176–177, 177f, 182
lateral fissure, 66–67, 67f
law of effect, 153
L-dopa, 47
Leaning Tower illusion, 132–133, 133f
learned helplessness, 334–335
learning
aversions and, 174–175
biological and cognitive aspects of, 
173–182, 175f, 176f, 177f, 178f
biological preparedness in,  
173–176, 175f, 182, 405
classical conditioning and. See clas-
sical conditioning
instinctual drift and, 176–177
latent, 176–177, 177f, 182
motivation in, 168–172
observational (social), 178–181, 
178f, 182, 332–333
operant conditioning and. See oper-
ant conditioning
specific phobias and, 405
left hemisphere, 77–80, 78f
left visual field, 77, 78, 78f
left-skewed distributions, 29–30, 29f
lens, 106f, 107
levels-of-processing theory,  
205–206, 206f
light waves
additive mixtures of, 111–112, 112f
amplitude of, 105f
perception of, 106f, 104–114. See 
also color vision; vision
subtractive mixtures of, 112, 112f
wavelength of, 105f, 105–107
limbic system, 63–65, 64f, 65t
linear perspective, 128, 129–132, 
129f, 131f, 132f, 133
linguistic intelligence, 257, 258t
lithium, 422–423
Little Albert study, 145–147, 146f, 
149–150, 432
loafing, social, 372
lobotomy, 428–429, 429f, 437
local processing, 79–81
loci, method of, 209–210
locus of control, 333–335
logical-mathematical intelligence, 
257, 258t
long tail phenomenon, 30–32, 30f
longitudinal studies, 291, 292–293, 
293t, 294
long-term memory (LTM)
amnesia influencing, 199–201
definition of, 196
forgetting curve for, 213, 213f
overview of, 196–203, 197t, 198f, 202f
STM as distinct from, 201–203, 
202f, 204
summary of, 204
types of, 197–199, 198f
low birth weight, 274, 279
low-ball compliance technique, 
360–361
LTM. See long-term memory
magnetic resonance imaging, func-
tional (fMRI), 45, 69, 71, 181, 
203, 357, 369
maintenance rehearsal, 196, 206
major depressive disorder, 398–399, 
410–412, 419
major depressive episode, 410
manic episode, 412–413
manic-depressive disorder.  
See bipolar disorder
manifest content, 431
MAO inhibitors. See monoamine  
oxidase inhibitors
males. See also fathers; testosterone
depression in, 411
malleus (bone), 114, 115f
maps, cognitive, 178
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs,  
329–331, 329f, 335
maze, latent-learning research with, 
176–177, 177f, 182
McGurk effect, 70–71
mean, 25, 30, 31
distortion of, 25, 30–31
in normal distribution, 27–28, 
27f, 28f
in skewed distribution, 28–29, 29f
means-end analysis heuristic,  
236–237, 238
measures of central tendency, 25
measures of variability, 25–26
media
depiction of mental disorders 
in, 401
violence in, 179–180, 182
median, 25, 30–31
in normal distribution, 27–28
in skewed distribution,  
28–29, 29f
medical hypotheses, testing, 239, 
247–250, 247f, 249f. See also 
conditional probabilities
medical school syndrome, 402
medulla, 61–62, 62f, 64t
memory. See also encoding; iconic 
memory; retrieval; three-stage 
model of memory
acoustic processing in, 206, 206f
brain’s storage capacity for, 
196–197
chunking in, 195
distractor task and, 195, 196f
Ebbinghaus’s studies of,  
212–213, 213f
echoic, 194
elaborative rehearsal,  
206–209, 210
emotion and, 208, 211
encoding information into. See 
encoding.
episodic, 197–198, 198f, 204
explicit (declarative), 197–198, 
198f, 201, 204, 272
false, 219–221, 220f, 222
forgetting and. See amnesia;  
forgetting
free recall task and, 201–202
full-report procedure and,  
192–193, 192f
hippocampus and, 10, 64, 199, 
201, 204
iconic, 190–194
implicit (nondeclarative), 198–199, 
198f, 201, 204
levels-of-processing theory,  
205–207, 206f
long-term, 190f, 196–203
maintenance rehearsal, 196
memory span task, 194–195
mood-dependent, 208, 211
organization of, 189–190, 
190f, 198f

Subject Index  |  SI-11
partial-report procedure and, 192, 
192f, 193
physical processing in, 205–206
primacy effect in, 202
priming in, 198–199, 198f
procedural, 198, 198f, 204
recovered, 221
repressed, 220–221, 222, 324
retrieving information from.  
See retrieval. 
schemas and, 218
self-reference effect, 207, 209
semantic, 197–198, 198f, 204
semantic processing in,  
205–206, 206f 
sensory, 190–194, 190f, 191f, 192f, 
193f, 203
short-term, 190f, 194–196, 196f
state-dependent, 208, 211
storage in, 196–197, 201, 204–211
temporal integration procedure, 
191–192
three-stage model, 189–204, 190f
memory loss. See amnesia; forgetting
memory span, 194–195
memory span task, 194–195
mental ability theories of  
intelligence, 257–259
mental age, 252, 253
mental disorders
anxiety, 403–407, 403t, 404t, 407f, 
418, 425
biopsychosocial approach to, 402
bipolar, 412–413, 422–423
causes of, 402
depressive, 398–399, 410–412, 419
diagnosis and classification of, 
397–402
dissociative identity, 413
false positives in diagnosis of, 
398–399
major categories of, 402–419, 403t, 
404t, 407f
major depressive, 398–399,  
410–412, 419
in media, 401
multiple personality, 413
obsessive-compulsive, 407–409, 
418–419, 429
obsessive-compulsive related,  
407–408, 409–410
perceptual bias of labeling and, 
400–401
personality, 417–418, 419
psychotic, 413, 425–427
schizophrenia, 47, 400, 413–417
six major categories of,  
402–419, 403t
spontaneous remission of,  
435–436, 436f
summary of, 418–419
symptoms of, 402
treatment of. See biomedical  
therapies; psychotherapies
mental health professionals,  
420, 420t
mental set, 231–232
meta-analysis, 22, 435–436, 436f, 438
method of loci, 209–210, 211
middle adulthood, 276t, 305t, 306
Milgram obedience studies,  
362–369, 364f, 364t, 367f, 
368t, 377, 379
mind
Freud’s iceberg model of, 317–318, 
317f, 324, 325–326, 327
theory of, in development,  
302–304, 307
mindware gap, 258–259
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory (MMPI), 340,  
342–343, 345–346
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory-2 (MMPI-2), 340, 
342, 343, 345–346
mirror neurons
autism and, 181, 303–304
definition and overview of, 180–181
imagination inflation effect and, 
219–220
observational learning and,  
180–181, 307
theory of mind and, 303–304
mirror-tracing task, 200
misinformation effect, 220–221, 220f
MMPI. See Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory
MMPI-2. See Minnesota Multiphasic 
Personality Inventory-2
mnemonics, 209–210, 211
mode, 25, 26t
in normal distribution, 27–28
in skewed distribution, 28–29, 29f
modeling. See observational learning; 
social learning
monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibi-
tors, 423
monocular depth cues, 128–129, 
130, 134
monozygotic twins. See identical twins
mood-congruence effect, 208–209, 
211
mood-dependent memory, 208, 211
moon illusion, 132, 132f
moral development, 295–298, 296f, 
297t, 306–307 
moral reasoning, 295–298, 296f, 
297t, 306–307
morphine, 49
mother(s)
attachment to, 298–302
parenting style of, 301–302
working, 301
motivation. See also humanistic 
theories
arousal theory of, 169, 170t
definition of, 168
drive-reduction theory of,  
168–169, 170t
extrinsic, 169–172
incentive theory of, 169, 170t
intrinsic, 169–172
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, 
329–331
overjustification effect and,  
170–171, 172–173
reinforcement and, 169–172
self-actualization as, 335
summary of, 172
motor cortex, 67–68, 68f
motor development, 274–275
motor homunculus, 68f
motor nerves, 52
motor neurons, 52
motor reflexes. See reflexes
Müller-Lyer illusion, 130–131, 131f
multiple personality (dissociative 
identity) disorder, 413
musical intelligence, 257, 258t
myelin sheath, 42
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, 326
NASA, groupthink and, 376
natural frequencies, in calculating 
conditional probabilities,  
248–249, 249f, 250
naturalist intelligence, 257, 258t
naturalistic observation, 8
nature vs. nurture debate
development and, 271, 273–274
intelligence and, 259–262, 262f, 263
language acquisition and,  
281–282, 294
Navon hierarchical figures, 80, 80f

SI-12  |  Subject Index
near-zero correlation, 13, 14f
nearsightedness, 107
Necker cube, 126–127, 126f
needs, 329–331, 329f
Maslow’s hierarchy of, 329–331
Horney’s security, 326–327
for sleep, 83–84
negative correlation, 12, 14f
negative punishment, 154–156, 155f
negative reinforcement,  
154–156, 155f
negatively skewed distribution, 
29–30
neo-Freudian theories, 316,  
325–327, 325f
NEO-PI-R, 340, 341t
nerve deafness, 116, 119
nervous system
autonomic, 51f, 56–60
central, 51, 51f, 52–53
neurons in, 52
overview of, 51–53, 51f
parasympathetic, 51f, 53
parts of, 51, 51f
peripheral, 51, 51f, 53
somatic (skeletal), 51f, 53
subdivisions of, 51
sympathetic, 51f, 53
neurocognitive theory of dreaming, 85
neurogenesis, 64–65, 425
BrdU as marker of, 65
cognitive psychotherapies and, 425
electroconvulsive therapy and, 427
placebo effect and, 425
selective serotonin reuptake inhibi-
tors and, 427
neurogenesis theory of depression, 
425, 427
neurons
communication between,  
41–45, 43f
electrical impulse of, 42–43
glial cells and, 40
glutamate killing of, 48
interneurons, 52
mirror, 180–181, 219–220,  
303–304, 307
motor, 52
neurotransmitters and, 43–44, 43f
number of, 39
postnatal development of, 278
sensory, 52
structure of, 40–41, 41f
neuroticism, in personality trait 
theories, 337, 338, 339t
neurotransmitter(s)
acetylcholine, 46, 49t, 63
definition of, 44
in depression, 411, 413
dopamine, 46–47, 49t, 416, 425–427
drugs and, 45–49
endorphins, 48–49, 49t
GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), 
48, 49t, 63, 407, 425
glutamate, 48, 49t, 416–417
in generalized anxiety disorder, 407
hormones vs., 54
norepinephrine, 45, 47–48, 49t, 54, 
406, 411, 423, 427
in obsessive-compulsive  
disorder, 409
poisons and, 45–49
in schizophrenia, 415–417
serotonin, 45, 47–48, 49t, 54, 409, 
411, 423, 425, 426, 427
summary of, 49t
newborns. See infants
nine-circle problems, 230–231, 233
nocebo effect, 19
nondeclarative memory. See implicit 
memory
nonsense syllables, 212–213, 213f
norepinephrine, 47–48, 49t, 54
normal distributions, 27–28, 27f, 28f
normative social influence, 355–357, 
355f, 356f
obedience
Astroten study on, 369–370
Burger’s study on, 367–369
gender differences in, 366
Jonestown massacre and, 370–371
Milgram’s studies on, 362–369, 
364f, 364t, 367f, 368t,  
377, 379
virtual environment study on, 369
object movement, 278
object permanence, 284, 288
observation inflation effect, 219–220
observational learning, 178–181, 
178f, 182
observational research techniques, 8–9
obsessions, 408–409
obsessive-compulsive disorder
cingulotomies treating, 429
overview of, 407–409
SSRIs treating, 409
summary of, 418–419
treatments for, 409, 429
obsessive-compulsive related disor-
ders, 407–408, 409–410
occipital lobe, 67, 67f
Oedipus conflict, in Freudian theory, 
323, 327
openness, in Five Factor Model of 
personality, 338–339, 339t
operant conditioning
acquisition in, 160, 161, 161f, 163t
behavioral therapies using, 434
cumulative record in, 160–161, 
160f, 161f
definition of, 4, 141, 152
extinction in, 160–161, 161f, 163t
motivation and, 168–172
partial-reinforcement schedules in, 
163–168, 165f, 166f, 167t
punishment in, 153–158, 155f
reinforcement in, 153–158, 155f
shaping in, 159–160
spontaneous recovery in, 161,  
161f, 163t
stimulus discrimination in,  
161–162, 163t
stimulus generalization in,  
162, 163t
summary of, 172–173
without awareness, 157–158
operant conditioning chambers, 
159–162, 159f, 160f, 161f
operational definition, 18
ophidiophobia, 404t
opponent-process theory of color 
vision, 113–114, 113f, 114t, 119
optic nerve, 78f, 106f, 107, 108
oral stage, in Freudian theory,  
322, 322t
organizational perceptual ambigui-
ties, 122–125, 123f,124f, 125f
ornithophobia, 404t
oval window, 115, 115f, 117
ovaries, 55, 55f
overextension, 280
overjustification effect, 170–173
overlearning, 211
pancreas, 55, 55f
panic disorder, 406–407
paranormal, 239
parasympathetic nervous  
system, 53, 54t
parentese. See baby talk
parenting styles, 301–302, 302f, 307
parietal lobe, 67, 67f, 68, 70t, 76, 77

Subject Index  |  SI-13
Parkinson’s disease, 46–47, 63
glial cells and, 40
L-dopa and, 47
partial-reinforcement effect, 163
partial-reinforcement schedules
extinction for, 167–168
fixed-interval, 165–166, 166f, 167t
fixed-ratio, 163–165, 165f, 167t
summary of, 172
variable-interval, 166, 167t
variable-ratio, 163–165, 165f, 167t
partial-report procedure, 192,  
192f, 193
participant observation, 9
pattern recognition, 108–109
bottom-up processing, 120–121
contextual effect, 122, 122f
perceptual set in, 121
top-down processing, 120–122
Pavlovian conditioning. See classical 
conditioning
PCP. See phencyclidine
peak experiences, 330
peg-word system, 210, 211
Peoples Temple, 353–354,  
370–371, 371f
percentile rank, 28
perception. See also hearing; vision
absolue threshold in, 97–98, 97f, 
103, 103t
bistable, 124
bottom-up processing and, 120
of color, 109–111, 113f, 114t, 276
contextual effects on 122, 122f
definition of, 119–120
of depth, 128–133, 129f, 131f, 132f, 
133f, 275
difference question in, 96, 100–101, 
103–104, 103t
difference threshold in, 100,  
103, 103t
extrasensory, 98
in Gestalt psychology, 122–128
illusions in, 95, 95f, 122–128
perceptual constancy and, 127–128
perceptual organization and, 
122–128
perceptual set influencing, 121
of pitch, 105, 116–118
scaling question and, 96,  
101–102, 103t
of self, 334–335, 384–385
sensory adaptation and, 102
sensory-perceptual development in 
infancy and, 275–278
signal detection theory, 98–100
of sound, 96, 100, 114–118, See also 
hearing
Stevens’s power law and,  
101–102, 103t
subjective nature of, 95, 95f,  
128–133, 129f, 131f, 132f, 133f
subliminal, 98
top-down processing and, 120–122, 
121f, 122f
visual. See vision
Weber’s law and, 100–101, 103, 
103t
perceptual ambiguity, 124–125,  
124f, 125f
perceptual constancy, 122,  
127–128, 134
perceptual organization, 128
closure in, 125–127, 126f
figure-and-ground principle for, 
123–125, 123f, 124f, 125f
overview of, 122–127, 123f, 124f, 
125f, 126f, 134
subjective contours in,  
125–127, 126f
perceptual set, 121
peripheral nervous system (PNS)
autonomic, 51f, 56–60
overview of, 53, 60
parts of, 51f
somatic (skeletal), 51f, 53
permissive parents, 301
person-who reasoning, 246–247
personality, 314–346. See also human-
istic theories; psychoanalytic 
theories; social-cognitive theo-
ries; trait theories; traits
anal-expulsive, 323
anal-retentive, 323
assessment, 336, 340–345
behavioral approach to, 328
collective unconscious and, 
325–326
defense mechanisms influencing, 
320–321
definition of, 315
disorders, 417–418, 419
extraverted, 337–338
Freudian theory of, 316, 317–325, 
317f, 320t, 322t
frontal lobes and, 73–74
humanistic approach to, 329–332
introverted, 337–338
neo-Freudian theories of, 316, 
325–327, 325f
phrenology theory of, 315
social-cognitive approach to, 
332–335
split personality (dissociative identity) 
disorder, 413
trait theories of, 336–340
personality development. See also 
humanistic theories; psychoan-
alytic theories; social-cognitive 
theories; trait theories
Erikson’s psychosocial stage theory 
of, 304–306, 304f, 305t, 307
Freudian theory of, 316, 317–325, 
317f, 320t, 322t
neo-Freudian theories of, 316, 
325–327, 325f
personality inventories, 340, 342, 
343, 345–346
personality disorders, 417–418
dissociative identity disorder, 413
personality tests
Big Five Inventory-10 (BFI-10),  
340, 341t
Five Factor Model inventories, 340
MMPI, 340, 342–343
MMPI-2, 340, 342, 343
personality inventory, 340, 342, 
343, 345–346
projective, 343–345, 344f,  
345f, 346
Rorschach Inkblot, 344–345, 344f
summary of, 345–346
Thematic Apperception Test  
(TAT), 345
personality theories
Adlerian, 326, 326f, 327
behavioral, 328–329
Five Factor Model, 338–339, 339t
Freudian. See Freudian theory
of Horney, 326–327
humanistic, 329–332
Jungian, 325, 326
of Maslow, 329–331
neo-Freudian, 316, 325–327, 325f
phrenology and, 315
psychoanalytic, 316, 317–325, 317f, 
320t, 322t, 327
of Rogers, 331–332, 332f
social-cognitive, 332–335
three-factor, of Eysenck, 337–338
trait, 315–316, 336–340, 342t
personality traits, 315, 321, 322, 
336–345
person-centered therapy.  
See client-centered therapy

SI-14  |  Subject Index
person-who reasoning, 246–247, 250
pessimistic explanatory style,  
334–335, 411–412
PET scans. See positron emission 
tomography scans
phallic stage, in Freudian theory, 
322t, 323
phencyclidine (PCP), 416
phobia(s), 403–406, 404t
agoraphobia, 403, 406
behavioral therapy for, 433–434
social (social anxiety disorder), 
405–406
specific, 403–404, 404t
phonemes, 277–278, 279
phrenology theory of personality, 315
physical component of emotion, 53
physical world
infants’ understanding of, 278
relationship to psychological 
world, 96–103
Piaget’s theory of cognitive  
development
accommodation in, 283
assimilation in, 283
concrete operational stage of, 284t, 
286–288, 287f, 294
evaluation of, 288–289
formal operational stage of, 284t, 
287–289, 294
preoperational stage in, 284–286, 
284t, 294
schemas in, 283–284
sensorimotor stage in, 284,  
284t, 294
summary of, 294
pinna (bone), 114, 115f
pitch perception
composite theory of, 117–118, 118t
frequency theory of, 117–118,  
118t, 119
place theory of, 117–118, 118t, 119
pituitary gland, 54–55, 55f
place theory of pitch perception, 
117–118, 118t, 119
placebo, 18–19, 424
placebo effects, 18–19, 21, 49, 
424–425
placebo groups, 19, 20f
pleasure principle, in Freudian 
theory, 318
PNS. See peripheral nervous system
poisons
acetylcholine and, 46
agonististic effects of, 46
antagonistic effects of, 46
botulinum, 46
neurotransmitters and, 45–49
pons, 61–62, 64t, 84
Ponzo illusion, 129–130, 129f
population, in a research study, 
10–11
positive correlation, 12–13, 13f, 14t
positive punishment, 154–156, 155f
positive reinforcement, 154–156, 155f
positively skewed distributions, 
28–29, 29f, 30f, 31–32
positron emission tomography (PET) 
scans, 44–45
postconventional level of moral rea-
soning, 296, 297, 297t, 306–307
practical intelligence, 258
preconscious mind, in Freudian 
theory, 317, 317f, 318
preconventional level of moral  
reasoning, 296, 297, 297t, 306
predispositions
fears and, 146, 173–174
schizophrenia and, 415–416
preferential-looking technique, 275
prefrontal lobotomy, 428–429
Premack principle, 156
prenatal development, 272–274, 
278–279
preoperational stage, in Piaget’s 
theory, 284–286, 284t, 294
primacy effect, 
impression formation and, 
379–380
in memory, 202–203, 202f, 204
primary auditory area, 67f, 70,  
115f, 116
primary mental abilities,  
257–258, 259t
primary motor area, 67f, 73, 77
primary reinforcers, 157
primary somatosensory area, 67f, 
68–69
primary visual area, 67f, 69–70
priming, 198–199, 198f
prison experiments, 385–389, 386f, 
389f, 390
proactive interference, in forgetting, 
215, 216f, 221
probability, 238–250
availability heuristic and, 242–244
of cancer, 247–250, 247f, 249f
conditional, 239, 247–249,  
249f, 250
conjunction fallacy, 241
definition of, 238
estimating, 238–239
gambler’s fallacy, 241
judging, 238–244, 240f, 241f,  
243f, 250
long-run, 242
overview of, 238–244, 240f,  
241f, 243f
range of, 238
representativeness heuristic and, 
240–242
problem solving. See also solution 
strategies
algorithms in, 233–233
of amnesics, 237
anterior temporal lobes influenc-
ing, 232–233
blocks to, 230–233, 238
fixation in, 230–231
frontal cortex hindering, 232
frontal lobes influencing, 232–233
functional fixedness limiting, 231
of insight problems, 232–233
mental set in, 231–232
practice improving, 237
right anterior temporal lobe 
improving, 232–233
solution strategies and, 233–237
problems
ill-defined, 229, 238
well-defined, 229, 238
procedural memories, 198, 198f, 204
processing
automatic, 205, 244, 250
effortful, 205, 250
levels of, 205–207, 206f
System 1, 243–244, 250, 258–259
System 2, 244, 250
projective tests, 343–345, 344f,  
345f, 346
projection, in Freud’s theory, 320t
prosopagnosia, 72
prototypes, for category, 3
pseudopatients, 9, 400–401
psychiatrists, 420t
psychoanalysis, 316, 331, 429–431, 
437–438
psychoanalytic theories of personal-
ity, 342t
Freudian, 316, 317–325, 317f, 320t, 
322t, 327
neo-Freudian, 316, 325–327, 325f
psychodynamic theories of  
personality, 316
psychodynamic therapy, 431

Subject Index  |  SI-15
psychological world, relationship to 
physical world, 96–103
psychology, 1
psychophysics, 96–104
absolute threshold and, 97f, 97–98, 
103, 103t
detection question and, 96–100, 
97f, 99t, 103, 103t
difference question and, 96, 100–
101, 103–104, 103t
scaling question and, 101–103, 
103t
signal detection and, 98–100, 99t
Stevens’s power law and,  
101–102, 103t
Weber’s law and, 100–101,  
103, 103t
psychosexual stages, in Freudian 
theory, 321–324, 322t, 327
psychosocial stages, in Erikson’s the-
ory, 304–306, 304f, 305t, 307
psychosurgery, 428–429, 429f, 437
psychotherapies
behavioral, 432–434
client-centered, 331, 431–432, 438
definition of, 420
effectiveness of, 435–436, 436f, 438
overview of, 420–421, 429–436, 
434f, 435f, 436f
psychoanalysis, 429–431
rational-emotive, 434–435
schizophrenia treated by, 436
summary of, 437–438
psychotic disorders, 413, 425–427. 
See also schizophrenia
drug therapy for, 425–426
psychoticism-impulse control trait, 
in Eysenck’s three-factor per-
sonality theory, 337, 338
psychotropic drugs, 422–427
punishers, 153–154
punishment, 153–158, 155f
negative, 155–156
positive, 155
pupil, 106–107, 106f
pyrophobia, 404t
random assignment, 16–17, 17t
random sampling, 11, 16–17, 17t
range, 25–26
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, 
82–83, 84–85, 86
rational-emotive therapy, 434–435, 
434f, 438
rational thought and action 
(Stanovich), 258, 259t
rationalization, in Freud’s  
theory, 320t
reaction formation, in Freud’s 
theory, 320t
reaction range, 260–261, 263
reality principle, in Freudian  
theory, 319
reasoning
moral, 295–298, 296f, 297t, 
306–307
person-who, 246–247
recall, 212
recency effect, in memory, 202–203, 
202f, 204
receptors for neurotransmitters, 
43f, 44
reciprocity principle, 360, 361, 362t
recognition, 212
recovered memory, 221, 324
reflex(es)
Babinski, 274
breathing, 274
in classical conditioning, 142
grasping, 274
knee-jerk, 52
of newborn, 274–275, 279
rooting, 274–275
spinal, 52
sucking, 274–275
registers, sensory, 190–194, 191f, 
192f, 193f, 203
regression, in Freud’s theory, 320t
rehearsal
elaborative, 206–207, 209, 211
maintenance, 196, 206
reinforcement
definition, 154
extrinsic and intrinsic, 169–172
language acquisition accounted for 
by, 5–6
motivation and, 168–172
negative, 154–156, 155f
in operant conditioning,  
153–158, 155f
positive, 154–156, 155f
primary and secondary, 157
relative nature of, 156
schedules of, 163–168
without awareness, 157–158
reinforcement schedule(s)
continuous, 163, 167–168
fixed-interval, 165–166, 166f, 167t
fixed-ratio, 163–165, 165f, 167t
partial, 163–168, 165f, 166f, 167t
variable-interval, 166, 166f, 167t
variable-ratio, 163–165, 165f, 167t
reinforcers, 153–154, 156–157, 170
extrinsic and intrinsic, 169–172
primary and secondary, 157
viewed as behaviors, 156
relearning, 212–213, 213f
reliability, in testing, 254–255,  
256, 263
REM sleep. See rapid eye  
movement sleep
remission (spontaneous),  
435–436, 436f
representativeness heuristic,  
239–242, 240f, 241f, 250
repressed memories, 220–221, 222, 324
repression, in Freud’s theory, 320, 
320t, 324
research analysis, 23–30
descriptive statistics and, 24–26, 26t
frequency distributions and, 24, 
27f, 27–32
meta-analysis and, 22, 435–436, 
436f, 438
research methods
case study, 9–10
correlational, 11–16
cross-sectional, 291–292, 293t
descriptive, 8–11
experimental, 16–22
longitudinal, 292–293, 293t
observational, 8–9
survey research, 10–11
research perspectives, 1–7, 5t
as complementary, 1
external factors emphasized by, 3–6
internal factors emphasized by, 2–3
resistance, in psychoanalysis, 430
responsibility, diffusion of, 372
reticular formation, 62, 62f
retina, 106, 106f, 107–113, 108f, 
110f, 110t, 112f
bipolar cells of, 106f, 107–111
blind spot in, 106f, 109–111
fovea of, 106f, 109–111
ganglion cells of, 106f, 107–111
rods and cones of, 106f,  
109–111, 110t
in visual processing, 105–111
retinal disparity, 128
retrieval
definition of, 205
environmental factors in, 207–209
failure of, 213–218, 214f, 216f, 217t

SI-16  |  Subject Index
retrieval (Continued )
false memories influencing,  
219–221, 220f
imagination inflation influencing, 
219
measuring, 212–213, 213f
misinformation effect influencing, 
220–221, 220f
mood and, 208, 211
observation inflation effect influ-
encing, 219–220
reasons for forgetting and, 213–
217, 214f, 216f, 217t
recall in, 212
recognition in, 212
reconstructive nature of,  
218–221, 220f
relearning in, 212, 213
with schemas, 218
source misattribution influencing, 
218–219
retroactive interference, in forgetting, 
215, 216f, 221
retrograde amnesia, 199–200
reversible figures, 123–125, 123f, 
124f, 125f
reversibility, in Piaget’s theory, 286
right anterior temporal lobe, 
232–233
right hemisphere, 77–80, 78f
right visual field, 77, 78, 78f
right-skewed distributions, 28–29, 
29f, 30f, 31–32
rods (in retina), 109–111, 110f,  
110t, 118
Rogers’s self theory, 331–332, 332f
role-playing, 385–389, 386f, 389f
rooting reflex, 274–275
Rorschach Inkblot Test,  
344–345, 344f
Rotter’s locus of control, 333–335
runner’s high, 48–49
s factors (specific intellectual abili-
ties), 256–257
sample, for a research study
definition of, 11
random, 11, 16
in survey research, 11
savings method (relearning),  
212–213, 213f 
scaffolding, 290–291, 294
scaling question, in psychophysics, 
101–102, 103t, 104
scatterplots, 13, 14f
Schachter-Singer two-factor theory 
of emotion, 58–59, 59f
schemas (schemes in Piaget’s theory), 
218, 222, 283
schizophrenia
acute, 414–415
antipsychotic drugs treating, 
425–427
brain abnormalities in, 417
causes of, 415–417
chronic, 414–415
definition of, 414
dopamine and, 47, 416
drugs for, 416–417, 425–427
glutamate dysfunction contribut-
ing to, 416–417
L-dopa’s side effects resembling, 47
lobotomies treating, 428–429,  
429f, 437
as psychotic disorder, 413
symptoms of, 413–415
Type I, 415
Type II, 415
vulnerability-stress model of, 417
Seattle Longitudinal Study, 292–293
secondary reinforcers, 157
secure attachment, 300–301
security needs, 326–327
attachment and, 300–301
personality and, 326
selective serotonin and norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitors (SSNRIs)
definition of, 48
effects of, 423–424
examples of, 48
selective serotonin reuptake  
inhibitors (SSRIs)
anxiety disorders treated with, 425
definition of, 48
for depression, 48, 423
effects of, 423–424
examples of, 48
neurogenesis caused by, 425
obsessive-compulsive disorder 
treated with, 409
self-actualization, 329f, 330–331, 
335, 431–432
self-efficacy, 333, 335
self-esteem
depression’s negative correlation 
with, 15
protecting, 334
self-serving bias protecting, 334, 
380–381, 382t, 390
self-fulfilling prophecy, 379, 380
self-perception
attribution maintaining, 334
explanatory style influencing, 
334–335
pessimistic explanatory style influ-
encing, 334–335
theory, 384–385, 390
self-reference effect, 207
self-serving bias, 334, 380–381,  
382t, 390
self-system (Bandura), 332–333, 335
self-testing, 211
self theory (Rogers), 331–332, 332f
semantic memory, 197–198,  
198f, 204
sensation. See also hearing, percep-
tion, psychophysics, vision
bottom-up processing and, 120
definition of, 119–120
in infancy, 277, 278
overview of, 95–96
sensorimotor stage, in Piaget’s  
theory,  284, 284t, 294
sensory adaptation, 102
sensory memory (SM), 190–194, 
190f, 191f, 192f, 193f, 203
duration and capacity of, 190–191
Sperling’s full- and partial-report 
procedures, 192–193
temporal integration procedure 
and, 191f, 191–192
sensory neurons, 52
sensory registers, 190–194, 191f, 
192f, 193f, 203
sensory-perceptual development, in 
infancy, 275–278, 276f, 279
seriation, 286
serotonin, 45, 47–48, 49t, 54, 409, 
411, 423, 425, 426, 427
in depression, 409
in obsessive-compulsive disorder, 
409
sex chromosomes, 273
sexual abuse, 220–221, 222
shaping, in operant conditioning, 
159–160
Sherif’s conformity studies,  
354–355, 355f
shock therapy. See electroconvulsive 
therapy
short-term memory (STM)
capacity of, 194–195
definition of, 194
duration of, 194, 195–196, 196f

Subject Index  |  SI-17
LTM as distinct from, 201–203, 
202f, 204
recency effect in, 202–203
in three-stage model of memory, 
190f, 194–196, 196f
signal detection theory, 99–100,  
99t, 103
simultaneous conditioning, 143–144
skeletal nervous system. See somatic 
nervous system
skewed distributions, 28–32, 29f, 30f
Skinner boxes. See operant chambers
skin-picking disorder. See excoriation 
disorder
sleep
brain and, 81–85
deprivation, 83–84
dreams and, 83–85
five stages of, 81–83, 82f, 83f
need for, 83–84
reasons for, 83–85
REM, 82–83, 84–85, 86
slow-wave, 82
stages of, 81–83, 82f, 83f
sleep deprivation, 84
sleep spindles, 82
slow-wave sleep, 82
SM. See sensory memory
smell sense in infants, 278
smiling
emotions and, 56–57, 414
infants and, 280
social anxiety disorder, 403t, 
405–406
social desirability bias, 10
social development
attachment and, 298–302
day care influencing, 301
Erikson’s psychosocial stage theory 
of, 304–306, 304f, 305t, 307
parenting styles and, 301–302
summary of, 307
temperament and, 300–301
theory of mind and, 302–304
social facilitation, 371–372
social identity theory, 389
social influence
compliance, 358–362, 362t,  
370, 377
conformity, 354–358, 355f, 356f, 
376–377
of groups, 371–376, 374f, 376f, 
377–378
informational, 354–355, 355f
normative, 355–357, 355f, 356f
obedience, 362–371, 362f, 364f, 
364t, 367f, 368t, 371f, 377
social loafing, 372–373
social psychology
attitudes and, 382–389
attribution and, 379–382, 382t
compliance and, 358–362
conformity and, 354–358
definition of, 353
group influence and, 371–376
obedience and, 362–371
social thinking
attitudes in, 382–389, 384f,  
386f, 389f
attribution in, 378–382, 382t
social workers, 420t
social-cognitive theories of personal-
ity, 342t
Bandura’s self-system in, 332–333
Rotter’s locus of control in, 
333–335
self-perception in, 334–335
sociocultural research perspective, 
4–5, 5t
solution strategies
algorithms, 233–234, 238
heuristics, 234–237, 238
somatic nervous system, 53
somatosensory cortex, 68–69, 68f
somatosensory homunculus, 68f
sound. See also hearing
loudness of, 105
pitch perception of, 95,  
105–106, 106t
processing of, 114–115
sound waves, 104–105, 105f
frequency of, 105, 105f
pitch and, 105, 105f, 116–118, 118t
source misattribution, 218–219
spatial intelligence, 258t, 259t
spacing effect, 210–211
SPE. See Stanford Prison Experiment
specific intelligence (s factors), 
256–257
specific phobias, 403–405, 404t
speech and language
brain and, 70, 71, 74–75
development of, 279–282, 293–294
hemispheric specialization and, 
78–79
in infancy, 277–278, 279, 280
in schizophrenia, 414
telegraphic speech and, 281, 284
speech and language centers of brain, 
70, 71, 74–75
in deaf people, 75
in split-brain patients, 78–79
Sperling’s full-report procedure, 
192–193, 192f
Sperling’s partial-report procedure, 
192, 192f, 193 
spinal cord, 52
spinal reflex, 52
split-brain research, 77–81, 86
spontaneous recovery
in classical conditioning, 147–148, 
148f, 151–152, 151t
in operant conditioning, 161, 161f
spontaneous remission, 435–436, 436f
SSNRIs. See selective serotonin 
and norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitors
SSRIs. See selective serotonin  
reuptake inhibitors
standard deviation, 26, 254, 255f
standardization, in testing, 253–254
Stanford Prison Experiment (SPE), 
385–389, 386f, 389f, 390
Stanford-Binet intelligence test,  
252–253, 252f, 254, 255, 262
stapes (bone), 114–115, 115f
state-dependent memory, 208, 211
statistical significance, 20–21
statistics
central tendency measures, 24
correlational, 11–12, 251
descriptive, 24–26, 26t
frequency distributions and, 24, 
27f, 27–32
inferential, 20–21
meta-analysis and, 22
variability measures, 25–26, 26t
Stevens’s power law, 101–102, 103t, 104
stimuli
appetitive, 155–156, 155f
aversive, 155–156, 155f
in classical conditioning, 142–145, 
145f, 151
conditioned, 142–145, 145f, 151
discriminative, 161–162
Navon hierarchical, 80
psychophysicists researching  
perception of, 95–104
subliminal, 98
unconditioned, 142–145, 145f, 151
stimulus discrimination
in classical conditioning, 149f,  
150, 151t
in operant conditioning,  
161–162, 163t

SI-18  |  Subject Index
stimulus generalization
in classical conditioning,148–150, 
149f, 151t, 162
in operant conditioning, 162, 163t
stirrup (bone), 114, 115f
STM. See short-term memory
storage decay theory of forgetting, 
215, 221
strange situation procedure,  
299–300, 307
striving for superiority, 326, 326f, 327
stroboscopic movement, 122–123
studying
distributed, 210–211
environment influencing, 207–208
interval schedules influencing, 
165–166, 166f
overjustification effect  
influencing, 171
spacing effect influencing, 210–211
subjective contours, 125–127, 126f
sublimation, in Freud’s theory, 320t
subliminal perception, 98
subliminal stimuli, 98
subtractive color mixtures, 112, 112f
sucking reflex, 274–275
suicide, 353–354, 370–371, 371f, 409
superego, in Freudian theory, 317f, 
319, 320, 321, 327
superiority complex, 326
survey research, 10–11
Sylvian fissure, 66
symbolic thought, 284–285
sympathetic nervous system, 53, 54t
synaptic gap (synapse), 43f, 44
synesthesia, 71
System 1 processing, in thinking, 
244, 250, 258
System 2 processing, in thinking, 
244, 250
systematic desensitization, 433–434
T. gondii. See Toxoplasma gondii
talk therapy, 420–421. See also 
psychotherapies
tardive dyskinesia, 426
taste aversion, 174–175, 182
TAT. See Thematic Apperception Test
telegraphic speech, 281
temperament, 300–301
temporal integration procedure, 
191–192, 191f
temporal lobe, 67, 69, 70t, 71
Wernicke’s area and, 75, 75f
teratogens, 273–274
testes, 55, 55f
testimony, eyewitness, 220–221
testing, during studying, 211
testosterone, 54
thalamus, 62f, 63, 64t
in hearing, 115f, 116
in vision, 108, 113
thanatophobia, 404
Thatcherization, 276–277, 276f
that’s-not-all compliance technique, 
361–362, 362t
Thematic Apperception Test  
(TAT), 345
theory of mind, 302–304, 307
therapy. See also biomedical thera-
pies; psychotherapies
Beck’s cognitive, 435, 438
behavioral, 432–434, 438
client-centered, 331, 431–432, 438
cognitive, 434–435, 434f, 435f, 438
drug, 422–427
electroconvulsive, 427–428, 427f, 
428f, 437
psychoanalysis, 316, 331, 429–431, 
437–438
psychodynamic, 431
rational-emotive, 434–435,  
434f, 438
virtual reality, 433–434
thinking 
abstract, 284t, 287–288, 292
categorization and, 242
cognitive development and,  
289–291, 290f, 294
definition of, 229
dual processing model of, 244
egocentric, 285–286
emotion and, 57
fast, intuitive (System 1), 244
hypothesis testing and, 244–250
intelligence and, 258–259
intelligent, 251–263, 251f, 252f, 
254f, 255f, 258t, 259t, 262f
during life span, 279–295, 283f, 
284t, 287f, 290f, 293t
outside the box, 233
in problem solving.  
See problem solving
rational thinking and action and, 
258, 259t
in schizophrenia, 414
slow, analytical (System 2), 244
social, 378–389
symbolic, 284, 284t
under uncertainty, 238–250, 240f, 
241f, 243f, 247f, 249f
third-variable problem, 13, 15–16
three-part personality structure, in 
Freudian theory, 318–321, 320t
three-stage model of memory
capacity in, 197t
duration in, 197t
flow chart of, 190f
long-term memory in, 196–203, 
197t, 198f, 202f
overview of, 189–190, 190f
sensory memory in, 190–194, 191f, 
192f, 193f
short-term memory in,  
194–196, 196f
summary of, 203–204
threshold
absolute, 97–98, 97f, 103
difference, 100–101, 103–104
thyroid gland, 55, 55f
tip-of-the-tongue (TOT) phenom-
enon, 216–217
TMS. See transcranial magnetic 
stimulation
toilet training, 322–323
token economies, 157, 434
top-down processing, 120–122,  
121f, 122f
TOT phenomenon. See tip-of-the-
tongue phenomenon
Tower of Hanoi problem, 236–237
toxins. See poisons.
Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii),  
schizophrenia and, 416
trace conditioning, 143–145
trait theories of personality, 342t
Eysenck’s three-factor theory, 
337–338
Five Factor Model, 338–340,  
339t, 345
overview of, 336–340, 339t
summary of, 345
tranquilizers, 48
tranquilizing chair, 421f, 422
transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(TMS), 428, 428f
transduction, 105–106
transference, in psychoanalysis, 431
transitivity, 286
transorbital lobotomy,  
429, 429f
trephining, 421f, 422
triarchic theory of intelligence, 258
trichotillomania, 410

Subject Index  |  SI-19
trichromatic theory of color vision, 
111–113, 112f, 114, 114t, 118–119
tricyclics, 423
trust vs. mistrust stage, in Erikson’s 
theory, 305, 305t
Turning the Tables illusion, 95, 95f, 
131–132
twins
fraternal (dizygotic), 260, 273
identical (monozygotic), 260, 273
twin studies
of bipolar disorder, 413
of depression, 411
of intelligence, 260–262
of schizophrenia, 415
2-4-6 task, 244–245, 246
Type I schizophrenia, 415
Type II schizophrenia, 415
UCR. See unconditioned response
UCS. See unconditioned stimulus
uncertainty
judging, 238–244, 240f, 241f, 243f
thinking under, 238–250, 240f, 
241f, 243f, 247f, 249f
unconditional positive regard, 331–332
unconditioned response (UCR), 142, 
145f, 151
unconditioned stimulus (UCS), 
142–145, 145f, 151
unconscious, 84, 317, 317f, 318, 324, 
325–326, 327
collective, in Jungian theory, 
325–326
in Freudian theory, 317–319,  
320, 324
underextension, 280–281
uninvolved parenting, 301
validity, in testing, 255–256, 263
variable-interval schedules, 166,  
166f, 167t
variable-ratio schedules, 164–165, 
165f, 167t
variability, measures of, 25–26, 26t
variable(s)
definition, 11
dependent, 17, 20f, 21–22
independent, 17, 20f, 21–22
operational definition of, 18
venom, black widow spider, 46
violence
children viewing, 179
in media, 179–180, 182
viral hypothesis of schizophrenia, 
415–416
virtual reality therapy, 433–434
vision. See also color vision; visual 
processing
accommodation and, 107
dark adaptation in, 111
depth perception and, 128–133, 
129f, 131f, 132f, 133f, 275
farsightedness and, 107
feature detectors and, 108–109
of infants, 278, 279
light waves and, 105f, 105–107
loss of, dreams and, 83
nearsightedness and, 107
of newborns, 275
pattern recognition and, 108–109, 
120–122, 122f
retina and. See retina
summary of, 118–119
visual acuity, 110, 275
visual aversions, 175
visual cortex, 69–71, 106f, 108–109, 
125f, 126
visual fields, 77–79, 78f
visual loss, dreams and, 83
visual processing. See also vision
binocular vs. monocular cues in, 
128–129
illusions in, 129–133, 129f, 131f, 
132f, 133f
retina and, 128–133, 132f, 133
visual sensory register.  
See iconic memory
vocabulary, of infants, 280–281
volley principle, in hearing,117
vulnerability-stress model of  
schizophrenia, 417
Vygotsky’s theory of cognitive  
development, 289–291, 290f, 294
WAIS. See Wechsler Adult 
Intelligence Scale
wavelength, 104–105, 105f
wave(s)
amplitude of, 105, 105f
brain, sleep stages and,  
81–83, 82f
delta, 82, 82f
frequency of, 105, 105f
light, 105–107, 105f, 118
sound, 104–105, 105f, 118
transduction and, 105
Weber’s law, 100–101, 103t
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 
(WAIS), 253–254, 254f, 255f, 
262–263
Wechsler Bellevue Scale, 253
Wechsler Intelligence Scale for 
Children (WISC), 253, 254, 
254f, 255, 262–263
well-defined problems, 229, 238
Wernicke’s aphasia, 75
Wernicke’s area, 75, 75f
white matter, 42–43
WISC. See Wechsler Intelligence  
Scale for Children
word salad, in schizophrenia, 414
working backward heuristic,  
236, 238
working memory. See short-term 
memory
working mothers, attachment  
and, 301
X chromosome, 273
xenophobia, 404t
Y chromosome, 273
Yerkes-Dodson law, 169, 170f
young adulthood, 271t, 305t, 306
zone of proximal development, 
290–291, 294
zoophobia, 404t
zygote, 272, 273


