
Why Do You Need this New Edition?
If you’re wondering why you should buy this new edition  
of Physiology of Behavior, here are several good reasons:
•	
Over 400 new research references. Biopsychology as a field evolves rapidly, with new research methods 
applied every year.  The new research reported in this edition reflects the enormous advances made in 
research methods. Instructors will include this new material in your exams.
•	
Updated illustrations. The author has revised existing art and prepared new art to illustrate research 
that is described for the first time in this edition. The result is a set of up-to-date, clear, consistent, and 
attractive illustrations.
•	
NEW Review Questions are included at the end of each chapter so you can check your understanding of 
the chapter’s content.
•	
Updated Section Summaries with Thought Questions. Summaries appear at the end of each major sec-
tion so you have the chance to stop and review several times in each chapter. Section Summaries now 
include Thought Questions so you can test your understanding of the material.
•	
NEW MyPsychLab combines original online learning applications with online assessments to help 
you engage in learning, assess your progress, and help you succeed. For each chapter of the text, 
MyPsychLab has a pre-test, post-test and chapter exam so you can get immediate feedback on your 
progress. You will receive a personalized study plan to help you succeed. MyPsychLab also contains an 
eText so you can access your textbook anytime, anywhere, including listening online.
•	
NEW feature: Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab. This feature appears at the end of every chapter 
and directs you to relevant content in the Virtual Brain application in MyPsychLab. Virtual Brain is an 
interactive 3D application which allows you to take tours through different sections of the brain while 
using real life scenarios to explain behavior.

This page intentionally left blank 

eleventh edition
Physiology  
of Behavior
Neil R. Carlson
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Boston   Columbus   Indianapolis   New York   San Francisco   Upper Saddle River 
Amsterdam   Cape Town   Dubai   London   Madrid   Milan   Munich   Paris   Montreal   Toronto 
Delhi   Mexico City   Sao Paulo   Sydney   Hong Kong   Seoul   Singapore   Taipei   Tokyo

Editorial Director: Craig Campanella
Editor in Chief: Jessica Mosher
Acquisitions Editor: Amber Chow
Senior Sponsoring Editor: Amber Mackey
Editorial Assistant: Diane Szulecki
Director of Marketing: Brandy Dawson
Senior Marketing Manager: Nicole Kunzmann
Senior Managing Editor: Maureen Richardson
Project Manager: Annemarie Franklin
Senior Operations Supervisor: Mary Fischer
Operations Specialist: Diane Peirano
Creative Director: Blair Brown
Art Director Cover: Leslie Osher
Cover Designer: Joseph DePinho
Project Coordination, Text Design, and  
Electronic Page Makeup: Cenveo Publisher  
Services/Nesbitt Graphics
Cover Art: iStock Photos
Media Editor: Michael Halas
Printer/Binder: Courier/Kendallville
Cover Printer: Lehigh-Phoenix Color/Hagerstown
Text Font: ITC New Baskerville Std.
Copyright © 2013, 2010, 2007, 2004 by Pearson Education, Inc.
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. This publication is 
protected by Copyright and permission should be obtained from the publisher 
prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmis-
sion in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, record-
ing, or likewise. To obtain permission(s) to use material from this work, please 
submit a written request to Pearson Education, Inc., Permissions Department, 
One Lake Street, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458 or you may fax your 
request to 201-236-3290.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data available upon request.
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Student Edition:  
ISBN-10: 0-205-23939-0
ISBN-13: 978-0-205-23939-9
Instructor’s Review Copy:  
ISBN-10: 0-205-23948-X
ISBN-13: 978-0-205-23948-1
A la Carte:  
ISBN-10: 0-205-23981-1
ISBN-13: 978-0-205-23981-8

Brief Contents
	
Chapter      1	
Introduction  1
	
Chapter      2	
Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System  27
	
Chapter      3	
Structure of the Nervous System  66
	
Chapter      4	
Psychopharmachology  99
	
Chapter      5	
Methods and Strategies of Research  130
	
Chapter      6	
Vision  164
	
Chapter      7	
Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses  207
	
Chapter      8	
Control of Movement  255
	
Chapter      9	
Sleep and Biological Rhythms  288
	
Chapter 10	
Reproductive Behavior  323
	
Chapter 11	
Emotion  359
	
Chapter 12	
Ingestive Behavior  393
	
Chapter 13	
Learning and Memory  434
	
Chapter 14	
Human Communication  479
	
Chapter 15	
Neurological Disorders  516
	
Chapter 16	
Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders  552
	
Chapter 17	
Anxiety Disorders, Autistic Disorder,  
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,  
and Stress Disorders  584
	
Chapter 18	
Drug Abuse  614
v

This page intentionally left blank 

2
1
vii
Contents
Introduction 
1
Understanding Human Consciousness:  
A Physiological Approach  3
Blindsight  4
Split Brains  4
Unilateral Neglect  7
Perception of Self  8
■ Section Summary  8
The Nature of Behavioral Neuroscience  9
The Goals of Research  10
Biological Roots of Behavioral Neuroscience  10
■ Section Summary  14
Natural Selection and Evolution  14
Functionalism and the Inheritance  
of Traits  14
Evolution of the Human Species  16
Evolution of Large Brains  19
■ Section Summary  21
Ethical Issues in Research with Animals  22
Careers in Neuroscience  26
■ Section Summary  24
Strategies for Learning  25
Review Questions  26 
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
26
Cells of the Nervous System  29
Neurons  29
Supporting Cells  36
The Blood–Brain Barrier  39
■ Section Summary  40
Communication Within a Neuron  41
Neural Communication: An Overview  41
Measuring Electrical Potentials of Axons  43
The Membrane Potential: Balance  
of Two Forces  45
The Action Potential  46
Conduction of the Action Potential  49
■ Section Summary  50
Communication Between Neurons  51
Structure of Synapses  52
Release of Neurotransmitter  54
Activation of Receptors  56
Postsynaptic Potentials  57
Termination of Postsynaptic Potentials  58
Effects of Postsynaptic Potentials:  
Neural Integration  60
Autoreceptors  60
Other Types of Synapses  61
Nonsynaptic Chemical Communication  62
■ Section Summary  63
Review Questions  65 
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
65
Structure and Functions  
of Cells of the Nervous System 
27

viii	
Contents
3
Structure of the Nervous System 
66
Basic Features of the Nervous System  67
An Overview  70
Meninges  70
The Ventricular System and Production  
of CSF  71
■ Section Summary  74
The Central Nervous System  74
Development of the Central Nervous System  74
The Forebrain  80
The Midbrain  88
The Hindbrain  89
The Spinal Cord  91
■ Section Summary  92
The Peripheral Nervous System  93
Spinal Nerves  93
Cranial Nerves  93
The Autonomic Nervous System  94
■ Section Summary  98
Review Questions  98 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
98
4
Psychopharmacology 
99
Principles of Psychopharmacology  101
Pharmacokinetics  101
Drug Effectiveness  103
Effects of Repeated Administration  104
Placebo Effects  105
■ Section Summary  106
Sites of Drug Action  106
Effects on Production of Neurotransmitters  107
Effects on Storage and Release  
of Neurotransmitters  108
Effects on Receptors  108
Effects on Reuptake or Destruction  
of Neurotransmitters  110
■ Section Summary  110
Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators  111
Acetylcholine  111
The Monoamines  114
Amino Acids  121
Peptides  123
Lipids  124
Nucleosides  125
Soluble Gases  126
■ Section Summary  127
Review Questions  129 
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
129

	
Contents	
ix
6
5
Methods and Strategies of Research 
130
Experimental Ablation  132
Evaluating the Behavioral Effects  
of Brain Damage  132
Producing Brain Lesions  132
Stereotaxic Surgery  134
Histological Methods  135
Tracing Neural Connections  139
Studying the Structure of the Living  
Human Brain  142
■ Section Summary  144
Recording and Stimulating Neural Activity  146
Recording Neural Activity  146
Recording the Brain’s Metabolic  
and Synaptic Activity  149
Stimulating Neural Activity  151
■ Section Summary  154
Neurochemical Methods  156
Finding Neurons That Produce Particular 
Neurochemicals  156
Localizing Particular Receptors  157
Measuring Chemicals Secreted in the Brain  158
■ Section Summary  159
Genetic Methods  160
Twin Studies  160
Adoption Studies  161
Genomic Studies  161
Targeted Mutations  161
Antisense Oligonucleotides  162
■ Section Summary  162
Review Questions  163 
The Stimulus  166
Anatomy of the Visual System  167
The Eyes  167
Photoreceptors  169
Connections Between Eye and Brain  171
■ Section Summary  173
Coding of Visual Information in the Retina  174
Coding of Light and Dark  174
Coding of Color  176
■ Section Summary  180
Analysis of Visual Information:  
Role of the Striate Cortex  181
Anatomy of the Striate Cortex  181
Orientation and Movement  181
Spatial Frequency  182
Retinal Disparity  184
Color  184
Modular Organization of the Striate Cortex  185
■ Section Summary  186
Analysis of Visual Information:  
Role of the Visual ­Association Cortex  187
Two Streams of Visual Analysis  187
Perception of Color  190
Perception of Form  191
Perception of Movement  198
Perception of Spatial Location  201
■ Section Summary  204
Review Questions  206 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
206
Vision 
164

x	
Contents
7
Audition, the Body Senses,  
and the Chemical Senses 
207
Audition  208
The Stimulus  208
Anatomy of the Ear  209
Auditory Hair Cells and the Transduction  
of Auditory Information  211
The Auditory Pathway  213
Perception of Pitch  216
Perception of Loudness  218
Perception of Timbre  218
Perception of Spatial Location  219
Perception of Complex Sounds  223
■ Section Summary  226
Vestibular System  227
Anatomy of the Vestibular Apparatus  228
The Receptor Cells  229
The Vestibular Pathway  229
■ Section Summary  230
Somatosenses  231
The Stimuli  231
Anatomy of the Skin and Its Receptive Organs  231
Perception of Cutaneous Stimulation  232
The Somatosensory Pathways  235
Perception of Pain  237
■ Section Summary  242
Gustation  243
The Stimuli  243
Anatomy of the Taste Buds  
and Gustatory Cells  244
Perception of Gustatory Information  244
The Gustatory Pathway  246
■ Section Summary  247
Olfaction  248
The Stimulus  248
Anatomy of the Olfactory Apparatus  248
Transduction of Olfactory Information  250
Perception of Specific Odors  250
■ Section Summary  253
Review Questions  254 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
254
8
Control of Movement 
255
Skeletal Muscle  256
Anatomy  257
The Physical Basis of Muscular Contraction  258
Sensory Feedback from Muscles  258
■ Section Summary  260
Reflexive Control of Movement  261
The Monosynaptic Stretch Reflex  261
The Gamma Motor System  261
Polysynaptic Reflexes  263
■ Section Summary  264
Control of Movement by the Brain  264
Organization of the Motor Cortex  265
Cortical Control of Movement: The Descending 
Pathways  266
Planning and Initiating Movements:  
Role of the Motor Association Cortex  268
Imitating and Comprehending Movements:  
Role of the Mirror Neuron System  273
Control of Reaching and Grasping  275
Deficits of Skilled Movements:  
The Apraxias  276
The Basal Ganglia  277
The Cerebellum  282
The Reticular Formation  285
■ Section Summary  286
Review Questions  287 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
287

	
Contents	
xi
10
9
Sleep and Biological Rhythms 
288
A Physiological and Behavioral Description  
of Sleep  289
Stages of Sleep  290
Mental Activity During Sleep  293
■ Section Summary  294
Disorders of Sleep  294
Insomnia  294
Narcolepsy  295
REM Sleep Behavior Disorder  297
Problems Associated with  
Slow-Wave Sleep  297
■ Section Summary  298
Why Do We Sleep?  299
Functions of Slow-Wave Sleep  299
Functions of REM Sleep  301
Sleep and Learning  302
■ Section Summary  303
Physiological Mechanisms of Sleep  
and ­Waking  304
Chemical Control of Sleep  304
Neural Control of Arousal  305
Neural Control of Slow-Wave Sleep  308
Neural Control of REM Sleep  311
■ Section Summary  314
Biological Clocks  315
Circadian Rhythms and Zeitgebers  315
The Suprachiasmatic Nucleus  316
Control of Seasonal Rhythms: The Pineal Gland 
and Melatonin  319
Changes in Circadian Rhythms: Shift Work  
and Jet Lag  320
■ Section Summary  321
Review Questions  322 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
322
Sexual Development  324
Production of Gametes and Fertilization  324
Development of the Sex Organs  325
Sexual Maturation  328
■ Section Summary  331
Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior  331
Hormonal Control of Female Reproductive 
Cycles  331
Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior  
of Laboratory Animals  332
Organizational Effects of Androgens 
on Behavior: Masculinization and 
Defeminization  334
Effects of Pheromones  334
Human Sexual Behavior  338
Sexual Orientation  340
■ Section Summary  345
Neural Control of Sexual Behavior  346
Males  346
Females  348
Formation of Pair Bonds  350
■ Section Summary  351
Parental Behavior  352
Maternal Behavior of Rodents  352
Hormonal Control of Maternal Behavior  353
Neural Control of Maternal Behavior  354
Neural Control of Paternal Behavior  356
■ Section Summary  357
Review Questions  358 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
358
Reproductive Behavior 
323

xii	
Contents
11
Emotion 
359
Emotions as Response Patterns  360
Fear  361
Anger, Aggression, and Impulse Control  365
Hormonal Control of Aggressive Behavior  371
■ Section Summary  375
Communication of Emotions  376
Facial Expression of Emotions:  
Innate Responses  377
Neural Basis of the Communication of Emotions: 
Recognition  378
Neural Basis of the Communication of Emotions: 
Expression  384
■ Section Summary  387
Feelings of Emotions  388
The James-Lange Theory  388
Feedback from Emotional Expressions  390
■ Section Summary  391
Review Questions  392 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
392
12
Ingestive Behavior 
393
Physiological Regulatory Mechanisms  394
Drinking  396
Some Facts About Fluid Balance  396
Two Types of Thirst  397
Neural Mechanisms of Thirst  401
■ Section Summary  402
Eating: Some Facts About Metabolism  403
■ Section Summary  406
What Starts a Meal?  406
Signals from the Environment  406
Signals from the Stomach  407
Metabolic Signals  408
■ Section Summary  409
What Stops a Meal?  410
Head Factors  410
Gastric Factors  410
Intestinal Factors  410
Liver Factors  411
Insulin  412
Long-Term Satiety: Signals from Adipose 
Tissue  412
■ Section Summary  413
Brain Mechanisms  414
Brain Stem  414
Hypothalamus  414
■ Section Summary  420
Obesity  421
Possible Causes  421
Treatment  424
■ Section Summary  427
Anorexia Nervosa/Bulimia Nervosa  428
Possible Causes  429
Treatment  431
■ Section Summary  432
Review Questions  432 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
433

	
Contents	
xiii
14
13
Learning and Memory 
434
The Nature of Learning  435
■ Section Summary  438
Synaptic Plasticity: Long-Term Potentiation  
and Long-Term Depression  439
Induction of Long-Term Potentiation  439
Role of NMDA Receptors  441
Mechanisms of Synaptic Plasticity  443
Long-Term Depression  447
Other Forms of Long-Term Potentiation  448
■ Section Summary  448
Perceptual Learning  449
Learning to Recognize Stimuli  449
Perceptual Short-Term Memory  451
■ Section Summary  452
Classical Conditioning  452
■ Section Summary  453
Instrumental Conditioning  454
Basal Ganglia  454
Reinforcement  455
■ Section Summary  458
Relational Learning  459
Human Anterograde Amnesia  459
Spared Learning Abilities  461
Declarative and Nondeclarative Memories  462
Anatomy of Anterograde Amnesia  464
Role of the Hippocampal Formation in 
Consolidation of Declarative Memories  466
Episodic and Semantic Memories  467
Spatial Memory  468
Relational Learning in Laboratory Animals  469
■ Section Summary  476
Review Questions  478 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
478
Speech Production and Comprehension:  
Brain Mechanisms  480
Lateralization  480
Speech Production  481
Speech Comprehension  485
Aphasia in Deaf People  494
Prosody: Rhythm, Tone,  
and Emphasis in Speech  496
Recognition of People’s Voices  497
Stuttering  497
■ Section Summary  499
Disorders of Reading and Writing  500
Relation to Aphasia  500
Pure Alexia  501
Toward an Understanding of Reading  503
Developmental Dyslexias  509
Toward an Understanding of Writing  511
■ Section Summary  513
Review Questions  514 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
515
Human Communication 
479

xiv	
Contents
15
Neurological Disorders 
516
Tumors  517
Seizure Disorders  519
Cerebrovascular Accidents  522
Traumatic Brain Injury  526
■ Section Summary  527
Disorders of Development  528
Toxic Chemicals  528
Inherited Metabolic Disorders  529
Down Syndrome  530
■ Section Summary  531
Degenerative Disorders  531
Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies  531
Parkinson’s Disease  533
Huntington’s Disease  538
Alzheimer’s Disease  540
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis  545
Multiple Sclerosis  546
Korsakoff’s Syndrome  547
■ Section Summary  547
Disorders Caused by Infectious Diseases  549
■ Section Summary  550
Review Questions  551 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
551
16
Schizophrenia and the Affective 
­Disorders 
552
Schizophrenia  554
Description  554
Heritability  555
Pharmacology of Schizophrenia:  
The Dopamine Hypothesis  556
Schizophrenia as a Neurological Disorder  559
■ Section Summary  568
Major Affective Disorders  570
Description  570
Heritability  571
Season of Birth  571
Biological Treatments  571
The Monoamine Hypothesis  575
Role of the 5-HT Transporter  575
Role of the Frontal Cortex  576
Role of Neurogenesis  577
Role of Circadian Rhythms  578
■ Section Summary  582
Review Questions  583 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
583

	
Contents	
xv
18
17
Anxiety Disorders, Autistic Disorder,  
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder, 
and Stress Disorders 
584
Anxiety Disorders  586
Panic Disorder, Generalized Anxiety Disorder, 
and Social Anxiety Disorder  586
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder  588
■ Section Summary  592
Autistic Disorder  593
Description  593
Possible Causes  594
■ Section Summary  597
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder  598
Description  598
Possible Causes  599
■ Section Summary  601
Stress Disorders  601
Physiology of the Stress Response  602
Health Effects of Long-Term Stress  603
Effects of Stress on the Brain  604
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder  606
Psychoneuroimmunology  609
■ Section Summary  612
Review Questions  613 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
613
Common Features of Addiction  615
A Little Background  615
Positive Reinforcement  616
Negative Reinforcement  620
Craving and Relapse  621
■ Section Summary  624
Commonly Abused Drugs  624
Opiates  625
Stimulant Drugs: Cocaine and Amphetamine  626
Nicotine  627
Alcohol  631
Cannabis  633
■ Section Summary  635
Heredity and Drug Abuse  636
■ Section Summary  638
Therapy for Drug Abuse  638
■ Section Summary  641
Review Questions  643 
Exploring the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab 
643
Drug Abuse 
614
References  645
Name Index  713
Subject Index  723

This page intentionally left blank 

Preface
I 
wrote the first edition of Physiology of Behavior over 
thirty years ago. When I did so, I had no idea I would 
someday be writing the eleventh edition. I’m still hav-
ing fun, so I hope to do a few more. The interesting 
work coming out of my colleagues’ laboratories—a 
result of their creativity and hard work—has given me 
something new to say with each edition. Because there 
was so much for me to learn, I enjoyed writing this 
­edition just as much as the first one. That is what makes 
writing new editions interesting: learning something 
new and then trying to find a way to convey the informa-
tion to the reader.
The first part of the book is concerned with foun-
dations: the history of the field, the structure and 
functions of neurons, neuroanatomy, psychophar-
macology, and research methods. The second part is 
concerned with inputs and outputs: the sensory sys-
tems and the motor system. The third part deals with 
classes of species-typical behavior: sleep, reproduction, 
­emotional behavior, and ingestion. The chapter on 
reproductive behavior includes parental behavior as 
well as courting and mating. The chapter on emotion 
includes a discussion of fear, anger and aggression, 
communication of emotions, and feelings of emo-
tions. The chapter on ingestive behavior covers the 
neural and metabolic bases of drinking and eating.
The fourth part of the book deals with learning, 
including research on synaptic plasticity, the neural 
mechanisms that are responsible for perceptual learn-
ing and stimulus-response learning (including classical 
and instrumental conditioning), human amnesia, and 
the role of the hippocampal formation in relational 
learning. The final part of the book deals with verbal 
communication and neurological, mental, and behav-
ioral disorders. The latter topic is covered in three 
chapters; the first discusses schizophrenia and the 
affective disorders; the second discusses the ­anxiety 
disorders, autism, attention deficit disorder, and stress 
disorders; and the third discusses drug abuse.
Each chapter begins with a Case History, which 
describes an episode involving a neurological disor-
der or an issue in neuroscience. Other case histo-
ries are included in the text of the chapters. Section 
Summaries with Thought Questions follow each major 
section of the book. They not only provide useful 
reviews, but also break each chapter into manage-
able chunks; the Thought Questions are designed to 
stimulate your own thinking about what you have just 
xvii
learned. Review Questions are provided at the end of 
each chapter to help you assess your understanding 
of the material. Definitions of Key Terms are printed in 
the margin near the places where the terms are first 
discussed. Pronunciation Guides for terms that might 
be difficult to pronounce are also found there.
New to This Edition
The research reported in this edition—approximately 
400 new references––reflects the enormous advances 
made in research methods. Nowadays, as soon as a new 
method is developed in one laboratory, it is adopted by 
other laboratories and applied to a wide range of prob-
lems. And more and more, researchers are combining 
techniques that converge upon the solution to a prob-
lem. In the past, individuals tended to apply their par-
ticular research method to a problem; now they are 
more likely to use many methods, often in collaboration 
with other laboratories.
The art in this book continues to evolve. With the 
collaboration of Jay Alexander of I-Hua Graphics, I 
have revised the existing art and prepared new art to 
illustrate research that is described for the first time 
in this edition. The result is a set of up-to-date, clear, 
consistent, and attractive illustrations.
The following list includes some of the informa-
tion that is new to this edition.
Chapter 6
Animal research on gene therapy for color 
blindness
Congenital prosopagnosia
Williams syndrome and the fusiform face area
Enhanced connections between auditory cortex 
and visual cortex in blind people
Chapter 7
Reaction to dissonance in newborns
Kinesthesia from skin receptors
New research on placebo analgesia
New research on fat taste
New research on olfactory coding in the cortex
Chapter 8
Interhemispheric transfer of motor learning
Role of frontopolar cortex in decisions to move

xviii	
Preface
Chapter 15
Role of tumor initiating cells in malignant 
gliomas
New research on treatment for cerebral  
blood clots
New section on traumatic brain injury
Prion-like behavior of misfolded a-synuclein 
and Ab proteins
Optogenetic methods in research on 
Parkinson’s disease
Chapter 16
Research on the role of DISC1 in schizophrenia 
and other mental disorders
Role of maternal substance abuse in 
development of schizophrenia in offspring
Season of birth in development of depressive 
disorder
Deep brain stimulation as treatment for 
depression
New section on role of the frontal cortex  
in development of depression
Increased apoptosis and depressive behavior 
after prolonged exposure to darkness
Chapter 17
Role of variations in the gene for BDNF  
in anxiety disorders
Research on efficacy of a neurosteroid 
enhancer in treatment of anxiety disorders
Research on oxytocin treatment to improve 
social interactions in autism spectrum 
disorders
Role of prenatal androgens in development  
of autism spectrum disorders
Role of variations in the gene for COMT  
in development of PTSD
Transcranial magnetic stimulation of the 
dorsolateral PFC for treatment of PTSD
Chapter 18
Discovery of the role of orexin and MCH  
in addictions
Role of the medial habenula and the 
interpeduncular nucleus in nicotine 
addiction
Role of variations in the gene for a5 ACh 
receptors in nicotine addiction
Inhibitory role of cannabidiol on addictive 
potential of marijuana
Role of sirtuins in the addictive potential  
of cocaine
Deep brain stimulation and TMS as a treatment 
for drug addiction
The hyperdirect pathway of the cortico-basal 
ganglia circuitry
Chapter 9
Health effects of chronic sleep deprivation
Role of variants in the gene for adenosine 
deaminase in sleep need
New optogenetic studies on role of 
noradrenergic and orexigenergic neurons  
in sleep and waking
Chapter 10
Role of kisspeptin in stimulation of puberty  
and control of secretion of sex hormones
Stimulation of neurogenesis by odor of 
potential sex partners
New research on congenital adrenal 
hypertrophy
Research on the role of the uncinate nucleus 
on gender identity
Role of prolactin in parental behavior  
by human fathers
Chapter 11
New research on the role of the prefrontal 
cortex on courage
“Emotional contagion” in people with 
blindsight
The simulationist hypothesis of recognition  
of emotional expressions
Effects of Botox treatment of facial muscles  
on mood
Chapter 12
Role of the FTO gene in obesity
Chapter 13
Discovery of the role of PKM-zeta in longlasting 
long-term potentiation
Role of the basal ganglia in filtering irrelevant 
information out of short-term memory
New research on place cells, grid cells, head 
direction cells, and border cells
Role of sharp-wave-ripple complexes during 
slow-wave sleep in memory consolidation
New research on reconsolidation of memories
Chapter 14
Role of sensorimotor function and mirror-
neuron circuits in speech perception
Role of subvocal articulation in word 
recognition in deaf people
New section on recognition of people’s voices
Research on the relation between object 
recognition and reading

	
Preface	
xix
a pre-test, post-test and chapter exam so both instruc-
tors and students can track progress and get immediate 
feedback. Each student receives a personalized study 
plan based on Bloom’s Taxonomy, which arranges con-
tent requiring less complex thinking—such as remem-
bering and ­under­standing—to more complex critical 
thinking—such as applying and analyzing. This layered 
approach helps students succeed in the course and 
­beyond. ­MyPsychLab also contains an eText so students 
can ­access their textbook anytime, anywhere, including 
listening online.
MyPsychLab for Physiology of Behavior, eleventh edi-
tion, contains simulations and animations of important 
figures and diagrams. The simulations and animations 
demonstrate some of the most important principles 
of neuroscience through movement and interaction, 
including modules on neurophysiology, neuroanat-
omy, psychopharmacology, audition, sleep, emotion, 
ingestive behavior, memory, and ­verbal communi­
cation. MyPsychLab also includes a 3D Virtual Brain 
application which allows students to take interactive 
tours through different sections of the brain while 
using real life scenarios to explain behavior. Also 
included are BioFlix animations, which are interac-
tive tutoring on the toughest topics in biopsychology, 
such as how neurons and synapses work. References 
throughout the text direct students to content in 
MyPsychLab, and a new feature at the end of each 
chapter directs student to Virtual Brain modules.
Resources for Instructors
Several supplements are available for instructors who 
adopt Physiology of Behavior, eleventh edition.
Instructor’s Manual (ISBN 020523951X): Written 
by Scott Wersinger, University of Buffalo, SUNY. Each 
chapter includes an Integrated Teaching Outline 
with teaching objectives, lecture material, demonstra-
tions and activities, videos, suggested readings, web 
resources, and information about other supplements. 
An appendix contains a set of student handouts. 
Available online at www.pearsonhighered.com/irc.
Test Bank (ISBN 0205239501): Written by Paul 
Wellman, Texas A&M University. Includes over 2500 
thoroughly reviewed multiple-choice, completion, 
short answer, and essay questions, each with answer 
skill justification, page references, difficulty rating, 
and skill type designation. The Test Bank is also avail-
able in Pearson MyTest (ISBN 0205239498), a power-
ful online assessment software program. Instructors 
can easily create and print quizzes and exams as well 
as author new questions online for maximum flex-
ibility. Both the Test Bank and MyTest are available 
online at www.pearsonhighered.com/irc.
Besides updating my discussion of research, I keep up-
dating my writing. Writing is a difficult, time-consuming 
endeavor, and I find that I am still ­learning how to do 
it well. But I do think that with practice my writing is 
better organized, smoother, and more ­coherent.
Good writing means including all steps of a logi-
cal discourse. My teaching experience has taught me 
that an entire lecture can be wasted if the students 
do not understand all of the “obvious” conclusions 
of a particular experiment before the next one is 
described. Unfortunately, puzzled students some-
times write notes feverishly, in an attempt to get the 
facts down so they can study them—and understand 
them—later. A roomful of busy, attentive students 
tends to reinforce the lecturer’s behavior. I am sure 
all my colleagues have been dismayed by a question 
from a student that reveals a lack of understanding of 
details long since passed, accompanied by quizzical 
looks from other students that confirm that they have 
the same question. Painful experiences such as these 
have taught me to examine the logical steps between 
the discussion of one experiment and the next and to 
make sure they are explicitly stated. A textbook writer 
must address the students who will read the book, not 
simply colleagues who are already acquainted with 
much of what he or she will say.
Because research on the physiology of behavior 
is an interdisciplinary effort, a textbook must pro-
vide the student with the background necessary for 
understanding a variety of approaches. I have been 
careful to provide enough biological background 
early in the book that students without a background 
in ­physiology can understand what is said later, while 
students with such a background can benefit from 
details that are familiar to them.
I designed this text for serious students who 
are willing to work. In return for their effort, I have 
endeavored to provide a solid foundation for further 
study. Those students who will not take subsequent 
courses in this or related fields should receive the 
­satisfaction of a much better understanding of their 
own behavior. Also, they will have a greater appre-
ciation for the forthcoming advances in medical 
practices related to disorders that affect a person’s 
perception, mood, or behavior. I hope that students 
who read this book carefully will henceforth perceive 
human behavior in a new light.
MyPsychLab
The new MyPsychLab combines original online learn-
ing applications with powerful online assessments to 
engage students, assess their learning, and help them 
succeed. For each chapter of the text, MyPsychLab has 

xx	
Preface
Christopher May, Carroll University
Khaleel Razak, University of California, 
Riverside
Christian Reich, Ramapo College of New Jersey
Christopher Sletten, University of North Florida
Alicia Swan, Southern Illinois University
Lorey Takahashi, University of Hawaii
Sheralee Tershner, Western New England 
University
Charles Trimbach, Roger Williams University
Steve Weinert, Cuyamaca College
Erin Young, Texas A&M University
I also want to thank the people involved in the 
editing and production of my book: Amber Chow, 
Acquisitions Editor; Amber Mackey, Senior Sponsoring 
Editor; Diane Szulecki, Editorial Assistant; Annemarie 
Franklin, Production Project Manager; Kathy Smith, 
Production Coordinator; and Margaret Pinnette, copy 
editor.
Finally, I thank my wife Mary for her support. 
Writing is a lonely pursuit, because one must be alone 
with one’s thoughts for many hours of the day. I thank 
her for giving me the time to read, reflect, and write 
without feeling that I was neglecting her too much.
I was delighted to hear from many students and 
colleagues who read previous editions of my book, 
and I hope that the dialogue will continue. Please 
write to me and tell me what you like and dislike 
about the book. My e-mail is nrc@psych.umass.edu. 
When I write, I like to imagine that I am talking with 
you, the reader. If you write to me, we can make the 
conversation a two-way exchange.
PowerPoint Slides (ISBN 0205239498): Written by 
Grant McLaren, Edinboro University of Pennsylvania. 
Provide a framework for lecture outlines with images 
from the text. For this edition, the slides have been 
enhanced with even more visual appeal to engage 
students. Available online at www.pearsonhighered 
.com/irc.
Acknowledgments
Although I must accept the blame for any shortcomings 
of the book, I want to thank the many colleagues who 
helped me by responding to my requests for reprints of 
their work, suggesting topics that I should cover, permit-
ting me to reproduce their diagrams and photographs 
in this book, and pointing out deficiencies in the previ-
ous edition.
Several colleagues have reviewed the manuscript 
of parts of this book and made suggestions for improv-
ing the final drafts. I thank:
Massimo Bardi, Marshall University
Kyle Baumbauer, Texas A&M University
Lora Becker, University of Evansville
Annie Cardell, Mountain State University
James Cherry, Boston University
Gary Dunbar, Central Michigan University
Walter Isaac, Georgia College & State University
Eric Jackson, University of New Mexico
Karen Jennings, Keene State College
Linda Lockwood, Metropolitan State College  
of Denver

Introduction
Outline
1
 Understanding Human 
Consciousness: A Physiological 
Approach
Blindsight
Split Brains
Unilateral Neglect
Perception of Self
Section Summary
 The Nature of Behavioral 
Neuroscience
The Goals of Research
Biological Roots of Behavioral 
Neuroscience
Section Summary
 Natural Selection and Evolution
Functionalism and the Inheritance 
of Traits
Evolution of the Human Species
Evolution of Large Brains
Section Summary
 Ethical Issues in Research with 
Animals
 Careers in Neuroscience
Section Summary
 Strategies for Learning
chapter

T
he last frontier in this world—and perhaps the 
greatest one—lies within us. The human nervous 
system makes possible all that we can do, all that 
we can know, and all that we can experience. Its com-
plexity is immense, and the task of studying it and un-
derstanding it dwarfs all previous explorations our spe-
cies has undertaken.
One of the most universal of all human characteris-
tics is curiosity. We want to explain what makes things 
happen. In ancient times, people believed that natural 
phenomena were caused by animating spirits. All moving 
objects—animals, the wind and tides, the sun, moon, and 
stars—were assumed to have spirits that caused them to 
move. For example, stones fell when they were dropped 
because their animating spirits wanted to be reunited 
with Mother Earth. As our ancestors became more so-
phisticated and learned more about nature, they aban-
doned this approach (which we call animism) in favor of 
physical explanations for inanimate moving objects. But 
they still used spirits to explain human behavior.
From the earliest historical times, people have be-
lieved that they possess something intangible that ani-
mates them: a mind, or a soul, or a spirit. This belief 
stems from the fact that each of us is aware of his or her 
own existence. When we think or act, we feel as though 
something inside us is thinking or deciding to act. But 
Miss S. was a 60-year-old woman with a history of high 
blood pressure, which was not responding well to the medi-
cation she was taking. One evening she was sitting in her 
reclining chair reading the newspaper when the phone 
rang. She got out of her chair and walked to the phone. As 
she did, she began to feel giddy and stopped to hold onto 
the kitchen table. She has no memory of what happened 
after that.
The next morning, a neighbor, who usually stopped by 
to have coffee with Miss S., found her lying on the floor, 
mumbling incoherently. The neighbor called an ambulance, 
which took Miss S. to a hospital.
Two days after her admission, I visited her in her room, 
along with a group of neuropsychologists and neurological 
residents being led by the chief of neurology. We had 
already been told by the neurological resident in charge of 
her case that Miss S. had had a stroke in the back part of 
the right side of the brain. He had attached a CT scan to 
an illuminated viewer mounted on the wall and had 
showed us a white spot caused by the accumulation of 
blood in a particular region of her brain. (You can look at 
the scan yourself if you like; it is shown in Figure 5.19.)
About a dozen of us entered Miss S.’s room. She was 
awake but seemed a little confused. The resident greeted 
her and asked how she was feeling. “Fine, I guess,” she 
said. “I still don’t know why I’m here.”
“Can you see the other people in the room?”
“Why, sure.”
“How many are there?”
She turned her head to the right and began counting. 
She stopped when she had counted the people at the foot 
of her bed. “Seven,” she reported. “What about us?” 
asked a voice from the left of her bed. “What?” she said, 
looking at the people she had already counted. “Here, to 
your left. No, toward your left!” the voice repeated. Slowly, 
rather reluctantly, she began turning her head to the left. 
The voice kept insisting, and finally she saw who was 
talking. “Oh,” she said, “I guess there are more of you.”
The resident approached the left side of her bed and 
touched her left arm. “What is this?” he asked. “Where?” 
she said. “Here,” he answered, holding up her arm and 
moving it gently in front of her face.
“Oh, that’s an arm.”
“An arm? Whose arm?”
“I don’t know…. I guess it must be yours.”
“No, it’s yours. Look, it’s a part of you.” He traced with 
his fingers from her arm to her shoulder.
“Well, if you say so,” she said, still sounding unconvinced.
When we returned to the residents’ lounge, the chief 
of neurology said that we had seen a classic example of 
unilateral neglect, caused by damage to a particular part of 
the right side of the brain. “I’ve seen many cases like this,” 
he explained. “People can still perceive sensations from 
the left side of their body, but they just don’t pay attention 
to them. A woman will put makeup on only the right side 
of her face, and a man will shave only half of his beard. 
When they put on a shirt or a coat, they will use their left 
hand to slip it over their right arm and shoulder, but then 
they’ll just forget about their left arm and let the garment 
hang from one shoulder. They also don’t look at things 
located toward the left or even the left halves of things. 
Once I visited a man in his hospital room who had just 
finished eating breakfast. He was sitting in his bed, with a 
tray in front of him. There was half of a pancake on his 
plate. ‘Are you all done?’ I asked. ‘Sure,’ he said. When he 
wasn’t looking, I turned the plate around so that the 
uneaten part was on his right. He saw it, looked startled, 
and said, ‘Where the hell did that come from?’ “

	
Understanding Human Consciou­sness: A Physiological Approach	
3
and not anesthetized. However, in this context I am using 
the word consciousness to refer to the fact that we humans 
are aware of—and can tell others about—our thoughts, 
perceptions, memories, and feelings.
We know that consciousness can be altered by changes 
in the structure or chemistry of the brain; therefore, we 
may hypothesize that consciousness is a physiological 
function, just like behavior. We can even speculate about 
the origins of this self-awareness. Consciousness and the 
ability to communicate seem to go hand in hand. Our spe-
cies, with its complex social structure and enormous ca-
pacity for learning, is well served by our ability to commu-
nicate: to express intentions to one another and to make 
requests of one another. Verbal communication makes 
cooperation possible and permits us to establish customs 
and laws of behavior. Perhaps the evolution of this ability 
is what has given rise to the phenomenon of conscious-
ness. That is, our ability to send and receive messages with 
other people enables us to send and receive our own mes-
sages inside our own heads—in other words, to think and 
to be aware of our own existence. (See Figure 1.1.)
what is the nature of the human mind? We each have a 
physical body, with muscles that move it and sensory 
organs such as eyes and ears that perceive information 
about the world around us. Within our bodies the ner-
vous system plays a central role, receiving information 
from the sensory organs and controlling the movements 
of the muscles. But what role does the mind play? Does 
it control the nervous system? Is it a part of the nervous 
system? Is it physical and tangible, like the rest of the 
body, or is it a spirit that will always remain hidden?
This puzzle has historically been called the mind–body 
question. Philosophers have been trying to answer it for 
many centuries, and more recently scientists have taken 
up the task. Basically, people have followed two different 
approaches: dualism and monism. Dualism is a belief in 
the dual nature of reality. Mind and body are separate; the 
body is made of ordinary matter, but the mind is not. 
Monism is a belief that everything in the universe consists 
of matter and energy and that the mind is a phenomenon 
produced by the workings of the nervous system.
Mere speculation about the nature of the mind can 
get us only so far. If we could answer the mind–body 
question simply by thinking about it, philosophers would 
have done so long ago. Behavioral neuroscientists take 
an empirical, practical, and monistic approach to the 
study of human nature. Most of us believe that once we 
understand the workings of the human body—and, in 
particular, the workings of the nervous system—the 
mind–body problem will have been solved. We will be 
able to explain how we perceive, how we think, how we 
remember, and how we act. We will even be able to ex-
plain the nature of our own self-awareness. Of course, we 
are far from understanding the workings of the nervous 
system, so only time will tell whether this belief is justi-
fied. In any event there is no way to study nonphysical 
phenomena in the laboratory. All that we can detect with 
our sense organs and our laboratory instruments are 
manifestations of the physical world: matter and energy.
Understanding Human 
Consciou­sness: A Physiological 
Approach
As you will learn from subsequent chapters, scientists 
have discovered much about the physiology of behavior: 
of perception, motivation, emotion, memory, and con-
trol of specific movements. But before addressing these 
problems, I want to show you that a scientific approach 
to perhaps the most complex phenomenon of all— 
human consciousness—is at least possible.
The term consciousness can be used to refer to a vari-
ety of concepts, including simple wakefulness. Thus, a 
researcher may write about an experiment using “con-
scious rats,” referring to the fact that the rats were awake 
x dualism  The belief that the body is physical but the mind (or 
soul) is not.
x monism (mahn ism)  The belief that the world consists only of 
matter and energy and that the mind is a phenomenon produced 
by the workings of the nervous system.
figure 1.1  Studying the Brain
Will the human brain ever completely understand its own 
workings? A sixteenth-century woodcut from the first 
edition of De humani corporis fabrica (On the Workings 
of the Human Body) by Andreas Vesalius.
(Courtesy of National Library of Medicine.)

4	
Chapter 1  Introduction
“Good. Thank you, you can put your hand down.” 
Dr. M. turned to Natalie. “I’d like to test your grandfa-
ther now, but I’ll be glad to talk with you later.”
Blindsight
Several phenomena involving the human brain provide in-
sights into the nature of consciousness. One of these phe-
nomena, caused by damage to a particular part of the brain, 
is known as blindsight (Weiskrantz et al., 1974; Cowey, 
2010). The symptoms of blindsight indicate that the com-
mon belief that perceptions must enter consciousness to af-
fect our behavior is incorrect. Our behavior can be guided 
by sensory information of which we are completely unaware.
x blindsight  The ability of a person who cannot see objects in 
his or her blind field to accurately reach for them while remaining 
unconscious of perceiving them; caused by damage to the 
“mammalian” visual system of the brain.
Natalie J. had brought her grandfather to see Dr. M., a 
neuropsychologist. Mr. J.’s stroke had left him almost 
completely blind; all he could see was a tiny spot in the 
middle of his visual field. Dr. M. had learned about Mr. 
J.’s condition from his neurologist and had asked Mr. J. 
to come to his laboratory so that he could do some 
tests for his research project.
Dr. M. helped Mr. J. find a chair and sit down.  
Mr. J., who walked with the aid of a cane, gave it to his 
granddaughter to hold for him. “May I borrow that?” 
asked Dr. M. Natalie nodded and handed the cane to 
Dr. M. “The phenomenon I’m studying is called blind-
sight,” he said. “Let me see if I can show you what it is.
“Mr. J., please look straight ahead. Keep looking that 
way, and don’t move your eyes or turn your head. I know 
that you can see a little bit straight ahead of you, and I 
don’t want you to use that piece of vision for what I’m 
going to ask you to do. Fine. Now, I’d like you to reach 
out with your right hand and point to what I’m holding.”
“But I don’t see anything—I’m blind!” said Mr. J., 
obviously exasperated.
“I know, but please try, anyway.”
Mr. J. shrugged his shoulders and pointed. He 
looked startled when his finger encountered the end of 
the cane, which Dr. M. was pointing toward him.
“Gramps, how did you do that?” asked Natalie, 
amazed. “I thought you were blind.”
“I am!” he said, emphatically. “It was just luck.”
“Let’s try it just a couple more times, Mr. J.,” said 
Dr. M. “Keep looking straight ahead. Fine.” He reversed 
the cane, so that the handle was pointing toward Mr. J. 
“Now I’d like you to grab hold of the cane.”
Mr. J. reached out with an open hand and grabbed 
hold of the cane.
“Good. Now put your hand down, please.” He 
rotated the cane 90 degrees, so that the handle was 
oriented vertically. “Now reach for it again.”
Mr. J. did so. As his arm came up, he turned his 
wrist so that his hand matched the orientation of the 
handle, which he grabbed hold of again.
As Dr. M. explained to Natalie afterward, the human 
brain contains not one but several mechanisms involved in 
vision. To simplify matters somewhat, let’s consider two 
systems, which evolved at different times. The more primi-
tive one, which resembles the visual system of animals such 
as fish and frogs, evolved first. The more complex one, 
which is possessed by mammals, evolved later. This second, 
“mammalian” system seems to be the one that is respon-
sible for our ability to perceive the world around us. The 
first, “primitive,” visual system is devoted mainly to control-
ling eye movements and bringing our attention to sudden 
movements that occur off to the side of our field of vision.
Mr. J.’s stroke had damaged the mammalian visual 
system: the visual cortex of the brain and some of the 
nerve fibers that bring information to it from the eyes. 
Cases like his show that after the mammalian visual system 
is damaged, people can use the primitive visual system of 
their brains to guide hand movements toward an object 
even though they cannot see what they are reaching for. 
In other words, visual information can control behavior 
without producing a conscious sensation. The phenome-
non of blindsight suggests that consciousness is not a general 
property of all parts of the brain; some parts of the brain, but 
not others, play a special role in consciousness. Although 
we are not sure just where these parts are or exactly how 
they work, they seem to be related to our ability to  
communicate—with others and with ourselves. The prim-
itive system, which evolved before the development of 
brain mechanisms that give rise to consciousness, does 
not have these connections, so we are not conscious of 
the visual information it detects. It does have connections 
with the parts of the brain responsible for controlling 
hand movements. Only the mammalian visual system in 
the human brain has direct connections with the parts of 
the brain responsible for consciousness. (See Figure 1.2.)
Split Brains
Studies of humans who have undergone a particular sur-
gical procedure demonstrate dramatically how discon-
necting parts of the brain involved with perceptions from 
parts that are involved with verbal behavior also discon-
nects them from consciousness. These results suggest 

	
Understanding Human Consciou­sness: A Physiological Approach	
5
that the parts of the brain involved in verbal behavior 
may be the ones responsible for consciousness.
The surgical procedure is one that has been used 
for people with very severe epilepsy that cannot be con-
trolled by drugs. In these people, nerve cells in one side 
of the brain become uncontrollably overactive, and the 
overactivity is transmitted to the other side of the brain 
by the corpus callosum. The corpus callosum (“tough 
body”) is a large bundle of nerve fibers that connect cor-
responding parts of one side of the brain with those of 
the other. Both sides of the brain then engage in wild 
activity and stimulate each other, causing a generalized 
epileptic seizure. These seizures can occur many times 
each day, preventing the patient from leading a normal 
life. Neurosurgeons discovered that cutting the corpus 
callosum (the split-brain operation) greatly reduced the 
frequency of the epileptic seizures.
Figure 1.3 shows a drawing of the split-brain opera-
tion. We see the brain being sliced down the middle, 
from front to back, dividing it into its two symmetrical 
halves. The artist has created a window in the left side of 
the brain so that we can see the corpus callosum being 
cut by the neurosurgeon’s special knife. (See Figure 1.3.)
Sperry (1966) and Gazzaniga and his associates 
(Gazzaniga and LeDoux, 1978; Gazzaniga, 2005) have 
studied these patients extensively. The largest part of 
the brain consists of two symmetrical parts, called the 
cerebral hemispheres, which receive sensory information 
from the opposite sides of the body. They also control 
movements of the opposite sides. The corpus callosum 
permits the two hemispheres to share information so 
that each side knows what the other side is perceiving 
figure 1.2  An Explanation of the Blindsight Phenomenon
More recently evolved
behavioral mechanisms
Primitive
visual system
Mammalian
visual system
Eye and head movements
Reaching movements
with hands
Other simple behaviors
Speech and thinking in
words (and consciousness)
Other complex behaviors
A person is not aware of
visual information received
by this system
Primitive behavioral
mechanisms
Damage abolishes perception
and awareness of visual stimuli
Eye
figure 1.3  The Split-Brain Operation
A “window” has been opened in the side of the brain so 
that we can see the corpus callosum being cut at the 
midline of the brain.
Cutting device
Top
Corpus callosum
Front
x corpus callosum (core pus ka low sum)  The largest commis-
sure of the brain, interconnecting the areas of neocortex on each 
side of the brain.
x split-brain operation  Brain surgery that is occasionally 
performed to treat a form of epilepsy; the surgeon cuts the corpus 
callosum, which connects the two hemispheres of the brain.
x cerebral hemispheres  The two symmetrical halves of the 
brain; constitute the major part of the brain.

6	
Chapter 1  Introduction
hand) when they had not intended to. A psychologist 
once reported that a man with a split brain attempted 
to hit his wife with one hand and protect her with the 
other. Did he really want to hurt her? Yes and no, I guess.
The olfactory system is an exception to the general 
rule that of sensory information crosses from one side of 
the body to the opposite side of the brain. That is, when 
a person sniffs a flower through the left nostril, the left 
brain receives information about the odor. Thus, if the 
right nostril of a patient with a split brain is closed, leav-
ing only the left nostril open, the patient will be able to 
tell us what the odors are because the information is 
received by the side of the brain that controls speech 
(Gordon and Sperry, 1969). However, if the odor enters 
only the right nostril, the patient will say that he or she 
smells nothing. But, in fact, the right brain has per-
ceived the odor and can identify it. To show that this is 
so, we ask the patient to smell an odor with the right 
nostril and then reach for some objects that are hidden 
from view by a partition. If asked to use the left hand, 
which is controlled by the hemisphere that detected the 
smell, the patient will select the object that corresponds 
to the odor—a plastic flower for a floral odor, a toy fish 
for a fishy odor, a model tree for the odor of pine, and 
so forth. But if asked to use the right hand, the patient 
fails the test because the right hand is connected to the 
left hemisphere, which did not smell the odor presented 
to the right nostril. (See Figure 1.4.)
and doing. After the split-brain operation is performed, 
the two hemispheres are disconnected and operate in-
dependently; their sensory mechanisms, memories, and 
motor systems can no longer exchange information. 
You might think that disconnecting the brain hemi-
spheres would be devastating, but the effects of these 
disconnections are not obvious to the casual observer. 
The simple reason for this fact is that only one hemi-
sphere—in most people, the left—controls speech. The 
right hemisphere of an epileptic person with a split 
brain appears able to understand instructions reason-
ably well, but it is totally incapable of producing speech.
Because only one side of the brain can talk about 
what it is experiencing, people speaking with a person 
who has a split brain are conversing with only one hemi-
sphere: the left. The operations of the right hemisphere 
are more difficult to detect. Even the patient’s left 
hemisphere has to learn about the independent exis-
tence of the right hemisphere. One of the first things 
that these patients say they notice after the operation is 
that their left hand seems to have a “mind of its own.” 
For example, patients may find themselves putting 
down a book held in the left hand, even if they have 
been reading it with great interest. This conflict occurs 
because the right hemisphere, which controls the left 
hand, cannot read and therefore finds holding the 
book boring. At other times these patients surprise 
themselves by making obscene gestures (with the left 
figure 1.4  Smelling with a Split Brain
Identification of an object in response to an olfactory stimulus by a 
person with a split brain.
Right hemisphere
Corpus callosum
has been cut
Left hemisphere
Control
of left
hand
Control of 
speech
Person
denies
smelling
anything
Left nostril
is plugged
Left
hand
chooses
a rose
Olfactory
information
Perfume with
aroma of rose
is presented
to right nostril

	
Understanding Human Consciou­sness: A Physiological Approach	
7
things. But to distinguish between the left and right halves 
of an object, you first have to perceive the entire object—
otherwise, how would you know where the middle was?
People with unilateral neglect also demonstrate 
their unawareness of the left half of things when they 
draw pictures. For example, when asked to draw a clock, 
they almost always successfully draw a circle; but then 
when they fill in the numbers, they scrunch them all in 
on the right side. Sometimes they simply stop after 
reaching 6 or 7, and sometimes they write the rest of the 
numbers underneath the circle. When asked to draw a 
daisy, they begin with a stem and a leaf or two and then 
draw all the petals to the right. (See Figure 1.5.)
Bisiach and Luzzatti (1978) demonstrated a similar 
phenomenon, which suggests that unilateral neglect  
extends even to a person’s own visual imagery. The inves-
tigators asked two patients with unilateral neglect to  
describe the Piazza del Duomo, a well-known landmark 
in Milan, the city in which they and the patients lived. 
They asked the patients to imagine that they were stand-
ing at the north end of the piazza and to describe what 
they saw. The patients duly named the buildings, but 
only those on the west, to their right. Then the investiga-
tors asked them to imagine themselves at the south end 
of the piazza. This time, they named the buildings on the 
east—again, to their right. Obviously, they knew about all 
of the buildings and their locations, but they visualized 
them only when the buildings were located in the right 
side of their (imaginary) visual field.
The effects of cutting the corpus callosum rein-
force the conclusion that we become conscious of 
something only if information about it is able to reach 
the parts of the brain responsible for verbal communi-
cation, which are located in the left hemisphere. If the 
information does not reach these parts of the brain, 
then that information does not reach consciousness. 
We still know very little about the physiology of con-
sciousness, but studies of people with brain damage are 
beginning to provide us with some useful insights. This 
issue is discussed in later chapters.
Unilateral Neglect
The phenomenon described in the case history at the be-
ginning of this chapter—failure to notice things located to 
a person’s left—is known as unilateral neglect (Adair and 
Barrett, 2008). Unilateral (“one-sided”) neglect is pro-
duced by damage to a particular part of the right side of 
the brain: the cortex of the parietal lobe. (Chapter 3 de-
scribes the location of this region.) The parietal lobe re-
ceives information directly from the skin, the muscles, the 
joints, the internal organs, and the part of the inner ear 
that is concerned with balance. Thus, it is concerned with 
the body and its position. But that is not all; the parietal 
cortex also receives auditory and visual information. Its 
most important function seems to be to put together in-
formation about the movements and location of the parts 
of the body with the locations of objects in space around 
us. This information makes it possible for us to reach for 
and manipulate objects and to orient ourselves in space.
If unilateral neglect simply consisted of blindness in 
the left side of the visual field and anesthesia of the left 
side of the body, it would not be nearly as interesting. 
But individuals with unilateral neglect are neither half 
blind nor half numb. Under the proper circumstances, 
they can see things located to their left, and they can tell 
when someone touches the left side of their bodies. But 
normally they ignore such stimuli and act as if the left side 
of the world and the left side of their bodies do not exist. 
In other words, their inattention to things to the left means 
that they normally do not become conscious of them.
Volpe, LeDoux, and Gazzaniga (1979) presented 
pairs of visual stimuli to people with unilateral neglect—
one stimulus in the left visual field and one stimulus in 
the right. Invariably, the people reported seeing only 
the right-hand stimulus. But when the investigators 
asked the people to say whether the two stimuli were 
identical, they answered correctly, even though they said that 
they were unaware of the left-hand stimulus.
If you think about the story that the chief of neurol-
ogy told about the man who ate only the right half of a 
pancake, you will realize that people with unilateral ne-
glect must be able to perceive more than the right visual 
field. Remember that people with unilateral neglect fail to 
notice not only things to their left but also the left halves of 
x unilateral neglect  A syndrome in which people ignore objects 
located toward their left and the left sides of objects located 
anywhere; most often caused by damage to the right parietal lobe.
figure 1.5  Unilateral Neglect
When people with unilateral neglect attempt to draw simple 
objects, they demonstrate their unawareness of the left half of 
things by drawing only the features that appear on the right.

8	
Chapter 1  Introduction
Another study from the same laboratory provided a 
particularly convincing demonstration that people ex-
perience a genuine feeling of ownership of the rubber 
hand (Ehrsson et al., 2007; Slater et al., 2009). The in-
vestigators used the procedure previously described to 
establish a feeling of ownership and then threatened 
the rubber hand by making a stabbing movement to-
ward it with a needle. (They did not actually touch the 
hand with the needle.) Brain scans showed increased 
activity in a region of the brain (the anterior cingulate 
cortex) that is normally activated when a person antici-
pates pain and also in a region (the supplementary 
motor area) that is normally activated when a person 
feels the urge to move his or her arm (Fried et al., 1991; 
Peyron, Laurent, and Garcia-Larrea, 2000). So the im-
pression that the rubber hand was about to receive a 
painful stab from a needle made people react as they 
would if their own hand were the target of the threat.
As you can see, there are two major symptoms of 
unilateral neglect: neglect of the left halves of things in 
the environment and neglect of the left half of one’s 
own body. In fact, although most people with unilateral 
neglect show both types of symptoms, research indicates 
that they are produced by damage to slightly different 
regions of the brain (Hillis et al., 2005).
Perception of Self
Although neglect of the left side of one’s own body can 
be studied only in people with brain abnormalities, an 
interesting phenomenon seen in people with undam-
aged brains confirms the importance of the parietal lobe 
(and another region of the brain) in feelings of body 
ownership. Ehrsson, Spence, and Passingham (2004) 
studied the rubber hand illusion. Normal subjects were 
positioned with their left hand hidden out of sight. They 
saw a lifelike rubber left hand in front of them. The ex-
perimenters stroked both the subject’s hidden left hand 
and the visible rubber hand with a small paintbrush. If 
the two hands were stroked synchronously and in the 
same direction, the subjects began to experience the 
rubber hand as their own. In fact, if they were then 
asked to use their right hand to point to their left hand, 
they tended to point toward the rubber hand. However, 
if the real and artificial hands were stroked in different 
directions or at different times, the subjects did not expe-
rience the rubber hand as their own. (See Figure 1.6.)
While the subjects were participating in the experi-
ment, the experimenters recorded the activity of their 
brains with a functional MRI scanner. (Brain scanning is 
described in Chapter 5.) The scans showed increased 
activity in the parietal lobe and then, as the subjects be-
gan to experience the rubber hand as belonging to their 
body, in the premotor cortex, a region of the brain involved 
in planning movements. When the stroking of the real 
and artificial hands was uncoordinated and the subjects 
did not experience the rubber hand as their own, the 
premotor cortex did not become activated. The experi-
menters concluded that the parietal cortex analyzed the 
sight and the feeling of brush strokes. When the parietal 
cortex detected that they were congruent, this informa-
tion was transmitted to the premotor cortex, which gave 
rise to the feeling of ownership of the rubber hand.
figure 1.6  The Rubber Hand Illusion
If the subject’s hidden left hand and the visible rubber 
hand are stroked synchronously in the same direction, the 
subject will come to experience the artificial hand as his 
or her own. If the hands are stroked asynchronously or in 
different directions, this illusion will not occur.
(Adapted from Botwinick, M. Science, 2004, 305, 782–783.)
Rubber hand
Brushes move in synchrony
Hand and brush
hidden from view
Section Summary
Understanding Human Consciousness
The mind–body question has puzzled philosophers for 
many centuries. Modern science has adopted a monis-
tic position—the belief that the world consists of matter 
and energy and that the human mind is a manifestation 

	
The Nature of Behavioral Neuroscience 	
9
important form of human behavior.) The basic function 
of perception is to inform us of what is happening in  
our environment so that our behaviors will be adaptive 
and useful: Perception without the ability to act would 
be useless. Of course, once perceptual abilities have 
evolved, they can be used for purposes other than guiding 
behavior. For example, we can enjoy a beautiful sunset 
or a great work of art without the perception causing us 
to do anything in particular. And thinking can often 
take place without causing any overt behavior. However, 
the ability to think evolved because it permits us to per-
form complex behaviors that accomplish useful goals. 
And whereas reminiscing about things that happened in 
our past can be an enjoyable pastime, the ability to learn 
and remember evolved—again—because it permitted 
our ancestors to profit from experience and perform 
behaviors that were useful to them.
The modern history of investigating the physiology of 
behavior has been written by scientists who have com-
bined the experimental methods of psychology with those 
of physiology and have applied them to the issues that 
concern researchers in many different fields. Thus, we 
The Nature of Behavioral  
Neuroscience
Behavioral neuroscience was formerly known as physio-
logical psychology, and it is still sometimes referred to by 
that name. Indeed, the first textbook of psychology, writ-
ten by Wilhelm Wundt in the late nineteenth century, 
was titled Principles of Physiological Psychology. In recent 
years, with the explosion of information in experimental 
biology, scientists from other disciplines have become 
prominent contributors to the investigation of the phys-
iology of behavior. The united effort of behavioral  
neuroscientists, physiologists, and other neuroscientists 
is due to the realization that the ultimate function of the 
nervous system is behavior.
When I ask my students what they think the ultimate 
function of the brain is, they often say “thinking,” or 
“logical reasoning,” or “perceiving,” or “remembering 
things.” Certainly, the nervous system performs these 
functions, but they support the primary one: control of 
movement. (Note that movement includes talking, an 
of the human brain. Studies of the functions of the 
human nervous system tend to support this position, as 
three specific examples show. These phenomena show 
that brain damage, by destroying conscious brain func-
tions or disconnecting them from the speech mecha-
nisms in the left hemisphere, can reveal the presence 
of perceptual mechanisms of which the person is not 
conscious and that a feeling of ownership of our own 
body is a function of the human brain.
Blindsight is a phenomenon that is seen after par-
tial damage to the “mammalian” visual system on one 
side of the brain. Although the person is, in the normal 
meaning of the word, blind to anything presented to 
part of the visual field, the person can nevertheless 
reach out and point to objects whose presence he or 
she is not conscious of. Similarly, when sensory informa-
tion about a particular object is presented to the right 
hemisphere of a person who has had a split-brain oper-
ation, the person is not aware of the object but can 
nevertheless indicate by movements of the left hand 
that the object has been perceived. Unilateral 
neglect—failure to become aware of the left half of 
one’s body, the left half of objects, or items located to 
a person’s left—reveals the existence of brain mecha-
nisms that control our attention to things and hence our 
ability to become aware of them. These phenomena 
suggest that consciousness involves operations of the 
verbal mechanisms of the left hemisphere. Indeed,  
consciousness may be, in large part, a matter of our 
“talking to ourselves.” Thus, once we understand the 
language functions of the brain, we may have gone a 
long way toward understanding how the brain can be 
conscious of its own existence. The rubber hand phe-
nomenon suggests that a feeling of ownership of our 
own body is a result of brain mechanisms that can be 
studied with the methods of neuroscience.
 Thought Questions
1.	 Could a sufficiently large and complex computer 
ever be programmed to be aware of itself? 
Suppose that someone someday claims to have 
done just that. What kind of evidence would you 
need to prove or disprove this claim?
2.	 Is consciousness found in animals other than 
humans? Is the ability of some animals to communi-
cate with each other and with humans evidence for 
at least some form of awareness of self and others?
3.	 Clearly, the left hemisphere of a person with a split 
brain is conscious of the information it receives and 
of its own thoughts. It is not conscious of the mental 
processes of the right hemisphere. But is it possible 
that the right hemisphere is conscious too but is just 
unable to talk to us? How could we possibly find out 
whether it is? Do you see some similarities between 
this issue and the one raised in the first question?

10	
Chapter 1  Introduction
the weather is cool, whereas a pregnant mouse will build 
one regardless of the temperature. The same behavior 
occurs for different reasons. In fact, nest-building behav-
ior is controlled by two different physiological mecha-
nisms. Nest building can be studied as a behavior related 
to the process of temperature regulation, or it can be 
studied in the context of parental behavior. Although the 
same set of brain mechanisms will control the movements 
that a mouse makes in building a nest in both cases, these 
mechanisms will be activated by different parts of the 
brain. One part receives information from the body’s tem-
perature detectors, and the other part is influenced by 
hormones that are present in the body during pregnancy.
Sometimes, physiological mechanisms can tell us 
something about psychological processes. This relation-
ship is particularly true of complex phenomena such as 
language, memory, and mood, which are poorly under-
stood psychologically. For example, damage to a specific 
part of the brain can cause very specific impairments in 
a person’s language abilities. The nature of these im-
pairments suggests how these abilities are organized. 
When the damage involves a brain region that is impor-
tant in analyzing speech sounds, it also produces deficits 
in spelling. This finding suggests that the ability to rec-
ognize a spoken word and the ability to spell it call on 
related brain mechanisms. Damage to another region of 
the brain can produce extreme difficulty in reading 
unfamiliar words by sounding them out, but it does not 
impair the person’s ability to read words with which he 
or she is already familiar. This finding suggests that 
reading comprehension can take two routes: one that is 
related to speech sounds and another that is primarily a 
matter of visual recognition of whole words.
In practice, the research efforts of behavioral neuro-
scientists involve both forms of explanation: generaliza-
tion and reduction. Ideas for experiments are stimulated 
by the investigator’s knowledge both of psychological 
generalizations about behavior and of physiological 
mechanisms. A good behavioral neuroscientist must 
therefore be an expert in the study of behavior and the 
study of physiology.
Biological Roots of Behavioral  
Neuroscience
Study of (or speculations about) the physiology of behav-
ior has its roots in antiquity. Because its movement was 
necessary for life and because emotions caused it to beat 
more strongly, many ancient cultures, including the 
have studied perceptual processes, control of movement, 
sleep and waking, reproductive behaviors, ingestive 
behaviors, emotional behaviors, learning, and language. 
In recent years we have begun to study the physiology of 
human pathological conditions, such as addictions and 
neurological and mental disorders. All of these topics are 
discussed in subsequent chapters of this book.
The Goals of Research
The goal of all scientists is to explain the phenomena they 
study. But what do we mean by explain? Scientific explana-
tion takes two forms: generalization and reduction. All 
scientists deal with generalization. For example, psycholo-
gists explain particular instances of behavior as examples 
of general laws, which they deduce from their experi-
ments. For instance, most psychologists would explain a 
pathologically strong fear of dogs as an example of a 
particular form of learning called classical conditioning. 
Presumably, the person was frightened earlier in life by a 
dog. An unpleasant stimulus was paired with the sight of 
the animal (perhaps the person was knocked down by an 
exuberant dog or was attacked by a vicious one), and the 
subsequent sight of dogs evokes the earlier response: fear.
Most physiologists use an additional approach to 
explanation: reduction. They explain complex phenom-
ena in terms of simpler ones. For example, they may 
explain the movement of a muscle in terms of the 
changes in the membranes of muscle cells, the entry of 
particular chemicals, and the interactions among pro-
tein molecules within these cells. By contrast, a molecu-
lar biologist would explain these events in terms of forces 
that bind various molecules together and cause various 
parts of the molecules to be attracted to one another. In 
turn, the job of an atomic physicist is to describe matter 
and energy themselves and to account for the various 
forces found in nature. Practitioners of each branch of 
science use reduction to call on sets of more elementary 
generalizations to explain the phenomena they study.
The task of the behavioral neuroscientist is to ex-
plain behavior by studying the physiological processes 
that control it. But behavioral neuroscientists cannot 
simply be reductionists. It is not enough to observe be-
haviors and correlate them with physiological events 
that occur at the same time. Identical behaviors may 
occur for different reasons and thus may be initiated by 
different physiological mechanisms. Therefore, we must 
understand “psychologically” why a particular behavior 
occurs—that is, what functions it performs—before we 
can understand what physiological events made it occur.
Let me provide a specific example: Mice, like many 
other mammals, often build nests. Behavioral observa-
tions show that mice will build nests under two conditions: 
when the air temperature is low and when the animal is 
pregnant. A nonpregnant mouse will build a nest only if 
x generalization  A type of scientific explanation; a general 
conclusion based on many observations of similar phenomena.
x reduction  A type of scientific explanation; a phenomenon is 
described in terms of the more elementary processes that underlie it.

	
The Nature of Behavioral Neuroscience 	
11
beneath the cerebral hemispheres. He noted that the 
brain contained hollow chambers (the ventricles) that 
were filled with fluid, and he hypothesized that this 
fluid was under pressure. When the mind decided to 
perform an action, it tilted the pineal body in a particu-
lar direction like a little joystick, causing fluid to flow 
from the brain into the appropriate set of nerves. This 
flow of fluid caused the same muscles to inflate and 
move. (See Figure 1.8.)
As a young man, René Descartes was greatly im-
pressed by the moving statues in the grottoes of the 
Royal Gardens, just west of Paris ( Jaynes, 1970). He was 
fascinated by the hidden mechanisms that caused the 
statues to move when visitors stepped on hidden plates. 
For example, as a visitor approached a bronze statue of 
the goddess Diana, bathing in a pool of water, she would 
flee and hide behind a bronze rose bush. If the visitor 
pursued her, an imposing statue of Neptune would rise 
up and bar the way with his trident.
These devices served as models for Descartes in the-
orizing about how the body worked. The pressurized 
water of the moving statues was replaced by pressurized 
fluid in the ventricles; the pipes by nerves; the cylinders 
by muscles; and, finally, the hidden valves by the pineal 
body. This story illustrates one of the first times that a 
technological device was used as a model for explaining 
Egyptian, Indian, and Chinese cultures, considered the 
heart to be the seat of thought and emotions. The ancient 
Greeks did too, but Hippocrates (460–370 b.c.e.) con-
cluded that this role should be assigned to the brain.
Not all ancient Greek scholars agreed with Hip-
pocrates. Aristotle did not; he thought the brain served 
to cool the passions of the heart. But Galen (130–200 
c.e.), who had the greatest respect for Aristotle, con-
cluded that Aristotle’s role for the brain was “utterly 
absurd, since in that case Nature would not have placed 
the encephalon [brain] so far from the heart,… and she 
would not have attached the sources of all the senses 
[the sensory nerves] to it” (Galen, 1968 translation, p. 
387). Galen thought enough of the brain to dissect and 
study the brains of cattle, sheep, pigs, cats, dogs, weasels, 
monkeys, and apes (Finger, 1994).
René Descartes, a seventeenth-century French phi-
losopher and mathematician, has been called the father 
of modern philosophy. Although he was not a biologist, 
his speculations concerning the roles of the mind and 
brain in the control of behavior provide a good starting 
point in the modern history of behavioral neurosci-
ence. Descartes assumed that the world was a purely 
mechanical entity that, once having been set in motion 
by God, ran its course without divine interference. 
Thus, to understand the world, one had only to under-
stand how it was constructed. To Descartes, animals 
were mechanical devices; their behavior was controlled 
by environmental stimuli. His view of the human body 
was much the same: It was a machine. As Descartes 
observed, some movements of the human body were 
automatic and involuntary. For example, if a person’s 
finger touched a hot object, the arm would immedi-
ately withdraw from the source of stimulation. Reac-
tions like this did not require participation of the mind; 
they occurred automatically. Descartes called these 
actions reflexes (from the Latin reflectere, “to bend back 
upon itself”). Energy coming from the outside source 
would be reflected back through the nervous system to 
the muscles, which would contract. The term is still in 
use today, but, of course, we explain the operation of a 
reflex differently. (See Figure 1.7.)
Like most philosophers of his time, Descartes was  
a dualist; he believed that each person possessed a 
mind—a uniquely human attribute that was not subject 
to the laws of the universe. But his thinking differed 
from that of his predecessors in one important way: He 
was the first to suggest that a link exists between the 
human mind and its purely physical housing, the brain. 
He believed that the mind controlled the movements of 
the body, while the body, through its sense organs, sup-
plied the mind with information about what was hap-
pening in the environment. In particular, he hypothe-
sized that this interaction took place in the pineal body, 
a small organ situated on top of the brain stem, buried 
x reflex  An automatic, stereotyped movement that is produced 
as the direct result of a stimulus.
figure 1.7  Descartes’ Explanation of a Reflex 
Action to a Painful Stimulus

12	
Chapter 1  Introduction
which muscles contracted. The results of these efforts 
gave rise to an accumulation of knowledge about the 
physiology of behavior.
One of the most important figures in the develop-
ment of experimental physiology was Johannes Müller, 
a nineteenth-century German physiologist. Müller was 
a forceful advocate of the application of experimental 
techniques to physiology. Previously, the activities of 
most natural scientists had been limited to observation 
and classification. Although these activities are essen-
tial, Müller insisted that major advances in our under-
standing of the workings of the body would be achieved 
only by experimentally removing or isolating animals’ 
organs, testing their responses to various chemicals, 
and otherwise altering the environment to see how the 
organs responded. (See Figure 1.9.) His most important 
contribution to the study of the physiology of behavior 
was his doctrine of specific nerve energies. Müller 
observed that although all nerves carry the same basic 
message—an electrical impulse—we perceive the mes-
sages of different nerves in different ways. For example, 
messages carried by the optic nerves produce sensa-
tions of visual images, and those carried by the auditory 
nerves produce sensations of sounds. How can differ-
ent sensations arise from the same basic message?
The answer is that the messages occur in different 
channels. The portion of the brain that receives mes-
sages from the optic nerves interprets the activity as visual 
stimulation, even if the nerves are actually stimulated 
how the nervous system works. In science a model is a 
relatively simple system that works on known principles 
and is able to do at least some of the things that a more 
complex system can do. For example, when scientists 
discovered that elements of the nervous system commu-
nicate by means of electrical impulses, researchers  
developed models of the brain based on telephone 
switchboards and, more recently, computers. Abstract 
models, which are completely mathematical in their 
properties, have also been developed.
Descartes’ model was useful because, unlike purely 
philosophical speculations, it could be tested experi-
mentally. In fact, it did not take long for biologists to 
prove that Descartes was wrong. Luigi Galvani, a seven-
teenth-century Italian physiologist, found that electrical 
stimulation of a frog’s nerve caused contraction of the 
muscle to which it was attached. Contraction occurred 
even when the nerve and muscle were detached from 
the rest of the body, so the ability of the muscle to con-
tract and the ability of the nerve to send a message to 
the muscle were characteristics of these tissues them-
selves. Thus, the brain did not inflate muscles by direct-
ing pressurized fluid through the nerve. Galvani’s ex-
periment prompted others to study the nature of the 
message transmitted by the nerve and the means by 
figure 1.8  Descartes’ Theory
A woodcut from De homine by René Descartes, 
published in 1662. Descartes believed that the “soul” 
(what we would today call the mind ) controls the 
movements of the muscles through its influence on the 
pineal body. His explanation is modeled on the 
mechanism that animated statues in the royal gardens. 
According to his theory, the eyes sent visual information 
to the brain, where it could be examined by the soul. 
When the soul decided to act, it would tilt the pineal 
body (labeled H in the diagram), which would divert 
pressurized fluid through nerves to the appropriate 
muscles. His explanation is modeled on the mechanism 
that animated statues in the Royal Gardens near Paris.
(Courtesy of Historical Pictures Service, Chicago.)
x model  A mathematical or physical analogy for a physiological 
process; for example, computers have been used as models for 
various functions of the brain.
x doctrine of specific nerve energies  Müller’s conclusion that, 
because all nerve fibers carry the same type of message, sensory 
information must be specified by the particular nerve fibers that 
are active.
figure 1.9  Johannes Müller (1801–1858)
(Courtesy of National Library of Medicine.)

	
The Nature of Behavioral Neuroscience 	
13
many different functions, which are organized through-
out the brain. Nonetheless, the method of experimental 
ablation remains important to our understanding of the 
brains of both humans and laboratory animals.
As I mentioned earlier, Luigi Galvani used electric-
ity to demonstrate that muscles contain the source of 
the energy that powers their contractions. In 1870, Ger-
man physiologists Gustav Fritsch and Eduard Hitzig 
used electrical stimulation as a tool for understanding 
the physiology of the brain. They applied weak electrical 
current to the exposed surface of a dog’s brain and 
observed the effects of the stimulation. They found that 
stimulation of different portions of a specific region of 
the brain caused contraction of specific muscles on the 
opposite side of the body. We now refer to this region as 
the primary motor cortex, and we know that nerve cells 
there communicate directly with those that cause mus-
cular contractions. We also know that other regions of 
the brain communicate with the primary motor cortex 
and thus control behaviors. For example, the region 
that Broca found necessary for speech communicates 
with, and controls, the portion of the primary motor 
cortex that controls the muscles of the lips, tongue, and 
throat, which we use to speak.
One of the most brilliant contributors to nineteenth-
century science was the German physicist and physiolo-
gist Hermann von Helmholtz. Helmholtz devised a math-
ematical formulation of the law of conservation of energy; 
invented the ophthalmoscope (used to examine the retina 
of the eye); devised an important and influential theory of 
color vision and color blindness; and studied audition, 
music, and many physiological processes.
Helmholtz was also the first scientist to attempt to 
measure the speed of conduction through nerves. Sci-
entists had previously believed that such conduction 
was identical to the conduction that occurs in wires, 
traveling at approximately the speed of light. But Helm-
holtz found that neural conduction was much slower—
only about 90 feet per second. This measurement 
proved that neural conduction was more than a simple 
electrical message, as we will see in Chapter 2.
Twentieth-century developments in experimental 
physiology include many important inventions, such as 
sensitive amplifiers to detect weak electrical signals, 
neurochemical techniques to analyze chemical changes 
within and between cells, and histological techniques to 
see cells and their constituents. Because these develop-
ments belong to the modern era, they are discussed in 
detail in subsequent chapters.
mechanically. (For example, when we rub our eyes, we 
see flashes of light.) Because different parts of the brain 
receive messages from different nerves, the brain must 
be functionally divided: Some parts perform some func-
tions, while other parts perform others.
Müller’s advocacy of experimentation and the logical 
deductions from his doctrine of specific nerve energies 
set the stage for performing experiments directly on the 
brain. Indeed, Pierre Flourens, a nineteenth-century 
French physiologist, did just that. Flourens removed vari-
ous parts of animals’ brains and observed their behavior. 
By seeing what the animal could no longer do, he could 
infer the function of the missing portion of the brain. 
This method is called experimental ablation (from the 
Latin ablatus, “carried away”). Flourens claimed to have 
discovered the regions of the brain that control heart rate 
and breathing, purposeful movements, and visual and 
auditory reflexes.
Soon after Flourens performed his experiments, Paul 
Broca, a French surgeon, applied the principle of experi-
mental ablation to the human brain. Of course, he did 
not intentionally remove parts of human brains to see 
how they worked but observed the behavior of people 
whose brains had been damaged by strokes. In 1861 he 
performed an autopsy on the brain of a man who had 
had a stroke that resulted in the loss of the ability to 
speak. Broca’s observations led him to conclude that a 
portion of the cerebral cortex on the front part of the left 
side of the brain performs functions that are necessary for 
speech. (See Figure 1.10.) Other physicians soon obtained 
evidence supporting his conclusions. As you will learn in 
Chapter 14, the control of speech is not localized in a 
particular region of the brain. Indeed, speech requires 
x experimental ablation  The research method in which the 
function of a part of the brain is inferred by observing the 
behaviors an animal can no longer perform after that part is 
damaged.
figure 1.10  Broca’s Area
This region of the brain is named for French surgeon Paul 
Broca, who discovered that damage to a part of the left 
side of the brain disrupted a person’s ability to speak.
Top
Front
Broca’s 
area

14	
Chapter 1  Introduction
figure 1.11  Charles Darwin (1809–1882)
Darwin’s theory of evolution revolutionized biology and 
strongly influenced early psychologists.
(North Wind Picture Archives.)
Section Summary
The Nature of Behavioral Neuroscience
All scientists hope to explain natural phenomena. In 
this context the term explanation has two basic mean-
ings: generalization and reduction. Generalization 
refers to the classification of phenomena according to 
their essential features so that general laws can be 
formulated. For example, observing that gravitational 
attraction is related to the mass of two bodies and to 
the distance between them helps to explain the 
movement of planets. Reduction refers to the descrip-
tion of phenomena in terms of more basic physical 
processes. For example, gravitation can be explained 
in terms of forces and subatomic particles.
Behavioral neuroscientists use both generalization 
and reduction to explain behavior. In large part, gen-
eralizations use the traditional methods of psychol-
ogy. Reduction explains behaviors in terms of physi-
ological events within the body—primarily within the 
nervous system. Thus, behavioral neuroscience builds 
on the tradition of both experimental psychology and 
experimental physiology.
A dualist, René Descartes proposed a model of 
the brain on the basis of hydraulically activated statues. 
His model stimulated observations that produced 
important discoveries. The results of Luigi Galvani’s 
experiments eventually led to an understanding of the 
nature of the message transmitted by nerves between 
the brain and the sensory organs and the muscles. 
Johannes Müller’s doctrine of specific nerve energies 
paved the way for study of the functions of specific 
parts of the brain, through the methods of experimen-
tal ablation and electrical stimulation. Hermann von 
Helmholtz discovered that the conduction through 
nerves was slower than the conduction of electricity, 
which meant that it was a physiological phenomenon, 
not a simple electrical one.
 Thought Questions
1.	 What is the value of studying the history of behav-
ioral neuroscience? Is it a waste of time?
2.	 Suppose we studied just the latest research and 
ignored explanations that we now know to be 
incorrect. Would we be spending our time more 
profitably, or might we miss something?
Natural Selection and Evolution
Following the tradition of Müller and von Helmholtz, 
other biologists continued to observe, classify, and think 
about what they saw, and some of them arrived at valu-
able conclusions. The most important of these scientists 
was Charles Darwin. (See Figure 1.11.)
Darwin formulated the principles of natural selection 
and evolution, which revolutionized biology.
Functionalism and the Inheritance  
of Traits
Darwin’s theory emphasized that all of an organism’s char-
acteristics—its structure, its coloration, its behavior—have 
functional significance. For example, the strong talons and 
sharp beaks that eagles possess permit the birds to catch 
and eat prey. Caterpillars that eat green leaves are them-
selves green, and their color makes it difficult for birds to 
see them against their usual background. Mother mice 
construct nests, which keep their offspring warm and out of 
harm’s way. Obviously, the behavior itself is not inherited—

	
Natural Selection and Evolution	
15
Darwin formulated his theory of evolution to explain 
the means by which species acquired their adaptive char-
acteristics. The cornerstone of this theory is the principle 
of natural selection. Darwin noted that members of a spe-
cies were not all identical and that some of the differences 
they exhibited were inherited by their offspring. If an  
individual’s characteristics permit it to reproduce more 
successfully, some of the individual’s offspring will inherit 
the favorable characteristics and will themselves produce 
more offspring. As a result, the characteristics will become 
how could it be? What is inherited is a brain that causes the 
behavior to occur. Thus, Darwin’s theory gave rise to func-
tionalism, a belief that characteristics of living organisms 
perform useful functions. So, to understand the physiolog-
ical basis of various behaviors, we must first understand 
what these behaviors accomplish. We must therefore under-
stand something about the natural history of the species 
being studied so that the behaviors can be seen in context.
To understand the workings of a complex piece of 
machinery, we should know what its functions are. This 
principle is just as true for a living organism as it is for 
a mechanical device. However, an important difference 
exists between machines and organisms: Machines 
have inventors who had a purpose when they designed 
them, whereas organisms are the result of a long series 
of accidents. Thus, strictly speaking, we cannot say that 
any physiological mechanisms of living organisms have 
a purpose. But they do have functions, and these we can 
try to determine. For example, the forelimbs shown in 
Figure 1.12 are adapted for different uses in different 
species of mammals. (See Figure 1.12.)
A good example of the functional analysis of an adap-
tive trait was demonstrated in an experiment by Blest 
(1957). Certain species of moths and butterflies have spots 
on their wings that resemble eyes—particularly the eyes of 
predators such as owls. (See Figure 1.13.) These insects 
normally rely on camouflage for protection; the backs of 
their wings, when folded, are colored like the bark of a 
tree. However, when a bird approaches, the insect’s wings 
flip open, and the hidden eyespots are suddenly displayed. 
The bird then tends to fly away rather than eat the insect. 
Blest performed an experiment to see whether the eye-
spots on a moth’s or butterfly’s wings really disturbed birds 
that saw them. He placed mealworms on different back-
grounds and counted how many worms the birds ate. 
Indeed, when the worms were placed on a background 
that contained eyespots, the birds tended to avoid them.
figure 1.12  Bones of the Forelimb
The figure shows the bones of (a) human, (b) bat, (c) whale, (d) dog. Through the process 
of natural selection, these bones have been adapted to suit many different functions.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
x functionalism  The principle that the best way to understand a 
biological phenomenon (a behavior or a physiological structure) is 
to try to understand its useful functions for the organism.
x natural selection  The process by which inherited traits that 
confer a selective advantage (increase an animal’s likelihood to live 
and reproduce) become more prevalent in a population.
figure 1.13  The Owl Butterfly
This butterfly displays its eyespots when approached by a 
bird. The bird usually will fly away.

16	
Chapter 1  Introduction
Other mutations are not immediately favorable, but 
because they do not put their possessors at a disadvantage, 
they are inherited by at least some members of the species. 
As a result of thousands of such mutations, the members 
of a particular species possess a variety of genes and are all 
at least somewhat different from one another. Variety is a 
definite advantage for a species. Different environments 
provide optimal habitats for different kinds of organisms. 
When the environment changes, species must adapt or 
run the risk of becoming extinct. If some members of the 
species possess assortments of genes that provide charac-
teristics permitting them to adapt to the new environment, 
their offspring will survive, and the species will continue.
An understanding of the principle of natural selection 
plays some role in the thinking of every scientist who 
undertakes research in behavioral neuroscience. Some 
researchers explicitly consider the genetic mechanisms of 
various behaviors and the physiological processes on which 
these behaviors depend. Others are concerned with com-
parative aspects of behavior and its physiological basis; they 
compare the nervous systems of animals from a variety of 
species to make hypotheses about the evolution of brain 
structure and the behavioral capacities that correspond to 
this evolutionary development. But even though many 
researchers are not directly involved with the problem of 
evolution, the principle of natural selection guides the 
thinking of behavioral neuroscientists. We ask ourselves 
what the selective advantage of a particular trait might be. 
We think about how nature might have used a physiologi-
cal mechanism that already existed to perform more com-
plex functions in more complex organisms. When we 
entertain hypotheses, we ask ourselves whether a particular 
explanation makes sense in an evolutionary perspective.
Evolution of the Human Species
To evolve means to develop gradually (from the Latin 
evolvere, “to unroll”). The process of evolution is a grad-
ual change in the structure and physiology of plant 
and animal species as a result of natural selection. New 
species evolve when organisms develop novel charac-
teristics that can take advantage of unexploited oppor-
tunities in the environment.
The first vertebrates to emerge from the sea—some 
360 million years ago—were amphibians. In fact, amphib-
ians (for example, frogs and toads) have not entirely left 
sponsible for the development of species. Of course, it 
was the natural environment, not the hand of the animal 
breeder, that shaped the process of evolution.
Darwin and his fellow scientists knew nothing about 
the mechanism by which the principle of natural selec-
tion works. In fact, the principles of molecular genetics 
were not discovered until the middle of the twentieth 
century. Briefly, here is how the process works: Every 
sexually reproducing multicellular organism consists of 
a large number of cells, each of which contains chromo-
somes. Chromosomes are large, complex molecules that 
contain the recipes for producing the proteins that cells 
need to grow and to perform their functions. In essence, 
the chromosomes contain the blueprints for the con-
struction (that is, the embryological development) of a 
particular member of a particular species. If the plans 
are altered, a different organism is produced.
The plans do get altered; mutations occur from 
time to time. Mutations are accidental changes in the 
chromosomes of sperm or eggs that join together and 
develop into new organisms. For example, cosmic radi-
ation might strike a chromosome in a cell of an ani-
mal’s testis or ovary, thus producing a mutation that 
affects that animal’s offspring. Most mutations are del-
eterious; the offspring either fails to survive or survives 
with some sort of defect. However, a small percentage 
of mutations are beneficial and confer a selective 
advantage to the organism that possesses them. That is, 
the animal is more likely than other members of its spe-
cies to live long enough to reproduce and hence to pass 
on its chromosomes to its own offspring. Many differ-
ent kinds of traits can confer a selective advantage: 
resistance to a particular disease, the ability to digest 
new kinds of food, more effective weapons for defense 
or for procurement of prey, and even a more attractive 
appearance to members of the other sex (after all, one 
must reproduce to pass on one’s chromosomes).
Naturally, the traits that can be altered by muta-
tions are physical ones; chromosomes make proteins, 
which affect the structure and chemistry of cells. But 
the effects of these physical alterations can be seen in an 
animal’s behavior. Thus, the process of natural selec-
tion can act on behavior indirectly. For example, if a 
particular mutation results in changes in the brain that 
cause a small animal to stop moving and freeze when it 
perceives a novel stimulus, that animal is more likely to 
escape undetected when a predator passes nearby. This 
tendency makes the animal more likely to survive and 
produce offspring, thus passing on its genes to future 
generations.
x mutation  A change in the genetic information contained in 
the chromosomes of sperm or eggs, which can be passed on to an 
organism’s offspring; provides genetic variability.
x selective advantage  A characteristic of an organism that 
permits it to produce more than the average number of offspring 
of its species.
x evolution  A gradual change in the structure and physiology  
of plant and animal species—generally producing more complex 
organisms—as a result of natural selection.
more prevalent in that species. He observed that animal 
breeders were able to develop strains that possessed par-
ticular traits by mating together only animals that pos-
sessed the desired traits. If artificial selection, controlled by 
animal breeders, could produce so many varieties of dogs, 
cats, and livestock, perhaps natural selection could be re-

	
Natural Selection and Evolution	
17
of all animal species. Among those that survived was a 
small therapsid known as a cynodont—the direct ancestor 
of the mammal, which first appeared about 220 million 
years ago. (See Figure 1.14.)
The earliest mammals were small nocturnal preda-
tors that fed on insects. They (and the other warm-
blooded animals: birds) were only a modest success for 
many millions of years. Dinosaurs ruled, and mammals 
had to remain small and inconspicuous to avoid the 
large variety of agile and voracious predators. Then, 
around 65 million years ago, another mass extinction 
occurred. An enormous meteorite struck the Yucatan 
peninsula of present-day Mexico, producing a cloud of 
dust that destroyed many species, including the dino-
saurs. Small, nocturnal mammals survived the cold and 
dark because they were equipped with insulating fur 
and a mechanism for maintaining their body tempera-
ture. The void left by the extinction of so many large 
herbivores and carnivores provided the opportunity for 
the sea; they still lay their eggs in water, and the larvae that 
hatch from these eggs have gills and only later transform 
into adults with air-breathing lungs. Seventy million years 
later, the first reptiles appeared. Reptiles had a consider-
able advantage over amphibians: Their eggs, enclosed in a 
shell just porous enough to permit the developing embryo 
to breathe, could be laid on land. Thus, reptiles could 
inhabit regions away from bodies of water, and they could 
bury their eggs where predators would be less likely to find 
them. Reptiles soon divided into three lines: the anapsids, 
the ancestors of today’s turtles; the diapsids, the ancestors 
of dinosaurs, birds, lizards, crocodiles, and snakes; and the 
synapsids, the ancestors of today’s mammals. One group of 
synapsids, the therapsids, became the dominant land ani-
mal during the Permian period. Then, about 248 million 
years ago, the end of the Permian period was marked by a 
mass extinction. Dust from a catastrophic series of volca-
nic eruptions in present-day Siberia darkened the sky, 
cooled the earth, and wiped out approximately 95 percent 
figure 1.14  Evolution of Vertebrate Species
(Adapted from Carroll, R. Vertebrate Paleontology and Evolution. New York: W. H. Freeman, 1988.)
Present
65
144
213
248
286
326
Time (million years ago)
Cenozoic
Placentals
Marsupials
Mammals
Mass
extinctions
Cretaceous
Multituberculates
Monotremes
Jurassic
Triassic
Mass
extinctions
Permian
Dicynodonts
Pelycosaurs
Dinosaurs, birds
Crocodiles
Lizards, snakes
Turtles
Pennsylvanian
Therapsids
Synapsids
Diapsids
Anapsids
Cynodonts

18	
Chapter 1  Introduction
some other animals got to it first. And because fruit is 
such a nutritious form of food, its availability provided 
an opportunity that could be exploited by larger pri-
mates, which were able to travel farther in quest of food.
The first hominids (humanlike apes) appeared in 
Africa. They appeared not in dense tropical forests but 
in drier woodlands and in the savanna—vast areas of 
grasslands studded with clumps of trees and populated 
by large herbivorous animals and the carnivores that 
preyed on them. Our fruit-eating ancestors continued 
to eat fruit, of course, but they evolved characteristics 
that enabled them to gather roots and tubers as well, to 
hunt and kill game, and to defend themselves against 
other predators. They made tools that could be used to 
hunt, produce clothing, and construct dwellings; they 
discovered the many uses of fire; they domesticated 
dogs, which greatly increased their ability to hunt and 
helped warn of attacks by predators; and they devel-
oped the ability to communicate symbolically, by means 
of spoken words.
Figure 1.15 shows the primate family tree. Our clos-
est living relatives—the only hominids besides ourselves 
who have survived—are the chimpanzees, gorillas, and 
orangutans. DNA analysis shows that genetically, there 
is very little difference between these four species. (See 
Figure 1.15.) For example, humans and chimpanzees 
share almost 99 percent of their DNA. (See Figure 1.16.)
mammals to expand into new ecological niches, and 
expand they did.
The climate of the early Cenozoic period, which fol-
lowed the mass extinction at the end of the Cretaceous 
period, was much warmer than is the climate today. 
Tropical forests covered much of the land areas, and in 
these forests our most direct ancestors, the primates, 
evolved. The first primates, like the first mammals, were 
small and preyed on insects and small cold-blooded ver-
tebrates such as lizards and frogs. They had grasping 
hands that permitted them to climb about in small 
branches of the forest. Over time, larger species devel-
oped, with larger, forward-facing eyes (and the brains to 
analyze what the eyes saw), which facilitated arboreal 
locomotion and the capture of prey.
Plants evolved as well as animals. Dispersal of seeds 
is a problem inherent in forest life; if a tree’s seeds fall 
at its base, they will be shaded by the parent and will not 
grow. Thus, natural selection favored trees that encased 
their seeds in sweet, nutritious fruit that would be eaten 
by animals and dropped on the ground some distance 
away, undigested, in the animals’ feces. (The feces even 
served to fertilize the young plants.) The evolution of 
fruit-bearing trees provided an opportunity for fruit-
eating primates. In fact, the original advantage of color 
vision was probably the ability to discriminate ripe fruit 
from green leaves and eat the fruit before it spoiled—or 
figure 1.15  Evolution of Primate Species
(Redrawn from Lewin, R. Human Evolution: An Illustrated Introduction, 3rd ed. Boston: Blackwell Scientific Publications, 
1993. Reprinted with permission by Blackwell Science Ltd.)
Gibbon
Colobus
monkey
Spider
monkey
Tarsier
Present
Orangutan
Human
Gorilla
Chimpanzee
Hominoids
Old World monkeys
New 
World
 mon
keys
Prosimians
10
20
30
40
50
60
Time (million years ago)
Baboon

	
Natural Selection and Evolution	
19
between 120,000 and 30,000 years ago. Neanderthals 
resembled modern humans. They made tools out of 
stone and wood and discovered the use of fire. Our own 
species, Homo sapiens, evolved in East Africa around 
100,000 years ago. Some of our ancestors migrated to 
other parts of Africa and out of Africa to Asia, Polyne-
sia, Australia, Europe, and the Americas. They encoun-
tered the Neanderthals in Europe around 40,000 years 
ago and coexisted with them for approximately 10,000 
years. Eventually, the Neanderthals disappeared—per-
haps through interbreeding with Homo sapiens, perhaps 
through competition for resources. Scientists have not 
found evidence of warlike conflict between the two spe-
cies. (See Figure 1.17.)
Evolution of Large Brains
Humans possessed several characteristics that enabled 
them to compete with other species. Their agile hands 
enabled them to make and use tools. Their excellent 
color vision helped them to spot ripe fruit, game animals, 
and dangerous predators. Their mastery of fire enabled 
them to cook food, provide warmth, and frighten noctur-
nal predators. Their upright posture and bipedalism 
made it possible for them to walk long distances effi-
ciently, with their eyes far enough from the ground to see 
long distances across the plains. Bipedalism also permit-
ted them to carry tools and food with them, which meant 
that they could bring fruit, roots, and pieces of meat back 
The first hominid to leave Africa did so around 1.7 
million years ago. This species, Homo erectus (“upright 
man”), scattered across Europe and Asia. One branch 
of Homo erectus appears to have been the ancestor of 
Homo neanderthalis, which inhabited Western Europe 
figure 1.16  DNA Among Species of Hominids
The pyramid illustrates the percentage differences in 
DNA among the four major species of hominids.
(Redrawn from Lewin, R. Human Evolution: An Illustrated Introduction. Boston: 
Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1993. Reprinted with permission by Blackwell 
Science Ltd.)
Chimpanzee
Human
Gorilla
Orangutan
1.8%
1.2%
1.2%
1.4%
2.4%
2.4%
figure 1.17  Migration Routes of Homo Sapiens
The figure shows proposed migration routes of Homo sapiens after evolution of the 
species in East Africa.
(Redrawn with permission from Cavalli-Sforza, L. L. Genes, peoples and languages. Scientific American, Nov. 1991, p. 75.)
40,000 years ago
100,000 years ago
50–60,000(?) years ago
60,000(?) years ago
15–35,000 years ago
Equator

20	
Chapter 1  Introduction
almost three times as much as a chimpanzee, but their 
brains weigh almost the same. In contrast, although the 
body weight of modern humans is only 29 percent more 
than that of Australopithecus africanus, our brains are 242 
percent larger. Clearly, some important mutations of the 
genes that control brain development occurred early in 
the evolution of the primate line. (See Figure 1.18.)
Besides varying is size, brains also vary in the num-
ber of neurons found in each gram of tissue. Herculano-
Houzel et al. (2007) compared the weight of the brains 
of several species of rodents and primates with the num-
ber of neurons that each brain contained. They found 
that primate brains—especially large ones—contain 
many more neurons per gram than rodent brains do. 
For example, the brain of a capuchin monkey weighs 52 
g and contains 3.7 billion neurons, while the brain of a 
capybara (a very large South American rodent) weighs 
76 g but contains only 1.6 billion neurons. The brain of 
a capuchin monkey (and a human brain, for that mat-
ter) contains 70.7 million neurons per gram, while that 
of a capybara contains only 21 million neurons per gram.
What types of genetic changes were responsible for 
the evolution of the human brain? This question will be 
addressed in more detail in Chapter 3, but evidence sug-
gests that the most important principle is a slowing of 
the process of brain development, allowing more time 
for growth. As we will see, the prenatal period of cell 
division in the brain is prolonged in humans, which re-
sults in a brain that weighs an average of 350 g and 
contains approximately 100 billion neurons. After birth 
to their tribe. Their linguistic abilities enabled them to 
combine the collective knowledge of all the members of 
the tribe, to make plans, to pass information on to subse-
quent generations, and to establish complex civilizations 
that established their status as the dominant species. All 
of these characteristics required a larger brain.
A large brain requires a large skull, and an upright 
posture limits the size of a woman’s birth canal. A new-
born baby’s head is about as large as it can safely be. As it 
is, the birth of a baby is much more arduous than the 
birth of mammals with proportionally smaller heads, 
including those of our closest primate relatives. Because a 
baby’s brain is not large or complex enough to perform 
the physical and intellectual abilities of an adult, the brain 
must continue to grow after the baby is born. In fact, all 
mammals (and all birds, for that matter) require parental 
care for a period of time while the nervous system devel-
ops. The fact that young mammals (particularly young 
humans) are guaranteed to be exposed to the adults who 
care for them means that a period of apprenticeship is 
possible. Consequently, the evolutionary process did not 
have to produce a brain that consisted solely of special-
ized circuits of neurons that performed specialized tasks. 
Instead, it could simply produce a larger brain with an 
abundance of neural circuits that could be modified by 
experience. Adults would nourish and protect their off-
spring and provide them with the skills they would need 
as adults. Some specialized circuits were necessary, of 
course (for example, those involved in analyzing the com-
plex sounds we use for speech), but, by and large, the 
brain is a general-purpose, programmable computer.
How does the human brain compare with the 
brains of other animals? In absolute size, our brains are 
dwarfed by those of elephants or whales. However, we 
might expect such large animals to have large brains to 
match their large bodies. Indeed, the human brain 
makes up 2.3 percent of our total body weight, while 
the elephant brain makes up only 0.2 percent of the 
animal’s total body weight, which makes our brains 
seem very large in comparison. However, the shrew, 
which weighs only 7.5 g, has a brain that weighs 0.25 g, 
or 3.3 percent of its total body weight. Certainly, the 
shrew brain is much less complex than the human 
brain, so something is wrong with this comparison.
The answer is that although bigger bodies require 
bigger brains, the size of the brain does not have to go 
up proportionally with that of the body. For example, 
larger muscles do not require more nerve cells to con-
trol them. What counts, as far as intellectual ability goes, 
is having a brain with plenty of nerve cells that are not 
committed to moving muscles or analyzing sensory 
information—nerve cells that are available for learning, 
remembering, reasoning, and making plans. Figure 1.18 
shows a graph of the brain sizes and body weights of 
several hominid species, including the ancestors of our 
own species. Note that the brain size of nonhuman 
hominids increases very little with size: A gorilla weighs 
figure 1.18  Hominid Brain Size
The graph shows average brain size as a function of body 
weight for several species of hominids.
(Redrawn from Lewin, R. Human Evolution: An Illustrated Introduction, 3rd ed. 
Boston: Blackwell Scientific Publications, 1993. Reprinted with permission by 
Blackwell Science Ltd.)
300
500
700
900
1100
1300
1500
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Average body weight (kg)
Average brain size (cm3)
Gorilla
Homo
sapiens
Homo
erectus
Homo
habilis
A. boisei
A. robustus
A. afarensis
A. africanus
Orangutan
Chimpanzee

	
Natural Selection and Evolution	
21
the body. Figure 1.19 shows fetal and adult skulls of 
chimpanzees and humans. As you can see, the fetal 
skulls are much more similar than are those of the 
adults. The grid lines show the pattern of growth, indi-
cating much less change in the human skull from birth 
to adulthood. (See Figure 1.19.)
the brain continues to grow. Production of new neurons 
almost ceases, but those that are already present grow 
and establish connections with each other, and other 
brain cells, which protect and support neurons, begin to 
proliferate. Not until late adolescence does the human 
brain reach its adult size of approximately 1400 g—
about four times the weight of a newborn’s brain. This 
prolongation of maturation is known as neoteny (roughly 
translated as “extended youth”). The mature human 
head and brain retain some infantile characteristics, in-
cluding their disproportionate size relative to the rest of 
figure 1.19  Neoteny in Evolution of the Human Skull
The skulls of fetal humans and chimpanzees are much more similar than are those of 
the adults. The grid lines show the pattern of growth, indicating much less change in 
the human skull from birth to adulthood.
(Redrawn from Lewin, R. Human Evolution: An Illustrated Introduction, 3rd ed. Boston: Blackwell Scientific Publications, 
1993. Reprinted with permission by Blackwell Science Ltd.)
Human fetus
Chimp adult
Chimp fetus
Human adult
x neoteny  A slowing of the process of maturation, allowing 
more time for growth; an important factor in the development  
of large brains.
Section Summary
Natural Selection and Evolution
Darwin’s theory of evolution, which was based on the 
concept of natural selection, provided an important con-
tribution to modern behavioral neuroscience. The theory 
asserts that we must understand the functions that are 
performed by an organ or body part or by a behavior. 
Through random mutations, changes in an individual’s 
genetic material cause different proteins to be pro-
duced, which results in the alteration of some physical 
characteristics. If the changes confer a selective advan-
tage on the individual, the new genes will be transmit-
ted to more and more members of the species. Even 
behaviors can evolve, through the selective advantage 
of alterations in the structure of the nervous system.
Amphibians emerged from the sea 360 million years 
ago. One branch, the therapsids, became the dominant 
land animal until a catastrophic series of volcanic  
eruptions wiped out most animal species. A small therap-
sid, the cynodont, survived the disaster and became the 
ancestor of the mammals. The earliest mammals were 
small, nocturnal insectivores who lived in trees. They 
remained small and inconspicuous until the extinction of 
the dinosaurs, which occurred around 65 million years 
ago. Mammals quickly filled the vacant ecological niches. 
Primates also began as small, nocturnal, tree-dwelling 
insectivores. Larger fruit-eating primates, with forward-
facing eyes and larger brains, eventually evolved.
The first hominids appeared in Africa around 25 
million years ago, eventually evolving into four major 
species: orangutans, gorillas, chimpanzees, and 
humans. Our ancestors acquired bipedalism around 
3.7 million years ago and discovered tool making 
(continued on next page)

22	
Chapter 1  Introduction
pet owners are not required to receive permission from a 
board of experts that includes a veterinarian to house their 
pets, nor are they subject to periodic inspections to be sure 
that their home is clean and sanitary, that their pets have 
enough space to exercise properly, or that their pets’ diets 
are appropriate. Scientific researchers are. Miller also notes 
that fifty times more dogs and cats are killed by humane 
societies each year because they have been abandoned by 
former pet owners than are used in scientific research.
If a person believes that it is wrong to use another 
animal in any way, regardless of the benefits to humans, 
there is nothing anyone can say to convince that person 
of the value of scientific research with animals. For that 
person the issue is closed from the very beginning. Moral 
absolutes cannot be settled logically; like religious beliefs 
they can be accepted or rejected, but they cannot be 
proved or disproved. My arguments in support of scien-
tific research with animals are based on an evaluation of 
the benefits the research has to humans. (We should also 
remember that research with animals often helps other 
animals; procedures used by veterinarians, as well as 
those used by physicians, come from such research.)
Before describing the advantages of research with ani-
mals, let me point out that the use of animals in research 
and teaching is a special target of animal rights activists. 
Nicholl and Russell (1990) examined twenty-one books 
written by such activists and counted the number of pages 
devoted to concern for different uses of animals. Next, 
they compared the relative concern the authors showed 
for these uses to the numbers of animals actually involved 
in each of these categories. The results indicate that the 
authors showed relatively little concern for animals that 
Ethical Issues in Research  
with Animals
Most of the research described in this book involves experi-
mentation on living animals. Any time we use another spe-
cies of animals for our own purposes, we should be sure that 
what we are doing is both humane and worthwhile. I believe 
that a good case can be made that research on the physiol-
ogy of behavior qualifies on both counts. Humane treat-
ment is a matter of procedure. We know how to maintain 
laboratory animals in good health in comfortable, sanitary 
conditions. We know how to administer anesthetics and 
analgesics so that animals do not suffer during or after 
surgery, and we know how to prevent infections with 
proper surgical procedures and the use of antibiotics. Most 
industrially developed societies have very strict regulations 
about the care of animals and require approval of the 
experimental procedures that are used on them. There is 
no excuse for mistreating animals in our care. In fact, the 
vast majority of laboratory animals are treated humanely.
Whether an experiment is worthwhile can be difficult to 
say. We use animals for many purposes. We eat their meat 
and eggs, and we drink their milk; we turn their hides into 
leather; we extract insulin and other hormones from their 
organs to treat people’s diseases; we train them to do useful 
work on farms or to entertain us. Even having a pet is a 
form of exploitation; it is we—not they—who decide that 
they will live in our homes. The fact is, we have been using 
other animals throughout the history of our species.
Pet owning causes much more suffering among ani-
mals than scientific research does. As Miller (1983) notes, 
around 2.5 million years ago. The first hominids to 
leave Africa, Homo erectus, did so around 1.7 million 
years ago and scattered across Europe and Asia. 
Homo neanderthalis evolved in Western Europe, 
eventually to be replaced by Homo sapiens, which 
evolved in Africa around 100,000 years ago and 
spread throughout the world. By 30,000 years ago, 
Homo sapiens had replaced Homo neanderthalis.
The evolution of large brains made possible the 
development of tool making, fire building, and lan-
guage, which in turn permitted the development of 
complex social structures. Large brains also provided 
a large memory capacity and the abilities to recognize 
patterns of events in the past and to plan for the 
future. Because an upright posture limits the size of a 
woman’s birth canal and therefore the size of the 
head that can pass through it, much of the brain’s 
growth must take place after birth, which means that 
children require an extended period of parental care. 
This period of apprenticeship enabled the developing 
brain to be modified by experience.
Although human DNA differs from that of chim-
panzees by only 1.2 percent, our brains are more 
than three times larger, which means that a small 
number of genes is responsible for the increase in 
the size of our brains. As we will see in Chapter 3, 
these genes appear to retard the events that stop 
brain development, resulting in a phenomenon 
known as neoteny.
 Thought Questions
1.	 What useful functions are provided by the fact that 
a human can be self-aware? How was this trait 
selected for during the evolution of our species?
2.	 Are you surprised that the difference in the DNA of 
humans and chimpanzees is only 1.2 percent? How 
do you feel about this fact?
3.	 If our species continues to evolve (and most geneti-
cists believe that this is the case), what kinds of 
changes do you think might occur?

	
Careers in Neuroscience	
23
examined. However, you will probably agree that research 
like this is just as legitimate as using animals for food.
As you will learn later in this book, research with 
laboratory animals has produced important discoveries 
about the possible causes or potential treatments of neu-
rological and mental disorders, including Parkinson’s dis-
ease, schizophrenia, manic-depressive illness, anxiety dis-
orders, obsessive-compulsive disorders, anorexia nervosa, 
obesity, and drug addictions. Although much progress 
has been made, these problems are still with us, and they 
cause much human suffering. Unless we continue our 
research with laboratory animals, they will not be solved. 
Some people have suggested that instead of using labora-
tory animals in our research, we could use tissue cultures 
or computers. Unfortunately, tissue cultures or comput-
ers are not substitutes for living organisms. We have no 
way to study behavioral problems such as addictions in 
tissue cultures, nor can we program a computer to simu-
late the workings of an animal’s nervous system. (If we 
could, that would mean we already had all the answers.)
The easiest way to justify research with animals is to 
point to actual and potential benefits to human health, 
as I have just done. However, we can also justify this re-
search with a less practical, but perhaps equally impor-
tant, argument. One of the things that characterizes our 
species is a quest for an understanding of our world. For 
example, astronomers study the universe and try to un-
cover its mysteries. Even if their discoveries never lead to 
practical benefits such as better drugs or faster methods 
of transportation, the fact that they enrich our under-
standing of the beginning and the fate of our universe 
justifies their efforts. The pursuit of knowledge is itself a 
worthwhile endeavor. Surely the attempt to understand 
the universe within us—our nervous system, which is re-
sponsible for all that we are or can be—is also valuable.
Careers in Neuroscience
What is behavioral neuroscience, and what do behav-
ioral neuroscientists do? By the time you finish this 
book, you will have as complete an answer as I can give 
to these questions, but perhaps it is worthwhile for me 
to describe the field—and careers open to those who 
specialize in it—before we begin our study in earnest.
Behavioral neuroscientists study all behavioral phe-
nomena that can be observed in nonhuman animals. 
Some study humans as well, using noninvasive physio-
logical research methods. They attempt to understand 
the physiology of behavior: the role of the nervous sys-
tem, interacting with the rest of the body (especially the 
are used for food, hunting, or furs or for those killed  
in animal shelters; but although only 0.3 percent of the 
animals are used for research and education, 63.3 percent 
of the pages were devoted to this use. In terms of pages per 
million animals used, the authors devoted 0.08 to food, 
0.23 to hunting, 1.27 to furs, 1.44 to killing in pounds—
and 53.2 to research and education. The authors showed 
665 times more concern for research and education com-
pared with food and 231 times compared with hunting. 
Even the use of animals for furs (which consumes two-
thirds as many animals as research and education) 
attracted 41.9 times less attention per animal.
The disproportionate amount of concern that animal 
rights activists show toward the use of animals in research 
and education is puzzling, particularly because this is the 
one indispensable use of animals. We can survive without 
eating animals, we can live without hunting, we can do 
without furs; but without using animals for research and 
for training future researchers, we cannot make progress 
in understanding and treating diseases. In not too many 
years our scientists will probably have developed a vaccine 
that will prevent the further spread of diseases such as 
malaria or AIDS. Some animal rights activists believe that 
preventing the deaths of laboratory animals in the pursuit 
of such a vaccine is a more worthy goal than the preven-
tion of the deaths of millions of humans that will occur as 
a result of these diseases if vaccines are not developed. 
Even diseases that we have already conquered would take 
new victims if drug companies could no longer use ani-
mals. If they were deprived of animals, these companies 
could no longer extract hormones used to treat human 
diseases, and they could not prepare many of the vaccines 
we now use to prevent disease.
Our species is beset by medical, mental, and behav-
ioral problems, many of which can be solved only through 
biological research. Let us consider some of the major 
neurological disorders. Strokes, caused by bleeding or 
obstruction of a blood vessel within the brain, often leave 
people partly paralyzed, unable to read, write, or con-
verse with their friends and family. Basic research on the 
means by which nerve cells communicate with each 
other has led to important discoveries about the causes 
of the death of brain cells. This research was not directed 
toward a specific practical goal; the potential benefits 
actually came as a surprise to the investigators.
Experiments based on these results have shown that if 
a blood vessel leading to the brain is blocked for a few 
minutes, the part of the brain that is nourished by that ves-
sel will die. However, the brain damage can be prevented 
by first administering a drug that interferes with a particu-
lar kind of neural communication. This research is impor-
tant, because it may lead to medical treatments that can 
help to reduce the brain damage caused by strokes. But it 
involves operating on a laboratory animal, such as a rat, 
and pinching off a blood vessel. (The animals are anesthe-
tized, of course.) Some of the animals will sustain brain 
damage, and all will be killed so that their brains can be 
x behavioral neuroscientist  A scientist who studies the 
physiology of behavior, primarily by performing physiological and 
behavioral experiments with laboratory animals.

24	
Chapter 1  Introduction
To become a professor or independent researcher, one 
must receive a doctorate—usually a Ph.D., although 
some people turn to research after receiving an M.D. 
Nowadays, most behavioral neuroscientists spend two 
years or more in a temporary postdoctoral position, 
working in the laboratory of a senior scientist to gain 
more research experience. During this time they write 
articles describing their research findings and submit 
them for publication in scientific journals. These publi-
cations are an important factor in obtaining a perma-
nent position.
Two other fields often overlap with that of behav-
ioral neuroscience: neurology and experimental neuropsy-
chology (often called cognitive neuroscience). Neurologists 
are physicians who are involved in the diagnosis and 
treatment of diseases of the nervous system. Most neu-
rologists are solely involved in the practice of medicine, 
but a few engage in research devoted to advancing our 
understanding of the physiology of behavior. They study 
the behavior of people whose brains have been dam-
aged by natural causes, using advanced brain-scanning 
devices to study the activity of various regions of the 
brain as a subject participates in various behaviors. This 
research is also carried out by experimental neuropsy-
chologists (or cognitive neuroscientists)—scientists with 
a Ph.D. (usually in psychology) and specialized training 
in the principles and procedures of neurology.
Not all people who are engaged in neuroscience 
research have doctoral degrees. Many research techni-
cians perform essential—and intellectually reward-
ing—services for the scientists with whom they work. 
Some of these technicians gain enough experience and 
education on the job to enable them to collaborate with 
their employers on their research projects rather than 
simply working for them.
endocrine system, which secretes hormones), in con-
trolling behavior. They study such topics as sensory pro-
cesses, sleep, emotional behavior, ingestive behavior, 
aggressive behavior, sexual behavior, parental behavior, 
and learning and memory. They also study animal mod-
els of disorders that afflict humans, such as anxiety, 
depression, obsessions and compulsions, phobias, psy-
chosomatic illnesses, and schizophrenia.
Although the original name for the field described in 
this book was physiological psychology, several other terms are 
now in general use, such as biological psychology, biopsychology, 
psychobiology, and—the most common one—behavioral neu-
roscience. Most professional behavioral neuroscientists have 
received a Ph.D. from a graduate program in psychology or 
from an interdisciplinary program. (My own university 
awards a Ph.D. in neuroscience and behavior. The pro-
gram includes faculty members from the departments of 
psychology, biology, biochemistry, and computer science.)
Behavioral neuroscience belongs to a larger field 
that is simply called neuroscience. Neuroscientists con-
cern themselves with all aspects of the nervous system: 
its anatomy, chemistry, physiology, development, and 
functioning. The research of neuroscientists ranges 
from the study of molecular genetics to the study of so-
cial behavior. The field has grown enormously in the 
last few years; the membership of the Society for Neuro-
science is currently over forty thousand.
Most professional behavioral neuroscientists are 
employed by colleges and universities, where they are 
engaged in teaching and research. Others are employed 
by institutions devoted to research—for example, in lab-
oratories owned and operated by national governments 
or by private philanthropic organizations. A few work in 
industry, usually for pharmaceutical companies that are 
interested in assessing the effects of drugs on behavior. 
Section Summary
Ethical Issues in Research with Animals and Careers in Neuroscience
Research on the physiology of behavior necessarily 
involves the use of laboratory animals. It is incumbent 
on all scientists who use these animals to ensure that 
they are housed comfortably and treated humanely, 
and laws have been enacted to ensure that they are. 
Such research has already produced many benefits to 
humankind and promises to continue to do so.
Behavioral neuroscience (also called biological psy-
chology, biopsychology, psychobiology, and behavioral 
neuroscience) is a field devoted to our understanding 
of the physiology of behavior. Behavioral neuroscientists 
are allied with other scientists in the broader field of 
neuroscience. To pursue a career in behavioral neuro-
science (or in the sister field of cognitive neuroscience), 
one must obtain a graduate degree and (usually) serve 
two years or more as a “postdoc”—a junior scientist 
working in the laboratory of an established scientist.
 Thought Question
Why do you think some people are apparently more 
upset about using animals for research and teaching 
than about using them for other purposes?

	
Strategies for Learning	
25
Enough said. Now let me offer some practical advice 
about studying. You have been studying throughout your 
academic career, and you have undoubtedly learned some 
useful strategies along the way. Even if you have developed 
efficient and effective study skills, at least consider the pos-
sibility that there might be some ways to improve them.
If possible, the first reading of an assignment should be 
as uninterrupted as you can make it; that is, read the chap-
ter without worrying much about remembering details. 
Next, after the first class meeting devoted to the topic, read 
the assignment again in earnest. Use a pen or pencil as you 
go, making notes. Don’t use a highlighter. Sweeping the felt 
tip of a highlighter across some words on a page provides 
some instant gratification; you can even imagine that the 
highlighted words are somehow being transferred to your 
knowledge base. You have selected what is important, and 
when you review the reading assignment, you have only to 
read the highlighted words. But this is an illusion.
Be active, not passive. Force yourself to write down 
whole words and phrases. The act of putting the informa-
tion into your own words will not only give you something 
to study shortly before the next exam but also put some-
thing into your head (which is helpful at exam time). Us-
ing a highlighter puts off the learning until a later date; 
rephrasing the information in your own words starts the 
learning process right then. Before you begin reading the 
next chapter, let me say a few things about the design of the 
book that may help you with your studies. The text and il-
lustrations are integrated as closely as possible. In my expe-
rience, one of the most annoying aspects of reading some 
books is not knowing when to look at an illustration. There-
fore, in this book you will find figure references in bold 
italic letters (like this: Figure 5.6), which means “stop read-
ing and look at the figure.” These references appear in lo-
cations I think will be optimal. If you look away from the 
text then, you will be assured that you will not be interrupt-
ing a line of reasoning in a crucial place and will not have 
to reread several sentences to get going again. You will find 
passages like this: “Figure 3.1 shows an alligator and two 
humans. This alligator is certainly laid out in a linear 
fashion; we can draw a straight line that starts between its 
eyes and continues down the center of its spinal cord. (See 
Figure 3.1.)” This particular example is a trivial one and will 
give you no problems no matter when you look at the 
figure. But in other cases the material is more complex, 
and you will have less trouble if you know what to look for 
before you stop reading and examine the illustration.
You will notice that some words in the text are itali-
cized, and others are printed in boldface. Italics mean 
one of two things: Either the word is being stressed for 
emphasis and is not a new term, or I am pointing out  
a new term that is not necessary for you to learn. On  
the other hand, a word in boldface is a new term that 
you should try to learn. Most of the boldfaced terms  
in the text are part of the vocabulary of the behavioral 
Strategies for Learning
The brain is a complicated organ. After all, it is respon-
sible for all our abilities and all our complexities. Scien-
tists have been studying this organ for a good many 
years and (especially in recent years) have been learning 
a lot about how it works. It is impossible to summarize 
this progress in a few simple sentences; therefore, this 
book contains a lot of information. I have tried to orga-
nize this information logically, telling you what you 
need to know in the order in which you need to know it. 
(After all, to understand some things, you sometimes 
need to understand other things first.) I have also tried 
to write as clearly as possible, making my examples as 
simple and as vivid as I can. Still, you cannot expect to 
master the information in this book by simply giving it a 
passive read; you will have to do some work.
Learning about the physiology of behavior involves 
much more than memorizing facts. Of course, there are 
facts to be memorized: names of parts of the nervous 
system, names of chemicals and drugs, scientific terms 
for particular phenomena and procedures used to in-
vestigate them, and so on. But the quest for informa-
tion is nowhere near completed; we know only a small 
fraction of what we have to learn. And almost certainly, 
many of the “facts” that we now accept will some day be 
shown to be incorrect. If all you do is learn facts, where 
will you be when these facts are revised?
The antidote to obsolescence is knowledge of the pro-
cess by which facts are obtained. Scientific facts are the 
conclusions that scientists reach about their observations. 
If you learn only the conclusions, obsolescence is almost 
guaranteed. You will have to remember which conclusions 
are overturned and what the new conclusions are, and that 
kind of rote learning is hard to do. But if you learn about 
the research strategies the scientists use, the observations 
they make, and the reasoning that leads to the conclu-
sions, you will develop an understanding that is easily re-
vised when new observations (and new “facts”) emerge. If 
you understand what lies behind the conclusions, then you 
can incorporate new information into what you already 
know and revise these conclusions yourself. I can attest to 
the fact that most of what I know about behavioral neuro-
science I learned in the years after receiving my Ph.D.
In recognition of these realities about learning, knowl-
edge, and the scientific method, this book presents not just 
a collection of facts but a description of the procedures, 
experiments, and logical reasoning that scientists have 
used in their attempt to understand the physiology of  
behavior. If, in the interest of expediency, you focus on the 
conclusions and ignore the process that leads to them, you 
run the risk of acquiring information that will quickly be-
come obsolete. On the other hand, if you try to understand 
the experiments and see how the conclusions follow from 
the results, you will acquire knowledge that lives and grows.

26	
Chapter 1  Introduction
think again about what you have just read to make sure 
that you understand the direction the discussion has 
gone. Taken together, these sections provide a detailed 
summary of the information introduced in the chapter. 
My students have told me that they review the interim 
summaries just before taking a test.
Okay, the preliminaries are over. The next chapter 
starts with something you can sink your (metaphorical) 
teeth into: the structure and functions of neurons, the 
most important elements of the nervous system.
neuroscientist. Often, they will be used again in a later 
chapter. As an aid to your studying, definitions of these 
terms are printed at the bottom of the page, along with 
pronunciation guides for terms whose pronunciation is 
not obvious. In addition, a comprehensive index at the 
end of the book provides a list of terms and topics, with 
page references.
At the end of each major section (there are usually 
three to five of them in a chapter), you will find a Section 
Summary, which provides a place for you to stop and 
 4.  Describe the role of natural selection in the evolution 
of behavioral traits.
 5.  Discuss the evolution of the human species and a 
large brain.
 6.  Discuss the value of research with animals and ethi-
cal issues concerning their care.
 7.  Describe career opportunities in neuroscience.
 1.  Describe blindsight, the behavior of people with 
split brains, and unilateral neglect and explain the 
contribution of these phenomena to our under-
standing of self-awareness.
 2.  Describe the nature of physiological psychology and 
the goals of research.
 3.  Describe the biological roots of physiological  
psychology.
Review Questions
 The Virtual Brain 
Biopsychology is, in many ways, a visual science. It can be a challenge to picture 
the location of brain regions and the functional connections among them from 
written descriptions. Although a cliché, it is true that a picture can be worth a thou-
sand words. The Virtual Brain is a 3-D, interactive resource that will help you visu-
alize the brain regions and circuits described in the text. There are 14 modules in 
the Virtual Brain, each featuring the neural circuitry underlying a general process.
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
Study and Review on MyPsychLab

Structure and Functions of 
Cells of the Nervous System
Outline
2	
 Cells of the Nervous System
Neurons
Supporting Cells
The Blood–Brain Barrier
Section Summary
 Communication Within a Neuron
Neural Communication:  
An Overview
Measuring Electrical Potentials  
of Axons
The Membrane Potential: Balance 
of Two Forces
The Action Potential
Conduction of the Action Potential
Section Summary
 Communication Between Neurons
Structure of Synapses
Release of Neurotransmitter
Activation of Receptors
Postsynaptic Potentials
Termination of Postsynaptic 
Potentials
Effects of Postsynaptic Potentials: 
Neural Integration
Autoreceptors
Other Types of Synapses
Nonsynaptic Chemical 
Communication
Section Summary
chapter

A
ll we can do—perceive, think, learn, remember, 
act—is made possible by the integrated activity 
of the cells of the nervous system. This chapter 
describes the structure and functions of these cells. 
Information, in the form of light, sound waves, odors, 
tastes, or contact with objects, is gathered from the envi-
ronment by specialized cells called sensory neurons. 
Movements are accomplished by the contraction of 
muscles, which are controlled by motor neurons. (The 
term motor is used here in its original sense to refer to 
movement, not to a mechanical engine.) And in be-
tween sensory neurons and motor neurons come the 
interneurons—neurons that lie entirely within the 
central nervous system. Local interneurons form circuits 
with nearby neurons and analyze small pieces of infor-
mation. Relay interneurons connect circuits of local inter-
neurons in one region of the brain with those in other 
Kathryn D. was getting desperate. All her life she had been 
healthy and active, eating wisely and keeping fit with 
sports and regular exercise. She went to her health club 
almost every day for a session of low-impact aerobics 
followed by a swim. But several months ago she began 
having trouble keeping up with her usual schedule. At first, 
she found herself getting tired toward the end of her 
aerobics class. Her arms, particularly, seemed to get heavy. 
Then when she entered the pool and started swimming, she 
found that it was hard to lift her arms over her head; she 
abandoned the crawl and the backstroke and did the 
sidestroke and breaststroke instead. She did not have any 
flulike symptoms, so she told herself that she needed more 
sleep and perhaps she should eat a little more.
Over the next few weeks, however, things only got 
worse. Aerobics classes were becoming an ordeal. Her 
instructor became concerned and suggested that Kathryn 
see her doctor. She did so, but he could find nothing 
wrong with her. She was not anemic, showed no signs of 
an infection, and seemed to be well nourished. He asked 
how things were going at work.
“Well, lately I’ve been under some pressure,” she 
said. “The head of my department quit a few weeks ago, 
and I’ve taken over his job temporarily. I think I have a 
chance of getting the job permanently, but I feel as if my 
bosses are watching me to see whether I’m good enough 
for the job.” Kathryn and her physician agreed that 
increased stress could be the cause of her problem. “I’d 
prefer not to give you any medication at this time,” he 
said, “but if you don’t feel better soon we’ll have a closer 
look at you.”
She did feel better for a while, but then all of a sudden 
her symptoms got worse. She quit going to the health club 
and found that she even had difficulty finishing a day’s work. 
She was certain that people were noticing that she was no 
longer her lively self, and she was afraid that her chances 
for the promotion were slipping away. One afternoon she 
tried to look up at the clock on the wall and realized that 
she could hardly see—her eyelids were drooping, and her 
head felt as if it weighed a hundred pounds. Just then, one 
of her supervisors came over to her desk, sat down, and 
asked her to fill him in on the progress she had been 
making on a new project. As she talked, she found herself 
getting weaker and weaker. Her jaw was getting tired, even 
her tongue was getting tired, and her voice was getting 
weaker. With a sudden feeling of fright she realized that 
the act of breathing seemed to take a lot of effort. She 
managed to finish the interview, but immediately afterward 
she packed up her briefcase and left for home, saying that 
she had a bad headache.
She telephoned her physician, who immediately 
arranged for her to go to the hospital to be seen by Dr. T., 
a neurologist. Dr. T. listened to a description of Kathryn’s 
symptoms and examined her briefly. She said to Kathryn,  
“I think I know what may be causing your symptoms. I’d 
like to give you an injection and watch your reaction.” She 
gave some orders to the nurse, who left the room and 
came back with a syringe. Dr. T. took it, swabbed Kathryn’s 
arm, and injected the drug. She started questioning 
Kathryn about her job. Kathryn answered slowly, her voice 
almost a whisper. As the questions continued, she realized 
that it was getting easier and easier to talk. She straight-
ened her back and took a deep breath. Yes, she was sure. 
Her strength was returning! She stood up and raised her 
arms above her head. “Look,” she said, her excitement 
growing. “I can do this again. I’ve got my strength back! 
What was that you gave me? Am I cured?”
(For an answer to her question, see p. 59.)
x sensory neuron  A neuron that detects changes in the external 
or internal environment and sends information about these changes 
to the central nervous system.
x motor neuron  A neuron located within the central nervous system 
that controls the contraction of a muscle or the secretion of a gland.
x interneuron  A neuron located entirely within the central 
nervous system.

	
Cells of the Nervous System	
29
according to the specialized jobs they perform. Most 
neurons have, in one form or another, the following 
four structures or regions: (1) cell body, or soma;  
(2) dendrites; (3) axon; and (4) terminal buttons. To 
see an interactive animation of the information pre-
sented in the following section, 
Simulate neurons 
and supporting cells, on MyPsychLab.
Soma.  The soma (cell body) contains the nucleus and 
much of the machinery that provides for the life pro-
cesses of the cell. (See Figure 2.1.) Its shape varies con-
siderably in different kinds of neurons.
Dendrites.  Dendron is the Greek word for tree, and the 
dendrites of the neuron look very much like trees. (Look 
again at Figure 2.1.) Neurons “converse” with one 
another, and dendrites serve as important recipients of 
these messages. The messages that pass from neuron to 
neuron are transmitted across the synapse, a junction 
between the terminal buttons (described later) of the 
sending cell and a portion of the somatic or dendritic 
membrane of the receiving cell. (The word synapse 
derives from the Greek sunaptein, “to join together.”) 
regions. Through these connections, circuits of neurons 
throughout the brain perform functions essential to 
tasks such as perceiving, learning, remembering, decid-
ing, and controlling complex behaviors. How many neu-
rons are there in the human nervous system? The most 
common estimate is around 100 billion, but no one has 
counted them yet.
To understand how the nervous system controls be-
havior, we must first understand its parts—the cells that 
compose it. Because this chapter deals with cells, you 
need not be familiar with the structure of the nervous 
system, which is presented in Chapter 3. However, you 
need to know that the nervous system consists of two 
basic divisions: the central nervous system and the 
peripheral nervous system. The central nervous system 
(CNS) consists of the parts that are encased by the bones 
of the skull and spinal column: the brain and the spinal 
cord. The peripheral nervous system (PNS) is found 
outside these bones and consists of the nerves and most 
of the sensory organs.
Cells of the Nervous System
The first part of this chapter is devoted to a description of 
the most important cells of the nervous system—neurons 
and their supporting cells—and to the blood–brain 
barrier, which provides neurons in the central nervous 
system with chemical isolation from the rest of the body.
Neurons
Basic Structure
The neuron (nerve cell) is the information-processing 
and information-transmitting element of the nervous 
system. Neurons come in many shapes and varieties, 
figure 2.1  The Principal Parts of a Multipolar Neuron
Dendrites
Myelin sheath
Terminal
buttons
Direction of
messages
Axon (inside
myelin sheath)
Soma
(cell body)
x central nervous system (CNS)  The brain and spinal cord.
x peripheral nervous system (PNS)  The part of the nervous 
system outside the brain and spinal cord, including the nerves 
attached to the brain and spinal cord.
x soma  The cell body of a neuron, which contains the nucleus.
x dendrite  A branched, treelike structure attached to the soma 
of a neuron; receives information from the terminal buttons of 
other neurons.
x synapse  A junction between the terminal button of an axon 
and the membrane of another neuron.

30	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
the nerve, from a sense organ to the brain or from the 
brain to a muscle or gland.
Terminal Buttons.  Most axons divide and branch 
many times. At the ends of the twigs are found little 
knobs called terminal buttons. (Some neuroscientists 
Communication at a synapse proceeds in one direction: 
from the terminal button to the membrane of the other 
cell. (Like many general rules, this one has some excep-
tions. As we will see in Chapter 4, some synapses pass 
information in both directions.)
Axon.  The axon is a long, slender tube, often covered 
by a myelin sheath. (The myelin sheath is described later.) 
The axon carries information from the cell body to the 
terminal buttons. (Look again at Figure 2.1.) The basic 
message it carries is called an action potential. This func-
tion is an important one and will be described in more 
detail later in the chapter. For now, it suffices to say that 
an action potential is a brief electrical/chemical event 
that starts at the end of the axon next to the cell body 
and travels toward the terminal buttons. The action 
potential is like a brief pulse; in any given axon the 
action potential is always of the same size and duration. 
When it reaches a point where the axon branches, it 
splits but does not diminish in size. Each branch receives 
a full-strength action potential.
Like dendrites, axons and their branches come in 
different shapes. In fact, the three principal types of 
neurons are classified according to the way in which 
their axons and dendrites leave the soma. The neuron 
depicted in Figure 2.1 is the most common type found 
in the central nervous system; it is a multipolar neuron. 
In this type of neuron the somatic membrane gives rise 
to one axon but to the trunks of many dendritic trees.  
Bipolar neurons give rise to one axon and one dendritic 
tree, at opposite ends of the soma. (See Figure 2.2a.) 
Bipolar neurons are usually sensory; that is, their den-
drites detect events occurring in the environment and 
communicate information about these events to the 
central nervous system.
The third type of nerve cell is the unipolar neuron. It 
has only one stalk, which leaves the soma and divides into 
two branches a short distance away. (See Figure 2.2b.)
Unipolar neurons, like bipolar neurons, transmit 
sensory information from the environment to the 
CNS. The arborizations (treelike branches) outside 
the CNS are dendrites; the arborizations within the 
CNS end in terminal buttons. The dendrites of most 
unipolar neurons detect touch, temperature changes, 
and other sensory events that affect the skin. Other 
unipolar neurons detect events in our joints, muscles, 
and internal organs.
The central nervous system communicates with the 
rest of the body through nerves attached to the brain 
and to the spinal cord. Nerves are bundles of many 
thousands of individual fibers, all wrapped in a tough, 
protective membrane. Under a microscope, nerves look 
something like telephone cables, with their bundles of 
wires. (See Figure 2.3.) Like the individual wires in a 
telephone cable, nerve fibers transmit messages through 
Cilia are sensitive
to physical stimuli
Dendrites are sensitive
to physical stimuli
Receptor
Dendrite
Axon
Soma of
bipolar
neuron
Soma of
unipolar
neuron
Axon
To brain
To brain
Terminal
buttons
Terminal
buttons
(a)
(b)
figure 2.2  Neurons
Pictured here are (a) a bipolar neuron, primarily found in 
sensory systems (for example, vision and audition), and 
(b) a unipolar neuron, found in the somatosensory system 
(touch, pain, and the like).
x axon  The long, thin, cylindrical structure that conveys informa-
tion from the soma of a neuron to its terminal buttons.
x multipolar neuron  A neuron with one axon and many dendrites 
attached to its soma.
x bipolar neuron  A neuron with one axon and one dendrite 
attached to its soma.
x unipolar neuron  A neuron with one axon attached to its soma; 
the axon divides, with one branch receiving sensory information and 
the other sending the information into the central nervous system.
x terminal button  The bud at the end of a branch of an axon; forms 
synapses with another neuron; sends information to that neuron.

	
Cells of the Nervous System	
31
receiving cell and thus helps to determine whether an 
action potential occurs in its axon. Details of this process 
will be described later in this chapter.
An individual neuron receives information from the 
terminal buttons of axons of other neurons—and the 
terminal buttons of its axons form synapses with other 
neurons. A neuron may receive information from dozens 
or even hundreds of other neurons, each of which can 
form a large number of synaptic connections with it. 
Figure 2.4 illustrates the nature of these connections. As 
you can see, terminal buttons can form synapses on the 
membrane of the dendrites or the soma. (See Figure 2.4.)
Internal Structure
Figure 2.5 illustrates the internal structure of a typical mul-
tipolar neuron. (See Figure 2.5.) The membrane defines 
the boundary of the cell. It consists of a double layer of 
lipid (fatlike) molecules. Embedded in the membrane are 
a variety of protein molecules that have special functions. 
Some proteins detect substances outside the cell (such as 
hormones) and pass information about the presence of 
these substances to the interior of the cell. Other proteins 
prefer the original French word bouton, and others sim-
ply refer to them as terminals.) Terminal buttons have a 
very special function: When an action potential traveling 
down the axon reaches them, they secrete a chemical 
called a neurotransmitter. This chemical (there are many 
different ones in the CNS) either excites or inhibits the 
BV
A
figure 2.3  Nerves
A nerve consists of a sheath of tissue that encases a 
bundle of individual nerve fibers (also known as axons). 
BV 5 blood vessel; A 5 individual axons.
(From Tissues and Organs: A Text-Atlas of Scanning Electron Microscopy, by 
Richard G. Kessel and Randy H. Kardon. Copyright © 1979 by W. H. Freeman and 
Co. Reprinted by permission of Barbara Kessel and Randy Kardon.)
x neurotransmitter  A chemical that is released by a terminal 
button; has an excitatory or inhibitory effect on another neuron.
x membrane  A structure consisting principally of lipid molecules 
that defines the outer boundaries of a cell and also constitutes 
many of the cell organelles, such as the Golgi apparatus.
Synapse on soma
Cell body
Myelin
sheath
Axon
Terminal
button
Synapse on
dendrite
figure 2.4  An Overview of the Synaptic Connections Between Neurons
The arrows represent the directions of the flow of information.

32	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
apart as well as enzymes that put them together; the en-
zymes that are present in a particular region of a cell thus 
determine which molecules remain intact. For example,
In this reversible reaction the relative concentrations 
of enzymes X and Y determine whether the complex 
substance AB or its constituents, A and B, will predominate. 
control access to the interior of the cell, permitting some 
substances to enter but barring others. Still other proteins 
act as transporters, actively carrying certain molecules into 
or out of the cell. Because the proteins that are found in 
the membrane of the neuron are especially important in 
the transmission of information, their characteristics will 
be discussed in more detail later in this chapter.
The nucleus (“nut”) of the cell is round or oval and 
is enclosed by the nuclear membrane. The nucleolus 
and the chromosomes reside here. The nucleolus is  
responsible for the production of ribosomes, small struc-
tures that are involved in protein synthesis. The chromo-
somes, which consist of long strands of deoxyribonucleic 
acid (DNA), contain the organism’s genetic informa-
tion. When they are active, portions of the chromosomes 
(genes) cause production of another complex molecule, 
messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA), which receives a 
copy of the information stored at that location. The 
mRNA leaves the nuclear membrane and attaches to ri-
bosomes, where it causes the production of a particular 
protein. (See Figure 2.6.)
Proteins are important in cell functions. As well as 
providing structure, proteins serve as enzymes, which 
direct the chemical processes of a cell by controlling 
chemical reactions. Enzymes are special protein mole-
cules that act as catalysts; that is, they cause a chemical 
reaction to take place without becoming a part of the  
final product themselves. Because cells contain the ingre-
dients needed to synthesize an enormous variety of com-
pounds, the ones that cells actually do produce depend 
primarily on the particular enzymes that are present. 
Furthermore, there are enzymes that break molecules 
Membrane
Microtubules
Dendrite
Nucleus
Cytoplasm
Mitochondria
Myelin
sheath
Dendritic 
spines
figure 2.5  The Principal Internal Structures of a Multipolar Neuron
x nucleus  A structure in the central region of a cell, containing 
the nucleolus and chromosomes.
x nucleolus (new clee o lus)  A structure within the nucleus of a 
cell that produces the ribosomes.
x ribosome (ry bo soam)  A cytoplasmic structure, made of 
protein, that serves as the site of production of proteins translated 
from mRNA.
x chromosome  A strand of DNA, with associated proteins, 
found in the nucleus; carries genetic information.
x deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (dee ox ee ry bo new clay ik)  A long, 
complex macromolecule consisting of two interconnected helical 
strands; along with associated proteins, strands of DNA constitute 
the chromosomes.
x gene  The functional unit of the chromosome, which directs 
synthesis of one or more proteins.
x messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA)  A macromolecule that 
delivers genetic information concerning the synthesis of a protein 
from a portion of a chromosome to a ribosome.
x enzyme  A molecule that controls a chemical reaction, 
combining two substances or breaking a substance into two parts.

	
Cells of the Nervous System	
33
A study by Woolfe et al. (2005) illustrates the longevity 
of most non-coding DNA. The researchers compared the 
genomes of the human and the pufferfish. The common 
ancestor of these two species lived many millions of years 
ago, which means that if non-coding DNA is really just 
useless, leftover junk, then random mutations should 
Enzyme X makes A and B join together; enzyme Y splits 
AB apart. (Energy may also be required to make the reac-
tions proceed.)
As you undoubtedly know, the sequence of the hu-
man genome—along with that of several other plants and 
animals—has been determined. (The genome is the se-
quence of nucleotide bases on the chromosomes that 
provide the information needed to synthesize all the pro-
teins that can be produced by a particular organism.) Bi-
ologists were surprised to learn that the number of genes 
was not correlated with the complexity of the organism 
(Mattick, 2004). For example, Caenorhabditis elegans, a 
simple worm that consists of about 1000 cells, has 19,000 
genes, whereas humans have around 25,000 genes. The 
research also revealed that the genomes of most verte-
brates contained much “junk” DNA, which did not con-
tain information needed to produce proteins. For exam-
ple, only about 1.5 percent of the human genome encodes 
for proteins. At first, molecular geneticists assumed that 
“junk” DNA was a leftover from our evolutionary history 
and that only the sequences of DNA that encoded for 
proteins were useful. However, further research found 
that the amount of non-protein-coding DNA did corre-
late well with the complexity of an organism and that 
many of these sequences have been conserved for mil-
lions of years. In other words, it started looking as though 
“junk” DNA was not junk after all. (See Figure 2.7.)
Nucleus
Neuron
Ribosome
Newly synthesized
protein
mRNA
Membrane
of nucleus
DNA
Gene
mRNA
Detail of Nucleus
figure 2.6  Protein Synthesis
When a gene is active, a copy of the information is made onto a molecule of messenger 
RNA. The mRNA leaves the nucleus and attaches to a ribosome, where the protein is 
produced.
figure 2.7  Non-coding DNA
This figure shows the percentage of DNA that does not 
code for proteins in various categories of living organisms.
(Adapted from Mattick, J. S. Scientific American, 2004, 291, 60–67.)
100
80
60
40
20
Percent of DNA not coding for protein
Prokaryotes
One-celled
eukaryotes
Fungi/plants
Invertebrates
Chordates
Vertebrates
Humans

34	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
Endoplasmic reticulum, which serves as a storage 
reservoir and as a channel for transporting chemicals 
through the cytoplasm, appears in two forms: rough and 
smooth. Both types consist of parallel layers of mem-
brane, arranged in pairs, of the sort that encloses the 
cell. Rough endoplasmic reticulum contains ribosomes. 
The protein produced by the ribosomes that are at-
tached to the rough endoplasmic reticulum is destined 
to be transported out of the cell or used in the mem-
brane. Unattached ribosomes are also distributed 
around the cytoplasm; the unattached variety appears to 
produce protein for use within the neuron. Smooth 
endoplasmic reticulum provides channels for the segre-
gation of molecules involved in various cellular pro-
cesses. Lipid (fatlike) molecules are also produced here.
The Golgi apparatus is a special form of smooth 
endoplasmic reticulum. Some complex molecules, made 
up of simpler individual molecules, are assembled here. 
The Golgi apparatus also serves as a wrapping or packag-
ing agent. For example, secretory cells (such as those 
that release hormones) wrap their product in a mem-
brane produced by the Golgi apparatus. When the cell 
secretes its products, it uses a process called exocytosis 
(exo, “outside”; cyto, “cell”; -osis, “process”). Briefly stated, 
the container migrates to the inside of the outer mem-
brane of the cell, fuses with it, and bursts, spilling its 
contents into the fluid surrounding the cell. As we will 
see, neurons communicate with one another by secret-
ing chemicals by this means. Therefore, I will describe 
the process of exocytosis in more detail later in this 
chapter. The Golgi apparatus also produces lysosomes, 
small sacs that contain enzymes that break down sub-
stances no longer needed by the cell. These products are 
then recycled or excreted from the cell.
have produced many changes in their sequences. How-
ever, Woolfe and his colleagues found 1400 highly con-
served non-coding sequences, many of which were over 
90 percent identical in humans and pufferfish. In addi-
tion, they found that these conserved sequences were 
located near genes that control development, which is 
unlikely to be a coincidence. In fact, we will see in 
Chapter 3 that mutations in non-coding regions of the 
human genome appear to be responsible for the 
increased size and complexity of the human brain.
What do these non-coding sequences of DNA do? 
Although their sequences can be transcribed into RNA, 
this RNA does not result in the production of protein. 
Instead, non-coding RNA (ncRNA) appears to have 
functions of it own. For example, when most genes be-
come active, segments of DNA are transcribed into mol-
ecules of messenger RNA, and then other molecules cut 
the mRNA into pieces, discard some parts, and splice 
the remaining pieces together. The resulting chunk of 
mRNA then contains the information required for the 
construction of the protein. The cutting and splicing 
are accomplished by molecular complexes called spliceo-
somes, and one of the constituents of spliceosomes is 
non-coding RNA. Molecules of ncRNA also attach to—
and modify—proteins that regulate gene expression 
(Szymanski et al., 2003; Storz, Altuvia, and Wassarman, 
2005; Satterlee et al., 2007). Thus, the human genome, 
more broadly defined to include non-coding RNA, is 
much larger than biologists previously believed.
The bulk of the cell consists of cytoplasm. Cytoplasm 
is complex and varies considerably across types of cells, 
but it can most easily be characterized as a jellylike, 
semiliquid substance that fills the space outlined by the 
membrane. It contains small, specialized structures, just 
as the body contains specialized organs. The generic 
term for these structures is organelle, “little organ.” The 
most important organelles are described next.
Mitochondria (singular: mitochondrion) are shaped 
like oval beads and are formed of a double membrane. 
The inner membrane is wrinkled, and the wrinkles make 
up a set of shelves (cristae) that fill the inside of the bead. 
Mitochondria perform a vital role in the economy of the 
cell; many of the biochemical steps that are involved in 
the extraction of energy from the breakdown of nutrients 
take place on the cristae, controlled by enzymes located 
there. Most cell biologists believe that many eons ago, 
mitochondria were free-living organisms that came to “in-
fect” larger cells. Because the mitochondria could extract 
energy more efficiently than the cells they infected, the 
mitochondria became useful to the cells and eventually 
became a permanent part of them. Cells provide mito-
chondria with nutrients, and mitochondria provide cells 
with a special molecule—adenosine triphosphate (ATP)—
that cells use as their immediate source of energy. Mito-
chondria contain their own DNA and reproduce inde-
pendently of the cells in which they reside.
x non-coding RNA (ncRNA)  A form of RNA that does not encode 
for protein but has functions of its own.
x cytoplasm  The viscous, semiliquid substance contained in the 
interior of a cell.
x mitochondrion  An organelle that is responsible for extracting 
energy from nutrients.
x adenosine triphosphate (ATP) (ah den o seen)  A molecule of 
prime importance to cellular energy metabolism; its breakdown 
liberates energy.
x endoplasmic reticulum  Parallel layers of membrane found 
within the cytoplasm of a cell. Rough endoplasmic reticulum 
contains ribosomes and is involved with production of proteins 
that are secreted by the cell. Smooth endoplasmic reticulum is 
the site of synthesis of lipids and provides channels for the 
segregation of molecules involved in various cellular processes.
x Golgi apparatus (goal jee)  A complex of parallel membranes 
in the cytoplasm that wraps the products of a secretory cell.
x exocytosis (ex o sy toe sis)  The secretion of a substance by a 
cell through means of vesicles; the process by which neurotrans-
mitters are secreted.
x lysosome (lye so soam)  An organelle surrounded by membrane; 
contains enzymes that break down waste products.

	
Cells of the Nervous System	
35
axoplasmic transport. (Antero- means “toward the 
front.”) This form of transport is accomplished by mol-
ecules of a protein called kinesin. In the cell body, kine-
sin molecules, which resemble a pair of legs and feet, 
attach to the item being transported down the axon. 
The kinesin molecule then walks down a microtubule, 
carrying the cargo to its destination (Yildiz et al., 2004). 
Energy is supplied by ATP molecules produced by the 
mitochondria. (See Figure 2.8.) Another protein, dynein, 
If a neuron grown in a tissue culture is exposed to a 
detergent, the lipid membrane and much of the interior 
of the cell dissolve away, leaving a matrix of insoluble 
strands of protein. This matrix, called the cytoskeleton, 
gives the neuron its shape. The cytoskeleton is made of 
three kinds of protein strands, linked to each other and 
forming a cohesive mass. The thickest of these strands, 
microtubules, are bundles of thirteen protein filaments 
arranged around a hollow core.
Axons can be extremely long relative to their diam-
eter and the size of the soma. For example, the longest 
axon in a human stretches from the foot to a region 
located in the base of the brain. Because terminal but-
tons need some items that can be produced only in the 
soma, there must be a system that can transport these 
items rapidly and efficiently through the axoplasm 
(that is, the cytoplasm of the axon). This system is  
referred to as axoplasmic transport, an active process 
by which substances are propelled along microtubules 
that run the length of the axon. Movement from  
the soma to the terminal buttons is called anterograde 
(b)
Microtubule
Vesicle
Kinesin
(a)
Detail of Axon
Vesicle
Microtubule
figure 2.8  Fast Axoplasmic Transport
This figure shows how kinesin molecules (a) “walk” down a microtubule, carrying their 
cargo from the soma to the terminal buttons. Another protein, dynein, carries 
substances from the terminal buttons to the soma. (b) A photomicrograph of a mouse 
axon, showing an organelle being transported along a microtubule. The arrow points 
to what appears to be a kinesin molecule.
(From Hirokawa, N. Science, 1998, 279, 519–526. Copyright © 1998 American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Reprinted with permission.)
x cytoskeleton  Formed of microtubules and other protein fibers, 
linked to each other and forming a cohesive mass that gives a cell 
its shape.
x microtubule (my kro too byool)  A long strand of bundles  
of protein filaments arranged around a hollow core; part of the 
cytoskeleton and involved in transporting substances from place 
to place within the cell.
x axoplasmic transport  An active process by which substances 
are propelled along microtubules that run the length of the axon.
x anterograde  In a direction along an axon from the cell body 
toward the terminal buttons.

36	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
to the cytoplasm of the astrocytes and then through the 
cytoplasm to the neurons.
Recent evidence suggests that Golgi was right: Al-
though neurons receive some glucose directly from 
capillaries, they receive most of their nutrients from 
astrocytes. Astrocytes receive glucose from capillaries 
and break it down to lactate, the chemical produced 
during the first step of glucose metabolism. They 
then release lactate into the extracellular fluid that 
surrounds neurons, and neurons take up the lactate, 
transport it to their mitochondria, and use it for en-
ergy (Tsacopoulos and Magistretti, 1996; Brown, Tek-
kök, and Ransom, 2003; Pellerin et al., 2007). Appar-
ently, this process provides neurons with a fuel that 
they can metabolize even more rapidly than glucose. 
In addition, astrocytes store a small amount of a car-
bohydrate called glycogen that can be broken down to 
glucose and then to lactate when the metabolic rate 
of neurons in their vicinity is especially high. (See 
Figure 2.9.)
Besides transporting chemicals to neurons, astro-
cytes serve as the matrix that holds neurons in place—
the “nerve glue,” so to speak. These cells also sur-
round and isolate synapses, limiting the dispersion of 
neurotransmitters that are released by the terminal 
buttons.
When cells in the central nervous system die, certain 
kinds of astrocytes take up the task of cleaning away the 
debris. These cells are able to travel around the CNS; 
they extend and retract their processes (pseudopodia, or 
“false feet”) and glide about the way amoebas do. When 
these astrocytes contact a piece of debris from a dead 
neuron, they push themselves against it, finally engulf-
ing and digesting it. We call this process phagocytosis 
(phagein, “to eat”; kutos, “cell”). If there is a considerable 
amount of injured tissue to be cleaned up, astrocytes will 
divide and produce enough new cells to do the task. 
Once the dead tissue has been broken down, a frame-
work of astrocytes will be left to fill in the vacant area, 
and a specialized kind of astrocyte will form scar tissue, 
walling off the area.
carries substances from the terminal buttons to the 
soma, a process known as retrograde axoplasmic trans-
port. Anterograde axoplasmic transport is remarkably 
fast: up to 500 mm per day. Retrograde axoplasmic 
transport is about half as fast as anterograde transport.
Supporting Cells
Neurons constitute only about half the volume of the 
CNS. The rest consists of a variety of supporting cells. 
Because neurons have a very high rate of metabolism 
but have no means of storing nutrients, they must con-
stantly be supplied with nutrients and oxygen or they 
will quickly die. Thus, the role played by the cells that 
support and protect neurons is very important to our 
existence.
Glia
The most important supporting cells of the central 
nervous system are the neuroglia, or “nerve glue.” Glia 
(also called glial cells) do indeed glue the CNS to-
gether, but they do much more than that. Neurons 
lead a very sheltered existence; they are buffered phys-
ically and chemically from the rest of the body by the 
glial cells. Glial cells surround neurons and hold them 
in place, controlling their supply of nutrients and 
some of the chemicals they need to exchange mes-
sages with other neurons; they insulate neurons from 
one another so that neural messages do not get scram-
bled; and they even act as housekeepers, destroying 
and removing the carcasses of neurons that are killed 
by disease or injury.
There are several types of glial cells, each of which 
plays a special role in the CNS. The three most impor-
tant types are astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and microglia. 
Astrocyte means “star cell,” and this name accurately 
describes the shape of these cells. Astrocytes provide 
physical support to neurons and clean up debris within 
the brain. They produce some chemicals that neurons 
need to fulfill their functions. They help to control the 
chemical composition of the fluid surrounding neu-
rons by actively taking up or releasing substances whose 
concentrations must be kept within critical levels. Fi-
nally, astrocytes are involved in providing nourishment 
to neurons.
Some of the astrocyte’s processes (the arms of the 
star) are wrapped around blood vessels; other processes 
are wrapped around parts of neurons, so the somatic 
and dendritic membranes of neurons are largely sur-
rounded by astrocytes. This arrangement suggested to 
the Italian histologist Camillo Golgi (1844–1926) that 
astrocytes supplied neurons with nutrients from the 
capillaries and disposed of their waste products (Golgi, 
1903). He thought that nutrients passed from capillaries 
x oligodendrocyte (oh li go den droh site)  A type of glial cell in 
the central nervous system that forms myelin sheaths.
x phagocytosis (fagg o sy toe sis)  The process by which cells 
engulf and digest other cells or debris caused by cellular degeneration.
x retrograde  In a direction along an axon from the terminal 
buttons toward the cell body.
x glia (glee ah)  The supporting cells of the central nervous system.
x astrocyte  A glial cell that provides support for neurons of the 
central nervous system, provides nutrients and other substances, 
and regulates the chemical composition of the extracellular fluid.

	
Cells of the Nervous System	
37
protein, is produced by the oligodendrocytes in the 
form of a tube surrounding the axon. This tube does 
not form a continuous sheath; rather, it consists of a 
series of segments, each approximately 1 mm long, 
with a small (1–2 μm) portion of uncoated axon be-
tween the segments. (A micrometer, abbreviated μm, is 
one-millionth of a meter, or one-thousandth of a mil-
limeter.) The bare portion of axon is called a node 
of Ranvier, after the person who discovered it. The 
myelinated axon, then, resembles a string of elon-
gated beads. (Actually, the beads are very much elon-
gated—their length is approximately 80 times their 
width.)
A given oligodendrocyte produces up to fifty seg-
ments of myelin. During the development of the CNS, 
oligodendrocytes form processes shaped something 
like canoe paddles. Each of these paddle-shaped pro-
cesses then wraps itself many times around a segment of 
an axon and, while doing so, produces layers of myelin. 
Each paddle thus becomes a segment of an axon’s my-
elin sheath. (See Figures 2.10 and 2.11a.)
The principal function of oligodendrocytes is to 
provide support to axons and to produce the myelin 
sheath, which insulates most axons from one an-
other. (Very small axons are not myelinated and lack 
this sheath.) Myelin, 80 percent lipid and 20 percent 
figure 2.9  Structure and Location of Astrocytes
The processes of astrocytes surround capillaries and neurons of the central nervous system.
Glucose
Glucose
Glycogen
(storage)
Lactate
Energy
Lactate
Lactate
Blood
vessel
Astrocyte
Neuron
Myelinated axons
Soma of
oligodendrocyte
Microtubule
Node of Ranvier
Mitochondrion
in axoplasm
Node of
Ranvier
figure 2.10  Oligodendrocyte
An oligodendrocyte forms the myelin that surrounds many 
axons in the central nervous system. Each cell forms one 
segment of myelin for several adjacent axons.
x node of Ranvier (raw vee ay)  A naked portion of a myelinated 
axon between adjacent oligodendroglia or Schwann cells.
x myelin sheath (my a lin)  A sheath that surrounds axons and 
insulates them, preventing messages from spreading between 
adjacent axons.

38	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
figure 2.11  Formation of Myelin
During development a process of an oligodendrocyte or an 
entire Schwann cell tightly wraps itself many times around 
an individual axon and forms one segment of the myelin 
sheath. (a) Oligodendrocyte. (b) Schwann cell.
Myelin sheath
Axons
Oligodendrocyte
(a)
(b)
Schwann cell
Dr. C., a retired neurologist, had been afflicted with 
multiple sclerosis for more than two decades when she 
died of a heart attack. One evening, twenty-three years 
previously, she and her husband had had dinner at their 
favorite restaurant. As they were leaving, she stumbled 
and almost fell. Her husband joked, “Hey, honey, you 
shouldn’t have had that last glass of wine.” She smiled 
at his attempt at humor, but she knew better—her 
clumsiness wasn’t brought on by the two glasses of 
wine she had drunk with dinner. She suddenly realized 
that she had been ignoring some symptoms that she 
should have recognized.
The next day, she consulted with one of her col-
leagues, who agreed that her own tentative diagnosis 
was probably correct: Her symptoms fit those of multiple 
sclerosis. She had experienced fleeting problems with 
double vision, she sometimes felt unsteady on her feet, 
and she occasionally noticed tingling sensations in her 
right hand. None of these symptoms was serious, and 
they lasted for only a short while, so she ignored them—
or perhaps denied to herself that they were important.
A few weeks after Dr. C.’s death twenty-three years 
later, a group of medical students and neurological resi-
dents gathered in an autopsy room at the medical 
school. Dr. D., the school’s neuropathologist, displayed 
a stainless-steel tray on which were lying a brain and a 
spinal cord. “These belonged to Dr. C.,” he said. 
“Several years ago she donated her organs to the medi-
cal school.” Everyone looked at the brain more intently, 
knowing that it had animated an esteemed clinician and 
teacher whom they all knew by reputation, if not person-
ally. Dr. D. led his audience to a set of light boxes on 
the wall, to which several MRI scans had been clipped. 
He pointed out some white spots that appeared on one 
scan. “This scan clearly shows some white-matter lesions, 
but they are gone on the next one, taken six months 
later. And here is another one, but it’s gone on the next 
scan. The immune system attacked the myelin sheaths in 
a particular region, and then glial cells cleaned up the 
debris. MRI doesn’t show the lesions then, but the axons 
can no longer conduct their messages.”
He put on a pair of surgical gloves, picked up  
Dr. C.’s brain, and cut it in several slices. He picked 
one up. “Here, see this?” He pointed out a spot of  
discoloration in a band of white matter. “This is a  
sclerotic plaque—a patch that feels harder than the 
surrounding tissue. There are many of them, located 
throughout the brain and spinal cord, which is why the 
disease is called multiple sclerosis.” He picked up the 
spinal cord, felt along its length with his thumb and 
forefinger, and then stopped and said, “Yes, I can feel 
a plaque right here.”
Dr. D. put the spinal cord down and said, “Who 
can tell me the etiology of this disorder?”
One of the students spoke up. “It’s an autoimmune 
disease. The immune system gets sensitized to the body’s 
own myelin protein and periodically attacks it, causing a 
variety of different neurological symptoms. Some say that 
a childhood viral illness somehow causes the immune sys-
tem to start seeing the protein as foreign.”
“That’s right,” said Dr. D. “The primary criterion for 
the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis is the presence of 
neurological symptoms disseminated in time and space. 
The symptoms don’t all occur at once, and they can be 
caused only by damage to several different parts of the 
nervous system, which means that they can’t be the 
result of a stroke.”
As their name indicates, microglia are the smallest 
of the glial cells. Like some types of astrocytes, they act 
as phagocytes, engulfing and breaking down dead and 
dying neurons. But, in addition, they serve as one of 
the representatives of the immune system in the brain, 
protecting the brain from invading microorganisms. 

	
Cells of the Nervous System	
39
to produce a chemical signal that instructs regenerat-
ing axons to begin the second mode of growth: to stop 
elongating and start sprouting terminal buttons. Thus, 
the difference in the regenerative properties of axons 
in the CNS and the PNS results from differences in the 
characteristics of the supporting cells, not from differ-
ences in the axons.
There is another difference between oligodendro-
cytes of the CNS and Schwann cells of the PNS: the 
chemical composition of the myelin protein they pro-
duce. The immune system of someone with multiple 
sclerosis attacks only the myelin protein produced by 
oligodendrocytes; thus, the myelin of the peripheral 
nervous system is spared.
The Blood–Brain Barrier
Over one hundred years ago, Paul Ehrlich discovered 
that if a blue dye is injected into an animal’s blood-
stream, all tissues except the brain and spinal cord will 
be tinted blue. However, if the same dye is injected into 
the fluid-filled ventricles of the brain, the blue color will 
spread throughout the CNS (Bradbury, 1979). This ex-
periment demonstrates that a barrier exists between the 
blood and the fluid that surrounds the cells of the brain: 
the blood–brain barrier.
Some substances can cross the blood–brain barrier; 
others cannot. Thus, it is selectively permeable (per, “through”; 
meare, “to pass”). In most of the body the cells that line 
the capillaries do not fit together absolutely tightly. 
Small gaps are found between them that permit the 
free exchange of most substances between the blood 
plasma and the fluid outside the capillaries that sur-
rounds the cells of the body. In the central nervous 
system the capillaries lack these gaps; therefore, many 
substances cannot leave the blood. Thus, the walls of 
the capillaries in the brain constitute the blood–brain 
barrier. (See Figure 2.12.) Other substances must be 
actively transported through the capillary walls by spe-
cial proteins. For example, glucose transporters bring 
the brain its fuel, and other transporters rid the brain 
of toxic waste products (Rubin and Staddon, 1999; 
Zlokovic, 2008).
What is the function of the blood–brain barrier? As 
we will see, transmission of messages from place to 
They are primarily responsible for the inflammatory 
reaction in response to brain damage.
Schwann Cells
In the central nervous system the oligodendrocytes 
support axons and produce myelin. In the peripheral 
nervous system the Schwann cells perform the same 
functions. Most axons in the PNS are myelinated. 
The myelin sheath occurs in segments, as it does in 
the CNS; each segment consists of a single Schwann 
cell, wrapped many times around the axon. In the 
CNS the oligodendrocytes grow a number of paddle-
shaped processes that wrap around a number of ax-
ons. In the PNS a Schwann cell provides myelin for 
only one axon, and the entire Schwann cell—not 
merely a part of it—surrounds the axon. (See Figure 
2.11b.)
Schwann cells also differ from their CNS coun-
terparts, the oligodendrocytes, in an important way. 
As we saw, a nerve consists of a bundle of many my-
elinated axons, all covered in a sheath of tough, elas-
tic connective tissue. If damage occurs to such a 
nerve, Schwann cells aid in the digestion of the dead 
and dying axons. Then the Schwann cells arrange 
themselves in a series of cylinders that act as guides 
for regrowth of the axons. The distal portions of the 
severed axons die, but the stump of each severed 
axon grows sprouts, which then spread in all direc-
tions. If one of these sprouts encounters a cylinder 
provided by a Schwann cell, the sprout will grow 
through the tube quickly (at a rate of up to 3–4 mm 
a day), while the other, nonproductive sprouts wither 
away. If the cut ends of the nerve are still located 
close enough to each other, the axons will reestablish 
connections with the muscles and sense organs they 
previously served.
Unfortunately, the glial cells of the CNS are not as 
cooperative as the supporting cells of the PNS. If ax-
ons in the brain or spinal cord are damaged, new 
sprouts will form, as in the PNS. However, the bud-
ding axons encounter scar tissue produced by the as-
trocytes, and they cannot penetrate this barrier. Even 
if the sprouts could get through, the axons would not 
reestablish their original connections without guid-
ance similar to that provided by the Schwann cells of 
the PNS. During development, axons have two modes 
of growth. The first mode causes them to elongate so 
that they reach their target, which could be as far away 
as the other end of the brain or spinal cord. Schwann 
cells provide this signal to injured axons. The second 
mode causes axons to stop elongating and begin 
sprouting terminal buttons because they have reached 
their target. Liuzzi and Lasek (1987) found that even 
when astrocytes do not produce scar tissue, they appear 
x Schwann cell  A cell in the peripheral nervous system that  
is wrapped around a myelinated axon, providing one segment  
of its myelin sheath.
x blood–brain barrier  A semipermeable barrier between the 
blood and the brain produced by the cells in the walls of the brain’s 
capillaries.
x microglia  The smallest of glial cells; act as phagocytes and 
protect the brain from invading microorganisms.

40	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
transmission of these messages will be disrupted, which 
means that brain functions will be disrupted. The pres-
ence of the blood–brain barrier makes it easier to regu-
late the composition of this fluid. In addition, many of 
the foods that we eat contain chemicals that would in-
terfere with the transmission of information between 
neurons. The blood–brain barrier prevents these chem-
icals from reaching the brain.
The blood–brain barrier is not uniform through-
out the nervous system. In several places the barrier is 
relatively permeable, allowing substances that are ex-
cluded elsewhere to cross freely. For example, the area 
postrema is a part of the brain that controls vomiting. 
The blood–brain barrier is much weaker there, permit-
ting neurons in this region to detect the presence of 
toxic substances in the blood. (A barrier around the 
area postrema prevents substances from diffusing from 
this region into the rest of the brain.) A poison that 
enters the circulatory system from the stomach can thus 
stimulate the area postrema to initiate vomiting. If the 
organism is lucky, the poison can be expelled from the 
stomach before causing too much damage.
place in the brain depends on a delicate balance be-
tween substances within neurons and those in the extra-
cellular fluid that surrounds them. If the composition 
of the extracellular fluid is changed even slightly, the 
figure 2.12  The Blood–Brain Barrier
This figure shows that (a) the cells that form the 
walls of the capillaries in the body outside the brain 
have gaps that permit the free passage of 
substances into and out of the blood, and (b) the 
cells that form the walls of the capillaries in the 
brain are tightly joined.
Gaps that permit the free flow
of substances into and out of
the blood
Capillary in all of body
except brain
(a)
(b)
Capillary 
in brain
x area postrema (poss tree ma)  A region of the medulla where 
the blood–brain barrier is weak; poisons can be detected there 
and can initiate vomiting.
Cells of the Nervous System
Section Summary
Neurons are the most important cells of the nervous 
system. The central nervous system (CNS) includes 
the brain and spinal cord; the peripheral nervous 
system (PNS) includes nerves and some sensory 
organs.
Neurons have four principal parts: dendrites, 
soma (cell body), axon, and terminal buttons. They 
communicate by means of synapses, junctions 
between the terminal buttons of one neuron and the 
somatic or dendritic membrane of another. When an 
action potential travels down an axon, its terminal 
buttons secrete a chemical that has either an excit-
atory or an inhibitory effect on the neurons with which 
they communicate. Ultimately, the effects of these 
excitatory and inhibitory synapses cause behavior, in 
the form of muscular contractions.
Neurons contain a quantity of cytoplasm, 
enclosed in a membrane. Embedded in the mem-
brane are protein molecules that have special func-
tions, such as the detection of hormones or neu-
rotransmitters or transport of particular substances 
into and out of the cell. The cytoplasm contains the 
nucleus, which contains the genetic information; 
the nucleolus (located in the nucleus), which manu-
factures ribosomes; the ribosomes, which serve as 
sites of protein synthesis; the endoplasmic reticu-
lum, which serves as a storage reservoir and as a 
channel for transportation of chemicals through the 
cytoplasm; the Golgi apparatus, which wraps sub-
stances that the cell secretes in a membrane; the 
lysosomes, which contain enzymes that destroy 
waste products; microtubules and other protein 

	
Communication Within a Neuron 	
41
withdrawal reflex. In the next two figures (and in subse-
quent figures that illustrate simple neural circuits), mul-
tipolar neurons are depicted in shorthand fashion as 
several-sided stars. The points of these stars represent 
dendrites, and only one or two terminal buttons are 
shown at the end of the axon. The sensory neuron in this 
example detects painful stimuli. When its dendrites are 
stimulated by a noxious stimulus (such as contact with a 
hot object), it sends messages down the axon to the ter-
minal buttons, which are located in the spinal cord. (You 
will recognize this cell as a unipolar neuron; see Figure 
2.13.) The terminal buttons of the sensory neuron re-
lease a neurotransmitter that excites the interneuron, 
causing it to send messages down its axon. The terminal 
buttons of the interneuron release a neurotransmitter 
that excites the motor neuron, which sends messages 
down its axon. The axon of the motor neuron joins a 
nerve and travels to a muscle. When the terminal buttons 
of the motor neuron release their neurotransmitter, the 
muscle cells contract, causing the hand to move away 
from the hot object. (Look again at Figure 2.13.)
So far, all of the synapses have had excitatory effects. 
Now let us complicate matters a bit to see the effect of 
inhibitory synapses. Suppose you have removed a hot 
casserole from the oven. As you start walking over to the 
table to put it down, the heat begins to penetrate the 
Communication Within  
a Neuron
This section describes the nature of communication 
within a neuron—the way an action potential is sent 
from the cell body down the axon to the terminal but-
tons, informing them to release some neurotransmitter. 
The details of synaptic transmission—the communica-
tion between neurons—will be described in the next 
section. As we will see in this section, an action potential 
consists of a series of alterations in the membrane of the 
axon that permit various substances to move between 
the interior of the axon and the fluid surrounding it. 
These exchanges produce electrical currents. To see an 
interactive animation of the information presented in 
the following section, 
Simulate the action potential 
on MyPsychLab.
Neural Communication:  
An Overview
Before I begin my discussion of the action potential, let’s 
step back and see how neurons can interact to produce 
a useful behavior. We begin by examining a simple as-
sembly of three neurons and a muscle that control a 
fibers, which compose the cytoskeleton and help to 
transport chemicals from place to place; and the 
mitochondria, which serve as the location for most 
of the chemical reactions through which the cell 
extracts energy from nutrients. Recent evidence 
indicates that only a small proportion of the human 
genome is devoted to the production of protein; 
the rest (formerly called “junk” DNA) is involved in 
the production of non-coding RNA, which has a 
variety of functions.
Neurons are supported by the glial cells of the 
central nervous system and the supporting cells of 
the peripheral nervous system. In the CNS, astrocytes 
provide support and nourishment, regulate the com-
position of the fluid that surrounds neurons, and 
remove debris and form scar tissue in the event of 
tissue damage. Microglia are phagocytes that serve 
as the representatives of the immune system. 
Oligodendrocytes form myelin, the substance that 
insulates axons, and also support unmyelinated 
axons. In the PNS, support and myelin are provided 
by the Schwann cells.
In most organs, molecules freely diffuse between 
the blood within the capillaries that serve them and the 
extracellular fluid that bathes their cells. The molecules 
pass through gaps between the cells that line the cap-
illaries. The walls of the capillaries of the CNS lack 
these gaps; consequently, fewer substances can enter 
or leave the brain across the blood–brain barrier.
 Thought Question
The fact that the mitochondria in our cells were orig-
inally microorganisms that infected our very remote 
ancestors points out that evolution can involve inter-
actions between two or more species. Many species 
have other organisms living inside them; in fact, the 
bacteria in our intestines are necessary for our good 
health. Some microorganisms can exchange genetic 
information, so adaptive mutations that develop in 
one species can be adopted by another. Is it possi-
ble that some of the features of the cells of our ner-
vous system were bequeathed to our ancestors by 
other species?

42	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
Figure 2.14 shows how this information reaches the 
spinal cord. As you can see, an axon from a neuron in 
the brain reaches the spinal cord, where its terminal but-
tons form synapses with an inhibitory interneuron. 
When the neuron in the brain becomes active, its termi-
nal buttons excite this inhibitory interneuron. The inter-
neuron releases an inhibitory neurotransmitter, which 
decreases the activity of the motor neuron, blocking the 
withdrawal reflex. This circuit provides an example of a 
contest between two competing tendencies: to drop the 
casserole and to hold onto it. (See Figure 2.14.)
Of course, reflexes are more complicated than this 
description, and the mechanisms that inhibit them are 
even more so. And thousands of neurons are involved in 
this process. The five neurons shown in Figure 2.14  
rather thin potholders you are using. The pain caused 
by the heat triggers a withdrawal reflex that tends to 
make you drop the casserole. Yet you manage to keep 
hold of it long enough to get to the table and put it 
down. What prevented your withdrawal reflex from mak-
ing you drop the casserole on the floor?
The pain from the hot casserole increases the activity 
of excitatory synapses on the motor neurons, which tends 
to cause the hand to pull away from the casserole. How-
ever, this excitation is counteracted by inhibition, supplied 
by another source: the brain. The brain contains neural 
circuits that recognize what a disaster it would be if you 
dropped the casserole on the floor. These neural circuits 
send information to the spinal cord that prevents the 
withdrawal reflex from making you drop the dish.
figure 2.13  A Withdrawal Reflex
The figure shows a simple example of a useful function of the nervous system. The painful 
stimulus causes the hand to pull away from the hot iron.
Brain
Spinal
cord
Cross section
of spinal cord
Motor
neuron
This interneuron excites
motor neuron, causing
muscular contraction
This muscle causes
withdrawal from
source of pain
Axon of sensory
neuron (pain)
Dendrites of
sensory neuron
detect painful
stimulus
figure 2.14  The Role of Inhibition
Inhibitory signals arising from the brain can prevent the withdrawal reflex from causing 
the person to drop the casserole.
This interneuron inhibits
motor neuron, preventing
muscular contraction
Cross section
of spinal cord
Axon from
neuron
in brain
Axon of sensory
neuron (pain)
This muscle causes
withdrawal from
source of pain
Motor
neuron
This interneuron excites
motor neuron, causing
muscular contraction
Neuron
in brain
Brain
Axon of 
neuron
in brain
Spinal cord

	
Communication Within a Neuron 	
43
converted into radiant energy (light). (See Figure 2.15b.) 
Similarly, if we connect our electrodes—one inside the 
axon and one outside it—to a very sensitive voltmeter, 
we will convert the potential energy to movement of the 
meter’s needle. Of course, the potential electrical en-
ergy of the axonal membrane is very weak in compari-
son with that of a flashlight battery.
As we will see, the message that is conducted down 
the axon consists of a brief change in the membrane 
potential. However, this change occurs very rapidly—too 
rapidly for us to see if we were using a voltmeter. There-
fore, to study the message, we will use an oscilloscope. 
This device, like a voltmeter, measures voltages, but it 
also produces a record of these voltages, graphing them 
as a function of time. These graphs are displayed on a 
screen, much like the one found in a television. The 
vertical axis represents voltage, and the horizontal axis 
represents time, going from left to right.
represent many others: Dozens of sensory neurons de-
tect the hot object, hundreds of interneurons are stimu-
lated by their activity, hundreds of motor neurons pro-
duce the contraction—and thousands of neurons in the 
brain must become active if the reflex is to be inhibited. 
Yet this simple model provides an overview of the pro-
cess of neural communication, which is described in 
more detail later in this chapter.
Measuring Electrical Potentials  
of Axons
Let’s examine the nature of the message that is con-
ducted along the axon. To do so, we obtain an axon that 
is large enough to work with. Fortunately, nature has 
provided the neuroscientist with the giant squid axon 
(the giant axon of a squid, not the axon of a giant 
squid!). This axon is about 0.5 mm in diameter, which 
is hundreds of times larger than the largest mammalian 
axon. (This large axon controls an emergency response: 
sudden contraction of the mantle, which squirts water 
through a jet and propels the squid away from a source 
of danger.) We place an isolated giant squid axon in a 
dish of seawater, in which it can exist for a day or two.
To measure the electrical charges generated by an 
axon, we will need to use a pair of electrodes. Electrodes 
are electrical conductors that provide a path for electric-
ity to enter or leave a medium. One of the electrodes is 
a simple wire that we place in the seawater. The other 
one, which we use to record the message from the axon, 
has to be special. Because even a giant squid axon is 
rather small, we must use a tiny electrode that will re-
cord the membrane potential without damaging the 
axon. To do so, we use a microelectrode.
A microelectrode is simply a very small electrode, 
which can be made of metal or glass. In this case we will 
use one made of thin glass tubing, which is heated and 
drawn down to an exceedingly fine point, less than a 
thousandth of a millimeter in diameter. Because glass 
will not conduct electricity, the glass microelectrode is 
filled with a liquid that conducts electricity, such as a 
solution of potassium chloride.
We place the wire electrode in the seawater and in-
sert the microelectrode into the axon. (See Figure 
2.15a.) As soon as we do so, we discover that the inside 
of the axon is negatively charged with respect to the 
outside; the difference in charge being 70 mV (milli-
volts, or thousandths of a volt). Thus, the inside of the 
membrane is –70 mV. This electrical charge is called the 
membrane potential. The term potential refers to a 
stored-up source of energy—in this case, electrical 
energy. For example, a flashlight battery that is not con-
nected to an electrical circuit has a potential charge of 
1.5 V between its terminals. If we connect a light bulb to 
the terminals, the potential energy is tapped and 
x electrode  A conductive medium that can be used to apply 
electrical stimulation or to record electrical potentials.
x microelectrode  A very fine electrode, generally used to 
record activity of individual neurons.
figure 2.15  Measuring Electrical Charge
The figure shows (a) a voltmeter detecting the charge 
across a membrane of an axon and (b) a light bulb 
detecting the charge across the terminals of a battery.
Voltmeter
Battery
Wire electrode
placed in
seawater
Giant
squid axon
Glass
microelectrode
filled with liquid
that conducts
electricity
(a)
(b)
x membrane potential  The electrical charge across a cell 
membrane; the difference in electrical potential inside and outside 
the cell.
x oscilloscope  A laboratory instrument that is capable of 
displaying a graph of voltage as a function of time on the face of a 
cathode ray tube.

44	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
potential suddenly reverses itself, so the inside  
becomes positive (and the outside becomes negative). 
The membrane potential quickly returns to normal, 
but first it overshoots the resting potential, becom-
ing hyperpolarized—more polarized than normal—
for a short time. The whole process takes about 2 msec 
(milliseconds). (See Figure 2.17.)
This phenomenon, a very rapid reversal of the 
membrane potential, is called the action potential. It 
constitutes the message carried by the axon from the 
cell body to the terminal buttons. The voltage level that 
triggers an action potential—which was achieved only by 
depolarizing shock number 4—is called the threshold 
of excitation.
Once we insert our microelectrode into the axon, 
the oscilloscope draws a straight horizontal line at 270 mV, 
as long as the axon is not disturbed. This electrical 
charge across the membrane is called, quite appropri-
ately, the resting potential. Now let us disturb the rest-
ing potential and see what happens. To do so, we will 
use another device—an electrical stimulator that  
allows us to alter the membrane potential at a specific 
location. (See Figure 2.16.) The stimulator can pass 
current through another microelectrode that we have 
inserted into the axon. Because the inside of the axon 
is negative, a positive charge applied to the inside of 
the membrane produces a depolarization. That is, it 
takes away some of the electrical charge across the 
membrane near the electrode, reducing the mem-
brane potential.
Let us see what happens to an axon when we ar-
tificially change the membrane potential at one 
point. Figure 2.17 shows a graph drawn by an oscillo-
scope that has been monitoring the effects of brief 
depolarizing stimuli. The graphs of the effects of 
these separate stimuli are superimposed on the same 
drawing so that we can compare them. We deliver a 
series of depolarizing stimuli, starting with a very 
weak stimulus (number 1) and gradually increasing 
their strength. Each stimulus briefly depolarizes the 
membrane potential a little more. Finally, after we 
present depolarization number 4, the membrane 
x resting potential  The membrane potential of a neuron when 
it is not being altered by excitatory or inhibitory postsynaptic 
potentials; approximately 270 mV in the giant squid axon.
x depolarization  Reduction (toward zero) of the membrane 
potential of a cell from its normal resting potential.
x hyperpolarization  An increase in the membrane potential of a 
cell, relative to the normal resting potential.
figure 2.17  An Action Potential
These results would be seen on an oscilloscope screen if 
depolarizing stimuli of varying intensities were delivered 
to the axon shown in Figure 2.16.
0
1
2
3
4 3
1
2
Depolarization
Hyperpolarization
Time (msec)
Stimulus
applied
+40
+30
+20
+10
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
–60
–70
–80
–90
Membrane potential (mV)
Threshold of excitation
Action potential
x action potential  The brief electrical impulse that provides the 
basis for conduction of information along an axon.
x threshold of excitation  The value of the membrane potential 
that must be reached to produce an action potential.
MODE
FREQUENCY
Stimulator
Wire
electrode
placed in
seawater
Oscilloscope
Records of
changes in
membrane
potential
displayed here
Giant squid axon
Electrical stimulator
Glass
microelectrodes
figure 2.16  Studying the Axon
The figure shows the means by which an axon can be 
stimulated while its membrane potential is being 
recorded.

	
Communication Within a Neuron 	
45
moves ions from place to place: Cations are pushed away 
from regions with an excess of cations, and anions are 
pushed away from regions with an excess of anions.
Ions in the Extracellular and  
Intracellular Fluid
The fluid within cells (intracellular fluid) and the fluid 
surrounding them (extracellular fluid) contain different 
ions. The forces of diffusion and electrostatic pressure 
contributed by these ions give rise to the membrane po-
tential. Because the membrane potential is produced by 
a balance between the forces of diffusion and electrostatic 
pressures, understanding what produces this potential 
requires that we know the concentration of the various 
ions in the extracellular and intracellular fluids.
There are several important ions in these fluids. I 
will discuss four of them here: organic anions (symbol-
ized by A2), chloride ions (Cl2), sodium ions (Na1), and 
potassium ions (K1). The Latin words for sodium and 
potassium are natrium and kalium; hence, they are abbre-
viated Na and K, respectively. Organic anions—negatively 
charged proteins and intermediate products of the cell’s 
metabolic processes—are found only in the intracellular 
fluid. Although the other three ions are found in both 
the intracellular and extracellular fluids, K1 is found pre-
dominantly in the intracellular fluid, whereas Na1 and 
Cl2 are found predominantly in the extracellular fluid. 
The sizes of the boxes in Figure 2.18 indicate the relative 
concentrations of these four ions. (See Figure 2.18.) The 
easiest way to remember which ion is found where is to 
recall that the fluid that surrounds our cells is similar to 
seawater, which is predominantly a solution of salt, NaCl. 
The primitive ancestors of our cells lived in the ocean; 
thus, the seawater was their extracellular fluid. Our extra-
cellular fluid thus resembles seawater, produced and 
maintained by regulatory mechanisms that are described 
in Chapter 12.
Let us consider the ions in Figure 2.18, examining 
the forces of diffusion and electrostatic pressure exerted 
on each and reasoning why each is located where it is. A2, 
the organic anion, is unable to pass through the mem-
brane of the axon; therefore, although the presence of 
The Membrane Potential:  
Balance of Two Forces
To understand what causes the action potential to oc-
cur, we must first understand the reasons for the exis-
tence of the membrane potential. As we will see, this 
electrical charge is the result of a balance between two 
opposing forces: diffusion and electrostatic pressure.
The Force of Diffusion
When a spoonful of sugar is carefully poured into a con-
tainer of water, it settles to the bottom. After a time the 
sugar dissolves, but it remains close to the bottom of the 
container. After a much longer time (probably several 
days) the molecules of sugar distribute themselves 
evenly throughout the water, even if no one stirs the 
liquid. The process whereby molecules distribute them-
selves evenly throughout the medium in which they are 
dissolved is called diffusion.
When there are no forces or barriers to prevent 
them from doing so, molecules will diffuse from regions 
of high concentration to regions of low concentration. 
Molecules are constantly in motion, and their rate of 
movement is proportional to the temperature. Only at 
absolute zero [0 K (kelvin) 5 2273.158C 5 2459.78F] 
do molecules cease their random movement. At all 
other temperatures they move about, colliding and veer-
ing off in different directions, thus pushing one another 
away. The result of these collisions in the example of 
sugar and water is to force sugar molecules upward (and 
to force water molecules downward), away from the re-
gions in which they are most concentrated.
The Force of Electrostatic Pressure
When some substances are dissolved in water, they split 
into two parts, each with an opposing electrical charge. 
Substances with this property are called electrolytes; the 
charged particles into which they decompose are called 
ions. Ions are of two basic types: Cations have a positive 
charge, and anions have a negative charge. For example, 
when sodium chloride (NaCl, table salt) is dissolved in 
water, many of the molecules split into sodium cations 
(Na1) and chloride anions (Cl2). (I find that the easiest 
way to keep the terms cation and anion straight is to 
think of the cation’s plus sign as a cross and remember 
the superstition of a black cat crossing your path.)
As you have undoubtedly learned, particles with the 
same kind of charge repel each other (1 repels 1, and  
2 repels 2), but particles with different charges are 
attracted to each other (1 and 2 attract). Thus, anions 
repel anions, cations repel cations, but anions and cations 
attract each other. The force exerted by this attraction or 
repulsion is called electrostatic pressure. Just as the force of 
diffusion moves molecules from regions of high concentra-
tion to regions of low concentration, electrostatic pressure 
x diffusion  Movement of molecules from regions of high 
concentration to regions of low concentration.
x electrolyte  An aqueous solution of a material that ionizes—
namely, a soluble acid, base, or salt.
x ion  A charged molecule. Cations are positively charged, and 
anions are negatively charged.
x electrostatic pressure  The attractive force between atomic 
particles charged with opposite signs or the repulsive force 
between atomic particles charged with the same sign.
x intracellular fluid  The fluid contained within cells.
x extracellular fluid  Body fluids located outside of cells.

46	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
the membrane, driven by energy provided by molecules 
of ATP produced by the mitochondria. These mole-
cules, known as sodium–potassium transporters, ex-
change Na1 for K1, pushing three sodium ions out for 
every two potassium ions they push in. (See Figure 2.19.)
Because the membrane is not very permeable to 
Na1, sodium–potassium transporters very effectively 
keep the intracellular concentration of Na1 low. By 
transporting K1 into the cell, they also increase the in-
tracellular concentration of K1 a small amount. The 
membrane is approximately 100 times more permeable 
to K1 than to Na1, so the increase is slight; but, as we will 
see when we study the process of neural inhibition later 
in this chapter, it is very important. The transporters 
that make up the sodium–potassium pump use consid-
erable energy: Up to 40 percent of a neuron’s metabolic 
resources are used to operate them. Neurons, muscle 
cells, glia—in fact, most cells of the body—have sodium–
potassium transporters in their membrane.
The Action Potential
As we saw, the forces of both diffusion and electro-
static pressure tend to push Na1 into the cell. How-
ever, the membrane is not very permeable to this ion, 
this ion within the cell contributes to the membrane po-
tential, it is located where it is because the membrane is 
impermeable to it.
The potassium ion K1 is concentrated within the 
axon; thus, the force of diffusion tends to push it out of 
the cell. However, the outside of the cell is charged 
positively with respect to the inside, so electrostatic 
pressure tends to force this cation inside. Thus, the two 
opposing forces balance, and potassium ions tend to 
remain where they are. (Refer again to Figure 2.18.)
The chloride ion Cl2 is in greatest concentration 
outside the axon. The force of diffusion pushes this ion 
inward. However, because the inside of the axon is neg-
atively charged, electrostatic pressure pushes this anion 
outward. Again, two opposing forces balance each other. 
(Look again at Figure 2.18.)
The sodium ion Na1 is also in greatest concentra-
tion outside the axon, so it, like Cl2, is pushed into the 
cell by the force of diffusion. But unlike chloride, the 
sodium ion is positively charged. Therefore, electrostatic 
pressure does not prevent Na1 from entering the cell; 
indeed, the negative charge inside the axon attracts Na1. 
(Look once more at Figure 2.18.)
How can Na1 remain in greatest concentration in 
the extracellular fluid, despite the fact that both forces 
(diffusion and electrostatic pressure) tend to push it 
inside? The answer is this: Another force, provided by 
the sodium–potassium pump, continuously pushes Na1 
out of the axon. The sodium–potassium pump consists 
of a large number of protein molecules embedded in 
+
+
+
+
+
+
K+
Na+
Cl–
K+
Na+
Cl–
A–
High
concentration
Electrostatic
pressure
Electrostatic
pressure
Electrostatic
pressure
Force of 
diffusion
Force of 
diffusion
Force of 
diffusion
Low 
concentration
Cannot
leave
cell
Inside of Cell
Outside of Cell
–
–
–
–
–
–
figure 2.18  Control of the Membrane Potential
The figure shows the relative concentration of some important ions inside and outside 
the neuron and the forces acting on them.
x sodium–potassium transporter  A protein found in the 
membrane of all cells that extrudes sodium ions from and 
transports potassium ions into the cell.

	
Communication Within a Neuron 	
47
potential: A brief increase in the permeability of the 
membrane to Na1 (allowing these ions to rush into the 
cell) is immediately followed by a transient increase in 
the permeability of the membrane to K1 (allowing 
these ions to rush out of the cell). What is responsible 
for these transient increases in permeability?
We already saw that one type of protein molecule 
embedded in the membrane—the sodium–potassium 
transporter—actively pumps sodium ions out of the cell 
and pumps potassium ions into it. Another type of pro-
tein molecule provides an opening that permits ions to 
enter or leave the cells. These molecules provide ion 
channels, which contain passages (“pores”) that can 
open or close. When an ion channel is open, a particular 
type of ion can flow through the pore and thus can enter 
or leave the cell. (See Figure 2.20.) Neural membranes 
contain many thousands of ion channels. For example, 
the giant squid axon contains several hundred sodium 
channels in each square micrometer of membrane. 
(There are one million square micrometers in a square 
millimeter; thus, a patch of axonal membrane the size of 
a lowercase letter o in this book would contain several 
hundred million sodium channels.) Each sodium chan-
nel can admit up to 100 million ions per second when it 
is open. Thus, the permeability of a membrane to a 
particular ion at a given moment is determined by the 
number of ion channels that are open.
The following numbered paragraphs describe the 
movements of ions through the membrane during the 
action potential. The numbers in the figure correspond 
and sodium–potassium transporters continuously 
pump out Na1, keeping the intracellular level of Na1 
low. But imagine what would happen if the membrane 
suddenly became permeable to Na1. The forces of dif-
fusion and electrostatic pressure would cause Na1 to 
rush into the cell. This sudden influx (inflow) of posi-
tively charged ions would drastically change the mem-
brane potential. Indeed, experiments have shown that 
this mechanism is precisely what causes the action  
figure 2.19  A Sodium–Potassium Transporter
These transporters are found in the cell membrane.
K+
K+
Na+
Na+
Na+
Sodium–potassium
transporter
3 sodium ions
pumped out
2 potassium ions
pumped in
Membrane
Inside of Cell
Outside of Cell
x ion channel  A specialized protein molecule that permits 
specific ions to enter or leave cells.
Closed ion
channel
Open ion
channel
Lipid molecules
in membrane
Ions
Protein subunits
of ion channel
Pore of ion
channel
Outside 
of Cell
Inside 
of Cell
figure 2.20  Ion Channels
When ion channels are open, ions can pass through them, entering or leaving the cell.

48	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
	 3.	 At about the time the action potential reaches its 
peak (in approximately 1 msec), the sodium 
channels become refractory—the channels become 
blocked and cannot open again until the mem-
brane once more reaches the resting potential. At 
this time, no more Na1 can enter the cell.
	 4.	 By now, the voltage-dependent potassium channels 
in the membrane are open, letting K1 ions move 
freely through the membrane. At this time, the in-
side of the axon is positively charged, so K1 is driven 
out of the cell by diffusion and by electrostatic pres-
sure. This outflow of cations causes the membrane 
potential to return toward its normal value. As it 
does so, the potassium channels begin to close again.
	 5.	 Once the membrane potential returns to normal, 
the sodium channels reset so that another depolar-
ization can cause them to open again.
	 6.	 The membrane actually overshoots its resting value 
(270 mV) and only gradually returns to normal as the 
potassium channels finally close. Eventually, sodium–
potassium transporters remove the Na1 ions that 
leaked in and retrieve the K1 ions that leaked out.
Figure 2.22 illustrates the changes in permeability 
of the membrane to sodium and potassium ions during 
the action potential. (See Figure 2.22.)
How much ionic flow is there? The increased per-
meability of the membrane to Na1 is brief, and diffu-
sion over any appreciable distance takes some time. 
Thus, when I say, “Na1 rushes in,” I do not mean that 
the axoplasm becomes flooded with Na1. At the peak of 
to the numbers of the paragraphs that follow. (See  
Figure 2.21.)
	 1.	 As soon as the threshold of excitation is reached, 
the sodium channels in the membrane open, and 
Na1 rushes in, propelled by the forces of diffusion 
and electrostatic pressure. The opening of these 
channels is triggered by reduction of the mem-
brane potential (depolarization); they open at the 
point at which an action potential begins: the 
threshold of excitation. Because these channels are 
opened by changes in the membrane potential, 
they are called voltage-dependent ion channels. 
The influx of positively charged sodium ions pro-
duces a rapid change in the membrane potential, 
from 270 mV to 140 mV.
	 2.	 The membrane of the axon contains voltage-depen-
dent potassium channels, but these channels are 
less sensitive than voltage-dependent sodium chan-
nels. That is, they require a greater level of depolar-
ization before they begin to open. Thus, they begin 
to open later than the sodium channels.
figure 2.21  Ion Movements During the Action 
Potential
The shaded box at the top shows the opening of sodium 
channels at the threshold of excitation, their refractory 
condition at the peak of the action potential, and their 
resetting when the membrane potential returns to normal.
0
1
1
2
3
3
4
5
6
5
+
+
–
–
+
+
–
–
+
+
–
–
–
–
+
+
Closed
Open
Refractory
Reset
Sodium channel
Sodium ions enter
Na+ channels
become
refractory, no
more Na+
enters cell
K+ channels
open, K+
begins to leave
cell
Na+ channels
open, Na+
begins to enter
cell
K+ continues to
leave cell,
causes membrane
potential to return
to resting level
K+ channels close,
Na+ channels reset
Extra K+ outside
diffuses away
Threshold of
excitation
Membrane potential (mV)
+40
–70
x voltage-dependent ion channel  An ion channel that opens or 
closes according to the value of the membrane potential.
0
0
20
Membrane potential (mV)
Action potential
Opening of Na+ channels
Opening of K+ channels
Time
+40
40
–70
Open channels per   m2 of membrane
µ
figure 2.22  Permeability to Ions During the 
Action Potential
The graph shows changes in the permeability of the 
membrane of an axon to Na1 and K1 during the action 
potential.

	
Communication Within a Neuron 	
49
in axons controls the strength of muscular contractions 
and represents the intensity of a physical stimulus. But if 
the action potential is an all-or-none event, how can it 
represent information that can vary in a continuous 
fashion? The answer is simple: A single action potential 
is not the basic element of information; rather, variable 
information is represented by an axon’s rate of firing. (In 
this context, firing refers to the production of action 
potentials.) A high rate of firing causes a strong muscu-
lar contraction, and a strong stimulus (such as a bright 
light) causes a high rate of firing in axons that serve the 
eyes. Thus, the all-or-none law is supplemented by the 
rate law. (See Figure 2.24.)
Recall that all but the smallest axons in mammalian 
nervous systems are myelinated; segments of the axons 
are covered by a myelin sheath produced by the oligo-
dendrocytes of the CNS or the Schwann cells of the 
PNS. These segments are separated by portions of naked 
axon, the nodes of Ranvier. Conduction of an action 
potential in a myelinated axon is somewhat different 
from conduction in an unmyelinated axon.
Schwann cells and the oligodendrocytes of the CNS 
wrap tightly around the axon, leaving no measurable 
extracellular fluid between them and the axon. The 
only place where a myelinated axon comes into contact 
the action potential a very thin layer of fluid immedi-
ately inside the axon becomes full of newly arrived Na1 
ions; this amount is indeed enough to reverse the mem-
brane potential. However, not enough time has elapsed 
for these ions to fill the entire axon. Before that event 
can take place, the Na1 channels close, and K1 starts 
flowing out.
Experiments have shown that an action potential 
temporarily increases the number of Na1 ions inside the 
giant squid axon by 0.0003 percent. Although the con-
centration just inside the membrane is high, the total 
number of ions entering the cell is very small relative to 
the number already there. This means that, on a short-
term basis, sodium–potassium transporters are not very 
important. The few Na1 ions that manage to leak in dif-
fuse into the rest of the axoplasm, and the slight in-
crease in Na1 concentration is hardly noticeable. How-
ever, sodium–potassium transporters are important on  
a long-term basis. Without the activity of sodium–potassium 
transporters, the concentration of sodium ions in the 
axoplasm would eventually increase enough that the 
axon would no longer be able to function.
Conduction of the Action Potential
Now that we have a basic understanding of the resting 
membrane potential and the production of the action 
potential, we can consider the movement of the mes-
sage down the axon, or conduction of the action potential. 
To study this phenomenon, we again make use of the 
giant squid axon. We attach an electrical stimulator to 
an electrode at one end of the axon and place recording 
electrodes, attached to oscilloscopes, at different dis-
tances from the stimulating electrode. Then we apply a 
depolarizing stimulus to the end of the axon and trigger 
an action potential. We record the action potential from 
each of the electrodes, one after the other. Thus, we see 
that the action potential is conducted down the axon. As 
the action potential travels, it remains constant in size. 
(See Figure 2.23.)
This experiment establishes a basic law of axonal con-
duction: the all-or-none law. This law states that an action 
potential either occurs or does not occur; and, once trig-
gered, it is transmitted down the axon to its end. An action 
potential always remains the same size, without growing or 
diminishing. And when an action potential reaches a 
point where the axon branches, it splits but does not 
diminish in size. An axon will transmit an action potential 
in either direction, or even in both directions, if it is started 
in the middle of the axon’s length. However, because  
action potentials in living animals start at the end attached 
to the soma, axons normally carry one-way traffic.
As you know, the strength of a muscular contraction 
can vary from very weak to very forceful, and the strength 
of a stimulus can vary from barely detectable to very in-
tense. We know that the occurrence of action potentials 
Depolarizing
stimulus
Oscilloscope
shows action
potentials
Giant
squid
axon
Direction of travel of action potential
figure 2.23  Conduction of the Action Potential
When an action potential is triggered, its size remains 
undiminished as it travels down the axon. The speed of 
conduction can be calculated from the delay between the 
stimulus and the action potential.
x all-or-none law  The principle that once an action potential is 
triggered in an axon, it is propagated, without decrement, to the 
end of the fiber.
x rate law  The principle that variations in the intensity of a 
stimulus or other information being transmitted in an axon are 
represented by variations in the rate at which that axon fires.

50	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
(undoubtedly) to think faster. One of the ways to in-
crease the speed of conduction is to increase size. Be-
cause it is so large, the unmyelinated squid axon, with a 
diameter of 500 μm, achieves a conduction velocity of 
approximately 35 m/sec (meters per second). However, 
a myelinated cat axon achieves the same speed with a 
diameter of a mere 6 μm. The fastest myelinated axon, 
20 μm in diameter, can conduct action potentials at a 
speedy 120 m/sec, or 432 km/h (kilometers per hour). 
At that speed a signal can get from one end of an axon 
to the other without much delay.
with the extracellular fluid is at a node of Ranvier, where 
the axon is naked. In the myelinated areas there can be 
no inward flow of Na1 when the sodium channels open 
because there is no extracellular sodium. The axon con-
ducts the electrical disturbance from the action poten-
tial to the next node of Ranvier. The disturbance is 
conducted passively, the way an electrical signal is con-
ducted through an insulated cable. The disturbance 
gets smaller as it passes down the axon, but it is still large 
enough to trigger a new action potential at the next 
node. (This decrease in the size of the disturbance is 
called decremental conduction.) The action potential gets 
retriggered, or repeated, at each node of Ranvier, and 
the electrical disturbance that results is conducted dec-
rementally along the myelinated area to the next node. 
Transmission of this message, hopping from node to 
node, is called saltatory conduction, from the Latin 
saltare, “to dance.” (See Figure 2.25.)
Saltatory conduction confers two advantages. The 
first is economic. Sodium ions enter axons during ac-
tion potentials, and these ions must eventually be re-
moved. Sodium–potassium transporters must be located 
along the entire length of unmyelinated axons because 
Na1 enters everywhere. However, because Na1 can enter 
myelinated axons only at the nodes of Ranvier, much 
less gets in, and consequently much less has to be 
pumped out again. Therefore, myelinated axons expend 
much less energy to maintain their sodium balance.
The second advantage to myelin is speed. Conduc-
tion of an action potential is faster in a myelinated axon 
because the transmission between the nodes is very fast. 
Increased speed enables an animal to react faster and 
figure 2.24  The Rate Law
The strength of a stimulus is represented by the rate of firing of an axon. The size of 
each action potential is always constant.
Weak stimulus
Action
potentials
Action
potentials
Stimulus
Stimulus
Strong stimulus
On
On
Off
Off
Time
x saltatory conduction  Conduction of action potentials by 
myelinated axons. The action potential appears to jump from one 
node of Ranvier to the next.
Myelin sheath
Depolarizing
stimulus
Decremental
conduction under
myelin sheath
Action potential
is regenerated
at nodes of Ranvier
figure 2.25  Saltatory Conduction
The figure shows propagation of an action potential 
down a myelinated axon.
Communication Within a Neuron
Section Summary
The withdrawal reflex illustrates how neurons can be 
connected to accomplish useful behaviors. The circuit 
responsible for this reflex consists of three sets of neu-
rons: sensory neurons, interneurons, and motor neurons. 
The reflex can be suppressed when neurons in the 
brain activate inhibitory interneurons that form syn-
apses with the motor neurons.

	
Communication Between Neurons 	
51
chemicals diffuse across the fluid-filled gap between the 
terminal buttons and the membranes of the neurons 
with which they form synapses. As we will see in this sec-
tion, neurotransmitters produce postsynaptic poten-
tials—brief depolarizations or hyperpolarizations—that  
increase or decrease the rate of firing of the axon of 
the postsynaptic neuron. To see an interactive animation 
of the information presented in the following section, 
Simulate synapses on MyPsychLab.
Neurotransmitters exert their effects on cells by at-
taching to a particular region of a receptor molecule 
Communication Between  
Neurons
Now that you know about the basic structure of neurons 
and the nature of the action potential, it is time to de-
scribe the ways in which neurons can communicate with 
each other. These communications make it possible for 
circuits of neurons to gather sensory information, make 
plans, and initiate behaviors.
The primary means of communication between 
neurons is synaptic transmission—the transmission of 
messages from one neuron to another through a syn-
apse. As we saw, these messages are carried by neu-
rotransmitters, released by terminal buttons. These 
The message that is conducted down an axon is 
called an action potential. The membranes of all cells 
of the body are electrically charged, but only axons 
can produce action potentials. The resting membrane 
potential occurs because various ions are located in 
different concentrations in the fluid inside and outside 
the cell. The extracellular fluid (like seawater) is rich in 
Na1 and Cl2, and the intracellular fluid is rich in K1 
and various organic anions, designated as A2.
The cell membrane is freely permeable to water, 
but its permeability to various ions—in particular, Na1 
and K1—is regulated by ion channels. When the 
membrane potential is at its resting value (–70 mV), 
the voltage-dependent sodium and potassium chan-
nels are closed. Some Na1 continuously leaks into the 
axon but is promptly forced out of the cell again by 
the sodium–potassium transporters (which also pump 
potassium into the axon). When an electrical stimula-
tor depolarizes the membrane of the axon so that its 
potential reaches the threshold of excitation, voltage-
dependent sodium channels open, and Na1 rushes 
into the cell, driven by the force of diffusion and by 
electrostatic pressure. The entry of these positively 
charged ions further reduces the membrane potential 
and, indeed, causes it to reverse, so the inside 
becomes positive. The opening of the sodium chan-
nels is temporary; they soon close again. The depo-
larization caused by the influx of Na1 activates  
voltage-dependent potassium channels, and K1 
leaves the axon, traveling down its concentration  
gradient. This efflux (outflow) of K1 quickly brings  
the membrane potential back to its resting value.
Because an action potential of a given axon is an 
all-or-none phenomenon, neurons represent intensity 
by their rate of firing. The action potential normally 
begins at one end of the axon, where the axon 
attaches to the soma. The action potential travels 
continuously down unmyelinated axons, remaining 
constant in size, until it reaches the terminal buttons. 
(If the axon divides, an action potential continues 
down each branch.) In myelinated axons, ions can 
flow through the membrane only at the nodes of 
Ranvier, because the axons are covered everywhere 
else with myelin, which isolates them from the extra-
cellular fluid. Thus, the action potential is conducted 
passively from one node of Ranvier to the next. When 
the electrical message reaches a node, voltage-
dependent sodium channels open, and a new action 
potential is triggered. This mechanism saves a consid-
erable amount of energy because sodium–potassium 
transporters are not needed along the myelinated 
portions of the axon, and saltatory conduction is 
faster.
 Thought Question
The evolution of the human brain, with all its com-
plexity, depended on many apparently trivial mecha-
nisms. For example, what if cells had not developed 
the ability to manufacture myelin? Unmyelinated 
axons must be very large if they are to transmit action 
potentials rapidly. How big would the human brain 
have to be if oligodendrocytes did not produce 
myelin? Could the human brain as we know it have 
evolved without myelin?
x postsynaptic potential  Alterations in the membrane potential 
of a postsynaptic neuron, produced by liberation of neurotransmit-
ter at the synapse.

52	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
billionth of a meter.) The synaptic cleft contains extracel-
lular fluid, through which the neurotransmitter diffuses. 
A meshwork of filaments crosses the synaptic cleft and 
keeps the presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes in 
alignment. (See Figure 2.27.)
As you may have noticed in Figure 2.27, two promi-
nent structures are located in the cytoplasm of the ter-
minal button: mitochondria and synaptic vesicles. We 
also see microtubules, which are responsible for trans-
porting material between the soma and terminal but-
ton. The presence of mitochondria implies that the ter-
minal button needs energy to perform its functions. 
Synaptic vesicles are small, rounded objects in the shape 
of spheres or ovoids. (The term vesicle means “little  
bladder.”) A given terminal button can contain from a 
few hundred to nearly a million synaptic vesicles. Many 
terminal buttons contain two types of synaptic vesicles: 
called the binding site. A molecule of the chemical fits 
into the binding site the way a key fits into a lock: The 
shape of the binding site and the shape of the molecule 
of the neurotransmitter are complementary. A chemical 
that attaches to a binding site is called a ligand, from  
ligare, “to bind.” Neurotransmitters are natural ligands, 
produced and released by neurons. But other chemicals 
found in nature (primarily in plants or in the poisonous 
venoms of animals) can serve as ligands too. In addition, 
artificial ligands can be produced in the laboratory. 
These chemicals are discussed in Chapter 4, which deals 
with drugs and their effects.
Structure of Synapses
As you have already learned, synapses are junctions be-
tween the terminal buttons at the ends of the axonal 
branches of one neuron and the membrane of another. 
Synapses can occur in three places: on dendrites, on the 
soma, and on other axons. These synapses are referred 
to as axodendritic, axosomatic, and axoaxonic. Axodendritic 
synapses can occur on the smooth surface of a dendrite 
or on dendritic spines—small protrusions that stud the 
dendrites of several types of large neurons in the brain. 
(See Figure 2.26.)
Figure 2.27 illustrates a synapse. The presynaptic 
membrane, located at the end of the terminal button, 
faces the postsynaptic membrane, located on the neuron 
that receives the message (the postsynaptic neuron). These 
two membranes face each other across the synaptic  
cleft, a gap that varies in size from synapse to synapse but 
is usually around 20 nm wide. (A nanometer, nm, is one 
x binding site  The location on a receptor protein to which a 
ligand binds.
x ligand (lye gand or ligg and)  A chemical that binds with the 
binding site of a receptor.
x dendritic spine  A small bud on the surface of a dendrite, with 
which a terminal button of another neuron forms a synapse.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Terminal
button
Terminal
button
Terminal
button
Smooth
dendrite
Dendritic
spine
Somatic
membrane
Presynaptic
terminal button
Postsynaptic
terminal button
figure 2.26  Types of Synapses
Axodendritic synapses can occur on the smooth surface of a dendrite (a) or on 
dendritic spines (b). Axosomatic synapses occur on somatic membrane (c). Axoaxonic 
synapses consist of synapses between two terminal buttons (d).
x presynaptic membrane  The membrane of a terminal button 
that lies adjacent to the postsynaptic membrane and through 
which the neurotransmitter is released.
x postsynaptic membrane  The cell membrane opposite the 
terminal button in a synapse; the membrane of the cell that 
receives the message.
x synaptic cleft  The space between the presynaptic membrane 
and the postsynaptic membrane.

	
Communication Between Neurons 	
53
large and small. Small synaptic vesicles (found in all 
terminal buttons) contain molecules of the neurotrans-
mitter. They range in number from a few dozen to sev-
eral hundred. The membrane of small synaptic vesicles 
consists of approximately 10,000 lipid molecules into 
which are inserted about 200 protein molecules. Trans-
port proteins fill vesicles with the neurotransmitter, and 
trafficking proteins are involved in the release of neu-
rotransmitter and recycling of the vesicles. Synaptic ves-
icles are found in greatest numbers around the part of 
the presynaptic membrane that faces the synaptic cleft—
near the release zone, the region from which the neu-
rotransmitter is released. In many terminal buttons we 
see a scattering of large, dense-core synaptic vesicles. 
These vesicles contain one of a number of different 
peptides, the functions of which are described later in 
this chapter. (See Figures 2.27 and 2.28.)
Small synaptic vesicles are produced in the Golgi 
apparatus located in the soma and are carried by fast 
axoplasmic transport to the terminal button. As we will 
see, some are also produced from recycled material in 
the terminal button. Large synaptic vesicles are pro-
duced only in the soma and are transported through the 
axoplasm to the terminal buttons.
In an electron micrograph the postsynaptic mem-
brane under the terminal button appears somewhat 
thicker and more dense than the membrane elsewhere. 
This postsynaptic density is caused by the presence of 
receptors—specialized protein molecules that detect 
the presence of neurotransmitters in the synaptic cleft—
and protein filaments that hold the receptors in place. 
(Look again at Figures 2.27 and 2.28.)
Neuron
Detail of Synapse
Mitochondrion
Microtubule
Synaptic
vesicle
Synaptic
cleft
Synaptic vesicle
being transported
from soma
Terminal button
Presynaptic 
membrane
Postsynaptic 
membrane
Postsynaptic 
density
Synaptic vesicle
located at release
zone
figure 2.27  Details of a Synapse
x synaptic vesicle (vess i kul)  A small, hollow, beadlike  
structure found in terminal buttons; contains molecules of a 
neurotransmitter.
x release zone  A region of the interior of the presynaptic 
membrane of a synapse to which synaptic vesicles attach and 
release their neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft.
Large dense-
core vesicle
Large dense-
core vesicle
Synaptic
vesicles
Synaptic
vesicles
Dendritic
spine
Dendritic
spine
Postsynaptic
density
Postsynaptic
density
Terminal
button
200nm
figure 2.28  Cross Section of a Synapse
The photograph from an electron microscope shows a 
cross section of a synapse. The terminal button contains 
many synaptic vesicles, filled with the neurotransmitter, 
and a single large dense-core vesicle, filled with a 
peptide.
(From De Camilli et al., in Synapses, edited by W. M. Cowan, T. C. Südhof, and  
C. F. Stevens. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001. Reprinted 
with permission.)

54	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
Release of Neurotransmitter
When action potentials are conducted down an axon 
(and down all of its branches), something happens in-
side all of the terminal buttons: A number of small syn-
aptic vesicles located just inside the presynaptic mem-
brane fuse with the membrane and then break open, 
spilling their contents into the synaptic cleft. Figure 2.29 
shows a portion of a frog’s neuromuscular junction—
the synapse between a terminal button and a muscle 
fiber. The axon has just been stimulated, and synaptic 
vesicles in the terminal button are in the process of 
releasing the neurotransmitter. Note that some vesicles 
are fused with the presynaptic membrane, forming the 
shape of an omega (Ω). (See Figure 2.29.)
How does an action potential cause synaptic vesicles 
to release the neurotransmitter? The process begins 
when a population of synaptic vesicles become “docked” 
against the presynaptic membrane, ready to release 
their neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft. Docking is 
accomplished when clusters of protein molecules attach 
to other protein molecules located in the presynaptic 
membrane. (See Figure 2.30.)
Postsynaptic
membrane
Presynaptic
membrane
Omega
figure
Synaptic
vesicle
figure 2.29  Cross Section of a Synapse
The photograph from an electron microscope shows a 
cross section of a synapse. The omega-shaped figures are 
synaptic vesicles fusing with the presynaptic membranes 
of terminal buttons that form synapses with frog muscle.
(From Heuser, J. E., in Society for Neuroscience Symposia, Vol. II, edited by W. M.  
Cowan and J. A. Ferrendelli. Bethesda, MD: Society for Neuroscience, 1977. 
Reprinted with permission.)
figure 2.30  Release of Neurotransmitter
An action potential opens calcium channels, which enter and bind with the protein 
embedded in the membrane of synaptic vesicles docked at the release zone. The 
fusion pores open, and the neurotransmitter is released into the synaptic cleft.
Undocked synaptic vesicle
Cluster of protein molecules
in membrane of synaptic vesicle
Docked synaptic vesicle
"Omega"
figures
Cluster of protein
in presynaptic
membrane
Entry of calcium
opens fusion pore
Fusion pore widens,
membrane of synaptic
vesicle fuses with
presynaptic membrane
Molecules of
neurotransmitter
begin to leave
terminal button
Presynaptic
membrane
Calcium
channel

	
Communication Between Neurons 	
55
(primarily those in the recycling pool) merge and recy-
cle and consequently lose their identity. The membranes 
of these vesicles merge with the presynaptic membrane. 
Little buds of membrane then pinch off into the cyto-
plasm and become synaptic vesicles. The appropriate 
proteins are inserted into the membrane of these vesi-
cles, and the vesicles are filled with molecules of the 
neurotransmitter. The membranes of vesicles in the re-
serve pool are recycled through a process of bulk endocy-
tosis. (Endocytosis means “the process of entering a cell.”) 
Large pieces of the membrane of the terminal button 
fold inward, break off, and enter the cytoplasm. New 
vesicles are formed from small buds that break off of 
these pieces of membrane. The recycling process takes 
less than a second for the readily releasable pool, a few 
seconds for the recycling pool, and a few minutes for the 
reserve pool. (See Figure 2.32.)
The release zone of the presynaptic membrane con-
tains voltage-dependent calcium channels. When the 
membrane of the terminal button is depolarized by an 
arriving action potential, the calcium channels open. 
Like sodium ions, calcium ions (Ca21) are located in 
highest concentration in the extracellular fluid. Thus, 
when the voltage-dependent calcium channels open, 
Ca21 flows into the cell, propelled by electrostatic pres-
sure and the force of diffusion. The entry of Ca21 is an 
essential step; if neurons are placed in a solution that 
contains no calcium ions, an action potential no longer 
causes the release of the neurotransmitter. (Calcium 
transporters, similar in operation to sodium–potassium 
transporters, later remove the intracellular Ca21.)
As we will see later in this chapter and in subsequent 
chapters of this book, calcium ions play many important 
roles in biological processes within cells. Calcium ions 
can bind with various types of proteins, changing their 
characteristics. Some of the calcium ions that enter the 
terminal button bind with the clusters of protein mole-
cules that join the membrane of the synaptic vesicles 
with the presynaptic membrane. This event makes the 
segments of the clusters of protein molecules move 
apart, producing a fusion pore—a hole through both 
membranes that enables them to fuse together. The 
process of fusion takes approximately 0.1 msec. (Look 
again at Figure 2.30.)
Figure 2.31 shows two photomicrographs of the pre-
synaptic membrane, before and after the fusion pores 
have opened. We see the face of the presynaptic mem-
brane as it would be viewed from the postsynaptic mem-
brane. As you can see, the synaptic vesicles are aligned in 
a row along the release zone. The small bumps arranged 
in lines on each side of the synaptic vesicles appear to be 
voltage-dependent calcium channels. (See Figure 2.31.)
Research indicates that there are three distinct 
pools of synaptic vesicles (Rizzoli and Betz, 2005). 
Release-ready vesicles are docked against the inside of the 
presynaptic membrane, ready to release their contents 
when an action potential arrives. These vesicles consti-
tute less than 1 percent of the total number found in the 
terminal. Vesicles in the recycling pool constitute 10–15 
percent of the total pool of vesicles, and those in the 
reserve pool make up the remaining 85–90 percent. If 
the axon fires at a low rate, only vesicles from the 
release-ready pool will be called on. If the rate of firing 
increases, vesicles from the recycling pool and finally 
from the reserve pool will release their contents.
What happens to the membrane of the synaptic 
vesicles after they have broken open and released the 
neurotransmitter they contain? It appears that many 
vesicles in the ready-release pool use a process known as 
kiss and run. These synaptic vesicles release most or all of 
their neurotransmitter, the fusion pore closes, and the 
vesicles break away from the presynaptic membrane and 
get filled with neurotransmitter again. Other vesicles 
Calcium channels–when open,
cause release of neurotransmitter
Synaptic vesicles fused with the presynaptic
membrane, releasing the neurotransmitter
(a)
(b)
figure 2.31  Release of Neurotransmitter
These photomicrographs show the release of 
neurotransmitter by a terminal button that forms a 
synapse with a frog muscle. The views are of the surface 
of the fusion zone of the terminal button. (a) Just before 
release. The two rows of dots are probably calcium 
channels. (b) During release. The larger circles are holes 
in the presynaptic membrane, revealing the contents of 
the synaptic vesicles that have fused with it.
(From Heuser, J., and Reese, T. Journal of Cell Biology, 1981, 88, 564–580. 
Reprinted with permission.)

56	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
method is simpler, so I will describe it first. Figure 2.33 
illustrates a neurotransmitter-dependent ion channel 
that is equipped with its own binding site. When a mole-
cule of the appropriate neurotransmitter attaches to it, 
the ion channel opens. The formal name for this com-
bination receptor/ion channel is an ionotropic recep-
tor. (See Figure 2.33.)
Ionotropic receptors were first discovered in the or-
gan that produces electrical current in Torpedo, the elec-
tric ray, where they occur in great number. (The electric 
ray is a fish that generates a powerful electrical current, 
not some kind of Star Wars weapon.) These receptors, 
which are sensitive to a neurotransmitter called acetylcho-
line, contain sodium channels. When these channels are 
open, sodium ions enter the cell and depolarize the 
membrane.
Activation of Receptors
How do molecules of the neurotransmitter produce a 
depolarization or hyperpolarization in the postsynaptic 
membrane? They do so by diffusing across the synaptic 
cleft and attaching to the binding sites of special protein 
molecules located in the postsynaptic membrane, called 
postsynaptic receptors. Once binding occurs, the postsyn-
aptic receptors open neurotransmitter-dependent ion 
channels, which permit the passage of specific ions into or 
out of the cell. Thus, the presence of the neurotransmitter 
in the synaptic cleft allows particular ions to pass through 
the membrane, changing the local membrane potential.
Neurotransmitters open ion channels by at least  
two different methods, direct and indirect. The direct 
figure 2.32  Recycling of the Membrane  
of Synaptic Vesicles
After synaptic vesicles have released neurotransmitter 
into the synaptic cleft, the following takes place: In "kiss 
and run," the vesicle fuses with the presynaptic 
membrane, releases the neurotransmitter, reseals, leaves 
the docking site, becomes refilled with the 
neurotransmitter, and mixes with other vesicles in the 
terminal button. In "merge and recycle," the vesicle 
completely fuses with the postsynaptic membrane, losing 
its identity. Extra membrane from fused vesicles pinches 
off into the cytoplasm and forms vesicles, which are filled 
with the neurotransmitter. The membranes of vesicles in 
the reserve pool are recycled through a process of bulk 
endocytosis. Large pieces of the membrane of the 
terminal button fold inward, break off, and enter the 
cytoplasm. New vesicles are formed from small buds that 
break off of these pieces of membrane.
Kiss and
run
Merge and
recycle
Synaptic
vesicles
Vesicles are filled
with neurotransmitter
Bulk
endocytosis
x postsynaptic receptor  A receptor molecule in the postsynap-
tic membrane of a synapse that contains a binding site for a 
neurotransmitter.
x neurotransmitter-dependent ion channel  An ion channel that 
opens when a molecule of a neurotransmitter binds with a 
postsynaptic receptor.
x ionotropic receptor (eye on oh trow pik)  A receptor that 
contains a binding site for a neurotransmitter and an ion channel 
that opens when a molecule of the neurotransmitter attaches to 
the binding site.
Binding site
of receptor
Molecule of
neurotransmitter
attached to
binding site
Ions
Open
ion channel
Closed
ion channel
Inside
of Cell
figure 2.33  Ionotropic Receptors
The ion channel opens when a molecule of 
neurotransmitter attaches to the binding site. For 
purposes of clarity the drawing is schematic; molecules of 
neurotransmitter are actually much larger than individual ions.

	
Communication Between Neurons 	
57
even turn specific genes on or off, thus initiating or ter-
minating production of particular proteins.
Postsynaptic Potentials
As I mentioned earlier, postsynaptic potentials can be 
either depolarizing (excitatory) or hyperpolarizing 
(inhibitory). What determines the nature of the post-
synaptic potential at a particular synapse is not the 
neurotransmitter itself. Instead, it is determined by the 
characteristics of the postsynaptic receptors—in parti-
cular, by the particular type of ion channel they open.
As Figure 2.35 shows, four major types of neurotrans-
mitter-dependent ion channels are found in the postsyn-
aptic membrane: sodium (Na1), potassium (K1), chloride 
(Cl2), and calcium (Ca21). Although the figure depicts 
only directly activated (ionotropic) ion channels, you 
should realize that many ion channels are activated indi-
rectly, by metabotropic receptors coupled to G proteins.
The neurotransmitter-dependent sodium channel is 
the most important source of excitatory postsynaptic po-
tentials. As we saw, sodium–potassium transporters keep 
sodium outside the cell, waiting for the forces of diffusion 
and electrostatic pressure to push it in. Obviously, when 
sodium channels are opened, the result is a depolariza-
tion—an excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP). (See 
Figure 2.35a.) We also saw that sodium–potassium trans-
porters maintain a small surplus of potassium ions inside 
the cell. If potassium channels open, some of these cations 
will follow this gradient and leave the cell. Because K1 is 
positively charged, its efflux will hyperpolarize the mem-
brane, producing an inhibitory postsynaptic potential 
(IPSP). (See Figure 2.35b.) At many synapses, inhibitory 
neurotransmitters open the chloride channels, instead of 
(or in addition to) potassium channels. The effect of open-
ing chloride channels depends on the membrane potential 
of the neuron. If the membrane is at the resting potential, 
The indirect method is more complicated. Some 
receptors do not open ion channels directly but instead 
start a chain of chemical events. These receptors are 
called metabotropic receptors because they involve 
steps that require that the cell expend metabolic en-
ergy. Metabotropic receptors are located in close prox-
imity to another protein attached to the membrane—a 
G protein. When a molecule of the neurotransmitter 
binds with the receptor, the receptor activates a G pro-
tein situated inside the membrane next to the receptor. 
When activated, the G protein activates an enzyme that 
stimulates the production of a chemical called a second 
messenger. (The neurotransmitter is the first messen-
ger.) Molecules of the second messenger travel through 
the cytoplasm, attach themselves to nearby ion chan-
nels, and cause them to open. Compared with postsyn-
aptic potentials produced by ionotropic receptors, 
those produced by metabotropic receptors take longer 
to begin and last longer. (See Figure 2.34.)
The first second messenger to be discovered was cy-
clic AMP, a chemical that is synthesized from ATP. Since 
then, several other second messengers have been discov-
ered. As you will see in later chapters, second messengers 
play an important role in both synaptic and nonsynaptic 
communication. And they can do more than open ion 
channels. For example, they can travel to the nucleus or 
other regions of the neuron and initiate biochemical 
changes that affect the functions of the cell. They can 
x metabotropic receptor (meh tab oh trow pik)  A receptor 
that contains a binding site for a neurotransmitter; activates an 
enzyme that begins a series of events that opens an ion channel 
elsewhere in the membrane of the cell when a molecule of the 
neurotransmitter attaches to the binding site.
x G protein  A protein coupled to a metabotropic receptor; 
conveys messages to other molecules when a ligand binds with 
and activates the receptor.
x second messenger  A chemical produced when a G protein 
activates an enzyme; carries a signal that results in the opening of 
the ion channel or causes other events to occur in the cell.
Molecule of
neurotransmitter
Surface of
membrane
Metabotropic receptor
Open ion
channel
Molecule of neurotransmitter
attached to binding site of
metabotropic receptor
Closed ion
channel
figure 2.34  Metabotropic Receptors
When a molecule of neurotransmitter binds with a receptor, 
a G protein activates an enzyme, which produces a second 
messenger (represented by black arrows) that opens nearby 
ion channels.
x excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP)  An excitatory 
depolarization of the postsynaptic membrane of a synapse caused 
by the liberation of a neurotransmitter by the terminal button.
x inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP)  An inhibitory 
hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic membrane of a synapse 
caused by the liberation of a neurotransmitter by the terminal 
button.

58	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
receptors with molecules of a neurotransmitter. They 
are kept brief by two mechanisms: reuptake and enzy-
matic deactivation.
The postsynaptic potentials produced by most 
neurotransmitters are terminated by reuptake. This 
process is simply an extremely rapid removal of neu-
rotransmitter from the synaptic cleft by the terminal 
button. The neurotransmitter does not return in the 
vesicles that get pinched off the membrane of the 
terminal button. Instead, the membrane contains 
special transporter molecules that draw on the cell’s 
energy reserves to force molecules of the neurotrans-
mitter from the synaptic cleft directly into the cyto-
plasm—just as sodium–potassium transporters move 
Na1 and K1 across the membrane. When an action 
potential arrives, the terminal button releases a small 
amount of neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft 
and then takes it back, giving the postsynaptic recep-
tors only a brief exposure to the neurotransmitter. 
(See Figure 2.36.)
Enzymatic deactivation is accomplished by an en-
zyme that destroys molecules of the neurotransmit-
ter. Postsynaptic potentials are terminated in this way 
for acetylcholine (ACh) and for neurotransmitters 
that consist of peptide molecules. Transmission at 
nothing happens, because (as we saw earlier) the forces of 
diffusion and electrostatic pressure balance perfectly for 
the chloride ion. However, if the membrane potential has 
already been depolarized by the activity of excitatory syn-
apses located nearby, then the opening of chloride chan-
nels will permit Cl2 to enter the cell. The influx of anions 
will bring the membrane potential back to its normal rest-
ing condition. Thus, the opening of chloride channels 
serves to neutralize EPSPs. (See Figure 2.35c.)
The fourth type of neurotransmitter-dependent ion 
channel is the calcium channel. Calcium ions (Ca21), 
being positively charged and being located in highest 
concentration outside the cell, act like sodium ions; that 
is, the opening of calcium channels depolarizes the 
membrane, producing EPSPs. But calcium does even 
more. As we saw earlier in this chapter, the entry of cal-
cium into the terminal button triggers the migration of 
synaptic vesicles and the release of the neurotransmitter. 
In the dendrites of the postsynaptic cell, calcium binds 
with and activates special enzymes. These enzymes have 
a variety of effects, including the production of biochem-
ical and structural changes in the postsynaptic neuron. 
As we will see in Chapter 13, one of the ways in which 
learning affects the connections between neurons in-
volves changes in dendritic spines initiated by the open-
ing of calcium channels. (See Figure 2.35d.)
Termination of Postsynaptic  
Potentials
Postsynaptic potentials are brief depolarizations or hyper-
polarizations caused by the activation of postsynaptic  
a
b
c
d
  
 
K  
+
 
Enzyme
Molecule of neurotransmitter
attached to binding site
Ion channel
Membrane
Influx of Na+ causes
depolarization
(EPSP)
Na+
Na+
Efflux of K+ causes
hyperpolarization
(IPSP)
Influx of Cl- causes
hyperpolarization
(IPSP)
Influx of Ca2+
activates enzyme
Effects
K+
Cl-
Cl-
Ca2+
Ca2+
Enzyme
Outside of Cell
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
figure 2.35  Ionic Movements During Postsynaptic Potentials
x reuptake  The reentry of a neurotransmitter just liberated by a 
terminal button back through its membrane, thus terminating the 
postsynaptic potential.
x enzymatic deactivation  The destruction of a neurotransmitter 
by an enzyme after its release—for example, the destruction of 
acetylcholine by acetylcholinesterase.

	
Communication Between Neurons 	
59
curare, a poison that blocks neural transmission at the 
synapses on muscles. A drug called physostigmine, which 
deactivates acetylcholinesterase, serves as an antidote for 
curare poisoning. As we just saw, AChE is an enzyme that 
destroys the ACh and terminates the postsynaptic poten-
tials it produces. By deactivating AChE, physostigmine 
greatly increases and prolongs the effects of ACh on the 
postsynaptic membrane. Thus, it increases the strength 
of synaptic transmission at the synapses on muscles and 
reverses the effects of curare. (Chapter 4 will say more 
about both curare and physostigmine.)
Dr. Walker reasoned that if physostigmine reversed 
the effects of curare poisoning, perhaps it would also 
reverse the symptoms of myasthenia gravis. She tried it, 
and it did within a matter of a few minutes. Later, 
synapses on muscle fibers and at some synapses be-
tween neurons in the central nervous system is medi-
ated by ACh. Postsynaptic potentials produced by 
ACh are short lived because the postsynaptic mem-
brane at these synapses contains an enzyme called 
acetylcholinesterase (AChE). AChE destroys ACh by 
cleaving it into its constituents: choline and acetate. 
Because neither of these substances is capable of ac-
tivating postsynaptic receptors, the postsynaptic po-
tential is terminated once the molecules of ACh are 
broken apart. AChE is an extremely energetic de-
stroyer of ACh; one molecule of AChE will chop 
apart more that 5000 molecules of ACh each second.
You will recall that Kathryn, the woman featured in 
the case history that opened this chapter, suffered from 
progressive muscular weakness. As her neurologist dis-
covered, Kathryn had myasthenia gravis. This disease was 
first described in 1672 by Thomas Willis, an English 
physician. The term literally means “grave muscle weak-
ness.” It is not a very common disorder, but most ex-
perts believe that many mild cases go undiagnosed.
In 1934, Dr. Mary Walker remarked that the symp-
toms of myasthenia gravis resembled the effects of  
Molecules of neurotransmitter
returned to terminal button
Transporter
Presynaptic
membrane
Postsynaptic
membrane
Synaptic
cleft
Postsynaptic
receptor
“Omega ﬁgure”–
remnants of synaptic
vesicle that has
released its
neurotransmitter
figure 2.36  Reuptake
Molecules of a neurotransmitter that has been released into the synaptic 
cleft are transported back into the terminal button.
x acetylcholine (ACh) (a see tul koh leen)  A neurotransmitter 
found in the brain, spinal cord, and parts of the peripheral nervous 
system; responsible for muscular contraction.
x acetylcholinesterase (AChE) (a see tul koh lin ess ter ace)  The 
enzyme that destroys acetylcholine soon after it is liberated by the 
terminal buttons, thus terminating the postsynaptic potential.

60	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
The rate at which a neuron fires is controlled by the 
relative activity of the excitatory and inhibitory synapses 
on its dendrites and soma. If the activity of excitatory 
synapses goes up, the rate of firing will go up. If the ac-
tivity of inhibitory synapses goes up, the rate of firing 
will go down.
Note that neural inhibition (that is, an inhibitory 
postsynaptic potential) does not always produce behavioral 
inhibition. For example, suppose a group of neurons  
inhibits a particular movement. If these neurons are in-
hibited, they will no longer suppress the behavior. Thus, 
inhibition of the inhibitory neurons makes the behavior 
more likely to occur. Of course, the same is true for neu-
ral excitation. Excitation of neurons that inhibit a behavior 
suppresses that behavior. For example, when we are 
dreaming, a particular set of inhibitory neurons in the 
brain becomes active and prevents us from getting up 
and acting out our dreams. (As we will see in Chapter 9, 
if these neurons are damaged, people will act out their 
dreams.) Neurons are elements in complex circuits; with-
out knowing the details of these circuits, one cannot 
predict the effects of the excitation or inhibition of one 
set of neurons on an organism’s behavior.
Autoreceptors
Postsynaptic receptors detect the presence of a neu-
rotransmitter in the synaptic cleft and initiate excit-
atory or inhibitory postsynaptic potentials. But the post-
synaptic membrane is not the only location of receptors 
that respond to neurotransmitters. Many neurons also 
possess receptors that respond to the neurotransmitter 
that they themselves release, called autoreceptors.
Autoreceptors can be located on the membrane of 
any part of the cell, but in this discussion we will consider 
those located on the terminal button. In most cases these 
autoreceptors do not control ion channels. Thus, when 
stimulated by a molecule of the neurotransmitter, autore-
ceptors do not produce changes in the membrane poten-
tial of the terminal button. Instead, they regulate internal 
processes, including the synthesis and release of the neu-
rotransmitter. (As you may have guessed, autoreceptors 
are metabotropic; the control they exert on these pro-
cesses is accomplished through G proteins and second 
messengers.) In most cases the effects of autoreceptor 
activation are inhibitory; that is, the presence of the neu-
rotransmitter in the extracellular fluid in the vicinity of 
pharmaceutical companies discovered drugs that 
could be taken orally and that produced longer-lasting 
effects. Nowadays, an injectable drug is used to make 
the diagnosis (as in Kathryn’s case), and an oral drug 
is used to treat it. Unfortunately, no cure has yet been 
found for myasthenia gravis.
Like multiple sclerosis, myasthenia gravis is an auto-
immune disease. For some reason the immune system 
becomes sensitized against the protein that makes up 
acetylcholine receptors. Almost as fast as new ACh recep-
tors are produced, the immune system destroys them.
Effects of Postsynaptic Potentials: 
Neural Integration
We have seen how neurons are interconnected by 
means of synapses, how action potentials trigger the 
release of neurotransmitters, and how these chemicals 
initiate excitatory or inhibitory postsynaptic potentials. 
Excitatory postsynaptic potentials increase the likeli-
hood that the postsynaptic neuron will fire; inhibitory 
postsynaptic potentials decrease this likelihood. (Re-
member, “firing” refers to the occurrence of an action 
potential.) Thus, the rate at which an axon fires is deter-
mined by the relative activity of the excitatory and in-
hibitory synapses on the soma and dendrites of that cell. 
If there are no active excitatory synapses or if the activity 
of inhibitory synapses is particularly high, that rate 
could be close to zero.
Let us look at the elements of this process. To see an 
interactive animation of the information presented in the  
rest of this chapter, 
Simulate postsynaptic potentials 
on MyPsychLab.
The interaction of the effects of excitatory and 
inhibitory synapses on a particular neuron is called 
neural integration. (Integration means “to make 
whole,” in the sense of combining two or more func-
tions.) Figure 2.37 illustrates the effects of excitatory 
and inhibitory synapses on a postsynaptic neuron. 
The top panel shows what happens when several excit-
atory synapses become active. The release of the neu-
rotransmitter produces depolarizing EPSPs in the 
dendrites of the neuron. These EPSPs (represented in 
red) are then transmitted down the dendrites, across 
the soma, to the axon hillock located at the base of 
the axon. If the depolarization is still strong enough 
when it reaches this point, the axon will fire. (See 
Figure 2.37a.)
Now let’s consider what would happen if, at the same 
time, inhibitory synapses also become active. Inhibitory 
postsynaptic potentials are hyperpolarizing—they bring 
the membrane potential away from the threshold of exci-
tation. Thus, they tend to cancel the effects of excitatory 
postsynaptic potentials. (See Figure 2.37b.)
x neural integration  The process by which inhibitory and 
excitatory postsynaptic potentials summate and control the rate of 
firing of a neuron.
x autoreceptor  A receptor molecule located on a neuron that 
responds to the neurotransmitter released by that neuron.

	
Communication Between Neurons 	
61
If the activity of the axoaxonic synapse decreases the 
release of the neurotransmitter, the effect is called  
presynaptic inhibition. If it increases the release, it is 
called presynaptic facilitation. (See Figure 2.38.) By the 
way, as we will see in Chapter 4, the active ingredient in 
marijuana exerts its effects on the brain by binding with 
presynaptic receptors.
Many very small neurons have extremely short pro-
cesses and apparently lack axons. These neurons form 
dendrodendritic synapses, or synapses between dendrites. 
Because these neurons lack long axonal processes, they 
do not transmit information from place to place within 
the brain. Most investigators believe that they perform 
regulatory functions, perhaps helping to organize the 
activity of groups of neurons. Because these neurons are 
so small, they are difficult to study; therefore, little is 
known about their function.
the neuron causes a decrease in the rate of synthesis or 
release of the neurotransmitter. Most investigators be-
lieve that autoreceptors are part of a regulatory system 
that controls the amount of neurotransmitter that is re-
leased. If too much is released, the autoreceptors inhibit 
both production and release; if not enough is released, 
the rates of production and release go up.
Other Types of Synapses
So far, the discussion of synaptic activity has referred 
only to the effects of postsynaptic excitation or inhibi-
tion. These effects occur at axosomatic or axodendritic 
synapses. Axoaxonic synapses work differently. Axoax-
onic synapses do not contribute directly to neural inte-
gration. Instead, they alter the amount of neurotrans-
mitter released by the terminal buttons of the 
postsynaptic axon. They can produce presynaptic modu-
lation: presynaptic inhibition or presynaptic facilitation.
As you know, the release of a neurotransmitter by a 
terminal button is initiated by an action potential. Nor-
mally, a particular terminal button releases a fixed 
amount of neurotransmitter each time an action poten-
tial arrives. However, the release of neurotransmitter 
can be modulated by the activity of axoaxonic synapses. 
Activity of excitatory
synapses produces
EPSPs (red) in
postsynaptic neuron
Axon hillock reaches
threshold of excitation;
action potential is
triggered in axon
Activity of inhibitory
synapses produces
IPSPs (blue) in
postsynaptic neuron
IPSPs counteract EPSPs;
action potential is not
triggered in axon
(b)
(a)
figure 2.37  Neural Integration
(a) If several excitatory synapses are active at the same time, the EPSPs they produce 
(shown in red) summate as they travel toward the axon, and the axon fires. (b) If several 
inhibitory synapses are active at the same time, the IPSPs they produce (shown in blue) 
diminish the size of the EPSPs and prevent the axon from firing.
x presynaptic inhibition  The action of a presynaptic terminal 
button in an axoaxonic synapse; reduces the amount of neu-
rotransmitter released by the postsynaptic terminal button.
x presynaptic facilitation  The action of a presynaptic terminal 
button in an axoaxonic synapse; increases the amount of neu-
rotransmitter released by the postsynaptic terminal button.

62	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
are dispersed more widely than are neurotransmitters. 
Most neuromodulators are peptides, chains of amino 
acids that are linked together by chemical attachments 
called peptide bonds (hence their name). Neuromodula-
tors are secreted in larger amounts and diffuse for lon-
ger distances, modulating the activity of many neurons 
in a particular part of the brain. For example, neuro-
modulators affect general behavioral states such as vigi-
lance, fearfulness, and sensitivity to pain. Chapter 4 dis-
cusses the most important neurotransmitters and 
neuromodulators.
Hormones are secreted by cells of endocrine 
glands (from the Greek endo-, “within,” and krinein, “to 
secrete”) or by cells located in various organs, such as 
the stomach, the intestines, the kidneys, and the brain. 
Cells that secrete hormones release these chemicals 
Some larger neurons, as well, form dendroden-
dritic synapses. Some of these synapses are chemical, 
indicated by the presence of synaptic vesicles in one of 
the juxtaposed dendrites and a postsynaptic thicken-
ing in the membrane of the other. Other synapses are 
electrical; the membranes meet and almost touch, form-
ing a gap junction. The membranes on both sides of a 
gap junction contain channels that permit ions to dif-
fuse from one cell to another. Thus, changes in the 
membrane potential of one neuron induce changes in 
the membrane of the other. (See Figure 2.39.) Al-
though most gap junctions in vertebrate synapses are 
dendrodendritic, axosomatic and axodendritic gap 
junctions also occur. Gap junctions are common in 
invertebrates; their function in the vertebrate nervous 
system is not known.
Nonsynaptic Chemical  
Communication
Neurotransmitters are released by terminal buttons of 
neurons and bind with receptors in the membrane of 
another cell located a very short distance away. The com-
munication at each synapse is private. Neuromodulators 
are chemicals released by neurons that travel farther and 
Terminal
button B
Terminal
button A
Axoaxonic
synapse
Postsynaptic
density
Axodendritic
synapse
Dendritic
spine
figure 2.38  An Axoaxonic Synapse
The activity of terminal button A can increase or decrease 
the amount of neurotransmitter released by terminal 
button B.
figure 2.39  A Gap Junction
A gap junction permits direct electrical coupling between 
the membranes of adjacent neurons.
(From Bennett, M. V. L., and Pappas, G. D. The Journal of Neuroscience, 1983,  
3, 748–761. Reprinted with permission.)
x gap junction  A special junction between cells that permits 
direct communication by means of electrical coupling.
x neuromodulator  A naturally secreted substance that acts like 
a neurotransmitter except that it is not restricted to the synaptic 
cleft but diffuses through the extracellular fluid.
x peptide  A chain of amino acids joined together by peptide 
bonds. Most neuromodulators, and some hormones, consist of 
peptide molecules.
x hormone  A chemical substance that is released by an 
endocrine gland that has effects on target cells in other organs.
x endocrine gland  A gland that liberates its secretions into  
the extracellular fluid around capillaries and hence into the 
bloodstream.

	
Communication Between Neurons 	
63
into the extracellular fluid. The hormones are then 
distributed to the rest of the body through the blood-
stream. Hormones affect the activity of cells (includ-
ing neurons) that contain specialized receptors lo-
cated either on the surface of their membrane or deep 
within their nuclei. Cells that contain receptors for a 
particular hormone are referred to as target cells for 
that hormone; only these cells respond to its presence. 
Many neurons contain hormone receptors, and hor-
mones are able to affect behavior by stimulating the 
receptors and changing the activity of these neurons. 
For example, a sex hormone, testosterone, increases 
the aggressiveness of most male mammals.
Peptide hormones exert their effects on target cells 
by stimulating metabotropic receptors located in the 
membrane. The second messenger that is generated 
travels to the nucleus of the cell, where it initiates 
changes in the cell’s physiological processes. Steroid 
hormones consist of very small fat-soluble molecules. 
(Steroid derives from the Greek stereos, “solid,” and Latin 
oleum, “oil.” They are synthesized from cholesterol.) Ex-
amples of steroid hormones include the sex hormones 
secreted by the ovaries and testes and the hormones 
secreted by the adrenal cortex. Because steroid hor-
mones are soluble in lipids, they pass easily through the 
cell membrane. They travel to the nucleus, where they 
attach themselves to receptors located there. The re-
ceptors, stimulated by the hormone, then direct the 
machinery of the cell to alter its protein production. 
(See Figure 2.40.)
In the past few years, investigators have discovered 
the presence of steroid receptors in terminal buttons 
and around the postsynaptic membrane of some neu-
rons. These steroid receptors influence synaptic trans-
mission, and they do so rapidly. Exactly how they work 
is still not known.
x target cell  The type of cell that is directly affected by a 
hormone or other chemical signal.
x steroid  A chemical of low molecular weight, derived from 
cholesterol. Steroid hormones affect their target cells by attaching 
to receptors found within the nucleus.
Molecule of
steroid hormone
Steroid
receptor
Membrane
of nucleus
Cell
membrane
Hormone binds
with steroid
receptor, which
directs chromosome
to initiate protein synthesis
Detail of Cell
figure 2.40  Action of Steroid Hormones
Steroid hormones affect their target cells by means of 
specialized receptors in the nucleus. Once a receptor 
binds with a molecule of a steroid hormone, it causes 
genetic mechanisms to initiate protein synthesis.
Communication Between Neurons
Section Summary
Synapses consist of junctions between the terminal 
buttons of one neuron and the membrane, another 
neuron, a muscle cell, or a gland cell. When an action 
potential is transmitted down an axon, the terminal 
buttons at the end release a neurotransmitter, a 
chemical that produces either depolarizations (EPSPs) 
or hyperpolarizations (IPSPs) of the postsynaptic 
(continued on next page)

64	
Chapter 2  Structure and Functions of Cells of the Nervous System
membrane. The rate of firing of the axon of the post-
synaptic neuron is determined by the relative activity 
of the excitatory and inhibitory synapses on the mem-
brane of its dendrites and soma—a phenomenon 
known as neural integration.
Terminal buttons contain synaptic vesicles. Most 
terminal buttons contain two sizes of vesicles, the 
smaller of which are found in greatest numbers 
around the release zone of the presynaptic mem-
brane. When an action potential is transmitted down 
an axon, the depolarization opens voltage-depen-
dent calcium channels, which permit Ca21 to enter. 
The calcium ions bind with the clusters of protein 
molecules in the membranes of synaptic vesicles that 
are docked at the release zone. The protein clusters 
spread apart, causing the vesicles to break open and 
release the neurotransmitter. Vesicles in the ready 
release pool briefly “kiss” the inside of the presyn-
aptic membrane, release their contents, and then 
break away to be refilled. Those in the recycling 
pool and reserve pool completely fuse with the pre-
synaptic membrane and lose their identity. The 
membrane contributed by these vesicles pinches off 
into the cytoplasm and is recycled in the production 
of new vesicles.
The activation of postsynaptic receptors by mol-
ecules of a neurotransmitter causes neurotransmitter-
dependent ion channels to open, resulting in post-
synaptic potentials. Ionotropic receptors contain ion 
channels, which are directly opened when a ligand 
attaches to the binding site. Metabotropic receptors 
are linked to G proteins, which, when activated, 
open ion channels—usually by producing a chemical 
called a second messenger.
The nature of the postsynaptic potential 
depends on the type of ion channel that is opened 
by the postsynaptic receptors at a particular synapse. 
Excitatory postsynaptic potentials occur when Na1 
enters the cell. Inhibitory postsynaptic potentials are 
produced when K1 leaves the cell or Cl2 enters it. 
The entry of Ca21 produces EPSPs, but, even more 
important, it activates special enzymes that cause 
physiological changes in the postsynaptic cell that 
are involved in learning.
Postsynaptic potentials are normally very brief. 
They are terminated by two means. Acetylcholine is 
deactivated by the enzyme acetylcholinesterase, and 
peptides are deactivated by a variety of enzymes. 
Molecules of the other neurotransmitters are removed 
from the synaptic cleft by means of transporters 
located in the presynaptic membrane. This retrieval 
process is called reuptake.
The presynaptic membrane, as well as the post-
synaptic membrane, contains receptors that detect 
the presence of a neurotransmitter. Presynaptic 
receptors, also called autoreceptors, monitor the 
quantity of neurotransmitter that a neuron releases 
and, apparently, regulate the amount that is synthe-
sized and released.
Axosomatic and axodendritic synapses are not 
the only kinds found in the nervous system. Axoaxonic 
synapses either reduce or enhance the amount of 
neurotransmitter released by the postsynaptic termi-
nal button, producing presynaptic inhibition or pre-
synaptic facilitation. Dendrodendritic synapses also 
exist, but their role in neural communication is not yet 
understood.
Nonsynaptic chemical transmission is similar to 
synaptic transmission. Peptide neuromodulators and 
hormones activate metabotropic peptide receptors 
located in the membrane; their effects are mediated 
through the production of second messengers. 
Steroid hormones enter the nucleus, where they bind 
with receptors that are capable of altering the synthe-
sis of proteins that regulate the cell’s physiological 
processes. These hormones also bind with receptors 
located elsewhere in the cell, but less is known about 
their functions.
 Thought Question
1.	 Why does synaptic transmission involve the release 
of chemicals? Direct electrical coupling of neurons 
is far simpler, so why do our neurons not use it 
more extensively? (A tiny percentage of synaptic 
connections in the human brain do use electrical 
coupling.) Normally, nature uses the simplest 
means possible to a given end, so there must be 
some advantages to chemical transmission. What 
do you think they are?
2.	 Consider the control of the withdrawal reflex illus-
trated in Figure 2.14. Could you design a circuit 
using electrical synapses that would accomplish the 
same tasks?

	
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab	
65
Review Questions
 1.  Name and describe the parts of a neuron and 
explain their functions.
 2.  Describe the supporting cells of the central and periph-
eral nervous systems and explain the blood–brain barrier.
 3.  Briefly describe the role of neural communication in a 
simple reflex and its inhibition by brain mechanisms.
 4.  Describe the measurement of the action potential 
and explain the dynamic equilibrium that is respon-
sible for the membrane potential.
 5.  Describe the role of ion channels in action potentials 
and explain the all-or-none law and the rate law.
 6.  Describe the structure of synapses, the release of the 
neurotransmitter, and the activation of postsynaptic 
receptors.
 7.  Describe postsynaptic potentials: the ionic movements 
that cause them, the processes that terminate them, 
and their integration.
 8.  Describe the regulation of the effects of the neu-
rotransmitters by autoreceptors, presynaptic inhibi-
tion, presynaptic facilitation, and nonsynaptic  
communication.
Study and Review on MyPsychLab
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Neural Conduction and Synaptic Transmission
For the nervous system to function normally, its parts must communicate among 
one another. The Neural Conduction and Synaptic Transmission module of the 
virtual brain depicts the different parts of the nervous system, which communi-
cate by the mechanisms described in this chapter.

66	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
Structure of the Nervous 
System
Outline
3
 Basic Features of the Nervous 
System
An Overview
Meninges
The Ventricular System and 
Production of CSF
Section Summary
 The Central Nervous System
Development of the Central 
Nervous System
The Forebrain
The Midbrain
The Hindbrain
The Spinal Cord
Section Summary
 The Peripheral Nervous System
Spinal Nerves
Cranial Nerves
The Autonomic Nervous System
Section Summary
chapter

	
Basic Features of the Nervous System	
67
T
he goal of neuroscience research is to under-
stand how the brain works. To understand the 
results of this research, you must be ac-
quainted with the basic structure of the nervous sys-
tem. The number of terms introduced in this chap-
ter is kept to a minimum (but as you will see, the 
minimum is still a rather large number). With the 
framework you will receive from this chapter and 
from the features on 
MyPsychLab, you should 
have no trouble learning the material presented in 
subsequent chapters.
Basic Features of the Nervous 
System
Before beginning a description of the nervous system, I 
want to discuss the terms that are used to describe it. 
The gross anatomy of the brain was described long ago, 
and everything that could be seen without the aid of a 
microscope was given a name. Early anatomists named 
most brain structures according to their similarity to 
commonplace objects: amygdala, or “almond-shaped 
Ryan B., a college freshman, had suffered from occa-
sional epileptic seizures since childhood. He had been 
taking drugs for his seizures for many years, but lately 
the medication wasn’t helping—his seizures were 
becoming more frequent. His neurologist increased the 
dose of the medication, but the seizures persisted, and 
the drug made it difficult for Ryan to concentrate on his 
studies. He was afraid that he would have to drop out of 
school.
He made an appointment with his neurologist and 
asked whether another drug was available that might work 
better and not affect his ability to concentrate. “No,” said 
the neurologist, “you’re taking the best medication we 
have right now. But I want to send you to Dr. L., a neuro-
surgeon at the medical school. I think you might be a good 
candidate for seizure surgery.”
Ryan had a focal-seizure disorder. His problems were 
caused by a localized region of the brain that contained 
some scar tissue. Periodically, this region would irritate the 
surrounding areas, triggering epileptic seizures—wild, 
sustained firing of cerebral neurons that result in cognitive 
disruption and, sometimes, uncontrolled movements. 
Ryan’s focus was probably a result of brain damage that 
occurred when he was born. Dr. L. ordered some tests that 
indicated that the seizure focus was located in the left side 
of his brain, in a region known as the medial temporal 
lobe.
Ryan was surprised to learn that he would remain 
awake during his surgery. In fact, he would be called on 
to provide information that the surgeon would need to 
remove a region of his brain that included the seizure 
focus. As you might expect, he was nervous when he 
was wheeled into the surgery, but after the anesthesiolo-
gist injected something through the tube in one of his 
veins, Ryan relaxed and thought to himself, “This won’t 
be too bad.”
Dr. L. marked something on his scalp, which had 
previously been shaved, and then made several injections 
of a local anesthetic. Then he cut the scalp and injected 
some more anesthetic. Finally, he used a drill and a saw to 
remove a piece of skull. He then cut and folded back the 
thick membrane that covers the brain, exposing the surface 
of the brain.
When removing a seizure focus, the surgeon wants 
to cut away all the abnormal tissue while sparing brain 
tissue that performs important functions, such as the 
comprehension and production of speech. For this 
reason, Dr. L. began stimulating parts of the brain to 
determine which regions he could safely remove. To do 
so, he placed a metal probe against the surface of Ryan’s 
brain and pressed a pedal that delivered a weak electri-
cal current. The stimulation disrupts the firing patterns of 
the neurons located near the probe, preventing them 
from carrying out their normal functions. Dr. L. found that 
stimulation of parts of the temporal lobe disrupted Ryan’s 
ability to understand what he and his associates were 
saying. When he removed the part of the brain contain-
ing the seizure focus, he was careful not to damage these 
regions.
The operation was successful. Ryan continued to take 
his medication but at a much lower dose. His seizures 
disappeared, and he found it easier to concentrate in class. 
I met Ryan during his junior year, when he took a course  
I was teaching. I described seizure surgery to the class one 
day, and after the lecture he approached me and told me 
about his experience. He received the third highest grade 
in the class.

68	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
face, while the ventral (front) surface faces the ground. 
(Dorsum means “back,” and ventrum means “belly.”) 
These directions are somewhat more complicated in 
the human; because we stand upright, our neuraxis 
bends, so the top of the head is perpendicular to the 
object”; hippocampus, or “sea horse”; genu, or “knee”; 
cortex, or “bark”; pons, or “bridge”; uncus, or “hook,” 
to give a few examples. Throughout this book I will 
translate the names of anatomical terms as I introduce 
them, because the translation makes the terms more 
memorable. For example, knowing that cortex means 
“bark” (like the bark of a tree) will help you to remem-
ber that the cortex is the outer layer of the brain.
When describing features of a structure as complex 
as the brain, we need to use terms denoting directions. 
Directions in the nervous system are normally described 
relative to the neuraxis, an imaginary line drawn 
through the length of the central nervous system, from 
the lower end of the spinal cord up to the front of the 
brain. For simplicity’s sake, let us consider an animal 
with a straight neuraxis. Figure 3.1 shows an alligator 
and two humans. This alligator is certainly laid out in a 
linear fashion; we can draw a straight line that starts 
between its eyes and continues down the center of its 
spinal cord. (See Figure 3.1.) The front end is anterior, 
and the tail is posterior. The terms rostral (toward the 
beak) and caudal (toward the tail) are also employed, 
especially when referring specifically to the brain. The 
top of the head and the back are part of the dorsal sur-
figure 3.1  Views of Alligator and Human
These side and frontal views show the terms used to denote anatomical directions.
Lateral
Lateral
Medial
Medial
Lateral
Lateral
Medial
Medial
Dorsal
Dorsal
Dorsal
Ventral
Caudal or posterior
Caudal or
posterior
Ventral
Rostral or
anterior
Rostral or
anterior
Neuraxis
Dorsal
Ventral
Dorsal
Neuraxis
Caudal or posterior
x neuraxis  An imaginary line drawn through the center of the 
length of the central nervous system, from the bottom of the 
spinal cord to the front of the forebrain.
x anterior  With respect to the central nervous system, located 
near or toward the head.
x posterior  With respect to the central nervous system, located 
near or toward the tail.
x rostral  “Toward the beak”; with respect to the central nervous 
system, in a direction along the neuraxis toward the front of the face.
x caudal  “Toward the tail”; with respect to the central nervous 
system, in a direction along the neuraxis away from the front of 
the face.
x dorsal  “Toward the back”; with respect to the central nervous 
system, in a direction perpendicular to the neuraxis toward the top 
of the head or the back.
x ventral  “Toward the belly”; with respect to the central 
nervous system, in a direction perpendicular to the neuraxis 
toward the bottom of the skull or the front surface of the body.

	
Basic Features of the Nervous System	
69
	 2.	 Parallel to the ground, giving us horizontal sections
	 3.	 Perpendicular to the ground and parallel to the 
neuraxis, giving us sagittal sections. The midsagittal  
plane divides the brain into two symmetrical halves. 
The sagittal section in Figure 3.2 lies in the midsagittal 
plane.
Note that because of our upright posture, cross sec-
tions of the spinal cord are parallel to the ground. (See 
Figure 3.2.)
back. (You will also encounter the terms superior and 
inferior. In referring to the brain, superior means “above,” 
and inferior means “below.” For example, the superior col-
liculi are located above the inferior colliculi.) The frontal 
views of both the alligator and the human illustrate the 
terms lateral and medial: toward the side and toward 
the middle, respectively. (Look again at Figure 3.1.)
Two other useful terms are ipsilateral and contralateral. 
Ipsilateral refers to structures on the same side of the 
body. If we say that the olfactory bulb sends axons to the 
ipsilateral hemisphere, we mean that the left olfactory bulb 
sends axons to the left hemisphere and the right olfactory 
bulb sends axons to the right hemisphere. Contralateral 
refers to structures on opposite sides of the body. If we say 
that a particular region of the left cerebral cortex controls 
movements of the contralateral hand, we mean that the 
region controls movements of the right hand.
To see what is in the nervous system, we have to cut it 
open; to be able to convey information about what we find, 
we slice it in a standard way. Figure 3.2 shows a human ner-
vous system. We can slice the nervous system in three ways:
	 1.	 Transversely, like a salami, giving us cross sections (also 
known as frontal sections when referring to the brain)
figure 3.2  Brain Slices and Planes
This figure shows planes of section as they pertain to the human central nervous system.
 
 
Dorsal
Ventral
Rostral
Rostral
Sagittal
plane
Transverse plane
(frontal section)
Dorsal
Ventral
Caudal
Caudal
Ventral
Horizontal
plane
Transverse plane
(cross section)
x lateral  Toward the side of the body, away from the middle.
x medial  Toward the middle of the body, away from the side.
x ipsilateral  Located on the same side of the body.
x contralateral  Located on the opposite side of the body.
x cross section  With respect to the central nervous system, a 
slice taken at right angles to the neuraxis.
x frontal section  A slice through the brain parallel to the forehead.
x horizontal section  A slice through the brain parallel to the ground.
x sagittal section (sadj i tul )  A slice through the brain parallel to 
the neuraxis and perpendicular to the ground.
x midsagittal plane  The plane through the neuraxis perpendicular 
to the ground; divides the brain into two symmetrical halves.

70	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
weblike appearance of the arachnoid trabeculae that pro-
trude from it (from the Greek arachne, meaning  
“spider”; trabecula means “track”). The arachnoid mem-
brane, soft and spongy, lies beneath the dura mater. 
Closely attached to the brain and spinal cord, and fol-
lowing every surface convolution, is the pia mater (“pi-
ous mother”). The smaller surface blood vessels of the 
brain and spinal cord are contained within this layer. 
Between the pia mater and arachnoid membrane is a 
gap called the subarachnoid space. This space is filled 
with a liquid called cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). (Look 
again at Figure 3.3.)
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) is covered 
with two layers of meninges. The middle layer (arach-
noid membrane), with its associated pool of CSF, cov-
ers only the brain and spinal cord. Outside the cen-
tral nervous system, the outer and inner layers (dura 
mater and pia mater) fuse and form a sheath that 
covers the spinal and cranial nerves and the peripheral  
ganglia.
In the first edition of this book I said that I did not 
know why the outer and inner layers of the meninges 
were referred to as “mothers.” I received a letter from 
medical historians at the Department of Anatomy at 
UCLA that explained the name. (Sometimes, it pays 
to proclaim one’s ignorance.) A tenth-century Persian 
physician, Ali ibn Abbas, used the Arabic term al umm 
to refer to the meninges. The term literally means 
“mother” but was used to designate any swaddling 
material, because Arabic lacked a specific term for the 
word membrane. The tough outer membrane was called 
al umm al djafiya, and the soft inner one was called al 
umm al rigiga. When the writings of Ali ibn Abbas were 
translated into Latin during the eleventh century, the 
translator, who was probably not familiar with the 
structure of the meninges, made a literal translation 
of al umm. He referred to the membranes as the “hard 
mother” and the “pious mother” (pious in the sense of 
“delicate”) rather than using a more appropriate 
Latin word.
An Overview
The nervous system consists of the brain and spinal 
cord, which make up the central nervous system (CNS), and 
the cranial nerves, spinal nerves, and peripheral gan-
glia, which constitute the peripheral nervous system (PNS). 
The CNS is encased in bone: The brain is covered by the 
skull, and the spinal cord is encased by the vertebral 
column. (See Table 3.1.)
Figure 3.3 illustrates the relationship of the brain 
and spinal cord to the rest of the body. Do not be con-
cerned with unfamiliar labels on this figure; these struc-
tures will be described later. (See Figure 3.3.) The brain 
is a large mass of neurons, glia, and other supporting 
cells. It is the most protected organ of the body, encased 
in a tough, bony skull and floating in a pool of cerebro-
spinal fluid. The brain receives a copious supply of blood 
and is chemically guarded by the blood–brain barrier.
The brain receives approximately 20 percent of the 
blood flow from the heart, and it receives it continuously. 
Other parts of the body, such as the skeletal muscles or 
digestive system, receive varying quantities of blood,  
depending on their needs, relative to those of other  
regions. But the brain always receives its share. The brain 
can store only a small amount of its fuel (primarily glu-
cose), and it cannot temporarily extract energy without 
oxygen, as the muscles can; therefore, a consistent blood 
supply is essential. A 1-second interruption of the blood 
flow to the brain uses up much of the dissolved oxygen; 
a 6-second interruption produces unconsciousness. Per-
manent damage begins within a few minutes.
Meninges
The entire nervous system—brain, spinal cord, cranial 
and spinal nerves, and peripheral ganglia—is covered 
by tough connective tissue. The protective sheaths 
around the brain and spinal cord are referred to as the 
meninges (singular: meninx, the Greek word for “mem-
brane”). The meninges consist of three layers, which 
are shown in Figure 3.3. The outer layer is thick, tough, 
and flexible but unstretchable; its name, dura mater, 
means “hard mother.” The middle layer of the menin-
ges, the arachnoid membrane, gets its name from the 
table 3.1  The Major Divisions of the Nervous 
System
Central Nervous 
System (CNS)
Peripheral Nervous  
System (PNS)
Brain	
Nerves
Spinal cord	
Peripheral ganglia
x meninges (singular: meninx) (men in jees)  The three layers of 
tissue that encase the central nervous system: the dura mater, 
arachnoid membrane, and pia mater.
x dura mater  The outermost of the meninges; tough and flexible.
x arachnoid membrane (a rak noyd )  The middle layer of the 
meninges, located between the outer dura mater and inner pia 
mater.
x pia mater  The layer of the meninges that clings to the surface 
of the brain; thin and delicate.
x subarachnoid space  The fluid-filled space that cushions the 
brain; located between the arachnoid membrane and the pia mater.
x cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)  A clear fluid, similar to blood 
plasma, that fills the ventricular system of the brain and the 
subarachnoid space surrounding the brain and spinal cord.

	
Basic Features of the Nervous System	
71
protected from shock. A human brain cannot even sup-
port its own weight well; it is difficult to remove and 
handle a fresh brain from a recently deceased human 
without damaging it.
Fortunately, the intact brain within a living human 
is well protected. It floats in a bath of CSF contained 
The Ventricular System  
and Production of CSF
The brain is very soft and jellylike. The considerable 
weight of a human brain (approximately 1400 g), along 
with its delicate construction, necessitates that it be 
figure 3.3  The Nervous System
The figures show (a) the relation of the nervous system to the rest of the body,  
(b) detail of the meninges that cover the central nervous system, and (c) a closer view 
of the lower spinal cord and cauda equina.
Surface of brain
Spinal cord
Cranial 
nerves
Layers of
meninges
Spinal cord
Brain
Opening cut in meninges
to show brain
Central Nervous
System:
Ribs
Spinal
nerves
(a)
(c)
(b)
Meninges
Spinal
nerves
Spinal nerve
Dura mater
Vertebra
Dura mater
Subarachnoid space (filled
with cerebrospinal fluid)
Arachnoid trabeculae
Pia mater
Surface of brain
Cauda equina
Kidney
Lung
Edge of
dura mater
(cut open)
Arachnoid membrane
Arachnoid 
membrane
Pia mater
(adheres to 
spinal cord)

72	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
within the subarachnoid space. Because the brain is 
completely immersed in liquid, its net weight is reduced 
to approximately 80 g; thus, pressure on the base of the 
brain is considerably diminished. The CSF surrounding 
the brain and spinal cord also reduces the shock to the 
central nervous system that would be caused by sudden 
head movement.
The brain contains a series of hollow, intercon-
nected chambers called ventricles (“little bellies”), 
which are filled with CSF. (See Figure 3.4.) The largest  
figure 3.4  The Ventricular System of the Brain
The figure shows (a) a lateral view of the left side of the brain, (b) a frontal view, (c) a 
dorsal view, and (d) the production, circulation, and reabsorption of cerebrospinal fluid.
x ventricle (ven trik ul )  One of the hollow spaces within the 
brain, filled with cerebrospinal fluid.
x lateral ventricle  One of the two ventricles located in the 
center of the telencephalon.
x third ventricle  The ventricle located in the center of the 
diencephalon.
chambers are the lateral ventricles, which are con-
nected to the third ventricle. The third ventricle is 
located at the midline of the brain; its walls divide the 
Lateral
ventricle
Lateral
ventricle
Lateral
ventricle
Fourth
ventricle
Fourth
ventricle
Fourth
ventricle
Cerebral
aqueduct
Cerebral
aqueduct
Cerebral
aqueduct
Cerebral
aqueduct
Massa
intermedia
Third
ventricle
Third ventricle
Third
ventricle
Third
ventricle
(a)
(b)
Choroid plexus of
lateral ventricle
Choroid plexus 
of fourth ventricle
Choroid plexus 
of third ventricle
Subarachnoid
space
Subarachnoid
space
Opening into
subarachnoid space
Arachnoid
granulation
Superior
sagittal sinus
(c)
(d)
Carlson/ POB 11e/C11B03F04 eps

	
Basic Features of the Nervous System	
73
surrounding part of the brain into symmetrical 
halves. A bridge of neural tissue called the massa  
intermedia crosses through the middle of the third 
ventricle and serves as a convenient reference point. 
The cerebral aqueduct, a long tube, connects the 
third ventricle to the fourth ventricle. The lateral 
ventricles constitute the first and second ventricles, 
but they are never referred to as such. (Look again at 
Figure 3.4.)
Cerebrospinal fluid is extracted from the blood and 
resembles blood plasma in its composition. CSF is man-
ufactured by special tissue with an especially rich blood 
supply called the choroid plexus, which protrudes into 
all four of the ventricles. CSF is produced continuously; 
the total volume of CSF is approximately 125 ml, and 
the half-life (the time it takes for half of the CSF present 
in the ventricular system to be replaced by fresh fluid) is 
about 3 hours. Therefore, several times this amount is 
produced by the choroid plexus each day. The continu-
ous production of CSF means that there must be a 
mechanism for its removal. The production, circulation, 
and reabsorption of CSF are illustrated in Figure 3.4d. A 
scanning electron micrograph of the choroid plexus is 
shown in Figure 3.5.
cerebral aqueduct to the fourth ventricle, where still 
more CSF is produced. The CSF leaves the fourth 
ventricle through small openings that connect with 
the subarachnoid space surrounding the brain. The 
CSF then flows through the subarachnoid space 
around the central nervous system, where it is reab-
sorbed into the blood supply through the arachnoid 
granulations. These pouch-shaped structures pro-
trude into the superior sagittal sinus, a blood vessel 
that drains into the veins serving the brain. (Look 
again at Figure 3.4d and 
Simulate meninges and CSF 
on MyPsychLab.)
Occasionally, the flow of CSF is interrupted at 
some point in its route of passage. For example, a 
brain tumor growing in the midbrain may push 
against the cerebral aqueduct, blocking its flow, or an 
infant may be born with a cerebral aqueduct that is 
too small to accommodate a normal flow of CSF. This 
occlusion results in greatly increased pressure within 
the ventricles, because the choroid plexus continues 
to produce CSF. The walls of the ventricles then ex-
pand and produce a condition known as obstructive 
hydrocephalus (hydrocephalus literally means “water-
head”). If the obstruction remains and if nothing is 
done to reverse the increased intracerebral pressure, 
blood vessels will be occluded, and permanent—per-
haps fatal—brain damage will occur. Fortunately, a 
surgeon can usually operate on the person, drilling a 
hole through the skull and inserting a shunt tube into 
one of the ventricles. The tube is then placed beneath 
the skin and connected to a pressure relief valve that 
is implanted in the abdominal cavity. When the pres-
sure in the ventricles becomes excessive, the valve 
permits the CSF to escape into the abdomen, where it 
is eventually reabsorbed into the blood supply. (See 
Figure 3.6.)
Figure 3.4(d) shows a slightly rotated midsagittal 
view of the central nervous system, which shows only 
the right lateral ventricle (because the left hemi-
sphere has been removed). Cerebrospinal fluid is pro-
duced by the choroid plexus of the lateral ventricles, 
and it flows into the third ventricle. More CSF is pro-
duced in this ventricle, which then flows through the 
figure 3.5  A Scanning Electron Micrograph of the 
Choroid Plexus
BV = blood vessel, CE = choroid plexus, V = ventricle.
(From Tissues and Organs: A Text-Atlas of Scanning Electron Microscopy, by 
Richard G. Kessel and Randy H. Kardon. Copyright © 1979 by W. H. Freeman and 
Co. Reprinted by permission of Barbara Kessel and Randy Kardon.)
V
V
x cerebral aqueduct  A narrow tube interconnecting the third 
and fourth ventricles of the brain, located in the center of the 
mesencephalon.
x fourth ventricle  The ventricle located between the cerebellum  
and the dorsal pons, in the center of the metencephalon.
x choroid plexus  The highly vascular tissue that protrudes into 
the ventricles and produces cerebrospinal fluid.
x arachnoid granulation  Small projections of the arachnoid 
membrane through the dura mater into the superior sagittal 
sinus; CSF flows through them to be reabsorbed into the blood 
supply.
x superior sagittal sinus  A venous sinus located in the midline 
just dorsal to the corpus callosum, between the two cerebral 
hemispheres.
x obstructive hydrocephalus  A condition in which all or some 
of the brain’s ventricles are enlarged; caused by an obstruction 
that impedes the normal flow of CSF.

74	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
The Central Nervous System
Although the brain is exceedingly complicated, an un-
derstanding of the basic features of brain development 
makes it easier to learn and remember the location of 
the most important structures. With that end in mind, 
I introduce these features here in the context of devel-
opment of the central nervous system.
Development of the Central  
Nervous System
The central nervous system begins early in embryonic life 
as a hollow tube and maintains this basic shape even after 
it is fully developed. During development, parts of the tube 
elongate, pockets and folds form, and the tissue around 
the tube thickens until the brain reaches its final form.
An Overview of Brain Development
Development of the human nervous system begins 
around the eighteenth day after conception. Part of the 
ectoderm (outer layer) of the back of the embryo thick-
ens and forms a plate. The edges of this plate form 
ridges that curl toward each other along a longitudinal 
line, running in a rostral–caudal direction. By the 
figure  3.6  Hydrocephalus in an Infant
A surgeon places a shunt tube in a lateral ventricle, which 
permits cerebrospinal fluid to escape to the abdominal 
cavity, where it is absorbed into the blood supply.  
A pressure valve regulates the flow of CSF through the shunt.
Tube to
abdominal
cavity
Valve to regulate
pressure
Tube inserted into
lateral ventricle
Section Summary
Basic Features of the Nervous System
Anatomists have adopted a set of terms to describe the 
locations of parts of the body. Anterior is toward the 
head, posterior is toward the tail, lateral is toward the 
side, medial is toward the middle, dorsal is toward the 
back, and ventral is toward the front surface of the 
body. In the special case of the nervous system, rostral 
means toward the beak (or nose), and caudal means 
toward the tail. Ipsilateral means “same side,” and con-
tralateral means “other side.” A cross section (or, in the 
case of the brain, a frontal section) slices the nervous 
system at right angles to the neuraxis, a horizontal sec-
tion slices the brain parallel to the ground, and a sagit-
tal section slices it perpendicular to the ground, parallel 
to the neuraxis.
The central nervous system consists of the brain 
and spinal cord, and the peripheral nervous system 
consists of the spinal and cranial nerves and periph-
eral ganglia. The CNS is covered with the meninges: 
dura mater, arachnoid membrane, and pia mater. 
The space under the arachnoid membrane is filled 
with cerebrospinal fluid, in which the brain floats. 
The PNS is covered with only the dura mater and 
pia mater. Cerebrospinal fluid is produced in the 
choroid plexus of the lateral, third, and fourth ven-
tricles. It flows from the two lateral ventricles into 
the third ventricle, through the cerebral aqueduct 
into the fourth ventricle, then into the subarachnoid 
space, and finally back into the blood supply 
through the arachnoid granulations. If the flow of 
CSF is blocked by a tumor or other obstruction, the 
result is hydrocephalus: enlargement of the ventri-
cles and subsequent brain damage.
x neural tube  A hollow tube, closed at the rostral end, that 
forms from ectodermal tissue early in embryonic development; 
serves as the origin of the central nervous system.

	
The Central Nervous System	
75
By the twenty-eighth day of development the neu-
ral tube is closed, and its rostral end has developed 
three interconnected chambers. These chambers be-
come ventricles, and the tissue that surrounds them 
becomes the three major parts of the brain: the fore-
brain, the midbrain, and the hindbrain. (See Figures 
3.8a and 3.8c.) As development progresses, the rostral 
chamber (the forebrain) divides into three separate 
parts, which become the two lateral ventricles and the 
third ventricle. The region around the lateral ventricles 
becomes the telencephalon (“end brain”), and the  
region around the third ventricle becomes the dien-
cephalon (“interbrain”). (See Figures 3.8b and 3.8d.) 
In its final form, the chamber inside the midbrain (mes-
encephalon) becomes narrow, forming the cerebral 
aqueduct, and two structures develop in the hindbrain: 
the metencephalon (“afterbrain”) and the myelen-
cephalon (“marrowbrain”). (See Figure 3.8e.)
Table 3.2 summarizes the terms I have introduced 
here and mentions some of the major structures found 
in each part of the brain. The colors in the table match 
those in Figure 3.8. These structures will be described in 
the remainder of the chapter. (See Table 3.2.)
Prenatal Brain Development
Brain development begins with a thin tube and ends 
with a structure weighing approximately 1400 g (about 
3 lb) and consisting of several hundreds of billions of 
cells. Where do these cells come from, and what con-
trols their growth?
Let’s consider the development of the cerebral cor-
tex, about which most is known. The principles de-
scribed here are similar to the ones that apply to devel-
opment of other regions of the brain. (For details of 
this process, see Cooper, 2008, and Rakic, 2009.) Cortex 
means “bark,” and the cerebral cortex, approximately  
3 mm thick, surrounds the cerebral hemispheres like 
the bark of a tree. Corrected for body size, the cerebral 
cortex is larger in humans than in any other species. As 
we will see later in this book, circuits of neurons in the 
cerebral cortex play a vital role in perception, cogni-
tion, and control of movement.
Stem cells that line the inside of the neural tube 
give rise to the cells of the central nervous system. The 
cerebral cortex develops from the inside out. That is, 
the first cells to be produced migrate a short distance 
and establish the first—and deepest—layer. The next 
wave of newborn cells passes through the first layer 
and forms the second one—and so on, until all six  
layers of the cerebral cortex are laid down. The last 
cells to be produced must pass through all the ones 
born before them.
twenty-first day these ridges touch each other and fuse 
together, forming a tube—the neural tube—which gives 
rise to the brain and spinal cord. The top part of the 
ridges break away from the neural tube and become the 
ganglia of the autonomic nervous system, described 
later in this chapter. (See Figure 3.7.)
figure 3.7  Neural Plate Development
The figure shows development of the neural plate into 
the neural tube, which gives rise to the brain and spinal 
cord. Left: Dorsal views. Right: Cross section at levels 
indicated by dashed lines.
Neural plate
of forebrain
Ectoderm
Neural
plate
Future
neural
crest
Neural
fold
Neural
folds
Neural
groove
Neural
crest
Fused
neural
folds
Brain
Spinal cord
(white matter)
Spinal cord
(gray matter)
Central canal
of spinal cord
Future ganglia
of the autonomic
nervous system
24-day-old embryo
20-day-old embryo
21-day-old embryo
x cerebral cortex  The outermost layer of gray matter of the 
cerebral hemispheres.

76	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
figure 3.8  Brain Development
This schematic outline of brain development shows its relation to the ventricles. Views 
(a) and (c) show early development. Views (b) and (d) show later development. View (e) 
shows a lateral view of the left side of a semitransparent human brain with the brain 
stem “ghosted in.” The colors of all figures denote corresponding regions.
Forebrain
Midbrain
Hindbrain
Rostral
Caudal
(a)
Telencephalon
Mesencephalon
Metencephalon
Myelencephalon
(b)
Dorsal
Ventral
(c)
Cerebral
cortex
Basal
ganglia
Thalamus
Tectum
Cerebellum
Medulla
Spinal
cord
Pons
Tegmentum
Hypothalamus
(d)
Cerebral
hemisphere
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
gland
Cerebellum
Spinal cord
(e)
Medulla
Pons
Midbrain
Brain
Stem
Diencephalon
Forebrain
Lateral
Telencephalon
Cerebral cortex
Basal ganglia
Limbic system
Third
Diencephalon
Thalamus
Hypothalamus
Midbrain
Cerebral aqueduct
Mesencephalon
Tectum
Tegmentum
Hindbrain
Fourth
Metencephalon
Cerebellum
Pons
Myelencephalon
Medulla oblongata
Anatomical Subdivisions of the Brain
Major division
Ventricle
Subdivision
Principal structures
size of the ventricular zone. Some progenitor cells 
migrate a short distance away from the ventricular zone, 
where they continue to divide into more progenitor cells 
and establish the subventricular zone (SVZ). This phase 
is referred to as symmetrical division, because the divi-
sion of each progenitor cell produces two new progenitor 
The stem cells that give rise to the cells of the brain 
are known as progenitor cells. (A progenitor is a direct 
ancestor of a line of descendants.) During the first phase 
of development, progenitor cells in the ventricular zone 
(VZ), located just outside the wall of the neural tube, 
divide, making new progenitor cells and increasing the 
table 3.2  Anatomical Subdivisions of the Brain

	
The Central Nervous System	
77
given day. The migration path of the earliest neurons is 
the shortest and takes about one day. The neurons that 
produce the last, outermost layer have to pass through 
cells. This form of division increases the size of the ven-
tricular and subventricular zones. Then, seven weeks 
after conception, progenitor cells receive a signal to 
begin a period of asymmetrical division. During this 
phase, progenitor cells form two different kinds of cells 
as they divide: another progenitor cell and a brain cell.
The first brain cells produced through asymmetri-
cal division are radial glia. The cell bodies of radial glia 
remain close to the wall of the neural tube, in the VZ 
and SVZ, but they extend fibers radially outward from 
the ventricular zone, like spokes in a wheel. These fi-
bers end in cuplike feet that attach to the pia mater, 
located at the outer surface of what becomes the cere-
bral cortex. As the cortex becomes thicker, the fibers of 
the radial glia grow longer and maintain their connec-
tions with the pia mater. (See Figure 3.9.)
The period of asymmetrical division lasts about 
three months. Because the human cerebral cortex con-
tains about 100 billion neurons, there are about one 
billion neurons migrating along radial glial fibers on a 
x subventricular zone (SVZ)  A layer of progenitor cells located 
just inside the ventricular zone; thicker in mammals with large brains.
x symmetrical division  Division of a progenitor cell that gives 
rise to two identical progenitor cells; increases the size of the 
ventricular zone and hence the brain that develops from it.
x asymmetrical division  Division of a progenitor cell that gives 
rise to another progenitor cell and a neuron, which migrates away 
from the ventricular zone toward its final resting place in the brain.
x radial glia  Special glia with fibers that grow radially outward 
from the ventricular zone to the surface of the cortex; provide 
guidance for neurons migrating outward during brain development.
figure 3.9  Cortical Development
This cross section through the cerebral cortex shows it early in its development. The 
radially oriented fibers of glial cells help to guide the migration of newly formed 
neurons from the ventricular zone to their final resting place in the cerebral cortex. 
Each successive wave of neurons passes neurons that migrated earlier, so the most 
recently formed neurons occupy layers closer to the cortical surface.
(Adapted from Rakic, P. Trends in Neuroscience, 1995, 18, 383–388.)
Cortex
Pia
mater
Migrating
neuron
Radial
glial
fiber
Ventricular
zone
Radial
glial
cell
Early
Late
1
1
1
2
3
3
4
5
6
2
x progenitor cells  Cells of the ventricular zone that divide and 
give rise to cells of the central nervous system.
x ventricular zone (VZ)  A layer of cells that line the inside of the 
neural tube; contains progenitor cells that divide and give rise to 
cells of the central nervous system.

78	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
The process I have just described explains the devel-
opment of the brains of small mammals such as rodents. 
These brains have a smooth outer surface, which limits 
the size of the cerebral cortex that cover them. Larger 
brains, especially those of the larger primates, have con-
voluted brains—brains with a surface covered by grooves 
and bulges. Convolutions greatly increase the surface 
area of the cerebral cortex, which means that the cortex 
of a convoluted brain contains many more neurons than 
that of a smooth brain. The increased number of neu-
rons in the convoluted human cerebral cortex makes 
possible the complex circuitry found in our brains.
Two studies appear to have discovered an important 
aspect of the process responsible for the development 
of convoluted brains. The subventricular zone of convo-
luted brains is much thicker than that of smooth brains. 
In fact, this zone can be divided into two parts, the inner 
SVZ and the outer SVZ. (The inner SVZ is located closer 
to the wall of the neural tube, and the outer SVZ is  
located closer to the surface of the brain.) In smooth-
brained animals such as rodents, all of the cells of the 
brain derive from progenitor cells located in the ven-
tricular and subventricular zones. Because the cell bod-
ies of the radial glia that develop from the progenitor 
cells are locked in place, the surface of the developing 
cortex remains more or less parallel to the wall of the 
neural tube, which means that it will remain smooth. 
Fietz et al. (2010) and Hansen et al. (2010) found that, 
during development of the human brain, some new-
born progenitor cells migrated into the inner SVZ, po-
sitioning themselves between the fibers of the radial glia 
whose cell bodies were anchored in place. These unat-
tached progenitor cells undergo asymmetrical division, 
sending neurons into the upper layer of the developing 
cortex. This source of neurons increases the numbers of 
cells in the cerebral cortex, which forces it to bend and 
fold into convolutions. The genes that control this pro-
cess have not yet been discovered.
Once neurons have migrated to their final locations, 
they begin forming connections with other neurons. 
They grow dendrites, which receive the terminal buttons 
from the axons of other neurons, and they grow axons of 
their own. Some neurons extend their dendrites and ax-
ons laterally, connecting adjacent columns of neurons or 
even establishing connections with other neurons in dis-
tant regions of the brain. The growth of axons is guided 
by physical and chemical factors. Once the growing ends 
of the axons (the growth cones) reach their targets, they 
form numerous branches. Each of these branches finds a 
vacant place on the membrane of the appropriate type of 
postsynaptic cell, grows a terminal button, and estab-
lishes a synaptic connection. Apparently, different types 
five layers of neurons, and their migration takes about 
two weeks. The end of cortical development occurs 
when the progenitor cells receive a chemical signal that 
causes them to die—a phenomenon known as apoptosis 
(literally, a “falling away”). Molecules of the chemical 
that conveys this signal bind with receptors that activate 
killer genes within the cells. (All cells have these genes, 
but only certain cells possess the receptors that respond 
to the chemical signals that turn them on.) At this time, 
radial glia are transformed into astrocytes.
The brains of the earliest vertebrates were smaller 
than those of later animals and were simpler as well. The 
evolutionary process brought about genetic changes that 
were responsible for the development of more complex 
brains, with more parts and more interconnections. An 
important factor in the evolution of more complex brains 
is genetic duplication (Allman, 1999). As Lewis (1992) 
noted, most of the genes that a species possesses perform 
important functions. If a mutation causes one of these 
genes to do something new, the previous function would 
be lost, and the animal might not survive. However,  
geneticists have discovered that genes can sometimes du-
plicate themselves, and if these duplications occur in cells 
that give rise to ova or sperms, the duplication can be 
passed on to the organism’s offspring. This means that 
the offspring will have one gene to perform the  
important functions and another one to “experiment” 
with. If a mutation of the extra gene occurs, the old gene 
is still present and its important function is still performed.
As we saw in Chapter 1, the human brain is larger 
than that of any other large animal when corrected for 
body size—more than three times larger than that of a 
chimpanzee, our closest relative. What types of genetic 
changes are required to produce a large brain?
Rakic (1988, 2009) suggests that the size differences 
between these two brains could be caused by a very sim-
ple process. We just saw that the size of the ventricular 
zone increases during symmetrical division of the pro-
genitor cells located there. The ultimate size of the brain 
is determined by the size of the ventricular zone. As Rakic 
notes, each symmetrical division doubles the number of 
progenitor cells and thus doubles the size of the brain. 
The human brain is ten times larger than that of a rhesus 
macaque monkey. Thus, between three and four addi-
tional symmetrical divisions of progenitor cells would 
account for the difference in the size of these two brains. 
In fact, the stage of symmetrical division lasts about two 
days longer in humans, which provides enough time for 
three more divisions. The period of asymmetrical divi-
sion is longer, too, which accounts for the fact that the 
human cortex is 15 percent thicker. Thus, delays in the 
termination of the symmetrical and asymmetrical periods 
of development could be responsible for the increased 
size of the human brain. A few simple mutations of the 
genes that control the timing of brain development could 
be responsible for these delays.
x apoptosis (ay po toe sis)  Death of a cell caused by a chemical 
signal that activates a genetic mechanism inside the cell.

	
The Central Nervous System	
79
with both eyes during a critical period early in life. If an 
infant’s eyes do not move together properly—if they are 
not directed toward the same place in the environment 
(that is, if the eyes are “crossed”)—the infant never de-
velops stereoscopic vision, even if the eye movements are 
later corrected by surgery on the eye muscles. This criti-
cal period occurs some time between one and three 
years of age (Banks, Aslin, and Letson, 1975). Similar 
phenomena have been studied in laboratory animals 
and have confirmed that sensory input affects the con-
nections established between cortical neurons.
Evidence indicates that a certain amount of neural 
rewiring can be accomplished even in the adult brain. 
For example, after a person’s arm has been amputated, 
the region of the cerebral cortex that previously ana-
lyzed sensory information from the missing limb soon 
begins analyzing information from adjacent regions of 
the body, such as the stump of the arm, the trunk, or the 
face. In fact, the person becomes more sensitive to touch 
in these regions after the changes in the cortex take 
place (Elbert et al., 1994; Kew et al., 1994; Yang et al., 
1994). In addition, musicians who play stringed instru-
ments have a larger cortical region devoted to analysis of 
sensory information from the fingers of the left hand 
(which they use to press the strings), and when a blind 
person who can read Braille touches objects with his or 
her fingertips, an enlarged region of the cerebral cortex 
is activated (Elbert et al., 1995; Sadato et al., 1996).
For many years, researchers have believed that neuro-
genesis—production of new neurons—cannot take place 
in the fully developed brain. However, more recent stud-
ies have shown this belief to be incorrect—the adult brain 
contains some stem cells (similar to the progenitor cells 
that give rise to the cells of the developing brain) that can 
divide and produce neurons. Detection of newly pro-
duced cells is done by administering a small amount of a 
radioactive form of one of the nucleotide bases that cells 
use to produce the DNA that is needed for neurogenesis. 
The next day, the animals’ brains are removed and exam-
ined with methods described in Chapter 5. Such studies 
have found evidence for neurogenesis in just two parts of 
the adult brain: the hippocampus, primarily involved in 
learning, and the olfactory bulb, involved in the sense of 
smell (Doetsch and Hen, 2005). Evidence indicates that 
exposure to new odors can increase the survival rate of 
new neurons in the olfactory bulbs, and training on a 
learning task can enhance neurogenesis in the hippo-
campus. (See Figure 3.10.) Chapter 13 has more to say 
about the role of neurogenesis in learning. In addition, as 
we will see in Chapter 16, depression or exposure to stress 
can suppress neurogenesis in the hippocampus, and 
of cells—or even different parts of a single cell—secrete 
different chemicals, which attract different types of axons 
(Benson, Colman, and Huntley, 2001). Of course, the 
establishment of a synaptic connection also requires ef-
forts on the part of the postsynaptic cell; this cell must 
contribute its parts of the synapse, including the postsyn-
aptic receptors. The chemical signals that the cells ex-
change to tell one another to establish these connections 
are just now being discovered.
The ventricular zone gives rise to more neurons 
than are needed. In fact, these neurons must compete 
to survive. The axons of approximately 50 percent of 
these neurons do not find vacant postsynaptic cells of 
the right type with which to form synaptic connections, 
so they die by apoptosis. This phenomenon, too, in-
volves a chemical signal; when a presynaptic neuron es-
tablishes synaptic connections, it receives a signal from 
the postsynaptic cell that permits it to survive. The neu-
rons that come too late do not find any available space 
and therefore do not receive this life-sustaining signal. 
This scheme might seem wasteful, but apparently the 
evolutionary process found that the safest strategy was 
to produce too many neurons and let them fight to es-
tablish synaptic connections rather than trying to pro-
duce exactly the right number of each type of neuron.
Postnatal Brain Development
Brain development continues after an animal is born. In 
fact, the human brain continues to develop for at least 
two decades, and subtle changes—for example those 
produced by learning experiences—continue to occur 
throughout life.
As we will see later in this chapter, different regions 
of the cerebral cortex perform specialized functions. 
Some receive and analyze visual information, some  
receive and analyze auditory information, some control 
movement of the muscles, and so on. Thus, different 
regions receive different inputs, contain different types 
of circuits of neurons, and have different outputs. What 
factors control this pattern of development?
Some of the specialization is undoubtedly programmed 
genetically. The neurons produced by the asymmetrical 
division of a particular progenitor cell all follow a particular 
radial glial fiber, so they end up more or less above the 
progenitor cell. Thus, if the progenitor cells in different 
regions of the developing brain are themselves different, 
the neurons they produce will reflect these differences.
Experience also affects brain development. For ex-
ample, one cue for depth perception arises from the fact 
that each eye gets a slightly different view of the world 
(Poggio and Poggio, 1984). This form of depth percep-
tion, stereopsis (“solid appearance”), is the kind obtained 
from a stereoscope or a three-dimensional movie. The 
particular neural circuits that are necessary for stereop-
sis, which are located in the cerebral cortex, will not 
develop unless an infant has experience viewing objects 
x neurogenesis  Production of new neurons through the division 
of neural stem cells; occurs in the hippocampus and olfactory bulb 
and appears to play a role in learning.

80	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
gray matter. (See Figure 3.11.) Beneath the cerebral cortex 
run millions of axons that connect the neurons of the 
cerebral cortex with those located elsewhere in the brain. 
The large concentration of myelin gives this tissue an 
opaque white appearance—hence the term white matter.
Three areas of the cerebral cortex receive informa-
tion from the sensory organs. The primary visual cortex, 
which receives visual information, is located at the back 
of the brain, on the inner surfaces of the cerebral hemi-
spheres—primarily on the upper and lower banks of the 
calcarine fissure. (Calcarine means “spur-shaped.” See 
Figure 3.12.) The primary auditory cortex, which re-
ceives auditory information, is located on the lower sur-
face of a deep fissure in the side of the brain—the lat-
eral fissure. (See the inset in Figure 3.12.) The primary 
somatosensory cortex, a vertical strip of cortex just cau-
dal to the central sulcus, receives information from the 
body senses. As Figure 3.12 shows, different regions of 
the primary somatosensory cortex receive information 
from different regions of the body. In addition, the base 
of the somatosensory cortex and a portion of the insular 
cortex, which is normally hidden from view by the fron-
tal and temporal lobes, receives information concerning 
taste. (Look again at Figure 3.12.)
With the exception of olfaction and gustation (taste), 
sensory information from the body or the environment 
drugs that reduce stress and depression can reinstate neu-
rogenesis. Unfortunately, there is no evidence that growth 
of new neurons can repair the effects of brain damage, 
such as that caused by head injury or strokes.
The Forebrain
As we saw, the forebrain surrounds the rostral end of 
the neural tube. Its two major components are the telen-
cephalon and the diencephalon.
Telencephalon
The telencephalon includes most of the two symmetri-
cal cerebral hemispheres that make up the cerebrum. 
The cerebral hemispheres are covered by the cerebral 
cortex and contain the limbic system and the basal gan-
glia. The latter two sets of structures are primarily in the 
subcortical regions of the brain—those located deep 
within it, beneath the cerebral cortex.
Cerebral Cortex.  As we saw in the previous section, 
the cerebral cortex surrounds the cerebral hemispheres 
like the bark of a tree. In humans the cerebral cortex is 
greatly convoluted; these convolutions, consisting of 
sulci (small grooves), fissures (large grooves), and gyri 
(bulges between adjacent sulci or fissures), greatly 
enlarge the surface area of the cortex, compared with a 
smooth brain of the same size. In fact, two-thirds of the 
surface of the cortex is hidden in the grooves; thus, the 
presence of these convolutions triples the area of the 
cerebral cortex. The total surface area is approximately 
2360 cm2 (2.5 ft2), and the thickness is approximately 3 
mm. The cerebral cortex consists mostly of glia and the 
cell bodies, dendrites, and interconnecting axons of neu-
rons. Because cell bodies predominate, giving the cere-
bral cortex a grayish tan appearance, it is referred to as 
x subcortical region  The region located within the brain, 
beneath the cortical surface.
x sulcus (plural: sulci) (sul kus, sul sigh)  A groove in the surface 
of the cerebral hemisphere, smaller than a fissure.
x fissure  A major groove in the surface of the brain, larger than 
a sulcus.
x gyrus (plural: gyri) (jye russ, jye rye)  A convolution of the  
cortex of the cerebral hemispheres, separated by sulci or fissures.
x primary visual cortex  The region of the posterior occipital 
lobe whose primary input is from the visual system.
x calcarine fissure (kal ka rine)  A fissure located in the occipital 
lobe on the medial surface of the brain; most of the primary visual 
cortex is located along its upper and lower banks.
x primary auditory cortex  The region of the superior temporal 
lobe whose primary input is from the auditory system.
x lateral fissure  The fissure that separates the temporal lobe 
from the overlying frontal and parietal lobes.
x primary somatosensory cortex  The region of the anterior 
parietal lobe whose primary input is from the somatosensory 
system.
x central sulcus  The sulcus that separates the frontal lobe from 
the parietal lobe.
x insular cortex (in sue lur)  A sunken region of the cerebral 
cortex that is normally covered by the rostral superior temporal 
lobe and caudal inferior frontal lobe.
x forebrain  The most rostral of the three major divisions of the 
brain; includes the telencephalon and diencephalon.
x cerebral hemisphere (sa ree brul)  One of the two major 
portions of the forebrain, covered by the cerebral cortex.
figure 3.10  Effects of Learning on Neurogenesis
The figure shows sections through a part of the 
hippocampus of rats that received training on a learning 
task or were exposed to a control condition that did not 
lead to learning. Arrows indicate newly formed cells.
(From Leuner, B., Mendolia-Loffredo, S., Kozorovitskiy, Y., Samburg, D., Gould, 
E., and Shors, T.J. Journal of Neuroscience, 2004, 24, 7477–7481. Reprinted with 
permission.)
1 day after
training
60 days after
training
Training task
Control condition

	
The Central Nervous System	
81
figure 3.11  Cross Section of the Human Brain
This brain slice shows fissures and gyri and the layer of cerebral cortex that follows these 
convolutions.
Fissure
Gyrus
White matter
Sulcus
Ventral
Dorsal
Cerebral cortex
 (gray matter)
region is involved in movement-related activities, such 
as planning and executing behaviors. The caudal region 
is involved in perceiving and learning.
Discussing the various regions of the cerebral cortex 
is easier if we have names for them. In fact, the cerebral 
cortex is divided into four areas, or lobes, named for the 
bones of the skull that cover them: the frontal lobe, pa-
rietal lobe, temporal lobe, and occipital lobe. Of course, 
the brain contains two of each lobe, one in each hemi-
sphere. The frontal lobe (the “front”) includes every-
thing in front of the central sulcus. The parietal lobe 
(the “wall”) is located on the side of the cerebral hemi-
sphere, just behind the central sulcus, caudal to the 
frontal lobe. The temporal lobe (the “temple”) juts for-
ward from the base of the brain, ventral to the frontal 
and parietal lobes. The occipital lobe (from the Latin ob, 
“in back of,” and caput, “head”) lies at the very back of 
the brain, caudal to the parietal and temporal lobes. 
is sent to primary sensory cortex of the contralateral 
hemisphere. Thus, the primary somatosensory cortex of 
the left hemisphere learns what the right hand is hold-
ing, the left primary visual cortex learns what is happen-
ing toward the person’s right, and so on.
The region of the cerebral cortex that is most directly 
involved in the control of movement is the primary motor 
cortex, located just in front of the primary somatosensory 
cortex. Neurons in different parts of the primary motor 
cortex are connected to muscles in different parts of the 
body. The connections, like those of the sensory regions of 
the cerebral cortex, are contralateral; the left primary mo-
tor cortex controls the right side of the body and vice versa. 
Thus, if a surgeon places an electrode on the surface of the 
primary motor cortex and stimulates the neurons there 
with a weak electrical current, the result will be movement 
of a particular part of the body. Moving the electrode to a 
different spot will cause a different part of the body to 
move. (Look again at Figure 3.12.) I like to think of the 
strip of primary motor cortex as the keyboard of a piano, 
with each key controlling a different movement. (We will 
see shortly who the “player” of this piano is.)
The regions of primary sensory and motor cortex 
occupy only a small part of the cerebral cortex. The rest 
of the cerebral cortex accomplishes what is done be-
tween sensation and action: perceiving, learning and 
remembering, planning, and acting. These processes 
take place in the association areas of the cerebral cortex. 
The central sulcus provides an important dividing line 
between the rostral and caudal regions of the cerebral 
cortex. (Look once more at Figure 3.12.) The rostral 
x primary motor cortex  The region of the posterior frontal lobe 
that contains neurons that control movements of skeletal muscles.
x frontal lobe  The anterior portion of the cerebral cortex, 
rostral to the parietal lobe and dorsal to the temporal lobe.
x parietal lobe (pa rye i tul )  The region of the cerebral cortex 
caudal to the frontal lobe and dorsal to the temporal lobe.
x temporal lobe (tem por ul )  The region of the cerebral cortex 
rostral to the occipital lobe and ventral to the parietal and frontal 
lobes.
x occipital lobe (ok sip i tul )  The region of the cerebral cortex 
caudal to the parietal and temporal lobes.

82	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
Figure 3.13 shows these lobes in three views of the cere-
bral hemispheres: a ventral view (a view from the bot-
tom), a midsagittal view (a view of the inner surface of 
the right hemisphere after the left hemisphere has been 
removed), and a lateral view. (See Figure 3.13.)
Each primary sensory area of the cerebral cortex 
sends information to adjacent regions, called the sensory 
association cortex. Circuits of neurons in the sensory as-
sociation cortex analyze the information received from 
the primary sensory cortex; perception takes place there, 
and memories are stored there. The regions of the sen-
sory association cortex located closest to the primary sen-
sory areas receive information from only one sensory sys-
tem. For example, the region closest to the primary visual 
cortex analyzes visual information and stores visual mem-
ories. Regions of the sensory association cortex located far 
from the primary sensory areas receive information from 
more than one sensory system; thus, they are involved in 
several kinds of perceptions and memories. These regions 
make it possible to integrate information from more than 
one sensory system. For example, we can learn the con-
nection between the sight of a particular face and the 
sound of a particular voice. (Look again at Figure 3.13.)
figure 3.12  The Primary Sensory Regions of the Brain
The figure shows a lateral view of the left side of a human brain and part of the inner 
surface of the right side. The inset shows a cutaway of part of the frontal lobe of the 
left hemisphere, permitting us to see the primary auditory cortex on the dorsal surface 
of the temporal lobe, which forms the ventral bank of the lateral fissure.
Fi
Primary auditory
cortex
Insular cortex 
Primary
motor
cortex
Central
sulcus
Lateral
fissure
Primary auditory
cortex
Primary
visual
cortex
Calcarine
fissure
Primary
somatosensory
cortex
Feet
Feet
Trunk
Trunk
Hands
Hands
Fingers
Fingers
Face
Face
Lips Lips
Portion of Left Hemisphere
Left Hemisphere
Right
Hemisphere
If people sustain damage to the somatosensory asso-
ciation cortex, their deficits are related to somatosensa-
tion and to the environment in general; for example, 
they may have difficulty perceiving the shapes of objects 
that they can touch but not see, they may be unable to 
name parts of their bodies (see the following case), or 
they may have trouble drawing maps or following them. 
Destruction of the primary visual cortex causes blindness. 
However, although people who sustain damage to the 
visual association cortex will not become blind, they may 
be unable to recognize objects by sight. People who sus-
tain damage to the auditory association cortex may have 
difficulty perceiving speech or even producing meaning-
ful speech of their own. People who sustain damage to 
regions of the association cortex at the junction of the 
three posterior lobes, where the somatosensory, visual, 
and auditory functions overlap, may have difficulty read-
ing or writing.
x sensory association cortex  Those regions of the cerebral 
cortex that receive information from the regions of primary 
sensory cortex.

	
The Central Nervous System	
83
Mr. M., a city bus driver, stopped to let a passenger 
climb board. The passenger asked him a question, and 
Mr. M. suddenly realized that he didn’t understand what 
she was saying. He could hear her, but her words made 
no sense. He opened his mouth to reply. He made 
some sounds, but the look on the woman’s face told 
him that she couldn’t understand what he was trying to 
say. He turned off the engine and looked around at the 
passengers and tried to tell them to get some help. 
Although he was unable to say anything, they under-
stood that something was wrong, and one of them 
called an ambulance.
An MRI scan showed that Mr. M. had sustained an 
intracerebral hemorrhage—a kind of stroke caused by 
rupture of blood vessels in the brain. The stroke had 
damaged his left parietal lobe. Mr. M. gradually 
regained the ability to talk and understand the speech 
of others, but some deficits remained. A colleague,  
Dr. D., and I studied Mr. M. several weeks after his 
stroke. The dialogue went something like this:
“Show me your hand.”
“My hand…my hand.” Looks at his arms, then 
touches his left forearm.
“Show me your chin.”
“My chin.” Looks at his arms, looks down, puts his 
hand on his abdomen.
“Show me your right elbow.”
“My right…” (points to the right with his right 
thumb) “elbow.” Looks up and down his right arm, 
finally touches his right shoulder.
As you can see, Mr. M. could understand that we 
were asking him to point out parts of his body and could 
repeat the names of the body parts when we spoke 
them, but he could not identify which body parts these 
names referred to. This strange deficit, which sometimes 
follows damage to the left parietal lobe, is called auto-
topagnosia, or “poor knowledge of one’s own topogra-
phy.” (A better term would be autotopanomia, or “poor 
knowledge of the names of one’s own topography,” 
but, then, no one asked me to choose the term.) The 
parietal lobes are involved with space: the right primarily 
with external space and the left with one’s body and 
personal space. I will say more about disorders such as 
this one in Chapter 14, which deals with brain mecha-
nisms of language.
(b)
Limbic cortex
Cross section
through midbrain
Temporal Lobe
Temporal Lobe
Temporal Lobe
Occipital Lobe
Occipital 
Lobe
Occipital Lobe
Frontal Lobe
Frontal
 Lobe
Frontal Lobe
Parietal 
Lobe
Parietal 
Lobe
Rostral
Caudal
Cingulate gyrus
(limbic cortex)
Primary
motor cortex
Primary
somatosensory cortex
Somatosensory
association
cortex
Visual
association
cortex
Vis
ual 
ass
oci
atio
n c
ort
ex
Primary
visual
cortex
Primary auditory
cortex (mostly
hidden from view)
(c)
(a)
P
r
e
m
o
to
r 
co
rt
ex
P
r
e
fr
o
n
t
a
l 
c
o
rt
e
x
Au
dito
ry a
ssoc
iation
 corte
x
figure 3.13  The Four Lobes of the Cerebral Cortex
This figure shows the location of the four lobes, the primary 
sensory and motor cortex, and the association cortex. (a) 
Ventral view, from the base of the brain. (b) Midsagittal view, 
with the cerebellum and brain stem removed. (c) Lateral view.
Just as regions of the sensory association cortex of 
the posterior part of the brain are involved in perceiv-
ing and remembering, the frontal association cortex is 
involved in the planning and execution of movements. 

84	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
The motor association cortex (also known as the premo-
tor cortex) is located just rostral to the primary motor 
cortex. This region controls the primary motor cortex; 
thus, it directly controls behavior. If the primary motor 
cortex is the keyboard of the piano, then the motor as-
sociation cortex is the piano player. The rest of the 
frontal lobe, rostral to the motor association cortex, is 
known as the prefrontal cortex. This region of the 
brain is less involved with the control of movement and 
more involved in formulating plans and strategies.
Although the two cerebral hemispheres cooperate 
with each other, they do not perform identical func-
tions. Some functions are lateralized—located primarily 
on one side of the brain. In general, the left hemisphere 
participates in the analysis of information—the extrac-
tion of the elements that make up the whole of an expe-
rience. This ability makes the left hemisphere particu-
larly good at recognizing serial events—events whose 
elements occur one after the other—and controlling 
sequences of behavior. (In a few people, the functions of 
the left and right hemispheres are reversed.) The serial 
functions that are performed by the left hemisphere 
include verbal activities, such as talking, understanding 
the speech of other people, reading, and writing. These 
abilities are disrupted by damage to the various regions 
of the left hemisphere. (I will say more about language 
and the brain in Chapter 14.)
In contrast, the right hemisphere is specialized for 
synthesis; it is particularly good at putting isolated ele-
ments together to perceive things as a whole. For exam-
ple, our ability to draw sketches (especially of three-
dimensional objects), read maps, and construct complex 
objects out of smaller elements depends heavily on circuits 
of neurons that are located in the right hemisphere. 
Damage to the right hemisphere disrupts these abilities.
We are not aware of the fact that each hemisphere 
perceives the world differently. Although the two cere-
bral hemispheres perform somewhat different func-
tions, our perceptions and our memories are unified. 
This unity is accomplished by the corpus callosum, a 
large band of axons that connects corresponding parts 
of the cerebral cortex of the left and right hemispheres: 
The left and right temporal lobes are connected, the 
left and right parietal lobes are connected, and so on. 
Because of the corpus callosum, each region of the  
association cortex knows what is happening in the cor-
responding region of the opposite side of the brain. 
The corpus callosum also makes a few asymmetrical 
connections that link different regions of the two hemi-
spheres. Figure 3.14 shows the bundles of axons that 
constitute the corpus callosum, obtained by means of 
diffusion tensor imaging, a special scanning method  
described in Chapter 5.
Figure 3.15 shows a midsagittal view of the brain. 
The brain (and part of the spinal cord) has been sliced 
down the middle, dividing it into its two symmetrical 
halves. The left half has been removed, so we see the 
inner surface of the right half. The cerebral cortex that 
covers most of the surface of the cerebral hemispheres 
(including the frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal 
lobes) is called the neocortex (“new” cortex, because it 
is of relatively recent evolutionary origin). Another form 
of cerebral cortex, the limbic cortex, is located around 
the medial edge of the cerebral hemispheres (limbus 
means “border”). The cingulate gyrus, an important  
region of the limbic cortex, can be seen in this figure. 
(See Figure 3.15.) In addition, if you look back at the top 
two drawings of Figure 3.13, you will see that the limbic 
figure 3.14  Bundles of Axons in the Corpus Callosum
This figure, obtained by means of diffusion tensor imaging, 
shows bundles of axons in the corpus callosum that serve 
different regions of the cerebral cortex.
(From Hofer, S., and Frahm, J. NeuroImage, 2006, 32, 989–994. Reprinted with 
permission.)
x motor association cortex  The region of the frontal lobe rostral 
to the primary motor cortex; also known as the premotor cortex.
x prefrontal cortex  The region of the frontal lobe rostral to the 
motor association cortex.
x corpus callosum (ka loh sum)  A large bundle of axons that 
interconnects corresponding regions of the association cortex on 
each side of the brain.
x neocortex  The phylogenetically newest cortex, including the 
primary sensory cortex, primary motor cortex, and association 
cortex.
x limbic cortex  Phylogenetically old cortex, located at the 
medial edge (“limbus”) of the cerebral hemispheres; part of the 
limbic system.
x cingulate gyrus (sing yew lett)  A strip of limbic cortex lying 
along the lateral walls of the groove separating the cerebral 
hemispheres, just above the corpus callosum.

	
The Central Nervous System	
85
bodies, protrusions on the base of the brain that con-
tain parts of the hypothalamus. (See Figure 3.16.)
MacLean noted that the evolution of this system, 
which includes the first and simplest form of cerebral 
cortex, appears to have coincided with the develop-
ment of emotional responses. As you will see in Chapter 13, 
we now know that parts of the limbic system (notably, 
the hippocampal formation and the region of limbic 
cortex that surrounds it) are involved in learning and 
memory. The amygdala and some regions of limbic 
cortex are specifically involved in emotions: feelings 
and expressions of emotions, emotional memories, and 
recognition of the signs of emotions in other people.
x limbic system  A group of brain regions including the anterior 
thalamic nuclei, amygdala, hippocampus, limbic cortex, and parts 
of the hypothalamus, as well as their interconnecting fiber bundles.
x hippocampus  A forebrain structure of the temporal lobe, 
constituting an important part of the limbic system; includes the 
hippocampus proper (Ammon’s horn), dentate gyrus, and subiculum.
x amygdala (a mig da la)  A structure in the interior of the rostral 
temporal lobe, containing a set of nuclei; part of the limbic 
system.
x fornix  A fiber bundle that connects the hippocampus with 
other parts of the brain, including the mammillary bodies of the 
hypothalamus; part of the limbic system.
x mammillary bodies (mam i lair ee)  A protrusion of the bottom 
of the brain at the posterior end of the hypothalamus, containing 
some hypothalamic nuclei; part of the limbic system.
cortex occupies the regions that have not been colored in. 
(Refer back to Figure 3.13.)
Figure 3.15 also shows the corpus callosum. To slice 
the brain into its two symmetrical halves, one must slice 
through the middle of the corpus callosum. (Recall that 
I described the split-brain operation, in which the cor-
pus callosum is severed, in Chapter 1.) (Look again at 
Figure 3.15.)
Simulate the rotatable brain on MyPsychLab to 
view the brain from various angles and see the loca-
tions of the specialized regions of the cerebral cortex. 
Simulate brain slices on MyPsychLab to see the inter­
nal structures of slices of human brains.
Limbic System.  A neuroanatomist, Papez (1937), 
suggested that a set of interconnected brain structures 
formed a circuit whose primary function was motiva-
tion and emotion. This system included several regions 
of the limbic cortex (already described) and a set of 
interconnected structures surrounding the core of the 
forebrain. A physiologist, MacLean (1949), expanded 
the system to include other structures and coined the 
term limbic system. Besides the limbic cortex, the most 
important parts of the limbic system are the hippocam-
pus (“sea horse”) and the amygdala (“almond”), 
located next to the lateral ventricle in the temporal 
lobe. The fornix (“arch”) is a bundle of axons that 
connects the hippocampus with other regions of the 
brain, including the mammillary (“breast-shaped”) 
figure 3.15  A Midsagittal View of the Brain and Part of the Spinal Cord
Spinal
cord
Medulla
Choroid
plexus
Cerebellum
Pons
Fourth
ventricle
Tentorium
Midbrain
Thalamus
Corpus
callosum
Massa
intermedia
Choroid plexus
Skull
Scalp
Layers of 
meninges
(includes 
blood
vessels)
Third
ventricle
Pituitary
gland
Cingulate gyrus
(region of limbic
cortex)

86	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
a bridge of gray matter called the massa intermedia, 
which pierces the middle of the third ventricle. (Look 
again at Figure 3.17.) The massa intermedia is probably 
not an important structure, because it is absent in the 
brains of many people. However, it serves as a useful 
reference point in looking at diagrams of the brain; it 
appears in Figures 3.4, 3.15, 3.16, and 3.19.
Most neural input to the cerebral cortex is received 
from the thalamus; indeed, much of the cortical surface 
can be divided into regions that receive projections from 
specific parts of the thalamus. Projection fibers are sets 
of axons that arise from cell bodies located in one re-
gion of the brain and synapse on neurons located within 
another region (that is, they project to these regions).
The thalamus is divided into several nuclei. Some 
thalamic nuclei receive sensory information from the 
sensory systems. The neurons in these nuclei then relay 
the sensory information to specific sensory projection 
Basal Ganglia.  The basal ganglia are a collection of 
subcortical nuclei in the forebrain, which lie beneath 
the anterior portion of the lateral ventricles. Nuclei are 
groups of neurons of similar shape. (The word nucleus, 
from the Greek “nut,” can refer to the inner portion of 
an atom, to the structure of a cell that contains the 
chromosomes, and—as in this case—to a collection of 
neurons located within the brain.) The major parts of 
the basal ganglia are the caudate nucleus, the putamen, 
and the globus pallidus (the “nucleus with a tail,” the 
“shell,” and the “pale globe”). (See Figure 3.17.) The 
basal ganglia are involved in the control of movement. 
For example, Parkinson’s disease is caused by degener-
ation of certain neurons located in the midbrain that 
send axons to the caudate nucleus and the putamen. 
The symptoms of this disease are weakness, tremors, 
rigidity of the limbs, poor balance, and difficulty in 
initiating movements.
Diencephalon
The second major division of the forebrain, the dien-
cephalon, is situated between the telencephalon and the 
mesencephalon; it surrounds the third ventricle. Its two 
most important structures are the thalamus and the hy-
pothalamus. (See Figure 3.17.)
Thalamus.  The thalamus (from the Greek thalamos, 
“inner chamber”) makes up the dorsal part of the dien-
cephalon. It is situated near the middle of the cerebral 
hemispheres, immediately medial and caudal to the 
basal ganglia. The thalamus has two lobes, connected by 
x projection fiber  An axon of a neuron in one region of the brain 
whose terminals form synapses with neurons in another region.
x thalamus  The largest portion of the diencephalon, located above 
the hypothalamus; contains nuclei that project information to specific 
regions of the cerebral cortex and receive information from it.
x diencephalon (dy en seff a lahn)  A region of the forebrain 
surrounding the third ventricle; includes the thalamus and the 
hypothalamus.
x basal ganglia  A group of subcortical nuclei in the telencepha-
lon, the caudate nucleus, the globus pallidus, and the putamen; 
important parts of the motor system.
x nucleus (plural: nuclei )  An identifiable group of neural cell 
bodies in the central nervous system.
figure 3.17  The Basal Ganglia and Diencephalon
The basal ganglia and diencephalon (thalamus and 
hypothalamus) are ghosted in to a semitransparent brain.
Hypothalamus
Thalamus
Thalamus
Basal ganglia
figure 3.16  The Major Components of the Limbic 
System
All of the left hemisphere except for the limbic system 
has been removed.
Corpus
callosum
Fornix
Mammillary
body
Amygdala
Hippocampus
Hippocampus of
right hemisphere
(ghosted in)
Cerebellum
Limbic
cortex
Massa
intermedia

	
The Central Nervous System	
87
role of the hypothalamus in the control of the four F ’s 
(and other behaviors, such as drinking and sleeping) 
will be considered in several chapters later in this book.
Much of the endocrine system is controlled by  
hormones produced by cells in the hypothalamus. A 
special system of blood vessels directly connects the 
hypothalamus with the anterior pituitary gland. (See  
Figure 3.19.) The hypothalamic hormones are secreted 
by specialized neurons called neurosecretory cells, 
located near the base of the pituitary stalk. These hor-
mones stimulate the anterior pituitary gland to secrete 
its hormones. For example, gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
x lateral geniculate nucleus  A group of cell bodies within the 
lateral geniculate body of the thalamus that receives fibers from 
the retina and projects fibers to the primary visual cortex.
x medial geniculate nucleus  A group of cell bodies within the 
medial geniculate body of the thalamus; receives fibers from the 
auditory system and projects fibers to the primary auditory cortex.
x ventrolateral nucleus  A nucleus of the thalamus that receives 
inputs from the cerebellum and sends axons to the primary motor 
cortex.
x hypothalamus  The group of nuclei of the diencephalon 
situated beneath the thalamus; involved in regulation of the 
autonomic nervous system, control of the anterior and posterior 
pituitary glands, and integration of species-typical behaviors.
x optic chiasm (kye az’m)  An X-shaped connection between the 
optic nerves, located below the base of the brain, just anterior to 
the pituitary gland.
x anterior pituitary gland  The anterior part of the pituitary 
gland; an endocrine gland whose secretions are controlled by the 
hypothalamic hormones.
x neurosecretory cell  A neuron that secretes a hormone or 
hormonelike substance.
figure 3.18  A Midsagittal View of Part of the Brain
This view shows some of the nuclei of the hypothalamus. The nuclei are situated on the far 
side of the wall of the third ventricle, inside the right hemisphere.
Corpus
callosum
Fornix
Massa
intermedia
Wall of third
ventricle
Hypothalamic
nuclei
Optic chiasm
Pituitary
gland
Mammillary
body
areas of the cerebral cortex. For example, the lateral 
geniculate nucleus receives information from the eye 
and sends axons to the primary visual cortex, and the 
medial geniculate nucleus receives information from 
the inner ear and sends axons to the primary auditory 
cortex. Other thalamic nuclei project to specific re-
gions of the cerebral cortex, but they do not relay sen-
sory information. For example, the ventrolateral nu-
cleus receives information from the cerebellum and 
projects it to the primary motor cortex. Still other nu-
clei receive information from one region of the cere-
bral cortex and relay it to another region. And as we 
will see in Chapter 9, several nuclei are involved in 
controlling the general excitability of the cerebral cor-
tex. To accomplish this task, these nuclei have wide-
spread projections to all cortical regions.
Hypothalamus.  As its name implies, the hypothalamus 
lies at the base of the brain, under the thalamus. 
Although the hypothalamus is a relatively small struc-
ture, it is an important one. It controls the autonomic 
nervous system and the endocrine system and organizes 
behaviors related to survival of the species—the so-called 
four F ’s: fighting, feeding, fleeing, and mating.
The hypothalamus is situated on both sides of the 
ventral portion of the third ventricle. The hypothala-
mus is a complex structure, containing many nuclei and 
fiber tracts. Figure 3.18 indicates its location and size. 
Note that the pituitary gland is attached to the base of 
the hypothalamus via the pituitary stalk. Just in front of 
the pituitary stalk is the optic chiasm, where half of the 
axons in the optic nerves (from the eyes) cross from 
one side of the brain to the other. (See Figure 3.18.) The 

88	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
The Midbrain
The midbrain (also called the mesencephalon) sur-
rounds the cerebral aqueduct and consists of two major 
parts: the tectum and the tegmentum.
Tectum
The tectum (“roof”) is located in the dorsal portion of the 
mesencephalon. Its principal structures are the superior 
colliculi and the inferior colliculi, which appear as four 
bumps on the dorsal surface of the brain stem. The brain 
causes the anterior pituitary gland to secrete the gonado-
tropic hormones, which play a role in reproductive physiol-
ogy and behavior.
Most of the hormones secreted by the anterior pitu-
itary gland control other endocrine glands. Because of 
this function, the anterior pituitary gland has been called 
the body’s “master gland.” For example, the gonado-
tropic hormones stimulate the gonads (ovaries and tes-
tes) to release male or female sex hormones. These hor-
mones affect cells throughout the body, including some 
in the brain. Two other anterior pituitary hormones—
prolactin and somatotropic hormone (growth hor-
mone)—do not control other glands but act as the final 
messenger. The behavioral effects of many of the ante-
rior pituitary hormones are discussed in later chapters.
The hypothalamus also produces the hormones of 
the posterior pituitary gland and controls their secre-
tion. These hormones include oxytocin, which stimu-
lates ejection of milk and uterine contractions at the 
time of childbirth, and vasopressin, which regulates 
urine output by the kidneys. They are produced by neu-
rons in the hypothalamus whose axons travel down the 
pituitary stalk and terminate in the posterior pituitary 
gland. The hormones are carried in vesicles through the 
axoplasm of these neurons and collect in the terminal 
buttons in the posterior pituitary gland. When these 
axons fire, the hormone contained within their terminal 
buttons is liberated and enters the circulatory system.
x tectum  The dorsal part of the midbrain; includes the superior 
and inferior colliculi.
x superior colliculi (ka lik yew lee)  Protrusions on top of the 
midbrain; part of the visual system.
x midbrain  The mesencephalon; the central of the three major 
divisions of the brain.
x mesencephalon (mezz en seff a lahn)  The midbrain; a region 
of the brain that surrounds the cerebral aqueduct; includes the 
tectum and the tegmentum.
figure 3.19  The Pituitary Gland
Hormones released by the neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus enter capillaries 
and are conveyed to the anterior pituitary gland, where they control its secretion of 
hormones. The hormones of the posterior pituitary gland are produced in the 
hypothalamus and carried there in vesicles by means of axoplasmic transport.
Secretory cells; release
anterior pituitary hormones
Terminals release posterior
pituitary hormones
Posterior pituitary gland
Artery
Capillary bed around terminals
of neurosecretory cells;
hypothalamic hormones
released here
Mammillary body
Neurosecretory cells in the hypothalamus
Artery
Pituitary 
stalk
Anterior 
pituitary gland
For posterior pituitary gland
For anterior pituitary gland
x posterior pituitary gland  The posterior part of the pituitary 
gland; an endocrine gland that contains hormone-secreting terminal 
buttons of axons whose cell bodies lie within the hypothalamus.
x inferior colliculi  Protrusions on top of the midbrain; part of 
the auditory system.
x brain stem  The “stem” of the brain, from the medulla to the 
midbrain, excluding the cerebellum.

	
The Central Nervous System	
89
stem includes the midbrain and the hindbrain, and it is 
called the brain stem because it looks just like that: a stem. 
Figure 3.20 shows several views of the brain stem: lateral 
and posterior views of the brain stem inside a semitrans-
parent brain, an enlarged view of the brain stem with part 
of the cerebellum cut away to reveal the inside of the 
fourth ventricle, and a cross section through the mid-
brain. (See Figure 3.20.) The inferior colliculi are a part 
of the auditory system. The superior colliculi are part of 
the visual system. In mammals they are primarily involved 
in visual reflexes and reactions to moving stimuli.
Tegmentum
The tegmentum (“covering”) consists of the portion of 
the mesencephalon beneath the tectum. It includes the 
rostral end of the reticular formation, several nuclei 
controlling eye movements, the periaqueductal gray 
matter, the red nucleus, the substantia nigra, and the 
ventral tegmental area. (See Figure 3.20d.)
The reticular formation is a large structure consist-
ing of many nuclei (over ninety in all). It is also char-
acterized by a diffuse, interconnected network of neu-
rons with complex dendritic and axonal processes. 
(Indeed, reticulum means “little net”; early anatomists 
were struck by the netlike appearance of the reticular 
formation.) The reticular formation occupies the core 
of the brain stem, from the lower border of the me-
dulla to the upper border of the midbrain. (Look again 
at Figure 3.20d.) The reticular formation receives sen-
sory information by means of various pathways and 
projects axons to the cerebral cortex, thalamus, and 
spinal cord. It plays a role in sleep and arousal, atten-
tion, muscle tonus, movement, and various vital re-
flexes. Its functions will be described more fully in later 
chapters.
The periaqueductal gray matter is so called because 
it consists mostly of cell bodies of neurons (“gray mat-
ter,” as contrasted with the “white matter” of axon bun-
dles) that surround the cerebral aqueduct as it travels 
from the third to the fourth ventricle. The periaqueduc-
tal gray matter contains neural circuits that control se-
quences of movements that constitute species-typical 
behaviors, such as fighting and mating. As we will see in 
Chapter 7, opiates such as morphine decrease an organ-
ism’s sensitivity to pain by stimulating receptors on neu-
rons located in this region.
The red nucleus and substantia nigra (“black sub-
stance”) are important components of the motor sys-
tem. A bundle of axons that arises from the red nucleus 
constitutes one of the two major fiber systems that bring 
motor information from the cerebral cortex and cere-
bellum to the spinal cord. The substantia nigra con-
tains neurons whose axons project to the caudate nu-
cleus and putamen, parts of the basal ganglia. As we will 
see in Chapter 4, degeneration of these neurons causes 
Parkinson’s disease.
The Hindbrain
The hindbrain, which surrounds the fourth ventricle, 
consists of two major divisions: the metencephalon and 
the myelencephalon.
Metencephalon
The metencephalon consists of the pons and the cere-
bellum.
Cerebellum.  The cerebellum (“little brain”), with its 
two hemispheres, resembles a miniature version of the 
cerebrum. It is covered by the cerebellar cortex and has 
a set of deep cerebellar nuclei. These nuclei receive 
projections from the cerebellar cortex and themselves 
send projections out of the cerebellum to other parts of 
the brain. Each hemisphere of the cerebellum is 
attached to the dorsal surface of the pons by bundles of 
axons: the superior, middle, and inferior cerebellar 
peduncles (“little feet”). (See Figure 3.20c.)
Damage to the cerebellum impairs standing, walk-
ing, or performance of coordinated movements. (A vir-
tuoso pianist or other performing musician owes much 
to his or her cerebellum.) The cerebellum receives vi-
sual, auditory, vestibular, and somatosensory informa-
tion, and it also receives information about individual 
muscle movements being directed by the brain. The 
cerebellum integrates this information and modifies the 
x red nucleus  A large nucleus of the midbrain that receives 
inputs from the cerebellum and motor cortex and sends axons to 
motor neurons in the spinal cord.
x substantia nigra  A darkly stained region of the tegmentum 
that contains neurons that communicate with the caudate nucleus 
and putamen in the basal ganglia.
x hindbrain  The most caudal of the three major divisions of the 
brain; includes the metencephalon and myelencephalon.
x cerebellum (sair a bell um)  A major part of the brain located 
dorsal to the pons, containing the two cerebellar hemispheres, 
covered with the cerebellar cortex; an important component of 
the motor system.
x cerebellar cortex  The cortex that covers the surface of the 
cerebellum.
x deep cerebellar nuclei  Nuclei located within the cerebellar 
hemispheres; receive projections from the cerebellar cortex and 
send projections out of the cerebellum to other parts of the brain.
x cerebellar peduncle (pee dun kul)  One of three bundles of 
axons that attach each cerebellar hemisphere to the dorsal pons.
x tegmentum  The ventral part of the midbrain; includes the 
periaqueductal gray matter, reticular formation, red nucleus, and 
substantia nigra.
x reticular formation  A large network of neural tissue located in 
the central region of the brain stem, from the medulla to the 
diencephalon.
x periaqueductal gray matter  The region of the midbrain 
surrounding the cerebral aqueduct; contains neural circuits 
involved in species-typical behaviors.

90	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
its core, a portion of the reticular formation, includ-
ing some nuclei that appear to be important in sleep 
and arousal. It also contains a large nucleus that 
relays information from the cerebral cortex to the 
cerebellum.
motor outflow, exerting a coordinating and smoothing 
effect on the movements. Cerebellar damage results in 
jerky, poorly coordinated, exaggerated movements; ex-
tensive cerebellar damage makes it impossible even to 
stand. Chapter 8 discusses the anatomy and functions of 
the cerebellum in more detail.
Pons.  The pons, a large bulge in the brain stem, lies 
between the mesencephalon and medulla oblongata, 
immediately ventral to the cerebellum. Pons means 
“bridge,” but it does not really look like one. (Refer 
back to Figures 3.15 and 3.20a.) The pons contains, in 
figure 3.20  The Cerebellum and the Brain Stem
This figure shows (a) a lateral view of a semitransparent brain, showing the cerebellum 
and brain stem ghosted in, (b) a view from the back of the brain, and (c) a dorsal view of 
the brain stem. The left hemisphere of the cerebellum and part of the right hemisphere 
have been removed to show the inside of the fourth ventricle and the cerebellar pedun-
cles. Part (d) shows a cross section of the midbrain.
Thalamus
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Cerebellum
(a)
Medulla
Cerebellum
Thalamus
(b)
Red
nucleus
Cerebral
aqueduct
Periaqueductal
gray matter
Superior colliculus
Reticular
formation
Substantia
nigra
(d)
Ventral
Dorsal
Cerebellum
Inferior colliculus
Superior colliculus
Pineal body
Floor of fourth
ventricle
(c)
Medulla
Cerebellar
peduncles
Thalamus
x pons  The region of the metencephalon rostral to the medulla, 
caudal to the midbrain, and ventral to the cerebellum.
x medulla oblongata (me doo la)  The most caudal portion of 
the brain; located in the myelencephalon, immediately rostral to 
the spinal cord.

	
The Central Nervous System	
91
Figure 3.22(b) shows a cross section of the spinal 
cord. Like the brain, the spinal cord consists of white 
matter and gray matter. Unlike the brain’s, the spinal 
cord’s white matter (consisting of ascending and descend-
ing bundles of myelinated axons) is on the outside; the 
gray matter (mostly neural cell bodies and short, unmy-
elinated axons) is on the inside. In Figure 3.22(b), 
ascending tracts are indicated in blue; descending tracts 
are indicated in red. (See Figure 3.22b.)
Myelencephalon
The myelencephalon contains one major structure, the 
medulla oblongata (literally, “oblong marrow”), usually 
just called the medulla. This structure is the most caudal 
portion of the brain stem; its lower border is the rostral 
end of the spinal cord. (Refer again to Figures 3.15 and 
3.20a.) The medulla contains part of the reticular forma-
tion, including nuclei that control vital functions such as 
regulation of the cardiovascular system, respiration, and 
skeletal muscle tonus.
The Spinal Cord
The spinal cord is a long, conical structure, approximately 
as thick as our little finger. The principal function of the 
spinal cord is to distribute motor fibers to the effector 
organs of the body (glands and muscles) and to collect 
somatosensory information to be passed on to the brain. 
The spinal cord also has a certain degree of autonomy 
from the brain; various reflexive control circuits (some of 
which are described in Chapter 8) are located there.
The spinal cord is protected by the vertebral column, 
which is composed of twenty-four individual vertebrae of 
the cervical (neck), thoracic (chest), and lumbar (lower back) 
regions and the fused vertebrae that make up the sacral 
and coccygeal portions of the column (located in the pelvic 
region). The spinal cord passes through a hole in each of 
the vertebrae (the spinal foramens). Figure 3.21 illustrates 
the divisions and structures of the spinal cord and vertebral 
column. (See Figure 3.21.) The spinal cord is only about 
two-thirds as long as the vertebral column; the rest of the 
space is filled by a mass of spinal roots composing the 
cauda equina (“horse’s tail”). (Refer back to Figure 3.3a.)
Early in embryological development the vertebral 
column and spinal cord are the same length. As develop-
ment progresses, the vertebral column grows faster than 
the spinal cord. This differential growth rate causes the 
spinal roots to be displaced downward; the most caudal 
roots travel the farthest before they emerge through 
openings between the vertebrae and thus compose the 
cauda equina. To produce the caudal block that is some-
times used in pelvic surgery or childbirth, a local anes-
thetic can be injected into the CSF contained within the 
sac of dura mater surrounding the cauda equina. The 
drug blocks conduction in the axons of the cauda equina.
Figure 3.22(a) shows a portion of the spinal cord, 
with the layers of the meninges that wrap it. Small 
bundles of fibers emerge from each side of the spinal 
cord in two straight lines along its dorsolateral and 
ventrolateral surfaces. Groups of these bundles fuse 
together and become the thirty-one paired sets of dorsal 
roots and ventral roots. The dorsal and ventral roots 
join together as they pass through the intervertebral 
foramens and become spinal nerves. (See Figure 3.22a.)
x caudal block  The anesthesia and paralysis of the lower part of 
the body produced by injection of a local anesthetic into the 
cerebrospinal fluid surrounding the cauda equina.
x dorsal root  The spinal root that contains incoming (afferent) 
sensory fibers.
x ventral root  The spinal root that contains outgoing (efferent) 
motor fibers.
x spinal root  A bundle of axons surrounded by connective 
tissue that occurs in pairs, which fuse and form a spinal nerve.
x cauda equina (ee kwye na)  A bundle of spinal roots located 
caudal to the end of the spinal cord.
x spinal cord  The cord of nervous tissue that extends caudally 
from the medulla.
Dorsal
Ventral
Ventral
Dorsal
Cervical
vertebrae
Thoracic
vertebrae
Lumbar
vertebrae
Sacral
vertebrae
(fused)
Coccyx
Spinal foramen
(spinal cord
passes through
this opening)
figure 3.21  Ventral View of the Spinal Column
Details show the anatomy of the bony vertebrae.

92	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
figure 3.22  Ventral View of the Spinal Cord
The figure shows (a) a portion of the spinal cord, showing the layers of the meninges and 
the relationship of the spinal cord to the vertebral column; and (b) a cross section through 
the spinal cord. Ascending tracts are shown in blue; descending tracts are shown in red.
Gray matter
Pia mater
(adheres to
spinal cord)
Arachnoid
membrane
Dura mater
Vertebra
White matter
Subarachnoid
space
Dorsal root
ganglion
Ventral
root
Dorsal
root
Spinal
nerve
(a)
Dorsal
Ventral
(b)
Section Summary
The Central Nervous System
The brain consists of three major divisions, organized 
around the three chambers of the tube that develops 
early in embryonic life: the forebrain, the midbrain, 
and the hindbrain. The development of the neural 
tube into the mature central nervous system is illus-
trated in Figure 3.8, and Table 3.2 outlines the major 
divisions and subdivisions of the brain.
During the first phase of brain development, sym-
metrical division of the progenitor cells of the ventric-
ular and subventricular zones, which lines the neural 
tube, increases in size. During the second phase, 
asymmetrical division of these cells gives rise to neu-
rons, which migrate up the fibers of radial glial cells to 
their final resting places. There, neurons develop den-
drites and axons and establish synaptic connections 
with other neurons. Later, neurons that fail to develop 
a sufficient number of synaptic connections are killed 
through apoptosis. Although the basic development 
of the nervous system is genetically controlled, sen-
sory stimulation plays a role in refining the details. In 
addition, the neural circuitry of even a fully mature 
brain can be modified through experience.
The duplication of genes—in particular, master 
genes that control groups of other genes—facilitated 
the increase in complexity of the brain during the pro-
cess of evolution. When a gene is duplicated, one of 
the copies can continue to perform vital functions, leav-
ing the other copy for “experimentation” through muta-
tions. The large size of the human brain, relative to the 
brains of other primates, appears to be accomplished 
primarily by lengthening the first and second periods of 
brain development, and convolutions are produced by 
division of progenitor cells of the inner SVZ that are not 
anchored to the wall of the neural tube.

	
The Peripheral Nervous System	
93
one limb into the spinal cord and the other limb out to 
the sensory organ. Note that all of the axons in the dorsal 
root convey somatosensory information.
Cell bodies that give rise to the ventral root are lo-
cated within the gray matter of the spinal cord. The ax-
ons of these multipolar neurons leave the spinal cord via 
a ventral root, which joins a dorsal root to make a spinal 
nerve. The axons that leave the spinal cord through the 
ventral roots control muscles and glands. They are re-
ferred to as efferent axons because they “bear away 
from” the CNS. (Look again at Figure 3.23.)
Cranial Nerves
Twelve pairs of cranial nerves are attached to the ventral 
surface of the brain. Most of these nerves serve sensory 
and motor functions of the head and neck region. One 
of them, the tenth, or vagus nerve, regulates the functions 
The Peripheral Nervous System
The brain and spinal cord communicate with the rest of 
the body via the cranial nerves and spinal nerves. These 
nerves are part of the peripheral nervous system, which 
conveys sensory information to the central nervous  
system and conveys messages from the central nervous 
system to the body’s muscles and glands.
Spinal Nerves
The spinal nerves begin at the junction of the dorsal 
and ventral roots of the spinal cord. The nerves leave 
the vertebral column and travel to the muscles or sen-
sory receptors they innervate, branching repeatedly as 
they go. Branches of spinal nerves often follow blood 
vessels, especially those branches that innervate skeletal 
muscles. (Refer back to Figure 3.3.)
Now let us consider the pathways by which sensory 
information enters the spinal cord and motor information 
leaves it. The cell bodies of all axons that bring sensory 
information into the brain and spinal cord are located 
outside the CNS. (The sole exception is the visual system; 
the retina of the eye is actually a part of the brain.) These 
incoming axons are referred to as afferent axons because 
they “bear toward” the CNS. The cell bodies that give rise 
to the axons that bring somatosensory information to the 
spinal cord reside in the dorsal root ganglia, rounded 
swellings of the dorsal root. (See Figure 3.23.) These neu-
rons are of the unipolar type (described in Chapter 2). 
The axonal stalk divides close to the cell body, sending 
The forebrain, which surrounds the lateral and 
third ventricles, consists of the telencephalon and 
diencephalon. The telencephalon contains the cere-
bral cortex, the limbic system, and the basal ganglia. 
The cerebral cortex is organized into the frontal, pari-
etal, temporal, and occipital lobes. The central sulcus 
divides the frontal lobe, which deals specifically with 
movement and the planning of movement, from the 
other three lobes, which deal primarily with perceiving 
and learning. The limbic system, which includes the 
limbic cortex, the hippocampus, and the amygdala, is 
involved in emotion, motivation, and learning. The 
basal ganglia participate in the control of movement. 
The diencephalon consists of the thalamus, which 
directs information to and from the cerebral cortex, 
and the hypothalamus, which controls the endocrine 
system and modulates species-typical behaviors.
The midbrain, which surrounds the cerebral aque-
duct, consists of the tectum and the tegmentum. The 
tectum is involved in audition and the control of visual 
reflexes and reactions to moving stimuli. The tegmen-
tum contains the reticular formation, which is impor-
tant in sleep, arousal, and movement; the periaque-
ductal gray matter, which controls various 
species-typical behaviors; and the red nucleus and 
the substantia nigra, both parts of the motor system. 
The hindbrain, which surrounds the fourth ventricle, 
contains the cerebellum, the pons, and the medulla. 
The cerebellum plays an important role in integrating 
and coordinating movements. The pons contains 
some nuclei that are important in sleep and arousal. 
The medulla oblongata, too, is involved in sleep and 
arousal, but it also plays a role in control of move-
ment and in control of vital functions such as heart 
rate, breathing, and blood pressure.
The outer part of the spinal cord consists of white 
matter: axons conveying information up or down. The 
central gray matter contains cell bodies.
x efferent axon (eff ur ent)  An axon directed away from the central 
nervous system, conveying motor commands to muscles and glands.
x afferent axon  An axon directed toward the central nervous 
system, conveying sensory information.
x dorsal root ganglion  A nodule on a dorsal root that contains 
cell bodies of afferent spinal nerve neurons.
x spinal nerve  A peripheral nerve attached to the spinal cord.
x cranial nerve  A peripheral nerve attached directly to the brain.
x vagus nerve (vay guss)  The largest of the cranial nerves, 
conveying efferent fibers of the parasympathetic division of the 
autonomic nervous system to organs of the thoracic and abdominal 
cavities.

94	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
of the skeletal muscles—is called the somatic nervous 
system. The other branch of the peripheral nervous 
system—the autonomic nervous system (ANS)—is con-
cerned with regulation of smooth muscle, cardiac mus-
cle, and glands. (Autonomic means “self-governing.”) 
Smooth muscle is found in the skin (associated with 
hair follicles), in blood vessels, in the eyes (controlling 
pupil size and accommodation of the lens), and in the 
walls and sphincters of the gut, gallbladder, and urinary 
bladder. Merely describing the organs innervated by the 
autonomic nervous system suggests the function of this 
system: regulation of “vegetative processes” in the body.
The ANS consists of two anatomically separate sys-
tems: the sympathetic division and the parasympathetic  
division. With few exceptions, organs of the body are 
innervated by both of these subdivisions, and each has 
a different effect. For example, the sympathetic division 
speeds the heart rate, whereas the parasympathetic 
division slows it.
of organs in the thoracic and abdominal cavities. It is 
called the vagus (“wandering”) nerve because its branches 
wander throughout the thoracic and abdominal cavities. 
(The word vagabond has the same root.) Figure 3.24 pres-
ents a view of the base of the brain and illustrates the 
cranial nerves and the structures they serve. Note that 
efferent (motor) fibers are drawn in red and that afferent 
(sensory) fibers are drawn in blue. (See Figure 3.24.)
As I mentioned in the previous section, cell bodies 
of sensory nerve fibers that enter the brain and spinal 
cord (except for the visual system) are located outside 
the central nervous system. Somatosensory information 
(and the sense of taste) is received, via the cranial 
nerves, from unipolar neurons. Auditory, vestibular, 
and visual information is received via fibers of bipolar 
neurons (described in Chapter 2). Olfactory informa-
tion is received via the olfactory bulbs, which receive 
information from the olfactory receptors in the nose. 
The olfactory bulbs are complex structures that contain 
a considerable amount of neural circuitry; actually, they 
are part of the brain. Sensory mechanisms are described 
in more detail in Chapters 6 and 7.
The Autonomic Nervous System
The part of the peripheral nervous system that I have 
discussed so far—which receives sensory information 
from the sensory organs and that controls movements 
figure 3.23  A Cross Section of the Spinal Cord
The figure shows the routes taken by afferent and efferent axons through the dorsal 
and ventral roots.
Dura mater
Arachnoid membrane
Pia mater
To brain
Afferent
axon
Dorsal
root
Dorsal root
ganglion
Spinal
nerve
Vertebra
Fat tissue
(for cushioning)
Subarachnoid
space
Spinal
cord
Motor
neuron
Efferent
axon
Ventral
root
x autonomic nervous system (ANS)  The portion of the peripheral 
nervous system that controls the body’s vegetative functions.
x olfactory bulb  The protrusion at the end of the olfactory 
nerve; receives input from the olfactory receptors.
x somatic nervous system  The part of the peripheral nervous 
system that controls the movement of skeletal muscles or transmits 
somatosensory information to the central nervous system.

	
The Peripheral Nervous System	
95
nervous system is also known as the thoracolumbar sys-
tem). The fibers of these neurons exit via the ventral 
roots. After joining the spinal nerves, the fibers branch 
off and pass into sympathetic ganglia (not to be con-
fused with the dorsal root ganglia). Figure 3.25 shows 
the relationship of these ganglia to the spinal cord. 
Sympathetic Division of the ANS
The sympathetic division is most involved in activities 
associated with expenditure of energy from reserves 
that are stored in the body. For example, when an 
organism is excited, the sympathetic nervous system 
increases blood flow to skeletal muscles, stimulates 
the secretion of epinephrine (resulting in increased 
heart rate and a rise in blood sugar level), and causes 
piloerection (erection of fur in mammals that have it 
and production of “goose bumps” in humans).
The cell bodies of sympathetic motor neurons are 
located in the gray matter of the thoracic and lumbar 
regions of the spinal cord (hence, the sympathetic 
figure 3.24  The Cranial Nerves
The figure shows the twelve pairs of cranial nerves and the regions and functions they serve. 
Red lines denote axons that control muscles or glands; blue lines denote sensory axons.
     
Taste
Muscles of
throat and
larynx
9. Glossopharyngeal
Balance
Hearing
8. Auditory
Taste
7. Facial
Face
muscles
5. Trigeminal
Jaw
muscles
Eye
movements
Touch,
pain
3. Oculomotor
4. Trochlear
6. Abducens
2. Optic
Vision
Smell
1. Olfactory
Tongue
movements
12. Hypoglossal
11. Spinal
      accessory
Neck
muscles
10. Vagus
Internal organs
x sympathetic division  The portion of the autonomic nervous 
system that controls functions that accompany arousal and 
expenditure of energy.
x sympathetic ganglia  Nodules that contain synapses between 
preganglionic and postganglionic neurons of the sympathetic 
nervous system.

96	
Chapter 3  Structure of the Nervous System
Note that individual sympathetic ganglia are con-
nected to the neighboring ganglia above and below, 
thus forming the sympathetic ganglion chain. (See 
Figure 3.25.)
The axons that leave the spinal cord through  
the ventral root belong to the preganglionic neurons. 
Sympathetic preganglionic axons enter the ganglia of 
the sympathetic chain. Most of the axons form synapses 
there, but others pass through these ganglia and travel to 
one of the sympathetic ganglia located among the inter-
nal organs. With one exception (mentioned in the next 
paragraph), all sympathetic preganglionic axons form 
synapses with neurons located in one of the ganglia. The 
neurons with which they form synapses are called post-
ganglionic neurons. The postganglionic neurons send 
axons to the target organs, such as the intestines, stom-
ach, kidneys, or sweat glands. (See Figure 3.25.)
The sympathetic nervous system controls the adrenal 
medulla, a set of cells located in the center of the adrenal 
gland. The adrenal medulla closely resembles a sympa-
thetic ganglion. It is innervated by preganglionic axons, 
and its secretory cells are very similar to postganglionic 
sympathetic neurons. These cells secrete epinephrine and 
norepinephrine when they are stimulated. These hor-
mones function chiefly as an adjunct to the direct neural 
effects of sympathetic activity; for example, they increase 
blood flow to the muscles and cause stored nutrients to be 
broken down into glucose within skeletal muscle cells, 
thus increasing the energy available to these cells.
The terminal buttons of sympathetic preganglionic 
axons secrete acetylcholine. The terminal buttons on 
the target organs, belonging to the postganglionic  
axons, secrete another neurotransmitter: norepineph-
rine. (An exception to this rule is provided by the sweat 
glands, which are innervated by acetylcholine-secreting 
terminal buttons.)
Parasympathetic Division of the ANS
The parasympathetic division of the autonomic nervous 
system supports activities that are involved with increases 
in the body’s supply of stored energy. These activities 
include salivation, gastric and intestinal motility, secretion 
of digestive juices, and increased blood flow to the gastro-
intestinal system.
Cell bodies that give rise to preganglionic axons in 
the parasympathetic nervous system are located in two 
regions: the nuclei of some of the cranial nerves (espe-
cially the vagus nerve) and the intermediate horn of the 
gray matter in the sacral region of the spinal cord. Thus, 
the parasympathetic division of the ANS has often been 
referred to as the craniosacral system. Parasympathetic gan-
glia are located in the immediate vicinity of the target 
organs; the postganglionic fibers are therefore relatively 
short. The terminal buttons of both preganglionic and 
postganglionic neurons in the parasympathetic nervous 
system secrete acetylcholine.
Table 3.3 summarizes the major divisions of the  
peripheral nervous system.
x adrenal medulla  The inner portion of the adrenal gland, 
located atop the kidney, controlled by sympathetic nerve fibers; 
secretes epinephrine and norepinephrine.
x parasympathetic division  The portion of the autonomic nervous 
system that controls functions that occur during a relaxed state.
x postganglionic neuron  Neurons of the autonomic nervous 
system that form synapses directly with their target organ.
x sympathetic ganglion chain  One of a pair of groups of 
sympathetic ganglia that lie ventrolateral to the vertebral column.
x preganglionic neuron  The efferent neuron of the autonomic 
nervous system whose cell body is located in a cranial nerve 
nucleus or in the intermediate horn of the spinal gray matter and 
whose terminal buttons synapse upon postganglionic neurons in 
the autonomic ganglia.
table 3.3  The Major Divisions of the Peripheral Nervous System
Somatic Nervous System
Autonomic Nervous System (ANS)
Spinal Nerves	
Sympathetic Branch
Afferents from sense organs	
Spinal nerves (from thoracic and lumbar regions)
Efferents to muscles	
Sympathetic ganglia
Cranial Nerves	
Parasympathetic Branch
Afferents from sense organs	
Cranial nerves (3rd, 7th, 9th, and 10th)
Efferents to muscles	
Spinal nerves (from sacral region)
	
Parasympathetic ganglia (adjacent to target organs)

	
The Peripheral Nervous System	
97
figure 3.25  The Autonomic Nervous System
The schematic figure shows the target organs and functions served by the sympathetic 
and parasympathetic branches of the autonomic nervous system.
Stimulates
orgasm
Parasympathetic:
    Preganglionic neuron
    Postganglionic neuron
Sympathetic:
    Preganglionic neuron
    Postganglionic neuron
Relaxes
bladder
Rectum
Stimulates
secretion of
epinephrine and
norepinephrine
by adrenal
medulla
Inhibits
digestive
system
Constricts blood
vessels in skin
Stimulates
glucose
release
Stimulates
sweating
Stimulates
digestive
system
Pancreas
Slows
heartbeat
Speeds
heartbeat
Constricts
airways
Dilates pupil,
inhibits tears
Constricts pupil,
produces tears
Small intestine
Large intestine
Contracts
bladder
Stimulates
sexual
arousal
Stimulates
salivation
Stomach
Liver
Inhibits salivation
Parasympathetic:
Cranial and Sacral
Sympathetic:
Thoracic and Lumbar
Lungs

98	
Chapter 3  Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
4.  Describe the telencephalon, one of the two major 
structures of the forebrain.
5.  Describe the two major structures of the diencephalon.
6.  Describe the two major structures of the midbrain, the 
two major structures of the hindbrain, and the spinal cord.
7.  Describe the peripheral nervous system, including the 
two divisions of the autonomic nervous system.
1.  Explain the origins of the names of brain structures and the 
terms used to indicate directions and planes of section.
2.  Describe the blood supply to the brain, the menin-
ges, the ventricular system, and flow of cerebrospinal 
fluid through the brain and its production.
3.  Outline the development of the central nervous  
system and the evolution of the human brain.
Review Questions
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 The Nervous System 
In order to understand the function of the nervous system, one must first learn 
its structure and its development. The virtual brain includes two modules that 
will help you master the material. The Development of the Nervous System 
module shows the major division of the brain. The Nervous System module that 
will help you become familiar with the names and locations of more specific 
structures (e.g. the ventricles) and brain regions.
Study and Review on MyPsychLab
Section Summary
The Peripheral Nervous System
The spinal nerves and the cranial nerves convey sensory 
axons into the central nervous system and motor axons 
out from it. Spinal nerves are formed by the junctions of 
the dorsal roots, which contain incoming (afferent) 
axons, and the ventral roots, which contain outgoing 
(efferent) axons. The autonomic nervous system consists 
of two divisions: the sympathetic division, which controls 
activities that occur during excitement or exertion, such 
as increased heart rate, and the parasympathetic division, 
which controls activities that occur during relaxation, 
such as decreased heart rate and increased activity of 
the digestive system. The pathways of the autonomic 
nervous system contain preganglionic axons, from the 
brain or spinal cord to the sympathetic or parasympa-
thetic ganglia, and postganglionic axons, from the gan-
glia to the target organ. The adrenal medulla, which 
secretes epinephrine and norepinephrine, is controlled 
by axons of the sympathetic nervous system.

Psychopharmacology
Outline
4
 Principles of 
Psychopharmacology
Pharmacokinetics
Drug Effectiveness
Effects of Repeated 
Administration
Placebo Effects
Section Summary
 Sites of Drug Action
Effects on Production of 
Neurotransmitters
Effects on Storage and Release  
of Neurotransmitters
Effects on Receptors
Effects on Reuptake or 
Destruction of 
Neurotransmitters
Section Summary
 Neurotransmitters and 
Neuromodulators
Acetylcholine
The Monoamines
Dopamine
Amino Acids
Peptides
Lipids
Nucleosides
Soluble Gases
Section Summary
chapter

C
hapter 2 introduced you to the cells of the ner-
vous system, and Chapter 3 described its basic 
structure. Now it is time to build on this informa-
tion by introducing the field of psychopharmacology. 
Psychopharmacology is the study of the effects of drugs 
on the nervous system and (of course) on behavior. 
(Pharmakon is the Greek word for “drug.”)
But what is a drug? Like many words, this one has 
several different meanings. In one context it refers to a 
medication that we would obtain from a pharmacist—a 
chemical that has a therapeutic effect on a disease or its 
symptoms. In another context the word refers to a chem-
ical that people are likely to abuse, such as heroin or 
cocaine. The meaning that will be used in this book (and 
the one generally accepted by pharmacologists) is “an 
exogenous chemical not necessary for normal cellular 
functioning that significantly alters the functions of cer-
tain cells of the body when taken in relatively low doses.” 
Because the topic of this chapter is psychopharmacology, 
we will concern ourselves here only with chemicals that 
alter the functions of cells within the nervous system. 
The word exogenous rules out chemical messengers pro-
duced by the body, such as neurotransmitters, neuro-
modulators, or hormones. (Exogenous means “produced 
from without”—that is, from outside the body.) Chemi-
cal messengers produced by the body are not drugs,  
although synthetic chemicals that mimic their effects are 
classified as drugs. The definition of a drug also rules out 
essential nutrients, such as proteins, fats, carbohydrates, 
minerals, and vitamins that are a necessary constituent of 
a healthy diet. Finally, it states that drugs are effective in 
low doses. This qualification is important, because large 
quantities of almost any substance—even common ones 
such as table salt—will alter the functions of cells.
Several years ago I spent the academic year in a neurologi-
cal research center affiliated with the teaching hospital at a 
medical center. One morning as I was having breakfast,  
I read a brief item in the newspaper about a man who had 
been hospitalized for botulism. Later that morning,  
I attended a weekly meeting during which the chief of 
neurology discussed interesting cases presented by the 
neurological residents. I was surprised to see that we would 
visit the man with botulism.
We entered the intensive care unit and saw that the 
man was clearly on his way to recovery. His face was pale 
and his voice was weak, but he was no longer on a 
respirator. There wasn’t much to see, so we went back to 
the lounge and discussed his case.
Just before dinner a few days earlier, Mr. F. had opened 
a jar of asparagus that his family had canned. He noted right 
away that it smelled funny. Because his family had grown the 
asparagus in their own garden, he was reluctant to throw it 
away. However, he decided that he wouldn’t take any 
chances. He dipped a spoon into the liquid in the jar and 
touched it to his tongue. It didn’t taste right, so he didn’t 
swallow it. Instead, he stuck his tongue out and rinsed it 
under a stream of water from the faucet at the kitchen sink. 
He dumped the asparagus into the garbage disposal.
About an hour later, as the family was finishing dinner, 
Mr. F. discovered that he was seeing double. Alarmed, he 
asked his wife to drive him to the hospital. When he 
arrived at the emergency room, he was seen by one of the 
neurological residents, who asked him, “Mr. F., you haven’t 
eaten some home-canned foods recently, have you?”
Learning that he had indeed let some liquid from a 
suspect jar of asparagus touch his tongue, the resident 
ordered a vial of botulinum antitoxin from the pharmacy. 
Meanwhile, he took a blood sample from Mr. F.’s vein and 
sent it to the lab for some in vivo testing in mice. He then 
administered the antitoxin to Mr. F., but already he could 
see that it was too late: The patient was showing obvious 
signs of muscular weakness and was having some diffi-
culty breathing. He was immediately sent to the intensive 
care unit, where he was put on a respirator. Although he 
became completely paralyzed, the life support system did 
what its name indicates, and he regained control of his 
muscles.
What fascinated me the most was the in vivo testing 
procedure for the presence of botulinum toxin in Mr. F.’s 
blood. Plasma extracted from the blood was injected into 
several mice, half of which had been pretreated with 
botulinum antitoxin. The pretreated mice survived; the others 
died. Just think: Mr. F. had touched only a few drops of the 
contaminated liquid on his tongue and then rinsed it off 
immediately, but enough of the toxin entered his blood-
stream that a small amount of his blood plasma could kill a 
mouse. By the way, we will examine the pharmacological 
effect of botulinum toxin later in this chapter.
x psychopharmacology  The study of the effects of drugs on the 
nervous system and on behavior.

	
Principles of Psychopharmacology 	
101
As we will see in this chapter, drugs have effects and 
sites of action. Drug effects are the changes we can observe 
in an animal’s physiological processes and behavior. For 
example, the effects of morphine, heroin, and other opi-
ates include decreased sensitivity to pain, slowing of the 
digestive system, sedation, muscular relaxation, constric-
tion of the pupils, and euphoria. The sites of action of 
drugs are the points at which molecules of drugs interact 
with molecules located on or in cells of the body, thus 
affecting some biochemical processes of these cells. For 
example, the sites of action of the opiates are specialized 
receptors situated in the membrane of some neurons. 
When molecules of opiates attach to and activate these 
receptors, the drugs alter the activity of these neurons 
and produce their effects. This chapter considers both 
the effects of drugs and their sites of action.
Psychopharmacology is an important field of neuro-
science. It has been responsible for the development of 
psychotherapeutic drugs, which are used to treat psy-
chological and behavioral disorders. It has also provided 
tools that have enabled other investigators to study the 
functions of cells of the nervous system and the behav-
iors controlled by particular neural circuits.
This chapter does not contain all this book has to 
say about the subject of psychopharmacology. Through-
out the book you will learn about the use of drugs to 
investigate the nature of neural circuits involved in the 
control of perception, memory, and behavior. In addi-
tion, Chapters 16 and 17 discuss the use of drugs to 
study and treat mental disorders such as schizophrenia, 
depression, and the anxiety disorders, and Chapter 18 
discusses the physiology of drug abuse.
Principles of  
Psychopharmacology
This chapter begins with a description of the basic prin-
ciples of psychopharmacology: the routes of administra-
tion of drugs and their fate in the body. The second 
section discusses the sites of drug actions. The final  
section discusses specific neurotransmitters and neuro-
modulators and the physiological and behavioral effects 
of specific drugs that interact with them.
Pharmacokinetics
To be effective, a drug must reach its sites of action. To do 
so, molecules of the drug must enter the body and then 
enter the bloodstream so that they can be carried to the 
organ (or organs) on which they act. Once there, they 
must leave the bloodstream and come into contact with the 
molecules with which they interact. For almost all of the 
drugs we are interested in, this means that the molecules 
of the drug must enter the central nervous system (CNS). 
Some behaviorally active drugs exert their effects on the 
peripheral nervous system, but these drugs are less impor-
tant to us than the drugs that affect cells of the CNS.
Molecules of drugs must cross several barriers to 
enter the body and find their way to their sites of 
action. Some molecules pass through these barriers  
easily and quickly; others do so very slowly. And once 
molecules of drugs enter the body, they begin to be  
metabolized—broken down by enzymes—or excreted 
in the urine (or both). In time, the molecules either 
disappear or are transformed into inactive fragments. 
The process by which drugs are absorbed, distributed 
within the body, metabolized, and excreted is referred 
to as pharmacokinetics (“movements of drugs”).
Routes of Administration
First, let’s consider the routes by which drugs can be ad-
ministered. For laboratory animals the most common 
route is injection. The drug is dissolved in a liquid (or, in 
some cases, suspended in a liquid in the form of fine 
particles) and injected through a hypodermic needle. 
The fastest route is intravenous (IV) injection—injection 
into a vein. The drug enters the bloodstream immedi-
ately and reaches the brain within a few seconds. The 
disadvantages of IV injections are the increased care and 
skill they require in comparison to most other forms of 
injection and the fact that the entire dose reaches the 
bloodstream at once. If an animal is especially sensitive 
to the drug, there may be little time to administer 
another drug to counteract its effects.
An intraperitoneal (IP) injection is rapid but not as 
rapid as an IV injection. The drug is injected through the 
abdominal wall into the peritoneal cavity—the space that 
surrounds the stomach, intestines, liver, and other 
abdominal organs. IP injection is the most common route 
for administering drugs to small laboratory animals. An 
intramuscular (IM) injection is made directly into a large 
muscle, such as those found in the upper arm, thigh, or 
buttocks. The drug is absorbed into the bloodstream 
through the capillaries that supply the muscle. If very 
x drug effect  The changes a drug produces in an animal’s 
physiological processes and behavior.
x sites of action  The locations at which molecules of drugs 
interact with molecules located on or in cells of the body, thus 
affecting some biochemical processes of these cells.
x pharmacokinetics  The process by which drugs are absorbed, 
distributed within the body, metabolized, and excreted.
x intravenous (IV) injection  Injection of a substance directly 
into a vein.
x intraperitoneal (IP) injection (in tra pair i toe nee ul)  Injection 
of a substance into the peritoneal cavity—the space that surrounds 
the stomach, intestines, liver, and other abdominal organs.
x intramuscular (IM) injection  Injection of a substance into a 
muscle.

102	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
mucous membrane lining the nasal passages also pro-
vides a route for topical administration. Commonly 
abused drugs such as cocaine hydrochloride are often 
sniffed so that they come into contact with the nasal 
mucosa. This route delivers the drug to the brain very 
rapidly. (The technical, rarely used name for this route 
is insufflation. And note that sniffing is not the same as 
inhalation; when powdered cocaine is sniffed, it ends 
up in the mucous membrane of the nasal passages, not 
in the lungs.)
Finally, drugs can be administered directly into 
the brain. As we saw in Chapter 2, the blood–brain 
barrier prevents certain chemicals from leaving capil-
laries and entering the brain. Some drugs cannot cross 
the blood–brain barrier. If these drugs are to reach 
the brain, they must be injected directly into the brain 
or into the cerebrospinal fluid in the brain’s ventricu-
lar system. To study the effects of a drug in a specific 
region of the brain (for example, in a particular nucleus 
of the hypothalamus), a researcher will inject a very 
small amount of the drug directly into the brain. This 
procedure, known as intracerebral administration, is 
described in more detail in Chapter 5. To achieve a 
widespread distribution of a drug in the brain, a re-
searcher will get past the blood–brain barrier by in-
jecting the drug into a cerebral ventricle. The drug is 
then absorbed into the brain tissue, where it can exert 
its effects. This route, intracerebroventricular (ICV) 
administration, is used very rarely in humans—primarily 
to deliver antibiotics directly to the brain to treat cer-
tain types of infections.
Figure 4.1 shows the time course of blood levels of 
a commonly abused drug, cocaine, after intravenous 
injection, inhalation, oral administration, and sniffing. 
The amounts received were not identical, but the graph 
illustrates the relative rapidity with which the drug 
reaches the blood. (See Figure 4.1.)
slow absorption is desirable, the drug can be mixed with 
another drug (such as ephedrine) that constricts blood 
vessels and retards the flow of blood through the muscle. 
A drug can also be injected into the space beneath the 
skin by means of a subcutaneous (SC) injection. A subcu-
taneous injection is useful only if small amounts of drug 
need to be administered, because injecting large amounts 
would be painful. Some fat-soluble drugs can be dissolved 
in vegetable oil and administered subcutaneously. In this 
case, molecules of the drug will slowly leave the deposit 
of oil over a period of several days. If very slow and pro-
longed absorption of a drug is desirable, the drug can be 
formed into a dry pellet or placed in a sealed silicone 
rubber capsule and implanted beneath the skin.
Oral administration is the most common form of ad-
ministering medicinal drugs to humans. Because of the 
difficulty of getting laboratory animals to eat something 
that does not taste good to them, researchers seldom use 
this route. Some chemicals cannot be administered orally 
because they will be destroyed by stomach acid or diges-
tive enzymes or because they are not absorbed from the 
digestive system into the bloodstream. For example, insu-
lin, a peptide hormone, must be injected. Sublingual  
administration of certain drugs can be accomplished by 
placing them beneath the tongue. The drug is absorbed 
into the bloodstream by the capillaries that supply the 
mucous membrane that lines the mouth. (Obviously, this 
method works only with humans, who will cooperate and 
leave the capsule beneath their tongue.) Nitroglycerine, a 
drug that causes blood vessels to dilate, is taken sublin-
gually by people who suffer the pains of angina pectoris, 
caused by obstructions in the coronary arteries.
Drugs can also be administered at the opposite end 
of the digestive tract, in the form of suppositories. 
Intra­rectal administration is rarely used to give drugs to 
experimental animals. For obvious reasons this process 
would be difficult with a small animal. In addition, when 
agitated, small animals such as rats tend to defecate, which 
would mean that the drug would not remain in place long 
enough to be absorbed. And I’m not sure I would want to 
try to administer a rectal suppository to a large animal. 
Rectal suppositories are most commonly used to adminis-
ter drugs that might upset a person’s stomach.
The lungs provide another route for drug adminis-
tration: inhalation. Nicotine, freebase cocaine, and mar-
ijuana are usually smoked. In addition, drugs used to 
treat lung disorders are often inhaled in the form of a 
vapor or fine mist, and many general anesthetics are gas-
ses that are administered through inhalation. The route 
from the lungs to the brain is very short, and drugs ad-
ministered this way have very rapid effects.
Some drugs can be absorbed directly through the skin, 
so they can be given by means of topical administration. 
Natural or artificial steroid hormones can be adminis-
tered in this way, as can nicotine (as a treatment to 
make it easier for a person to stop smoking). The 
x subcutaneous (SC) injection  Injection of a substance into the 
space beneath the skin.
x oral administration  Administration of a substance into the 
mouth so that it is swallowed.
x sublingual administration (sub ling wul)  Administration of a 
substance by placing it beneath the tongue.
x intrarectal administration  Administration of a substance into 
the rectum.
x inhalation  Administration of a vaporous substance into the lungs.
x topical administration  Administration of a substance directly 
onto the skin or mucous membrane.
x intracerebral administration  Administration of a substance 
directly into the brain.
x intracerebroventricular (ICV) administration  Administration 
of a substance into one of the cerebral ventricles.
x dose-response curve  A graph of the magnitude of an effect 
of a drug as a function of the amount of drug administered.

	
Principles of Psychopharmacology 	
103
primarily by the kidneys. The liver plays an especially 
active role in enzymatic deactivation of drugs, but some 
deactivating enzymes are also found in the blood. The 
brain also contains enzymes that destroy some drugs. In 
some cases, enzymes transform molecules of a drug into 
other forms that themselves are biologically active.  
Occasionally, the transformed molecule is even more  
active than the one that is administered. In such cases 
the effects of a drug can have a very long duration.
Drug Effectiveness
Drugs vary widely in their effectiveness. The effects of a 
small dose of a relatively effective drug can equal or 
exceed the effects of larger amounts of a relatively inef-
fective drug. The best way to measure the effectiveness 
of a drug is to plot a dose-response curve. To do this, 
subjects are given various doses of a drug, usually defined 
as milligrams of drug per kilogram of a subject’s body 
weight, and the effects of the drug are plotted. Because 
the molecules of most drugs distribute themselves 
throughout the blood and then throughout the rest of 
the body, a heavier subject (human or laboratory ani-
mal) will require a larger quantity of a drug to achieve 
the same concentration as a smaller quantity will pro-
duce in a smaller subject. As Figure 4.2 shows, increas-
ingly stronger doses of a drug cause increasingly larger 
effects until the point of maximum effect is reached. At 
this point, increasing the dose of the drug does not 
produce any more effect. (See Figure 4.2.)
Most drugs have more than one effect. Opiates such 
as morphine and codeine produce analgesia (reduced 
sensitivity to pain), but they also depress the activity of 
neurons in the medulla that control heart rate and  
Entry of Drugs into the Brain
As we saw, drugs exert their effects only when they reach 
their sites of action. In the case of drugs that affect behav-
ior, most of these sites are located on or in particular cells 
in the central nervous system. The previous section de-
scribed the routes by which drugs can be introduced into 
the body. With the exception of intracerebral or intracere-
broventricular administration, the routes of drug adminis-
tration vary only in the rate at which a drug reaches the 
blood plasma (that is, the liquid part of the blood). But 
what happens next? All the sites of action of drugs of inter-
est to psychopharmacologists lie outside the blood vessels.
The most important factor that determines the rate 
at which a drug in the bloodstream reaches sites of ac-
tion within the brain is lipid solubility. The blood–brain 
barrier is a barrier only for water-soluble molecules. Mol-
ecules that are soluble in lipids pass through the cells 
that line the capillaries in the central nervous system, 
and they rapidly distribute themselves throughout the 
brain. For example, diacetylmorphine (more commonly 
known as heroin) is more lipid soluble than morphine is. 
Thus, an intravenous injection of heroin produces more 
rapid effects than does one of morphine. Even though 
the molecules of the two drugs are equally effective when 
they reach their sites of action in the brain, the fact that 
heroin molecules get there faster means that they pro-
duce a more intense “rush,” and this explains why drug 
addicts prefer heroin to morphine.
Inactivation and Excretion
Drugs do not remain in the body indefinitely. Many are 
deactivated by enzymes, and all are eventually excreted, 
figure 4.1  Cocaine in Blood Plasma
The graph shows the concentration of cocaine in blood 
plasma after intravenous injection, inhalation, oral 
administration, and sniffing.
(Adapted from Feldman, R. S., Meyer, J. S., and Quenzer, L. F. Principles of 
Neuropsychopharmacology. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, 1997; after 
Jones, R. T. NIDA Research Monographs, 1990, 99, 30–41.)
0
Time (min)
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
420
480
Intranasal (2 mg/kg)
Oral (2 mg/kg)
Smoked (100 mg base)
Intravenous (0.6 mg/kg)
600
500
400
300
200
100
Plasma cocaine concentration (ng/ml)
figure 4.2  A Dose-Response Curve
Increasingly stronger doses of the drug produce 
increasingly larger effects until the maximum effect is 
reached. After that point, increments in the dose do not 
produce any increments in the drug’s effect. However, 
the risk of adverse side effects increases.
low
low
high
high
Dose of drug
Effect of drug
After this point,
increasing the dose
does not produce
a stronger effect

104	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
action. For example, both morphine and aspirin have 
analgesic effects, but morphine suppresses the activity 
of neurons in the spinal cord and brain that are in-
volved in pain perception, whereas aspirin reduces the 
production of a chemical involved in transmitting  
information from damaged tissue to pain-sensitive neu-
rons. Because the drugs act very differently, a given 
dose of morphine (expressed in terms of milligrams of 
drug per kilogram of body weight) produces much more 
pain reduction than the same dose of aspirin does.
The second reason that drugs vary in their effec-
tiveness has to do with the affinity of the drug with its 
site of action. As we will see in the next major section 
of this chapter, most drugs of interest to psychophar-
macologists exert their effects by binding with other 
molecules located in the central nervous system—with 
presynaptic or postsynaptic receptors, with transporter 
molecules, or with enzymes involved in the produc-
tion or deactivation of neurotransmitters. Drugs vary 
widely in their affinity for the molecules to which they 
attach—the readiness with which the two molecules 
join together. A drug with a high affinity will produce 
effects at a relatively low concentration, whereas a 
drug with a low affinity must be administered in higher 
doses. Thus, even two drugs with identical sites of ac-
tion can vary widely in their effectiveness if they have 
different affinities for their binding sites. In addition, 
because most drugs have multiple effects, a drug can 
have high affinities for some of its sites of action and 
low affinities for others. The most desirable drug has 
a high affinity for sites of action that produce thera-
peutic effects and a low affinity for sites of action that 
produce toxic side effects. One of the goals of re-
search by drug companies is to find chemicals with 
just this pattern of effects.
Effects of Repeated Administration
Often, when a drug is administered repeatedly, its effects 
will not remain constant. In most cases its effects will 
diminish—a phenomenon known as tolerance. In other 
cases a drug becomes more and more effective—a 
phenomenon known as sensitization.
Let’s consider tolerance first. Tolerance is seen in 
many drugs that are commonly abused. For example, a 
respiration. A physician who prescribes an opiate to  
relieve a patient’s pain wants to administer a dose that is 
large enough to produce analgesia but not large enough 
to depress heart rate and respiration—effects that could 
be fatal. Figure 4.3 shows two dose-response curves, one 
for the analgesic effects of a painkiller and one for the 
drug’s depressant effects on respiration. The difference 
between these curves indicates the drug’s margin of 
safety. Obviously, the most desirable drugs have a large 
margin of safety. (See Figure 4.3.)
One measure of a drug’s margin of safety is its 
therapeutic index. This measure is obtained by ad-
ministering varying doses of the drug to a group of 
laboratory animals such as mice. Two numbers are 
obtained: the dose that produces the desired effects 
in 50 percent of the animals and the dose that pro-
duces toxic effects in 50 percent of the animals. The 
therapeutic index is the ratio of these two numbers. 
For example, if the toxic dose is five times higher 
than the effective dose, then the therapeutic index is 
5.0. The lower the therapeutic index, the more care 
must be taken in prescribing the drug. For example, 
barbiturates have relatively low therapeutic indexes—
as low as 2 or 3. In contrast, tranquilizers such as 
Valium have therapeutic indexes of well over 100. As 
a consequence, an accidental overdose of a barbitu-
rate is much more likely to have tragic effects than a 
similar overdose of Valium.
Why do drugs vary in their effectiveness? There are 
two reasons. First, different drugs—even those with the 
same behavioral effects—may have different sites of  
figure 4.3  Dose-Response Curves for Morphine
The dose-response curve on the left shows the analgesic 
effect of morphine, and the curve on the right shows one 
of the drug’s adverse side effects: its depressant effect on 
respiration. A drug’s margin of safety is reflected by the 
difference between the dose-response curve for its 
therapeutic effects and that for its adverse side effects.
low
low
high
high
Dose of drug
Effect of drug
Margin of safety
Dose-response
curve for the
analgesic effect
of morphine
Dose-response
curve for the
depressive effect
of morphine on
respiration
x affinity  The readiness with which two molecules join together.
x tolerance  A decrease in the effectiveness of a drug that is 
administered repeatedly.
x sensitization  An increase in the effectiveness of a drug that is 
administered repeatedly.
x therapeutic index  The ratio between the dose that produces 
the desired effect in 50 percent of the animals and the dose that 
produces toxic effects in 50 percent of the animals.

	
Principles of Psychopharmacology 	
105
larger effects. Because compensatory mechanisms tend 
to correct for deviations away from the optimal values of 
physiological processes, sensitization is less common 
than tolerance. And some of the effects of a drug may 
show sensitization while others show tolerance. For ex-
ample, repeated injections of cocaine become more and 
more likely to produce movement disorders and convul-
sions, whereas the euphoric effects of the drug do not 
show sensitization—and may even show tolerance.
Placebo Effects
A placebo is an innocuous substance that has no specific 
physiological effect. The word comes from the Latin placere, 
“to please.” A physician may sometimes give a placebo to 
anxious patients to placate them. (You can see that the 
word placate also has the same root.) But although place-
bos have no specific physiological effect, it is incorrect to 
say that they have no effect. If a person thinks that a  
placebo has a physiological effect, then administration of 
the placebo may actually produce that effect.
When experimenters want to investigate the behav-
ioral effects of drugs in humans, they must use control 
groups whose members receive placebos, or they cannot 
be sure that the behavioral effects they observe were 
caused by specific effects of the drug. Studies with labo-
ratory animals must also use placebos, even though we 
need not worry about the animals’ “beliefs” about the 
effects of the drugs we give them. Consider what you 
must do to give a rat an intraperitoneal injection of a 
drug. You reach into the animal’s cage, pick the animal 
up, hold it in such a way that its abdomen is exposed 
and its head is positioned to prevent it from biting you, 
insert a hypodermic needle through its abdominal wall, 
press the plunger of the syringe, and replace the animal 
in its cage, being sure to let go of it quickly so that it 
cannot turn and bite you. Even if the substance you  
inject is innocuous, the experience of receiving the  
injection would activate the animal’s autonomic nervous 
system, cause the secretion of stress hormones, and have 
other physiological effects. If we want to know what the 
behavioral effects of a drug are, we must compare the 
drug-treated animals with other animals who receive a 
placebo, administered in exactly the same way as the 
drug. (By the way, a skilled and experienced researcher 
can handle a rat so gently that it shows very little reac-
tion to a hypodermic injection.)
regular user of heroin must take larger and larger 
amounts of the drug for it to be effective. And once a 
person has taken heroin regularly enough to develop 
tolerance, that individual will suffer withdrawal symptoms 
if he or she suddenly stops taking the drug. Withdrawal 
symptoms are primarily the opposite of the effects of the 
drug itself. For example, heroin produces euphoria; 
withdrawal from it produces dysphoria—a feeling of anx-
ious misery. (Euphoria and dysphoria mean “easy to bear” 
and “hard to bear,” respectively.) Heroin produces  
constipation; withdrawal from it produces nausea and 
cramping. Heroin produces relaxation; withdrawal from 
it produces agitation.
Withdrawal symptoms are caused by the same mecha-
nisms that are responsible for tolerance. Tolerance is the 
result of the body’s attempt to compensate for the effects 
of the drug. That is, most systems of the body, including 
those controlled by the brain, are regulated so that they 
stay at an optimal value. When the effects of a drug alter 
these systems for a prolonged time, compensatory mecha-
nisms begin to produce the opposite reaction, at least 
partially compensating for the disturbance from the opti-
mal value. These mechanisms account for the fact that 
more and more of the drug must be taken to achieve a 
given level of effects. Then, when the person stops taking 
the drug, the compensatory mechanisms make them-
selves felt, unopposed by the action of the drug.
Research suggests that there are several types of 
compensatory mechanisms. As we will see, many drugs 
that affect the brain do so by binding with receptors and 
activating them. The first compensatory mechanism in-
volves a decrease in the effectiveness of such binding. 
Either the receptors become less sensitive to the drug 
(that is, their affinity for the drug decreases), or the re-
ceptors decrease in number. The second compensatory 
mechanism involves the process that couples the recep-
tors to ion channels in the membrane or to the produc-
tion of second messengers. After prolonged stimulation 
of the receptors, one or more steps in the coupling 
process become less effective. (Of course, both effects can 
occur.) The details of these compensatory mechanisms 
are described in Chapter 18, which discusses the causes 
and effects of drug abuse.
As we saw, many drugs have several different sites of 
action and thus produce several different effects. This 
means that some of the effects of a drug may show toler-
ance but others may not. For example, barbiturates cause 
sedation and also depress neurons that control respira-
tion. The sedative effects show tolerance, but the respira-
tory depression does not. This means that if larger and 
larger doses of a barbiturate are taken to achieve the 
same level of sedation, the person begins to run the risk 
of taking a dangerously large dose of the drug.
Sensitization is, of course, the exact opposite of tol-
erance: Repeated doses of a drug produce larger and 
x withdrawal symptom  The appearance of symptoms opposite 
to those produced by a drug when the drug is administered 
repeatedly and then suddenly no longer taken.
x placebo (pla see boh)  An inert substance that is given to an 
organism in lieu of a physiologically active drug; used experimen-
tally to control for the effects of mere administration of a drug.

106	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
laboratories to investigate the operations of the nervous 
system. Most drugs that affect behavior do so by affect-
ing synaptic transmission. Drugs that affect synaptic 
transmission are classified into two general categories. 
Those that block or inhibit the postsynaptic effects are 
called antagonists. Those that facilitate them are called 
agonists. (The Greek word agon means “contest.” Thus, 
an agonist is one who takes part in the contest.)
Sites of Drug Action
Throughout the history of our species, people have 
discovered that plants—and some animals—produce 
chemicals that act on the nervous system. (Of course, 
the people who discovered these chemicals knew noth-
ing about neurons and synapses.) Some of these chem-
icals have been used for their pleasurable effects; others 
have been used to treat illness, reduce pain, or poison 
other animals (or enemies). More recently, scientists 
have learned to produce completely artificial drugs, 
some with potencies far greater than those of the natu-
rally occurring drugs. The traditional uses of drugs  
remain, but in addition they can be used in research 
Section Summary
Principles of Psychopharmacology
Psychopharmacology is the study of the effects of 
drugs on the nervous system and behavior. Drugs are 
exogenous chemicals that are not necessary for nor-
mal cellular functioning that significantly alter the 
functions of certain cells of the body when taken in 
relatively low doses. Drugs have effects, physiological 
and behavioral, and they have sites of action—molecules 
located somewhere in that body with which they 
interact to produce these effects.
Pharmacokinetics is the fate of a drug as it is 
absorbed into the body, circulates throughout the 
body, and reaches its sites of action. Drugs may be 
administered by intravenous, intraperitoneal, intra-
muscular, and subcutaneous injection; they may be 
administered orally, sublingually, intrarectally, by inha-
lation, and topically (on skin or mucous membrane); 
and they may be injected intracerebrally or intracere-
broventricularly. Lipid-soluble drugs easily pass through 
the blood–brain barrier, whereas others pass this barrier 
slowly or not at all.
The time courses of various routes of drug 
administration are different. Eventually, drugs disap-
pear from the body. Some are deactivated by 
enzymes, especially in the liver, and others are  
simply excreted.
The dose-response curve represents a drug’s 
effectiveness; it relates the amount administered  
(usually in milligrams per kilogram of the subject’s 
body weight) to the resulting effect. Most drugs have 
more than one site of action and thus more than one 
effect. The safety of a drug is measured by the differ-
ence between doses that produce desirable effects 
and those that produce toxic side effects. Drugs vary 
in their effectiveness because of the nature of their 
sites of actions and the affinity between molecules of 
the drug and these sites of action.
Repeated administration of a drug can cause 
either tolerance, often resulting in withdrawal symp-
toms, or sensitization. Tolerance can be caused by 
decreased affinity of a drug with its receptors, by 
decreased numbers of receptors, or by decreased 
coupling of receptors with the biochemical steps it 
controls. Some of the effects of a drug may show tol-
erance, while others may not—or may even show  
sensitization.
 Thought Questions
1.	 Choose a drug whose effects you are familiar with 
and suggest where in the body the sites of action 
of that drug might be.
2.	 Some drugs can cause liver damage if large doses 
are taken for an extended period of time. What 
aspect of the pharmacokinetics of these drugs 
might cause the liver damage?
x antagonist  A drug that opposes or inhibits the effects of a 
particular neurotransmitter on the postsynaptic cell.
x agonist  A drug that facilitates the effects of a particular 
neurotransmitter on the postsynaptic cell.

	
Sites of Drug Action	
107
effects I will describe are summarized in Figure 4.4, with 
some details shown in additional figures. I should warn 
you that some of the effects are complex, so the discus-
sion that follows bears careful reading. I recommend 
that you 
Simulate actions of drugs on MyPsychLab, 
which reviews this material.
Effects on Production  
of Neurotransmitters
The first step is the synthesis of the neurotransmitter 
from its precursors. In some cases the rate of synthesis 
and release of a neurotransmitter is increased when a 
precursor is administered; in these cases the precursor 
itself serves as an agonist. (See step 1 in Figure 4.4.)
The steps in the synthesis of neurotransmitters are 
controlled by enzymes. Therefore, if a drug inactivates 
one of these enzymes, it will prevent the neurotransmit-
ter from being produced. Such a drug serves as an  
antagonist. (See step 2 in Figure 4.4.)
This section will describe the basic effects of drugs 
on synaptic activity. Recall from Chapter 2 that the  
sequence of synaptic activity goes like this: Neurotrans-
mitters are synthesized and stored in synaptic vesicles. 
The synaptic vesicles travel to the presynaptic mem-
brane, where they become docked. When an axon fires,  
voltage-dependent calcium channels in the presynaptic 
membrane open, permitting the entry of calcium ions. 
The calcium ions interact with the docking proteins and 
initiate the release of the neurotransmitters into the 
synaptic cleft. Molecules of the neurotransmitter bind 
with postsynaptic receptors, causing particular ion chan-
nels to open, which produces excitatory or inhibitory 
postsynaptic potentials. The effects of the neurotrans-
mitter are kept relatively brief by their reuptake by trans-
porter molecules in the presynaptic membrane or by 
their destruction by enzymes. In addition, the stimula-
tion of presynaptic autoreceptors on the terminal but-
tons regulates the synthesis and release of the neu-
rotransmitter. The discussion of the effects of drugs in 
this section follows the same basic sequence. All of the 
figure 4.4  Drug Effects on Synaptic Transmission
The figure summarizes the ways in which drugs can affect the synaptic transmission 
(AGO = agonist; ANT = antagonist; NT = neurotransmitter). Drugs that act as agonists 
are marked in blue; drugs that act as antagonists are marked in red.
3
1
4
5
6
7
2
11
Drug inactivates 
acetylcholinesterase
AGO
(e.g., physostigmine—ACh)
10
Drug blocks reuptake
AGO
(e.g., cocaine—dopamine)
9
Drug blocks autoreceptors;
increases synthesis/release of NT
AGO
(e.g., idazoxan—norepinephrine)
8
Drug serves as precursor
AGO
(e.g., L-DOPA—dopamine)
Drug prevents storage of NT in vesicles
ANT
(e.g., reserpine—monoamines)
Drug stimulates release of NT
AGO
(e.g., black widow spider venom—ACh)
Drug inhibits release of NT
ANT
(e.g., botulinum toxin—ACh)
Drug stimulates
postsynaptic receptors
AGO
(e.g., nicotine, muscarine—ACh)
Drug blocks
postsynaptic receptors
ANT
(e.g., curare, atropine—ACh)
Molecules of
drugs
Drug inactivates synthetic enzyme;
inhibits synthesis of NT
ANT
(e.g., PCPA—serotonin)
Drug stimulates autoreceptors;
inhibits synthesis/release of NT
ANT
(e.g., apomorphine—dopamine)
Precursor
Enzyme
Neurotransmitter
Inhibition
Choline
+
acetate
ACh
AChE

108	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
presynaptic and postsynaptic. Let’s consider postsynaptic  
receptors first. (Here is where the careful reading should 
begin.) Once a neurotransmitter is released, it must 
stimulate the postsynaptic receptors. Some drugs bind 
with these receptors, just as the neurotransmitter does. 
Once a drug has bound with the receptor, it can serve as 
either an agonist or an antagonist.
A drug that mimics the effects of a neurotransmitter 
acts as a direct agonist. Molecules of the drug attach to 
the binding site to which the neurotransmitter normally 
attaches. This binding causes ion channels controlled by 
the receptor to open, just as they do when the neu­
rotransmitter is present. Ions then pass through these 
channels and produce postsynaptic potentials. (See step 
6 in Figure 4.4.)
Drugs that bind with postsynaptic receptors can also 
serve as antagonists. Molecules of such drugs bind with 
the receptors but do not open the ion channel. Because 
they occupy the receptor’s binding site, they prevent the 
neurotransmitter from opening the ion channel. These 
drugs are called receptor blockers or direct antagonists. 
(See step 7 in Figure 4.4.)
Some receptors have multiple binding sites, to 
which different ligands can attach. Molecules of the 
neurotransmitter bind with one site, and other sub­
stances (such as neuromodulators and various 
drugs) bind with the others. Binding of a molecule 
with one of these alternative sites is referred to as 
noncompetitive binding, because the molecule does 
not compete with molecules of the neurotransmitter 
for the same binding site. If a drug attaches to one 
of these alternative sites and prevents the ion chan­
nel from opening, the drug is said to be an indirect 
antagonist. The ultimate effect of an indirect antago­
nist is similar to that of a direct antagonist, but its 
Effects on Storage and Release  
of Neurotransmitters
Neurotransmitters are stored in synaptic vesicles, 
which are transported to the presynaptic membrane, 
where the chemicals are released. The storage of 
neurotransmitters in vesicles is accomplished by the 
same kind of transporter molecules that are respon­
sible for reuptake of a neurotransmitter into a termi­
nal button. The transporter molecules are located in 
the membrane of synaptic vesicles, and their action 
is to pump molecules of the neurotransmitter across 
the membrane, filling the vesicles. Some of the 
transporter molecules that fill synaptic vesicles are 
capable of being blocked by a drug. Molecules of the 
drug bind with a particular site on the transporter 
and inactivate it. Because the synaptic vesicles re­
main empty, nothing is released when the vesicles 
eventually rupture against the presynaptic mem­
brane. The drug serves as an antagonist. (See step 3 in 
Figure 4.4.)
Some drugs act as antagonists by preventing the  
release of neurotransmitters from the terminal button. 
They do so by deactivating the proteins that cause 
docked synaptic vesicles to fuse with the presynaptic 
membrane and expel their contents into the synaptic 
cleft. Other drugs have just the opposite effect: They act 
as agonists by binding with these proteins and directly 
triggering release of the neurotransmitter. (See steps 4 
and 5 in Figure 4.4.)
Effects on Receptors
The most important—and most complex—site of action 
of drugs in the nervous system is on receptors, both 
figure 4.5  Drug Actions at Binding Sites
(a) Competitive binding: Direct agonists and antagonists act directly on the 
neurotransmitter binding site. (b) Noncompetitive binding: Indirect agonists and 
antagonists act on an alternative binding site and modify the effects of the 
neurotransmitter on opening of the ion channel.
Neurotransmitter
binding site
Drug
Drug
Drug
Drug
Noncompetitive
Binding
Neuromodulator
binding site
Indirect
antagonist
Indirect
agonist
Direct
antagonist
Direct
agonist
(a)
(b)
Neuro-
transmitter
Neuro-
transmitter
Competitive
Binding

	
Sites of Drug Action	
109
x direct agonist  A drug that binds with and activates a receptor.
x receptor blocker  A drug that binds with a receptor but does not 
activate it; prevents the natural ligand from binding with the  
receptor.
x direct antagonist  A synonym for receptor blocker.
x noncompetitive binding  Binding of a drug to a site on a receptor; 
does not interfere with the binding site for the principal ligand.
x indirect antagonist  A drug that attaches to a binding site on a 
receptor and interferes with the action of the receptor; does not 
interfere with the binding site for the principal ligand.
x indirect agonist  A drug that attaches to a binding site on a 
receptor and facilitates the action of the receptor; does not 
interfere with the binding site for the principal ligand.
x presynaptic heteroreceptor  A receptor located in the 
membrane of a terminal button that receives input from  
another terminal button by means of an axoaxonic synapse;  
binds with the neurotransmitter released by the presynaptic 
terminal button.
figure 4.6  Presynaptic Heteroreceptors
Presynaptic facilitation is caused by activation of 
receptors that facilitate the opening of calcium  
channels near the active zone of the postsynaptic 
terminal button, which promotes release of the 
neurotransmitter. Presynaptic inhibition is caused by 
activation of receptors that inhibit the opening of these 
calcium channels.
Molecule of drug that
activates presynaptic
heteroreceptors
Presynaptic
heteroreceptor
Presynaptic
inhibition: Opening
of calcium channels
is inhibited
Synaptic
vesicle
Presynaptic
terminal button
Postsynaptic
terminal button
Calcium channels must
open to permit the release
of the neurotransmitter
Postsynaptic
receptor
Presynaptic
facilitation: Opening
of calcium channels
is facilitated
site of action is different. If a drug attaches to one 
of the alternative sites and facilitates the opening of 
the ion channel, it is said to be an indirect agonist. 
(See Figure 4.5.)
As we saw in Chapter 2, the presynaptic mem-
branes of some neurons contain autoreceptors that 
regulate the amount of neurotransmitter that is re-
leased. Because stimulation of these receptors causes 
less neurotransmitter to be released, drugs that selec-
tively activate presynaptic receptors act as antagonists. 
Drugs that block presynaptic autoreceptors have the 
opposite effect: They increase the release of the neu-
rotransmitter, acting as agonists. (Refer to steps 8 and 
9 in Figure 4.4.)
We also saw in Chapter 2 that some terminal but-
tons form axoaxonic synapses—synapses of one terminal 
button with another. Activation of the first terminal 
button causes presynaptic inhibition or facilitation of 
the second one. The second terminal button contains 
presynaptic heteroreceptors, which are sensitive to the 
neurotransmitter released by the first one. (Auto 
means “self”; hetero means “other.”) Presynaptic het-
eroreceptors that produce presynaptic inhibition do 
so by inhibiting the release of the neurotransmitter. 
Conversely, presynaptic heteroreceptors responsible 
for presynaptic facilitation facilitate the release of the 
neurotransmitter. So drugs can block or facilitate pre-
synaptic inhibition or facilitation, depending on 
whether they block or activate presynaptic heterore-
ceptors. (See Figure 4.6.)
Finally (yes, this is the last site of action I will de-
scribe in this subsection), you will recall from Chapter 
2 that autoreceptors are located in the membrane of 
dendrites of some neurons. When these neurons be-
come active, their dendrites, as well as their terminal 
buttons, release neurotransmitter. The neurotransmit-
ter released by the dendrites stimulates autoreceptors 
located on these same dendrites, which decrease neu-
ral firing by producing hyperpolarizations. This mech-
anism has a regulatory effect, serving to prevent these 
neurons from becoming too active. Thus, drugs that 
bind with and activate dendritic autoreceptors will 
serve as antagonists. Those that bind with and block 
dendritic autoreceptors will serve as agonists, because 
they will prevent the inhibitory hyperpolarizations. 
(See Figure 4.7.)
As you will surely realize, the effects of a particular 
drug that binds with a particular type of receptor can 
be very complex. The effects depend on where the 
receptor is located, what its normal effects are, and 
whether the drug activates the receptor or blocks its 
actions.

110	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
Effects on Reuptake or Destruction 
of Neurotransmitters
The next step after stimulation of the postsynaptic 
receptor is termination of the postsynaptic potential. 
Two processes accomplish that task: Molecules of the 
neurotransmitter are taken back into the terminal 
button through the process of reuptake, or they are 
destroyed by an enzyme. Drugs can interfere with 
either of these processes. In the first case, molecules 
of the drug attach to the transporter molecules  
responsible for reuptake and inactivate them, thus 
blocking reuptake. In the second case, molecules of 
the drug bind with the enzyme that normally destroys 
the neurotransmitter and prevents the enzymes from 
working. The most important example of such an 
enzyme is acetylcholinesterase, which destroys  
acetylcholine. Because both types of drugs prolong 
the presence of molecules of the neurotransmitter in 
the synaptic cleft (and hence in a location where 
these molecules can stimulate postsynaptic receptors), 
they serve as agonists. (Refer to steps 10 and 11 in 
Figure 4.4.)
Section Summary
Sites of Drug Action
The process of synaptic transmission entails the syn-
thesis of the neurotransmitter, its storage in synaptic 
vesicles, its release into the synaptic cleft, its interac-
tion with postsynaptic receptors, and the consequent 
opening of ion channels in the postsynaptic mem-
brane. The effects of the neurotransmitter are then 
terminated by reuptake into the terminal button or  
by enzymatic deactivation.
Each of the steps necessary for synaptic transmis-
sion can be interfered with by drugs that serve as 
antagonists, and a few can be stimulated by drugs 
that serve as agonists. Thus, drugs can increase the 
pool of available precursor, block a biosynthetic 
enzyme, prevent the storage of neurotransmitter in 
synaptic vesicles, stimulate or block the release of  
the neurotransmitter, stimulate or block presynaptic 
or postsynaptic receptors, retard reuptake, or deacti-
vate enzymes that destroy the neurotransmitter. A 
drug that activates postsynaptic receptors serves as 
an agonist, whereas one that activates presynaptic or 
dendritic autoreceptors serves as an antagonist. A 
drug that blocks postsynaptic receptors serves as an 
antagonist, whereas one that blocks autoreceptors 
serves as an agonist. A drug that activates or blocks 
presynaptic heteroreceptors serves as an agonist or 
antagonist, depending on whether the heterorecep-
tors are responsible for presynaptic facilitation or  
inhibition.
 Thought Question
Explain how a drug that blocks receptors can serve as 
an agonist.
figure 4.7  Dendritic Autoreceptors
The dendrites of certain neurons release some 
neurotransmitter when the cell is active. Activation  
of dendritic autoreceptors by the neurotransmitter  
(or by a drug that binds with these receptors) 
hyperpolarizes the membrane, reducing the neuron’s  
rate of firing. Blocking of dendritic autoreceptors by  
a drug prevents this effect.
Molecule of
neurotransmitter
released by dendrite
when neuron
becomes active
Cell body
Nucleus
Dendritic
autoreceptor
Activation of dendritic
autoreceptors produces
a hyperpolarization

	
Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators 	
111
types of drugs. As you will see, that still leaves a good 
number of drugs to be mentioned by name. Obviously, 
some are more important than others. Those whose 
effects I describe in some detail are more important 
than those I mention in passing.
Acetylcholine
Acetylcholine 
is 
the 
primary 
neurotransmitter 
secreted by efferent axons of the peripheral nervous 
system. All muscular movement is accomplished by 
the release of acetylcholine, and ACh is also found in 
the ganglia of the autonomic nervous system and at 
the target organs of the parasympathetic branch of the 
ANS. Because ACh is found outside the central ner-
vous system in locations that are easy to study, this 
neurotransmitter was the first to be discovered, and it 
has received much attention from neuroscientists. 
Some terminology: These synapses are said to be ace-
tylcholinergic. Ergon is the Greek word for “work.” Thus, 
dopaminergic synapses release dopamine, serotonergic 
synapses release serotonin, and so on. (The suffix  
-ergic is pronounced “ur jik”.)
The axons and terminal buttons of acetylcholin-
ergic neurons are distributed widely throughout the 
brain. Three systems have received the most atten-
tion from neuroscientists: those originating in the 
dorsolateral pons, the basal forebrain, and the 
medial septum. The effects of ACh release in the 
brain are generally facilitatory. The acetylcholinergic 
neurons located in the dorsolateral pons play a role 
in REM sleep (the phase of sleep during which 
dreaming occurs). Those located in the basal forebrain 
are involved in activating the cerebral cortex and fa-
cilitating learning, especially perceptual learning. 
Those located in the medial septum control the elec-
trical rhythms of the hippocampus and modulate its 
functions, which include the formation of particular 
kinds of memories.
Figure 4.8 shows a schematic midsagittal view of a 
rat brain. On it are indicated the most important sites 
of acetylcholinergic cell bodies and the regions served 
by the branches of their axons. The figure illustrates a 
rat brain because most of the neuroanatomical tracing 
studies have been performed with rats. Presumably, the 
location and projections of acetylcholinergic neurons 
in the human brain resemble those found in the rat 
brain, but we cannot yet be certain. The methods used 
for tracing particular systems of neurons in the brain 
and the difficulty of doing such studies with the human 
brain are described in Chapter 5. (See Figure 4.8.)
Acetylcholine is composed of two components: cho-
line, a substance derived from the breakdown of lipids, 
and acetate, the anion found in vinegar, also called acetic 
acid. Acetate cannot be attached directly to choline;  
Neurotransmitters and  
Neuromodulators
Because neurotransmitters have two general effects on 
postsynaptic membranes—depolarization (EPSP) or 
hyperpolarization (IPSP)—one might expect that there 
would be two kinds of neurotransmitters, excitatory and 
inhibitory. Instead, there are many different kinds—
several dozen at least. In the brain most synaptic com-
munication is accomplished by two neurotransmitters: 
one with excitatory effects (glutamate) and one with 
inhibitory effects (GABA). (Another inhibitory neu-
rotransmitter, glycine, is found in the spinal cord and 
lower brain stem.) Most of the activity of local circuits of 
neurons involves balances between the excitatory and 
inhibitory effects of these chemicals, which are respon-
sible for most of the information transmitted from place 
to place within the brain. In fact, there are probably no 
neurons in the brain that do not receive excitatory input 
from glutamate-secreting terminal buttons and inhibi-
tory input from neurons that secrete either GABA or 
glycine. And with the exception of neurons that detect 
painful stimuli, all sensory organs transmit information 
to the brain through axons whose terminals release glu-
tamate. (Pain-detecting neurons secrete a peptide.)
What do all the other neurotransmitters do? In 
general, they have modulating effects rather than 
information-transmitting effects. That is, the release of 
neurotransmitters other than glutamate and GABA tends 
to activate or inhibit entire circuits of neurons that are 
involved in particular brain functions. For example, secre-
tion of acetylcholine activates the cerebral cortex and fa-
cilitates learning, but the information that is learned and 
remembered is transmitted by neurons that secrete gluta-
mate and GABA. Secretion of norepinephrine increases 
vigilance and enhances readiness to act when a signal is 
detected. Secretion of histamine enhances wakefulness. 
Secretion of serotonin suppresses certain categories of 
species-typical behaviors and reduces the likelihood that 
the animal acts impulsively. Secretion of dopamine in 
some regions of the brain generally activates voluntary 
movements but does not specify which movements will 
occur. In other regions, secretion of dopamine reinforces 
ongoing behaviors and makes them more likely to occur 
at a later time. Because particular drugs can selectively 
affect neurons that secrete particular neurotransmitters, 
they can have specific effects on behavior.
This section introduces the most important neu-
rotransmitters, discusses some of their behavioral func-
tions, and describes the drugs that interact with them. 
As we saw in the previous section of this chapter, drugs 
have many different sites of action. Fortunately for 
your information-processing capacity (and perhaps 
your sanity), not all types of neurons are affected by all 

112	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
A simple analogy will illustrate the role of coen-
zymes in chemical reactions. Think of acetate as a hot 
dog and choline as a bun. The task of the person (en-
zyme) who operates the hot dog vending stand is to put 
a hot dog into the bun (make acetylcholine). To do so, 
the vendor needs a fork (coenzyme) to remove the hot 
dog from the boiling water. The vendor inserts the fork 
into the hot dog (attaches acetate to CoA) and transfers 
the hot dog from fork to bun.
Two drugs, botulinum toxin and the venom of the 
black widow spider, affect the release of acetylcholine. 
Botulinum toxin is produced by clostridium botulinum, a 
bacterium that can grow in improperly canned food. 
This drug prevents the release of ACh (step 5 of Figure 
4.4). As we saw in this chapter’s opening case, botuli-
num toxin drug is an extremely potent poison because 
the paralysis it can cause leads to suffocation. In contrast, 
instead, it is transferred from a molecule of acetyl-CoA. 
CoA (coenzyme A) is a complex molecule, consisting in 
part of the vitamin pantothenic acid (one of the B vita-
mins). CoA is produced by the mitochondria, and it 
takes part in many reactions in the body. Acetyl-CoA is 
simply CoA with an acetate ion attached to it. ACh is 
produced by the following reaction: In the presence of 
the enzyme choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), the ace-
tate ion is transferred from the acetyl-CoA molecule to 
the choline molecule, yielding a molecule of ACh and 
one of ordinary CoA. (See Figure 4.9.)
figure 4.8  Acetylcholinergic Pathways in a Rat Brain
This schematic figure shows the locations of the most important groups of 
acetylcholinergic neurons and the distribution of their axons and terminal buttons.
(Adapted from Woolf, N. J. Progress in Neurobiology, 1991, 37, 475–524.)
Laterodorsal and
pedunculopontine
tegmental nuclei
(dorsolateral pons)
Neocortex
Cingulate
cortex
Olfactory
bulb
Medial
septum
Caudate nucleus,
putamen, and
nucleus accumbens
(contain interneurons)
Nucleus
basalis
(basal
forebrain)
Amygdala
Lateral
hypothalamus
Hippocampus
Medial
habenula
Thalamus
Substantia
nigra
Pontine
reticular
formation
Raphe
nuclei
Tectum
Deep
cerebellar
nuclei
Locus
coeruleus
Vestibular
nuclei
Medullary
reticular
formation
Dorsal
figure 4.9  Biosynthesis of Acetylcholine
Choline
Acetyl coenzyme A
(acetyl-CoA)
Coenzyme A
(CoA)
Acetylcholine (ACh)
ChAT transfers
acetate ion from
acetyl-CoA to
choline
Choline
acetyltransferase
(ChAT)
x botulinum toxin (bot you lin um)  An acetylcholine antagonist; 
prevents release by terminal buttons.
x black widow spider venom  A poison produced by the black 
widow spider that triggers the release of acetylcholine.
x acetyl-CoA (a see tul)  A cofactor that supplies acetate for the 
synthesis of acetylcholine.
x choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) (koh leen a see tul trans  
fer ace)  The enzyme that transfers the acetate ion from acetyl  
coenzyme A to choline, producing the neurotransmitter acetylcholine.

	
Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators 	
113
the blood–brain barrier, so it does not affect the AChE 
found in the central nervous system.)
There are two types of ACh receptors: one iono-
tropic and one metabotropic. These receptors were 
identified when investigators discovered that different 
drugs activated them (step 6 of Figure 4.4). The iono-
tropic ACh receptor is stimulated by nicotine, a drug 
found in tobacco leaves. (The Latin name of the plant 
is Nicotiniana tabacum.) The metabotropic ACh recep-
tor is stimulated by muscarine, a drug found in the 
poison mushroom Amanita muscaria. Consequently, 
these two ACh receptors are referred to as nicotinic  
receptors and muscarinic receptors, respectively. Because 
muscle fibers must be able to contract rapidly, they  
contain the rapid, ionotropic nicotinic receptors.
Because muscarinic receptors are metabotropic in 
nature and thus control ion channels through the pro-
duction of second messengers, their actions are slower 
and more prolonged than those of nicotinic receptors. 
The central nervous system contains both kinds of ACh 
receptors, but muscarinic receptors predominate. Some 
nicotinic receptors are found at axoaxonic synapses in 
the brain, where they produce presynaptic facilitation. 
Activation of these receptors is responsible for the addic-
tive effect of the nicotine found in tobacco smoke.
Just as two different drugs stimulate the two classes 
of acetylcholine receptors, two different drugs block 
them (step 7 of Figure 4.4). Both drugs were discovered 
in nature long ago, and both are still used by modern 
medicine. The first, atropine, blocks muscarinic recep-
tors. The drug is named after Atropos, the Greek fate 
who cut the thread of life (which a sufficient dose of 
atropine will certainly do). Atropine is one of several 
belladonna alkaloids extracted from a plant called the 
deadly nightshade, and therein lies a tale. Many years 
ago, women who wanted to increase their attractiveness 
to men put drops containing belladonna alkaloids into 
their eyes. In fact, belladonna means “pretty lady.” Why 
was the drug used this way? One of the unconscious 
responses that occurs when we are interested in some-
thing is dilation of our pupils. By blocking the effects of 
acetylcholine on the pupil, belladonna alkaloids such 
as atropine make the pupils dilate. This change makes 
a woman appear more interested in a man when she 
looks at him, and, of course, this apparent sign of inter-
est makes him regard her as more attractive.
black widow spider venom has the opposite effect: It 
stimulates the release of ACh (step 4 of Figure 4.4). 
Although the effects of black widow spider venom can 
also be fatal, the venom is much less toxic than botuli-
num toxin. In fact, most healthy adults would have to 
receive several bites, but infants or frail elderly people 
would be more susceptible.
You may have been wondering why double vision 
was the first symptom of botulism in the opening case. 
The answer is that the delicate balance among the mus-
cles that move the eyes is upset by any interference with 
acetylcholinergic transmission. You undoubtedly know 
that botox treatment has become fashionable. A very di-
lute (obviously!) solution of botulinum toxin is injec­ted 
into people’s facial muscles to stop muscular contrac-
tions that are causing wrinkles in the skin. I’m not plan-
ning on getting a botox treatment, but if I did, I would 
want to be sure that the solution was sufficiently dilute.
You will recall from Chapter 2 that after being re-
leased by the terminal button, ACh is deactivated by the 
enzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE), which is present in 
the postsynaptic membrane. (See Figure 4.10.)
Drugs that deactivate AChE (step 11 of Figure 4.4) are 
used for several purposes. Some are used as insectici­des. 
These drugs readily kill insects but not humans and other 
mammals, because our blood contains enzymes that de-
stroy them. (Insects lack the enzyme.) Other AChE in-
hibitors are used medically. For example, a hereditary 
disorder called myasthenia gravis is caused by an attack of a 
person’s immune system against acetylch­oline receptors 
located on skeletal muscles. (Kathryn D., whose symptoms 
were described in the opening  case of Chapter 2, had this 
disorder.) The person becomes weaker and weaker as the 
muscles become less responsive to the neurotransmitter. If 
the person is given an AChE inhibitor such as neostigmine, 
the person will regain some strength because the 
acetylcholine that is released has a more prolonged effect 
on the remaining receptors. (Neostigmine cannot cross 
figure 4.10  Destruction of Acetylcholine (ACh) by 
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE)
Acetylcholine
molecule
Acetate ion
Choline molecule
Action of AChE
breaks apart
acetylcholine
molecule
Acetylcholin-
esterase
(AChE)
x neostigmine (nee o stig meen)  A drug that inhibits the activity 
of acetylcholinesterase.
x nicotinic receptor  An ionotropic acetylcholine receptor that is 
stimulated by nicotine and blocked by curare.
x muscarinic receptor (muss ka rin ic)  A metabotropic acetylcholine 
receptor that is stimulated by muscarine and blocked by atropine.
x atropine (a tro peen)  A drug that blocks muscarinic acetylcho-
line receptors.

114	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
potentials, depending on the postsynaptic receptor. 
Dopamine is one of the more interesting neurotrans-
mitters because it has been implicated in several impor-
tant functions, including movement, attention, learn-
ing, and the reinforcing effects of drugs that people 
tend to abuse. It is discussed in Chapters 8, 9, 13, 16, 
and 18. The synthesis of the catecholamines is some-
what more complicated than that of ACh, but each step 
is a simple one. The precursor molecule is modified 
slightly, step by step, until it achieves its final shape. 
Each step is controlled by a different enzyme, which 
causes a small part to be added or taken off. The pre-
cursor for the two major catecholamine neurotransmit-
ters (dopamine and norepinephrine) is tyrosine, an es-
sential amino acid that we must obtain from our diet. 
Tyrosine receives a hydroxyl group (OH—an oxygen 
atom and a hydrogen atom) and becomes l-DOPA 
(L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine). The enzyme that adds 
the hydroxyl group is called tyrosine hydroxylase. l-DOPA 
then loses a carboxyl group (COOH—one carbon 
atom, two oxygen atoms, and one hydrogen atom) 
through the activity of the enzyme DOPA decarboxylase 
and becomes dopamine. Finally, the enzyme dopamine 
b-hydroxylase attaches a hydroxyl group to dopamine, 
which becomes norepinephrine. These reactions are 
shown in Figure 4.11.
The brain contains several systems of dopaminergic 
neurons. The three most important of these originate in 
the midbrain: in the substantia nigra and in the ventral 
tegmental area. (The substantia nigra was shown in  
Figure 3.21; the ventral tegmental area is located just 
below this region.) The cell bodies of neurons of the 
nigrostriatal system are located in the substantia nigra 
and project their axons to the neostriatum: the caudate 
nucleus and the putamen. The neostriatum is an impor-
tant part of the basal ganglia, which is involved in the 
control of movement. The cell bodies of neurons of the 
mesolimbic system are located in the ventral tegmental 
area and project their axons to several parts of the  
Another drug, curare, blocks nicotinic receptors. 
Because these receptors are the ones found on muscles, 
curare, like botulinum toxin, causes paralysis. However, 
the effects of curare are much faster. The drug is ex-
tracted from several different species of plants found in 
South America, where it was discovered long ago by 
people who used it to coat the tips of arrows and darts. 
Within minutes of being struck by one of these points, 
an animal collapses, ceases breathing, and dies. Nowa-
days, curare (and other drugs with the same site of ac-
tion) are used to paralyze patients who are to undergo 
surgery so that their muscles will relax completely and 
not contract when they are cut with a scalpel. An anes-
thetic must also be used, because a person who receives 
only curare will remain perfectly conscious and sensi-
tive to pain, even though paralyzed. And, of course, a 
respirator must be used to supply air to the lungs.
The Monoamines
Dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, serotonin, 
and histamine are five chemicals that belong to a family 
of compounds called monoamines. Because the 
molecular structures of these substances are similar, 
some drugs affect the activity of all of them to some 
degree. The first three—dopamine, norepinephrine, 
and epinephrine—belong to a subclass of monoamines 
called catecholamines. It is worthwhile learning the 
terms in Table 4.1, because they will be used through-
out the rest of this book. (See Table 4.1.)
The monoamines are produced by several systems 
of neurons in the brain. Most of these systems consist of 
a relatively small number of cell bodies located in the 
brain stem, whose axons branch repeatedly and give rise 
to an enormous number of terminal buttons distributed 
throughout many regions of the brain. Monoaminergic 
neurons thus serve to modulate the function of wide-
spread regions of the brain, increasing or decreasing 
the activities of particular brain functions.
Dopamine
The first catecholamine in Table 4.1, dopamine (DA), 
produces both excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic 
table 4.1  Classification of the Monoamine 
Neurotransmitters
Catecholamines
Indolamine
Ethylamine
Dopamine	
Serotonin	
Histamine
Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
x monoamine (mahno a meen)  A class of amines that includes 
indolamines, such as serotonin; and catecholamines, such as 
dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine.
x catecholamine (cat a kohl a meen)  A class of amines that includes 
the neurotransmitters dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine.
x dopamine (DA) (dopea meen)  A neurotransmitter; one of the 
catecholamines.
x l-DOPA (ell dope a)  The levorotatory form of DOPA; the 
precursor of the catecholamines; often used to treat Parkinson’s 
disease because of its effect as a dopamine agonist.
x nigrostriatal system (nigh grow stry ay tul)  A system of 
neurons originating in the substantia nigra and terminating in the 
neostriatum (caudate nucleus and putamen).
x curare (kew rahr ee)  A drug that blocks nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptors.

	
Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators 	
115
gives color to skin. This compound is produced by the 
breakdown of dopamine. (The brain damage that causes 
Parkinson’s disease was discovered by pathologists who 
observed that the substantia nigra of a deceased person 
who had had this disorder was pale rather than black.) 
People with Parkinson’s disease are given l-DOPA, the 
precursor to dopamine. Although dopamine cannot 
cross the blood–brain barrier, l-DOPA can. Once 
l-DOPA reaches the brain, it is taken up by dopaminer-
gic neurons and is converted to dopamine (step 1 of 
Figure 4.4). The increased synthesis of dopamine causes 
more dopamine to be released by the surviving dopami-
nergic neurons in patients with Parkinson’s disease. As a 
consequence, the patients’ symptoms are alleviated.
Another drug, AMPT (or a-methyl-p-tyrosine), in-
activates tyrosine hydroxylase, the enzyme that converts 
tyrosine to l-DOPA (step 2 of Figure 4.4). Because this 
drug interferes with the synthesis of dopamine (and of 
norepinephrine as well), it serves as a catecholamine 
antagonist. The drug is not normally used medically, 
but it has been used as a research tool in laboratory 
animals.
The drug reserpine prevents the storage of mono-
amines in synaptic vesicles by blocking the transporters 
in the membrane of vesicles of monoaminergic neurons 
(step 3 of Figure 4.4). Because the synaptic vesicles re-
main empty, no neurotransmitter is released when an 
action potential reaches the terminal button. Reserpine, 
then, is a monoamine antagonist. The drug, which 
comes from the root of a shrub, was discovered over 
3000 years ago in India, where it was found to be useful 
in treating snakebite and seemed to have a calming ef-
fect. Pieces of the root are still sold in markets in rural 
areas of India. In Western medicine, reserpine was pre-
viously used to treat high blood pressure, but it has been 
replaced by drugs with fewer side effects.
Several different types of dopamine receptors have 
been identified, all metabotropic. Of these, two are the 
most common: D1 receptors and D2 receptors. It appears 
that D1 receptors are exclusively postsynaptic, whereas 
limbic system, including the nucleus accumbens, amyg-
dala, and hippocampus. The nucleus accumbens plays 
an important role in the reinforcing (rewarding) effects 
of certain categories of stimuli, including those of drugs 
that people abuse. The cell bodies of neurons of the 
mesocortical system are also located in the ventral teg-
mental area. Their axons project to the prefrontal cor-
tex. These neurons have an excitatory effect on the 
frontal cortex and affect such functions as formation of 
short-term memories, planning, and strategy prepara-
tion for problem solving. These three systems of dopa-
minergic neurons are shown in Figure 4.12.
Degeneration of dopaminergic neurons that con-
nect the substantia nigra with the caudate nucleus causes 
Parkinson’s disease, a movement disorder characterized 
by tremors, rigidity of the limbs, poor balance, and dif-
ficulty in initiating movements. The cell bodies of these 
neurons are located in a region of the brain called the 
substantia nigra (“black substance”). This region is nor-
mally stained black with melanin, the substance that 
figure 4.11  Biosynthesis of the Catecholamines
NH2
HO
H
COOH
H
H
NH2
L-DOPA
Tyrosine
hydroxylase
DOPA
decarboxylase
Dopamine
C
C
Tyrosine
Norepinephrine
Dopamine
-hydroxylase
β
HO
H
COOH
H
H
C
C
HO
H
H
H
NH2
C
C
HO
H
H
NH2
C
C
OH
OH
OH
H
OH
H
x mesolimbic system (mee zo lim bik)  A system of dopaminergic 
neurons originating in the ventral tegmental area and terminating 
in the nucleus accumbens, amygdala, and hippocampus.
x mesocortical system (mee zo kor ti kul)  A system of 
dopaminergic neurons originating in the ventral tegmental area 
and terminating in the prefrontal cortex.
x Parkinson’s disease  A neurological disease characterized  
by tremors, rigidity of the limbs, poor balance, and difficulty in 
initiating movements; caused by degeneration of the nigrostriatal 
system.
x AMPT  A drug that blocks the activity of tyrosine hydroxylase 
and thus interferes with the synthesis of the catecholamines.
x reserpine (ree sur peen)  A drug that interferes with the 
storage of monoamines in synaptic vesicles.

116	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
has an interesting effect: It causes the release of both 
dopamine and norepinephrine by causing the trans-
porters for these neurotransmitters to run in reverse, 
propelling DA and NE into the synaptic cleft. Of course, 
this action also blocks reuptake of these neurotransmit-
ters. Cocaine and methylphenidate simply block dopa-
mine reuptake. Because cocaine also blocks voltage-
dependent sodium channels, it is sometimes used as a 
topical anesthetic, especially in the form of eye drops 
for eye surgery. Methylphenidate (Ritalin) is used to 
treat children who have attention deficit disorder.
The production of the catecholamines is regulated 
by an enzyme called monoamine oxidase (MAO). This 
enzyme is found within monoaminergic terminal buttons, 
where it destroys excessive amounts of neurotransmitter. 
D2 receptors are found both presynaptically and post-
synaptically in the brain. Stimulation of D1 receptors 
increases the production of the second messenger cyclic 
AMP, whereas stimulation of D2 receptors decreases it, 
as does stimulation of D3 and D4 receptors. Several 
drugs stimulate or block specific types of dopamine 
receptors.
Autoreceptors are found in the dendrites, soma, 
and terminal buttons of dopaminergic neurons. Activation 
of the autoreceptors in the dendritic and somatic mem-
brane decreases neural firing by producing hyperpolar-
izations. The presynaptic autoreceptors located in the 
terminal buttons suppress the activity of the enzyme 
tyrosine hydroxylase and thus decrease the production 
of dopamine—and ultimately its release. Dopamine au-
toreceptors resemble D2 receptors, but there seem to 
be some differences. For example, the drug apomorphine 
is a D2 agonist, but it seems to have a greater affinity for 
presynaptic D2 receptors than for postsynaptic D2 recep-
tors. A low dose of apomorphine acts as an antagonist, 
because it stimulates the presynaptic receptors and  
inhibits the production and release of dopamine. 
Higher doses begin to stimulate postsynaptic D2 recep-
tors, and the drug begins to act as a direct agonist. (See 
Figure 4.13.)
Several drugs inhibit the reuptake of dopamine, 
thus serving as potent dopamine agonists (step 10 of 
Figure 4.4). The best known of these drugs are amphet-
amine, cocaine, and methylphenidate. Amphetamine 
x apomorphine (ap o more feen)  A drug that blocks dopamine 
autoreceptors at low doses; at higher doses, blocks postsynaptic 
receptors as well.
x methylphenidate (meth ul fen i date)  A drug that inhibits the 
reuptake of dopamine.
x monoamine oxidase (MAO) (mahn o a meen)  A class of 
enzymes that destroy the monoamines: dopamine, norepinephrine, 
and serotonin.
x deprenyl (depp ra nil)  A drug that blocks the activity of 
MAO-B; acts as a dopamine agonist.
x chlorpromazine (klor proh ma zeen)  A drug that reduces the 
symptoms of schizophrenia by blocking dopamine D2 receptors.
figure 4.12  Dopaminergic Pathways in a Rat Brain
This schematic figure shows the locations of the most important groups of 
dopaminergic neurons and the distribution of their axons and terminal buttons.
(Adapted from Fuxe, K., Agnati, L. F., Kalia, M., et al., in Basic and Clinical Aspects of Neuroscience: The Dopaminergic 
System, edited by E. Fluckinger, E. E. Muller, and M. O. Thomas. Berlin: Springer–Verlag, 1985.)
Neocortex
Hippocampus
Olfactory
tubercle
Anterior
olfactory
nucleus
Lateral
septum
Nucleus
accumbens
Amygdala
Globus
pallidus
Caudate nucleus
and putamen
Thalamus
Lateral
habenula
Ventral
tegmental
area
Substantia
nigra
Mesolimbic and
Mesocortical Systems
Nigrostriatal System

	
Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators 	
117
Dopamine has been implicated as a neurotransmit-
ter that might be involved in schizophrenia, a serious 
mental disorder whose symptoms include hallucinations, 
delusions, and disruption of normal, logical thought 
processes. Drugs such as chlorpromazine, which block 
D2 receptors, alleviate these symptoms (step 7 of Figure 
4.4). Hence, investigators have speculated that schizo-
phrenia is produced by overactivity of dopaminergic 
neurons. 
More 
recently 
discovered 
drugs—the  
so-called atypical antipsychotics—have more complicated 
actions, which are discussed in Chapter 16.
A drug called deprenyl destroys the particular form of 
monoamine oxidase (MAO-B) that is found in dopami-
nergic terminal buttons. Because deprenyl prevents  
the destruction of dopamine, more dopamine is re-
leased when an action potential reaches the terminal 
button. Thus, deprenyl serves as a dopamine agonist. 
(See Figure 4.14.)
MAO is also found in the blood, where it deactivates 
amines that are present in foods such as chocolate and 
cheese. Without such deactivation these amines could 
cause dangerous increases in blood pressure.
figure 4.14  Role of Monoamine Oxidase
This schematic shows the role of monoamine oxidase in dopaminergic terminal buttons 
and the action of deprenyl.
MAO converts
dopamine to
an inactive
substance
Dopamine
Dopamine is stored
in synaptic vesicles
MAO
MAO
Inactive
substance
Because of the higher
concentration of dopamine,
more dopamine is stored
in synaptic vesicles
Deprenyl, an MAO
inhibitor, blocks the
destruction of dopamine
Presynaptic autoreceptors
have high affinity for
apomorphine; even at low
doses many are activated;
acts as an antagonist
Terminal
button
Inhibition of
dopamine production
Inhibition of
dopamine production
Postsynaptic
membrane
At high doses,
apomorphine binds
with postsynaptic
receptors; acts as
an agonist
figure 4.13  Effects of Low and High Doses of Apomorphine
At low doses, apomorphine serves as a dopamine antagonist; at high doses, it serves 
as an agonist.

118	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
blocks the production of norepinephrine without affec­
ting the production of dopamine.
Excess norepinephrine in the terminal buttons is 
destroyed by monoamine oxidase, type A. The drug 
moclobemide specifically blocks MAO-A and hence 
serves as a noradrenergic agonist.
Almost every region of the brain receives input from 
noradrenergic neurons. The cell bodies of most of these 
neurons are located in seven regions of the pons and me­
dulla and one region of the thalamus. The cell bodies of the 
most important noradrenergic system begin in the locus 
coeruleus, a nucleus located in the dorsal pons. The axons 
of these neurons project to the regions shown in Figure 
4.15. As we will see later, the primary effect of activation of 
these neurons is an increase in vigilance—attentiveness to 
events in the environment. (See Figure 4.15.)
Most neurons that release norepinephrine do not do 
so through terminal buttons on the ends of axonal 
Norepinephrine
Because norepinephrine (NE), like ACh, is found in 
neurons in the autonomic nervous system, this neurot­
ransmitter has received much experimental attention. I 
should note that the terms Adrenalin and epinephrine are 
synonymous, as are noradrenalin and norepinephrine. Let 
me explain why. Epinephrine is a hormone produced 
by the adrenal medulla, the central core of the adrenal 
glands, located just above the kidneys. Epinephrine 
also serves as a neurotransmitter in the brain, but it is 
of minor importance compared with norepinephrine. 
Ad renal is Latin for “toward the kidney.” In Greek, one 
would say epi nephron (“upon the kidney”), hence the 
term epinephrine. The latter term has been adopted by 
pharmacologists, probably because the word Adrenalin 
was appropriated by a drug company as a proprietary 
name; therefore, to be consistent with general usage, I 
will refer to the neurotransmitter as norepinephrine. The 
accepted adjectival form is noradrenergic; I suppose that 
norepinephrinergic never caught on because it takes so 
long to pronounce.
We have already seen the biosynthetic pathway for 
norepinephrine in Figure 4.11. The drug AMPT, which 
prevents the conversion of tyrosine to l-DOPA, blocks 
the production of norepinephrine as well as dopamine 
(step 2 of Figure 4.4).
Most neurotransmitters are synthesized in the cyto­
plasm of the terminal button and then stored in newly 
formed synaptic vesicles. However, for norepinephrine 
the final step of synthesis occurs inside the vesicles them­
selves. The vesicles are first filled with dopamine. Then 
the dopamine is converted to norepinephrine through the 
action of the enzyme dopamine b-hydroxylase located 
within the vesicles. The drug fusaric acid inhibits the 
activity of the enzyme dopamine-b-hydroxylase and thus 
figure 4.15  Noradrenergic Pathways in a Rat Brain
This schematic figure shows the locations of the most important groups of 
noradrenergic neurons and the distribution of their axons and terminal buttons.
(Adapted from Cotman, C. W. and McGaugh, J. L. Behavioral Neuroscience: An Introduction. New York: Academic  
Press, 1980.)
Neocortex
Hippocampus
Amygdala
Thalamus
Olfactory
bulb
Tectum
Locus
coeruleus
Septum
Preoptic
area
Hypothalamus
Basal
ganglia
Dorsal bundle
Cerebellum
Spinal
cord
Ventral bundle
x fusaric acid (few sahr ik)  A drug that inhibits the activity of the 
enzyme dopamine-b-hydroxylase and thus blocks the production 
of norepinephrine.
x moclobemide (mok low bem ide)  A drug that blocks the 
activity of MAO-A; acts as a noradrenergic agonist.
x locus coeruleus (sur oo lee us)  A dark-colored group of 
noradrenergic cell bodies located in the pons near the rostral end 
of the floor of the fourth ventricle.
x axonal varicosity  An enlarged region along the length of an 
axon that contains synaptic vesicles and releases a neurotransmit-
ter or neuromodulator.
x epinephrine (epp i neff rin)  One of the catecholamines; a 
hormone secreted by the adrenal medulla; serves also as a 
neurotransmitter in the brain.
x norepinephrine (NE) (nor epp i neff rin)  One of the catechol-
amines; a neurotransmitter found in the brain and in the sympa-
thetic division of the autonomic nervous system.

	
Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators 	
119
or near the midline of the brain stem. Both the dorsal and 
median raphe nuclei project axons to the cerebral cortex. 
In addition, neurons in the dorsal raphe innervate the basal 
ganglia, and those in the median raphe innervate the den-
tate gyrus, a part of the hippocampal formation. These and 
other connections are shown in Figure 4.17.
Investigators have identified at least nine different 
types of serotonin receptors: 5-HT1A-1B, 5-HT1D-1F, 
5-HT2A-2C, and 5-HT3. Of these the 5-HT1B and 5-HT1D 
receptors serve as presynaptic autoreceptors. In the 
dorsal and median raphe nuclei, 5-HT1A receptors 
serve as autoreceptors in the membrane of dendrites 
and soma. All 5-HT receptors are metabotropic except 
for the 5-HT3 receptor, which is ionotropic. The 5-HT3 
receptor controls a chloride channel, which means that 
it produces inhibitory postsynaptic potentials. These 
receptors appear to play a role in nausea and vomiting, 
because 5-HT3 antagonists have been found to be use-
ful in treating the side effects of chemotherapy and  
radiotherapy for the treatment of cancer. Pharmacolo-
gists have discovered drugs that serve as agonists or 
antagonists for some, but not all, of the types of 5-HT 
receptors.
branches. Instead, they usually release them through axonal 
varicosities, beadlike swellings of the axonal branches. 
These varicosities give the axonal branches of catechol-
aminergic neurons the appearance of beaded chains.
There are several types of noradrenergic receptors, 
identified by their differing sensitivities to various drugs. 
Actually, these receptors are usually called adrenergic re-
ceptors rather than noradrenergic receptors, because they 
are sensitive to epinephrine (Adrenalin) as well as nor-
epinephrine. Neurons in the central nervous system con-
tain a1- and a2-adrenergic receptors and b1- and b2-adrenergic 
receptors. All four kinds of receptors are also found in 
various organs of the body besides the brain and are re-
sponsible for the effects of epinephrine and norepi-
nephrine when they act as hormones outside the central 
nervous system. In the brain, all autoreceptors appear to 
be of the a2 type. (The drug idazoxan blocks a2 autore-
ceptors and hence acts as an agonist.) All adrenergic 
receptors are metabotropic, coupled to G proteins that 
control the production of second messengers.
Adrenergic receptors produce both excitatory and 
inhibitory effects. In general, the behavioral effects of the 
release of NE are excitatory. In the brain, a1 receptors 
produce a slow depolarizing (excitatory) effect on the 
postsynaptic membrane, while a2 receptors produce a 
slow hyperpolarization. Both types of b receptors in-
crease the responsiveness of the postsynaptic neuron to 
its excitatory inputs, which presumably related to the 
role this neurotransmitter plays in vigilance. Noradren-
ergic neurons—in particular, a2 receptors—are also in-
volved in sexual behavior and in the control of appetite.
Serotonin
The third monoamine neurotransmitter, serotonin (also 
called 5-HT, or 5-hydroxytryptamine), has also received 
much experimental attention. Its behavioral effects are 
complex. Serotonin plays a role in the regulation of 
mood; in the control of eating, sleep, and arousal; and 
in the regulation of pain. Serotonergic neurons are in-
volved somehow in the control of dreaming.
The precursor for serotonin is the amino acid trypto-
phan. The enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase adds a hydroxyl 
group, producing 5-HTP (5-hydroxytryptophan). The 
enzyme 5-HTP decarboxylase removes a carboxyl group 
from 5-HTP, and the result is 5-HT (serotonin). (See 
Figure 4.16.) The drug PCPA (p-chlorophenylalanine) 
blocks the activity of tryptophan hydroxylase and thus 
serves as a serotonergic antagonist.
The cell bodies of serotonergic neurons are found in 
nine clusters, most of which are located in the raphe nu-
clei of the midbrain, pons, and medulla. Like norepineph-
rine, 5-HT is released from varicosities rather than termi-
nal buttons. The two most important clusters of 
serotonergic cell bodies are found in the dorsal and  
medial raphe nuclei, and I will restrict my discussion to 
these clusters. The word raphe means “seam” or “crease” and 
refers to the fact that most of the raphe nuclei are found at 
figure 4.16  Biosynthesis of Serotonin 
(5-Hydroxytryptamine, or 5-HT)
N
CH2
CH
NH2
COOH
N
CH2
CH
NH2
COOH
N
CH2
NH2
Tryptophan
HO
5-hydroxytryptophan
(5-HTP)
CH2
HO
5-hydroxytryptamine
(5-HT, or serotonin)
Tryptophan
hydroxylase
5-HTP
decarboxylase
x serotonin (5-HT) (sair a toe nin)  An indolamine neurotransmitter;  
also called 5-hydroxytryptamine.
x PCPA  A drug that inhibits the activity of tryptophan hydroxy-
lase and thus interferes with the synthesis of 5-HT.
x idazoxan  A drug that blocks presynaptic noradrenergic a2 
receptors and hence acts as an agonist, facilitating the synthesis 
and release of NE.

120	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
cell bodies of histaminergic neurons are found in only 
one place in the brain: the tuberomammillary nucleus,  
located in the posterior hypothalamus. Histaminergic 
neurons send their axons to widespread regions of the 
cerebral cortex and brain stem. Histamine plays an im-
portant role in wakefulness. In fact, the activity of hista-
minergic neurons is strongly correlated with the states 
of sleep and wakefulness, and drugs that block hista-
mine receptors cause drowsiness. Histamine also plays a 
role in control of the digestive system and immune  
system and is essential for the development of allergic 
symptoms. Histaminergic H1 receptors are responsible 
for the itching produced by histamine and for the con-
striction of the bronchi seen in asthma attacks, H2 re-
ceptors stimulate gastric secretions, and both H2 and 
H4 receptors are involved in immune reactions. Cimeti-
dine, an H2 antagonist, blocks gastric acid secretion. H3 
receptors serve as autoreceptors on the terminals of 
histaminergic neurons in the brain; thus, the drug cip-
roxifan, an H3 antagonist, increases the release of hista-
mine. All types of histamine receptors are found in the 
central nervous system.
Drugs that inhibit the reuptake of serotonin have 
found a very important place in the treatment of men-
tal disorders. The best known of these, fluoxetine (Pro-
zac), is used to treat depression, some forms of anxiety 
disorders, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. These  
disorders—and their treatment—are discussed in 
Chapters 16 and 17. Another drug, fenfluramine, which 
causes the release of serotonin as well as inhibits its 
reuptake, was formerly used as an appetite suppressant 
in the treatment of obesity. Chapter 12 discusses the 
topic of obesity and its control by means of drugs.
Several hallucinogenic drugs produce their effects by 
interacting with serotonergic transmission. LSD (lysergic 
acid diethylamide) produces distortions of visual percep-
tions that some people find awesome and fascinating but 
that simply frighten other people. This drug, which is ef-
fective in extremely small doses, is a direct agonist for 
postsynaptic 5-HT2A receptors in the forebrain. Another 
drug, MDMA (methylenedioxymethamphetamine), is 
both a noradrenergic and a serotonergic agonist and has 
both excitatory and hallucinogenic effects. Like its relative 
amphetamine, MDMA (popularly called “ecstasy”) causes 
noradrenergic transporters to run backwards, thus caus-
ing the release of NE and inhibiting its reuptake. This site 
of action is apparently responsible for the drug’s excit-
atory effect. MDMA also causes serotonergic transporters 
to run backwards, and this site of action is apparently re-
sponsible for the drug’s hallucinogenic effects. Unfortu-
nately, research indicates that MDMA can damage seroto-
nergic neurons and cause cognitive deficits.
Histamine
Histamine is produced from histidine—an amino acid—
by the action of the enzyme histidine decarboxylase. The 
figure 4.17  Serotonergic Pathways in a Rat Brain
This schematic figure shows the locations of the most important groups of serotonergic 
neurons and the distribution of their axons and terminal buttons.
(Adapted from Consolazione, A. and Cuello, A. C. CNS serotonin pathways. In Biology of Serotonergic Transmission, edited 
by N. N. Osborne. Chichester: England: Wiley & Sons, 1982.)
Neocortex
Hippocampus
Amygdala
Thalamus
Olfactory
bulb
Tectum
Septum
Hypothalamus
Basal
ganglia
Cerebellum
Spinal
cord
Olfactory
tubercle
Substantia
nigra
Raphe
nuclei
Habenula
Spinal
trigeminal nucleus
x LSD  A drug that stimulates 5-HT2A receptors.
x MDMA  A drug that serves as a noradrenergic and serotoner-
gic agonist, also known as “ecstasy”; has excitatory and hallucino-
genic effects.
x histamine  A neurotransmitter that plays an important role in 
stimulating wakefulness.
x fluoxetine (floo ox i teen)  A drug that inhibits the reuptake of 
5-HT.
x fenfluramine (fen fluor i meen)  A drug that stimulates the 
release of 5-HT.

	
Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators 	
121
The NMDA receptor has some special—and very 
important—characteristics. It contains at least six dif-
ferent binding sites: four located on the exterior of 
the receptor and two located deep within the ion 
channel. When it is open, the ion channel controlled 
by the NMDA receptor permits both sodium and  
calcium ions to enter the cell. The influx of both of 
these ions causes a depolarization, of course, but the 
entry of calcium (Ca2+) is especially important. Cal-
cium serves as a second messenger, binding with—and 
activating—various enzymes within the cell. These 
enzymes have profound effects on the biochemical 
and structural properties of the cell. As we shall see, 
one important result is alteration in the characteristics 
of the synapse that provide one of the building blocks 
of a newly formed memory. These effects of NMDA 
receptors will be discussed in much more detail in 
Chapter 13. The drug AP5 (2-amino-5-phosphonopen-
tanoate) blocks the glutamate binding site on the 
NMDA receptor and impairs synaptic plasticity and 
certain forms of learning.
Figure 4.18 presents a schematic diagram of an 
NMDA receptor and its binding sites. Obviously, gluta-
mate binds with one of these sites, or we would not call 
it a glutamate receptor. However, glutamate by itself 
cannot open the calcium channel. For that to happen, a 
molecule of glycine must be attached to the glycine 
binding site, located on the outside of the receptor. (We 
do not yet understand why glycine—which also serves as 
an inhibitory neurotransmitter in some parts of the  
central nervous system—is required for this ion channel 
to open.) (See Figure 4.18.)
An additional requirement for the opening of the 
calcium channel is that a magnesium ion not be at-
tached to the magnesium binding site, located deep 
within the channel. Under normal conditions, when the 
postsynaptic membrane is at the resting potential, a 
magnesium ion (Mg2+) is attracted to the magnesium 
binding site and blocks the calcium channel. If a mole-
cule of glutamate attaches to its binding site, the chan-
nel widens, but the magnesium ion still blocks it, so no 
The older antihistamines (H1 antagonists) such as 
diphenhydramine produced drowsiness. In fact, some 
over-the-counter sleep aids contain these drugs for that 
very reason. Modern antihistamines that are used to 
treat the symptoms of allergies do not cross the blood–
brain barrier, so they have no direct effects on the brain.
Amino Acids
So far, all of the neurotransmitters I have described are 
synthesized within neurons: acetylcholine from choline, 
the catecholamines from the amino acid tyrosine, and se-
rotonin from the amino acid tryptophan. Some neurons 
secrete simple amino acids as neurotransmitters. Because 
amino acids are used for protein synthesis by all cells of 
the brain, it is difficult to prove that a particular amino 
acid is a neurotransmitter. However, investigators suspect 
that at least eight amino acids may serve as neurotransmit-
ters in the mammalian central nervous system. As we saw 
in the introduction to this section, three of them are espe-
cially important because they are the most common neu-
rotransmitters in the CNS: glutamate, gamma-aminobu-
tyric acid (GABA), and glycine.
Glutamate
Because glutamate (also called glutamic acid) and GABA 
are found in very simple organisms, many investigators 
believe that these neurotransmitters were the first to 
have evolved. Besides producing postsynaptic poten-
tials by activating postsynaptic receptors, they also have 
direct excitatory effects (glutamic acid) and inhibitory 
effects (GABA) on axons; they raise or lower the thresh-
old of excitation, thus affecting the rate at which action 
potentials occur. These direct effects suggest that these 
substances had a general modulating role even before 
the evolutionary development of specific receptor  
molecules.
Glutamate is the principal excitatory neurotransmit-
ter in the brain and spinal cord. It is produced in abun-
dance by the cells’ metabolic processes. There is no effec-
tive way to prevent its synthesis without disrupting other 
activities of the cell.
Investigators have discovered four major types of 
glutamate receptors. Three of these receptors are iono-
tropic and are named after the artificial ligands that 
stimulate them: the NMDA receptor, the AMPA recep-
tor, and the kainate receptor. The other glutamate  
receptor—the metabotropic glutamate receptor—is 
(obviously!) metabotropic. Actually, there appear to be 
at least eight subtypes of metabotropic glutamate recep-
tors, but little is known about their functions except that 
some of them serve as presynaptic autoreceptors. The 
AMPA receptor is the most common glutamate recep-
tor. It controls a sodium channel, so when glutamate 
attaches to the binding site, it produces EPSPs. The 
kainate receptor has similar effects.
x glutamate  An amino acid; the most important excitatory 
neurotransmitter in the brain.
x NMDA receptor  A specialized ionotropic glutamate receptor 
that controls a calcium channel that is normally blocked by Mg2+ 
ions; has several other binding sites.
x AMPA receptor  An ionotropic glutamate receptor that 
controls a sodium channel; stimulated by AMPA.
x kainate receptor (kay in ate)  An ionotropic glutamate 
receptor that controls a sodium channel; stimulated by kainic acid.
x metabotropic glutamate receptor (meh tab a troh pik)  A category 
of metabotropic receptors that are sensitive to glutamate.
x AP5 (2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoate)  A drug that blocks 
the glutamate binding site on NMDA receptors.

122	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
The drug allylglycine inactivates GAD and thus prevents 
the synthesis of GABA (step 2 of Figure 4.4). GABA is an 
inhibitory neurotransmitter, and it appears to have a 
widespread distribution throughout the brain and spinal 
cord. Two GABA receptors have been identified: GABAA 
and GABAB. The GABAA receptor is ionotropic and 
controls a chloride channel; the GABAB receptor is 
metabotropic and controls a potassium channel.
As you know, neurons in the brain are greatly inter-
connected. Without the activity of inhibitory synapses 
these interconnections would make the brain unstable. 
That is, through excitatory synapses neurons would excite 
their neighbors, which would then excite their neigh-
bors, which would then excite the originally active neu-
rons, and so on, until most of the neurons in the brain 
would be firing uncontrollably. In fact, this event does 
sometimes occur, and we refer to it as a seizure. (Epilepsy 
is a neurological disorder characterized by the presence 
of seizures.) Normally, an inhibitory influence is sup-
plied by GABA-secreting neurons, which are present in 
large numbers in the brain. Some investigators believe 
that one of the causes of epilepsy is an abnormality in 
the biochemistry of GABA-secreting neurons or in 
GABA receptors.
Like NMDA receptors, GABAA receptors are com-
plex; they contain at least five different binding sites. The 
primary binding site is, of course, for GABA. The drug 
muscimol (derived from the ACh agonist muscarine) 
serves as a direct agonist for this site (step 6 of Figure 4.4). 
Another drug, bicuculline, blocks this GABA binding site, 
serving as a direct antagonist (step 7 of Figure 4.4). A sec-
ond site on the GABAA receptor binds with a class of 
tranquilizing drugs called the benzodiazepines. These 
drugs include diazepam (Valium) and chlordiazepoxide 
(Librium), which are used to reduce anxiety, promote 
sleep, reduce seizure activity, and produce muscle relax-
ation. The third site binds with barbiturates. The fourth 
site binds with various steroids, including some steroids 
used to produce general anesthesia. The fifth site binds 
with picrotoxin, a poison found in an East Indian shrub. 
In addition, alcohol binds with an as-yet unknown site on 
the GABAA receptor. (See Figure 4.19.)
calcium can enter the postsynaptic neuron. However, if 
the postsynaptic membrane is partially depolarized, the 
magnesium ion is repelled from its binding site. Thus, 
the NMDA receptor opens only if glutamate is present 
and the postsynaptic membrane is depolarized. The 
NMDA receptor, then, is a voltage- and neurotransmit-
ter-dependent ion channel. (See Figure 4.18.)
What about the other three binding sites? If a zinc 
ion (Zn2+) binds with the zinc binding site, the activity 
of the NMDA receptor is decreased. On the other hand, 
the polyamine site has a facilitatory effect. (Polyamines 
are chemicals that have been shown to be important for 
tissue growth and development. The significance of the 
polyamine binding site is not yet understood.) The PCP 
site, located deep within the ion channel near the mag-
nesium binding site, binds with a hallucinogenic drug, 
PCP (phencyclidine, also known as “angel dust”). PCP 
serves as an indirect antagonist; when it attaches to its 
binding site, calcium ions cannot pass through the ion 
channel. PCP is a synthetic drug and is not produced by 
the brain. Thus, it is not the natural ligand of the PCP 
binding site. What that ligand is and what useful func-
tions it serves are not yet known.
Several drugs affect glutamatergic synapses. As you 
already know, NMDA, AMPA, and kainate (more pre-
cisely, kainic acid) serve as direct agonists at the receptors 
named after them. In addition, one of the most com-
mon drugs—alcohol—serves as an antagonist of NMDA 
receptors. As we will see in Chapter 18, this effect is re-
sponsible for the seizures that can be provoked by sud-
den withdrawal from heavy long-term alcohol intake.
Gaba
GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) is produced from 
glutamic acid by the action of an enzyme (glutamic acid 
decarboxylase, or GAD) that removes a carboxyl group. 
x PCP  Phencyclidine; a drug that binds with the PCP binding 
site of the NMDA receptor and serves as an indirect antagonist.
x GABA  An amino acid; the most important inhibitory neu-
rotransmitter in the brain.
x allylglycine  A drug that inhibits the activity of GAD and thus 
blocks the synthesis of GABA.
x muscimol (musk i mawl)  A direct agonist for the GABA binding 
site on the GABAA receptor.
x bicuculline (by kew kew leen)  A direct antagonist for the 
GABA binding site on the GABAA receptor.
x benzodiazepine (ben zoe dy azz a peen)  A category of 
anxiolytic drugs; an indirect agonist for the GABAA receptor.
figure 4.18  NMDA Receptor
This schematic illustration of an NMDA receptor shows its 
binding sites.
Glycine
PCP
Mg2+
Zn2+
Calcium
channel
Glutamate
Polyamine
+
+

	
Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators 	
123
bacteria that cause tetanus (lockjaw) release a chemical 
that prevents the release of glycine (and GABA as well); 
the removal of the inhibitory effect of these synapses 
causes muscles to contract continuously.
The glycine receptor is ionotropic, and it controls a 
chloride channel. Thus, when it is active, it produces 
inhibitory postsynaptic potentials. The drug strychnine, 
an alkaloid found in the seeds of the Strychnos nux vomica, 
a tree found in India, serves as a glycine antagonist. 
Strychnine is very toxic, and even relatively small doses 
cause convulsions and death. No drugs have yet been found 
that serve as specific glycine agonists.
Researchers have discovered that some terminal 
buttons in the brain release both glycine and GABA 
(Jonas, Bischofberger, and Sandkühler, 1998; Nicoll 
and Malenka, 1998). The apparent advantage for the 
corelease of these two inhibitory neurotransmitters is 
the production of rapid, long-lasting postsynaptic poten-
tials: The glycine stimulates rapid ionotropic receptors, 
and the GABA stimulates long-lasting metabotropic  
receptors. Obviously, the postsynaptic membrane at these 
synapses contains both glycine and GABA receptors.
Peptides
Recent studies have discovered that the neurons of the 
central nervous system release a large variety of peptides. 
Peptides consist of two or more amino acids linked  
together by peptide bonds. All the peptides that have 
been studied so far are produced from precursor mol-
ecules. These precursors are large polypeptides that are 
broken into pieces by special enzymes. Neurons 
manufacture both the polypeptides and the enzymes 
needed to break them apart in the right places. The 
appropriate sections of the polypeptides are retained, 
and the rest are destroyed. Because the synthesis of 
peptides takes place in the soma, vesicles containing 
these chemicals must be delivered to the terminal but-
tons by axoplasmic transport.
Peptides are released from all parts of the terminal 
button, not just from the active zone; thus, only a por-
tion of the molecules are released into the synaptic cleft. 
The rest presumably act on receptors belonging to other 
cells in the vicinity. Once released, peptides are de-
stroyed by enzymes. There is no mechanism for reup-
take and recycling of peptides.
Several different peptides are released by neu-
rons. Although most peptides appear to serve as  
neuromodulators, some act as neurotransmitters. One 
Barbiturates, drugs that bind to the steroid site, and 
benzodiazepines all promote the activity of the GABAA 
receptor; thus, all these drugs serve as indirect agonists. 
The benzodiazepines are very effective anxiolytics, or 
“anxiety-dissolving” drugs. They are often used to treat 
people with anxiety disorders. In addition, some benzo-
diazepines serve as effective sleep medications, and oth-
ers are used to treat some types of seizure disorder.
Picrotoxin has effects opposite to those of benzodi-
azepines and barbiturates: It inhibits the activity of the 
GABAA receptor, thus serving as an indirect antagonist. 
In high enough doses, this drug causes convulsions.
Various steroid hormones are normally produced 
in the body, and some hormones related to progester-
one (the principal pregnancy hormone) act on the ste-
roid binding site of the GABAA receptor, producing a 
relaxing, anxiolytic sedative effect. However, the brain 
does not produce Valium, barbiturates, or picrotoxin. 
The natural ligands for these binding sites have not yet 
been discovered.
What about the GABAB receptor? This metabotropic 
receptor, coupled to a G protein, serves as both a postsyn-
aptic receptor and a presynaptic autoreceptor. A GABAB 
agonist, baclofen, serves as a muscle relaxant. Another 
drug, CGP 335348, serves as an antagonist. The activation 
of GABAB receptors opens potassium channels, produc-
ing hyperpolarizing inhibitory postsynaptic potentials.
Glycine
The amino acid glycine appears to be the inhibitory 
neurotransmitter in the spinal cord and lower portions 
of the brain. Little is known about its biosynthetic path-
way; there are several possible routes, but not enough is 
known to decide how neurons produce glycine. The 
figure 4.19  GABAA Receptor
This schematic illustration of a GABAA receptor shows its 
binding sites.
Barbiturate
(and alcohol?)
site
Picrotoxin
site
GABA site
Chloride
channel
Steroid
site
Benzodiazepine
site
+
+
x anxiolytic (angz ee oh lit ik)   An anxiety-reducing effect.
x glycine (gly seen)  An amino acid; an important inhibitory 
neurotransmitter in the lower brain stem and spinal cord.
x strychnine (strik neen)  A direct antagonist for the glycine 
receptor.

124	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
of the muscarinic receptors in the salivary gland to 
ACh; thus, much saliva is released.
Several peptide hormones released by endocrine 
glands are also found in the brain, where they serve 
as neuromodulators. In some cases the peripheral 
and central peptides perform related functions. For 
example, outside the nervous system the hormone 
angiotensin acts directly on the kidneys and blood 
vessels to produce effects that help the body cope 
with the loss of fluid, and inside the nervous system 
circuits of neurons that use angiotensin as a neu-
rotransmitter perform complementary functions, in-
cluding the activation of neural circuits that produce 
thirst. The existence of the blood–brain barrier keeps 
hormones in the general circulation separate from 
the extracellular fluid in the brain, which means that 
the same peptide molecule can have different effects 
in these two regions.
Many peptides produced in the brain have interest-
ing behavioral effects, which will be discussed in subse-
quent chapters.
Lipids
Various substances derived from lipids can serve to transmit 
messages within or between cells. The best known, and 
probably the most important, are the endocannabinoids 
(“endogenous cannabis-like substances”)—natural liga­
nds for the receptors that are responsible for the physi-
ological effects of the active ingredient in marijuana. 
Matsuda et al. (1990) discovered that THC (tetrahydro-
cannabinol, the active ingredient of marijuana) stimu-
lates cannabinoid receptors located in specific regions of 
the brain. (See Figure 4.20.) Two types of cannabinoid 
receptors, CB1 and CB2, both metabotropic, have since 
been discovered. CB1 receptors are found in the brain, 
especially in the frontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, 
basal ganglia, cerebellum, hypothalamus, and hippo-
campus. Very low levels of CB1 receptors are found in 
the brain stem, which accounts for the low toxicity of 
THC. CB2 receptors are found outside the brain, espe-
cially in cells of the immune system.
THC produces analgesia and sedation, stimulates  
appetite, reduces nausea caused by drugs used to treat 
of the best known families of peptides is the endogenous 
opioids. (Endogenous means “produced from within”; 
opioid means “like opium.”) Research has revealed that 
opiates (drugs such as opium, morphine, and heroin) 
reduce pain because they have direct effects on the 
brain. (Please note that the term opioid refers to endog-
enous chemicals, and opiate refers to drugs.) Pert, Snow-
man, and Snyder (1974) discovered that neurons in a 
localized region of the brain contain specialized recep-
tors that respond to opiates. Then, soon after the dis-
covery of the opiate receptor, other neuroscientists dis-
covered the natural ligands for these receptors (Hughes 
et al., 1975; Terenius and Wahlström, 1975), which they 
called enkephalins (from the Greek word enkephalos, “in 
the head”). We now know that the enkephalins are only 
two members of a family of endogenous opioids, all of 
which are synthesized from one of three large peptides 
that serve as precursors. In addition, we know that there 
are at least three different types of opiate receptors: μ 
(mu),  (delta), and  (kappa).
Several different neural systems are activated when 
opiate receptors are stimulated. One type produces 
analgesia, another inhibits species-typical defensive  
responses such as fleeing and hiding, and another 
stimulates a system of neurons involved in reinforce-
ment (“reward”). The last effect explains why opiates 
are often abused. The situations that cause neurons to 
secrete endogenous opioids are discussed in Chapter 7, 
and the brain mechanisms of opiate addiction are dis-
cussed in Chapter 18.
So far, pharmacologists have developed only two 
types of drugs that affect neural communication by 
means of opioids: direct agonists and antagonists. Many 
synthetic opiates, including heroin (dihydromorphine), 
have been developed, and some are used clinically as 
analgesics (step 6 of Figure 4.4). Several opiate recep-
tor blockers have also been developed (step 7 of Figure 
4.4). One of them, naloxone, is used clinically to re-
verse opiate intoxication. This drug has saved the lives 
of many drug abusers who would otherwise have died of 
an overdose of heroin.
As we saw in Chapter 2, many terminal buttons 
contain two different types of synaptic vesicles, each 
filled with a different substance. These terminal but-
tons release peptides in conjunction with a “classical” 
neurotransmitter (one of those I just described). One 
reason for the corelease of peptides is their ability to 
regulate the sensitivity of presynaptic or postsynaptic 
receptors to the neurotransmitter. For example, the 
terminal buttons of the salivary nerve of the cat (which 
control the secretion of saliva) release both acetylcho-
line and a peptide called VIP. When the axons fire at a 
low rate, only ACh is released and only a little saliva is 
secreted. At a higher rate, both ACh and VIP are se-
creted, and the VIP dramatically increases the sensitivity 
x enkephalin (en keff a lin)  One of the endogenous opioids.
x naloxone (na lox own)  A drug that blocks opiate receptors.
x endocannabinoid (en do can ab in oyd)  A lipid; an endogenous 
ligand for cannabinoid receptors, which also bind with THC, the 
active ingredient of marijuana.
x THC  The active ingredient in marijuana; activates CB1 receptors 
in the brain.
x endogenous opioid (en dodge en us oh pee oyd)  A class of 
peptides secreted by the brain that act as opiates.

	
Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators 	
125
of neurotransmitter that is released. When neurons 
release cannabinoids, the chemicals diffuse a dis-
tance of approximately 20 μm in all directions, and 
their effects persist for several tens of seconds. The 
short-term memory impairment that accompanies 
marijuana use appears to be caused by the action of 
THC on CB1 receptors in the hippocampus. Endo-
cannabinoids also appear to play an essential role in 
the reinforcing effects of opiates: A targeted muta-
tion that prevents the production of CB1 receptors 
abolishes the reinforcing effects of morphine but not 
of cocaine, amphetamine, or nicotine (Cossu et al., 
2001). These effects of cannabinoids are discussed 
further in Chapter 18.
I mentioned three paragraphs ago that THC 
(and, of course, the endocannabinoids) have an anal-
gesic effect. Agarwal et al. (2007) found that THC 
exerts its analgesic effects by stimulating CB1 recep-
tors in the peripheral nervous system. In addition, a 
commonly used over-the-counter analgesic, acetamino-
phen (known as paracetamol in many countries), also 
acts on these receptors. Once it enters the blood,  
acetaminophen is converted into another compound 
that then joins with arachidonic acid, the precursor of 
anandamide. This compound binds with peripheral 
CB1 receptors and activates them, reducing pain sen-
sation. Because the compound does not cross the 
blood–brain barrier, it does not produce effects like 
those of THC. Administration of a CB1 antagonist 
completely blocks the analgesic effect of acetamino-
phen (Bertolini et al., 2006).
Nucleosides
A nucleoside is a compound that consists of a sugar 
molecule bound with a purine or pyrimidine base. One 
of these compounds, adenosine (a combination of ri-
bose and adenine), serves as a neuromodulator in the 
brain.
Adenosine is known to be released by astrocytes 
when neurons in the brain are short of fuel or oxygen. 
cancer, relieves asthma attacks, decreases pressure within 
the eyes in patients with glaucoma, and reduces the symp-
toms of certain motor disorders. On the other hand, THC 
interferes with concentration and memory, alters visual 
and auditory perception, and distorts perceptions of the 
passage of time. Devane et al. (1992) discovered the first 
natural ligand for the THC receptor: a lipidlike substance 
that they named anandamide, from the Sanskrit word 
ananda, or “bliss.” A few years after the discovery of anan-
damide, Mechoulam et al. (1995) discovered another en-
docannabinoid, 2-arachidonyl glycerol (2-AG).
Anandamide seems to be synthesized on demand; 
that is, it is produced and released as it is needed and 
is not stored in synaptic vesicles. It is deactivated by an 
enzyme, FAAH (fatty acid amide hydrolase), which is 
present in anandamide-secreting neurons. Because 
the enzyme is found there, molecules of anandamide 
must be transported back into these neurons, which is 
accomplished by anandamide transporters. Besides 
THC, several drugs have been discovered that affect 
the actions of the endocannabinoids. CB1 receptors 
are blocked by the drug rimonabant, the enzyme FAAH 
is inhibited by MAFP, and reuptake is inhibited by 
AM1172.
CB1 receptors are found on terminal buttons of 
glutamatergic, GABAergic, acetylcholinergic, norad-
renergic, dopaminergic, and serotonergic neurons, 
where they serve as presynaptic heteroreceptors, reg-
ulating neurotransmitter release (Iversen, 2003). 
When activated, the receptors open potassium chan-
nels in the terminal buttons, shortening the duration 
of action potentials there and decreasing the amount 
figure 4.20  Cannabinoid Receptors in a Rat Brain
In this autoradiogram the brain has been incubated in a 
solution containing a radioactive ligand for cannabinoid 
receptors. The receptors are indicated by dark areas. 
(Autoradiography is described in Chapter 5.) (Br St = brain 
stem, Cer = cerebellum, CP = caudate nucleus/putamen, 
Cx = cortex, EP = entopeduncular nucleus, GP = globus 
pallidus, Hipp = hippocampus, SNr = substantia nigra.)
(Courtesy of Miles Herkenham, National Institute of Mental Health,  
Bethesda, MD.)
Cx
CP
x anandamide (a nan da mide)  The first cannabinoid to be 
discovered and probably the most important one.
x FAAH  Fatty acid amide hydrolase, the enzyme that destroys 
anandamide after it is brought back into the cell by anandamide 
transporters.
x rimonabant  A drug that blocks CB1 receptors.
x MAFP  A drug that inhibits FAAH; prevents the breakdown of 
anandamide.
x AM1172  A drug that inhibits the reuptake of anandamide.
x adenosine (a den oh seen)  A nucleoside; a combination of 
ribose and adenine; serves as a neuromodulator in the brain.

126	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
and carbon monoxide—to communicate with one  
another. One of these, nitric oxide (NO), has received 
the most attention. Nitric oxide (not to be confused 
with nitrous oxide, or laughing gas) is a soluble gas 
that is produced by the activity of an enzyme found in 
certain neurons. Researchers have found that NO is 
used as a messenger in many parts of the body; for 
example, it is involved in the control of the muscles in 
the wall of the intestines, it dilates blood vessels in 
regions of the brain that become metabolically active, 
and it stimulates the changes in blood vessels that 
produce penile erections (Culotta and Koshland, 
1992). As we will see in Chapter 13, NO may also play 
a role in the establishment of neural changes that are 
produced by learning.
All of the neurotransmitters and neuromodulators 
discussed so far (with the exception of anandamide 
and adenosine) are stored in synaptic vesicles and re-
leased by terminal buttons. Nitric oxide is produced in 
several regions of a nerve cell—including dendrites—
and is released as soon as it is produced. More accu-
rately, it diffuses out of the cell as soon as it is pro-
duced. It does not activate membrane-bound receptors 
but enters neighboring cells, where it activates an  
enzyme responsible for the production of a second 
messenger, cyclic GMP. Within a few seconds of being 
produced, nitric oxide is converted into biologically 
inactive compounds.
Nitric oxide is produced from arginine, an amino 
acid, by the activation of an enzyme known as nitric oxide 
synthase. This enzyme can be inactivated (step 2 of  
Figure 4.4) by a drug called l-NAME (nitro-L-arginine 
methyl ester).
You have undoubtedly heard of a drug called silde-
nafil (more commonly known as Viagra), which is used 
to treat men who have erectile dysfunction—difficulty 
maintaining a penile erection. As we just saw, nitric  
oxide produces its physiological effects by stimulating 
the production of cyclic GMP. Although nitric oxide 
lasts only for a few seconds, cyclic GMP lasts somewhat 
longer but is ultimately destroyed by an enzyme. Mole-
cules of sildenafil bind with this enzyme and thus cause 
cyclic GMP to be destroyed at a much slower rate. As a 
consequence, an erection is maintained for a longer 
time. (By the way, sildenafil has effects on other parts of 
the body and is used to treat altitude sickness and other 
vascular disorders.)
The release of adenosine activates receptors on 
nearby blood vessels and causes them to dilate, in-
creasing the flow of blood and helping to bring more 
of the needed substances to the region. Adenosine 
also acts as a neuromodulator, through its action on 
at least three different types of adenosine receptors. 
Adenosine receptors are coupled to G proteins, and 
their effect is to open potassium channels, producing 
inhibitory postsynaptic potentials.
Because adenosine receptors suppress neural ac-
tivity, adenosine and other adenosine receptor ago-
nists have generally inhibitory effects on behavior. In 
fact, as we will see in Chapter 9, there is good evidence 
that adenosine receptors play an important role in the 
control of sleep. For example, the amount of adenosine  
in the brain increases during wakefulness and decre­
ases during sleep. In fact, the accumulation of adenos-
ine after prolonged wakefulness may be the most  
important cause of the sleepiness that ensues. A very 
common drug, caffeine, blocks adenosine receptors 
(step 7 of Figure 4.4) and hence produces excitatory 
effects. Caffeine is a bitter-tasting alkaloid found in cof-
fee, tea, cocoa beans, and other plants. In much of the 
world a majority of the adult population ingests caf-
feine every day—fortunately, without apparent harm. 
(See Table 4.2.)
Soluble Gases
Recently, investigators have discovered that neurons 
use at least two simple, soluble gases—nitric oxide 
x nitric oxide (NO)  A gas produced by cells in the nervous 
system; used as a means of communication between cells.
x nitric oxide synthase  The enzyme responsible for the 
production of nitric oxide.
x caffeine  A drug that blocks adenosine receptors.
Based on data from Somani and Gupta, 1988.
table 4.2  Typical Caffeine Content  
of Chocolate and Several Beverages
Item
Caffeine Content
Chocolates
Baking chocolate	
35 mg/oz
Milk chocolate	
6 mg/oz
Beverages
Coffee	
85 mg/5-oz cup
Decaffeinated coffee	
3 mg/5-oz cup
Tea (brewed 3 minutes)	
28 mg/5-oz cup
Cocoa or hot chocolate	
30 mg/5-oz cup
Cola drink	
30–46 mg/12-oz container

	
Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators 	
127
Section Summary
The nervous system contains a variety of neurotrans-
mitters, each of which interacts with one or more spe-
cialized receptors. The neurotransmitters that have 
received the most study are acetylcholine and the 
monoamines: dopamine, norepinephrine, 5-hydroxy-
tryptamine (serotonin), and histamine. The synthesis 
of these neurotransmitters is controlled by a series of 
enzymes. Several amino acids also serve as neu-
rotransmitters, the most important of which are gluta-
mate (glutamic acid), GABA, and glycine. Glutamate 
serves as an excitatory neurotransmitter; the others 
serve as inhibitory neurotransmitters.
Peptide neurotransmitters consist of chains of 
amino acids. Like proteins, peptides are synthesized 
at the ribosomes according to sequences coded for 
by the chromosomes. The best-known class of pep-
tides in the nervous system includes the endogenous 
opioids, whose effects are mimicked by drugs such as 
opium and heroin. Two lipids serve as chemical mes-
sengers: Anandamide and 2-AG are endogenous 
ligands for cannabinoid receptors. CB1 receptors are 
found in the central nervous system, and CB2 recep-
tors are found outside the blood–brain barrier. 
Adenosine, a nucleoside that has inhibitory effects on 
synaptic transmission, is released by neurons and glial 
cells in the brain. In addition, two soluble gases—
nitric oxide and carbon monoxide—can diffuse out of 
the cell in which they are produced and trigger the 
production of a second messenger in adjacent cells.
This chapter has mentioned many drugs and their 
effects. They are summarized for your convenience in 
Table 4.3.
 Thought Questions
1.	 What type(s) of drug might potentially be used to 
treat seizure disorders? Explain.
2.	 One of the causes of the symptoms of schizophre-
nia may be excessive activity at dopaminergic syn-
apses in the brain. Explain why drug treatment of 
Parkinson’s disease can sometimes provoke these 
symptoms.
Neurotransmitters and Neuromodulators
Neurotransmitter
Name of Drug
Effect of Drug
Effect on Synaptic 
Transmission
Acetylcholine (ACh)	
Botulinum toxin	
Blocks release of ACh	
Antagonist
	
Black widow spider venom	
Stimulates release of ACh	
Agonist
	
Nicotine	
Stimulates nicotinic receptors	
Agonist
	
Curare	
Blocks nicotinic receptors	
Antagonist
	
Muscarine	
Stimulates muscarinic receptors	
Agonist
	
Atropine	
Blocks muscarinic receptors	
Antagonist
	
Neostigmine	
Inhibits acetylcholinesterase	
Agonist
	
Hemicholinium	
Inhibits reuptake of choline	
Antagonist
Dopamine (DA)	
l-DOPA	
Facilitates synthesis of DA	
Agonist
	
AMPT	
Inhibits synthesis of DA	
Antagonist
	
Reserpine	
Inhibits storage of DA in synaptic vesicles	
Antagonist
	
Chlorpromazine	
Blocks D2 receptors	
Antagonist
	
Clozapine	
Blocks D4 receptors	
Antagonist
	
Cocaine, methylphenidate	
Blocks DA reuptake	
Agonist
	
Amphetamine	
Stimulates release of DA	
Agonist
	
Deprenyl	
Blocks MAO-B	
Agonist
table 4.3  Drugs Mentioned in This Chapter
(continued on next page)

128	
Chapter 4  Psychopharmacology
Norepinephrine (NE)	
Fusaric acid	
Inhibits synthesis of NE	
Antagonist
	
Reserpine	
Inhibits storage of NE in synaptic vesicles	
Antagonist
	
Idazoxan	
Blocks a2 autoreceptors	
Agonist
	
Desipramine	
Inhibits reuptake of NE	
Agonist
	
Moclobemide	
Inhibits MAO-A	
Agonist
	
MDMA, amphetamine	
Stimulates release of NE	
Agonist
Serotonin (5-HT)	
PCPA	
Inhibits synthesis of 5-HT	
Antagonist
	
Reserpine	
Inhibits storage of 5-HT in synaptic vesicles	
Antagonist
	
Fenfluramine	
Stimulates release of 5-HT	
Agonist
	
Fluoxetine	
Inhibits reuptake of 5-HT	
Agonist
	
LSD	
Stimulates 5-HT2A receptors	
Agonist
	
MDMA	
Stimulates release of 5-HT	
Agonist
Histamine	
Diphenhydramine	
Blocks H1 receptors	
Antagonist
	
Cimetidine	
Blocks H2 receptors	
Antagonist
	
Ciproxifan	
Blocks H3 autoreceptors	
Agonist
Glutamate	
AMPA	
Stimulates AMPA receptor	
Agonist
	
Kainic acid	
Stimulates kainate receptor	
Agonist
	
NMDA	
Stimulates NMDA receptor	
Agonist
	
AP5	
Blocks NMDA receptor	
Antagonist
GABA	
Allylglycine	
Inhibits synthesis of GABA	
Antagonist
	
Muscimol	
Stimulates GABA receptors	
Agonist
	
Bicuculline	
Blocks GABA receptors	
Antagonist
	
Benzodiazepines	
Serve as indirect GABA agonist	
Agonist
Glycine	
Strychnine	
Blocks glycine receptors	
Antagonist
Opioids	
Opiates (morphine, heroin, etc.)	 Stimulates opiate receptors	
Agonist
	
Naloxone	
Blocks opiate receptors	
Antagonist
Anandamide	
Rimonabant	
Blocks cannabinoid CB1 receptors	
Antagonist
	
THC	
Stimulates cannabinoid CB1 receptors	
Agonist
	
MAFP	
Inhibits FAAH	
Agonist
	
AM1172	
Blocks reuptake of anandamide	
Agonist
Adenosine	
Caffeine	
Blocks adenosine receptors	
Antagonist
Nitric oxide (NO)	
l-NAME	
Inhibits synthesis of NO	
Antagonist
	
Sildenafil	
Inhibits destruction of cyclic GMP	
Agonist
table 4.3  Drugs Mentioned in This Chapter
	
	
	
Effect on Synaptic
Neurotransmitter	
Name of Drug	
Effect of Drug	
Transmission
(continued)

	
Review Questions	
129
5.  Describe the monoaminergic pathways in the brain 
and the drugs that affect these neurons.
6.  Review the role of neurons that release amino acid 
neurotransmitters and describe drugs that affect 
these neurons.
7.  Describe the effects of peptides, lipids, nucleosides, 
and soluble gases released by neurons.
1.  Describe the routes of administration and the distri-
bution of drugs within the body.
2.  Describe drug effectiveness, the effects of repeated 
administration, and the placebo effect.
3.  Describe the effects of drugs on neurotransmitters 
and presynaptic and postsynaptic receptors.
4.  Review the general role of neurotransmitters and neuro-
modulators and describe the acetylcholinergic pathways 
in the brain and the drugs that affect these neurons.
Review Questions
Study and Review on MyPsychLab
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Drug Addiction and Brain Reward Circuits
Many of the drugs described in this chapter have the potential for abuse. The 
abuse potential appears to be related to activation of the brain reward circuits. 
Indeed, every drug of abuse, with one known exception, ultimately triggers the 
release of dopamine in the brain reward circuitry. The Drug Addiction and Brain 
Reward Circuits module of the virtual brain show these circuits.

130	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
Methods and Strategies  
of Research
Outline
5
 Experimental Ablation
Evaluating the Behavioral Effects 
of Brain Damage
Producing Brain Lesions
Stereotaxic Surgery
Histological Methods
Tracing Neural Connections
Studying the Structure of the 
Living Human Brain
Section Summary
 Recording and Stimulating 
Neural Activity
Recording Neural Activity
Recording the Brain’s Metabolic 
and Synaptic Activity
Stimulating Neural Activity
Section Summary
 Neurochemical Methods
Finding Neurons That Produce 
Particular Neurochemicals
Localizing Particular Receptors
Measuring Chemicals Secreted  
in the Brain
Section Summary
 Genetic Methods
Twin Studies
Adoption Studies
Genomic Studies
Targeted Mutations
Antisense Oligonucleotides
Section Summary
chapter

S
tudy of the physiology of behavior involves the 
efforts of scientists in many disciplines, including 
physiology, neuroanatomy, biochemistry, psy-
chology, endocrinology, and histology. Pursuing a re-
search project in behavioral neuroscience requires 
competence in many experimental techniques. Because 
different procedures often produce contradictory results, 
investigators must be familiar with the advantages and 
limitations of the methods they employ. Scientific inves-
tigation entails a process of asking questions of nature. 
The method that is used frames the question. Often we 
receive a puzzling answer, only to realize later that we 
were not asking the question we thought we were. As we 
will see, the best conclusions about the physiology of 
behavior are made not by any single experiment but by 
a program of research that enables us to compare the 
results of studies that approach the problem with different 
methods.
An enormous—and bewildering—array of research 
methods is available to the investigator. If I merely pre-
sented a catalog of them, it would not be surprising if 
you got lost—or simply lost interest. Instead, I will pres-
ent only the most important and commonly used proce-
dures, organized around a few problems that researchers 
In July 1982, several young people began showing up at 
neurology clinics in northern California displaying dramatic, 
severe symptoms (Langston et al., 1983). The most severely 
affected patients were almost totally paralyzed. They were 
unable to speak intelligibly, they drooled constantly, and 
their eyes were open with a fixed stare. Others, less 
severely affected, walked with a slow, shuffling gait and 
moved slowly and with great difficulty. The symptoms 
looked like those of Parkinson’s disease, but that disorder 
has a very gradual onset. In addition, it rarely strikes people 
before late middle age, and the patients were all in their 
twenties or early thirties.
The common factor linking these patients was intrave-
nous drug use; all of them had been taking a “new 
heroin,” a synthetic opiate related to meperidine (De-
merol). Some detective work revealed that the illicit drug 
was contaminated with MPTP, a toxic chemical that 
damaged dopaminergic neurons and caused the neuro-
logical symptoms. Because the symptoms looked like 
those of Parkinson’s disease, the patients were given 
l-DOPA, the drug that is used to treat this disease, and 
they all showed significant improvement in their symptoms. 
Unfortunately, the improvement was temporary; the drug 
lost its effectiveness.
Fetal transplantation, an experimental neurosurgical 
method of treating parkinsonism, has shown some prom-
ise. The rationale for the procedure is this: The symptoms 
of parkinsonism, whether from Parkinson’s disease or the 
toxic effects of MPTP, are caused by the lack of dopamine 
in the caudate nucleus and putamen. There is at present 
no way to induce the brain to grow new dopaminergic 
neurons. However, if dopamine-secreting neurons can be 
introduced into the caudate nucleus and putamen and if 
they survive and secrete dopamine, then perhaps the 
parkinsonian symptoms will diminish. Because the im-
planted neurons must be healthy and vigorous and not 
trigger the recipient’s immune system, the logical source 
for them is aborted human fetuses—or, perhaps someday, 
cultures of stem cells that have been induced to become 
dopamine-secreting neurons.
At least one of the people with MPTP poisoning 
received such a transplant. (Let’s call him Mr. B.) Before  
the operation took place, Mr. B. was given an injection  
of radioactive l-DOPA, the precursor for dopamine. Then, 
one hour later, he was wheeled into a small room that 
housed a PET scanner. His head was positioned in the 
scanner, and for the next several minutes the machine 
gathered data from subatomic particles that were emitted 
as the radioactive l-DOPA in his head broke down.
A few weeks later, Mr. B. entered the hospital for his 
surgery. Technicians removed dopaminergic neurons from 
the substantia nigra of several fetal brains and prepared 
them for implantation into Mr. B.’s brain. Mr. B. was 
anesthetized, and the surgeon made cuts in his scalp to 
expose parts of his skull. He attached the frame of a 
stereotaxic apparatus to Mr. B’s skull, made some measure-
ments, and then drilled several holes. He used the stere-
otaxic apparatus to guide the injections of the fetal 
neurons into Mr. B.’s caudate nucleus and putamen. Once 
the injections were complete, the surgeon removed the 
stereotaxic frame and sutured the incisions he had made in 
the scalp.
The operation was quite successful; Mr. B. recovered 
much of his motor control. A little more than a year later, 
he was again given an injection of radioactive l-DOPA, and 
again his head was placed in the PET scanner. The results 
of the second scan showed what his recovery implied: The 
cells had survived and were secreting dopamine.

132	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
The researcher’s task is to understand the functions 
that are required for performing a particular behavior 
and to determine what circuits of neurons in the brain 
are responsible for each of these functions.
The interpretation of lesion studies is complicated 
by the fact that all regions of the brain are intercon-
nected. Suppose that we have a good understanding of 
the functions required for performance of a particular 
behavior. We find that damage to brain structure X im-
pairs a particular behavior. Can we necessarily conclude 
that a function essential to this behavior is performed by 
circuits of neurons located in structure X? Unfortu-
nately, we cannot. The functions we are interested in 
may actually be performed by neural circuits located 
elsewhere in the brain. Damage to structure X may sim-
ply interfere with the normal operation of the neural 
circuits in structure Y.
Producing Brain Lesions
How do we produce brain lesions? Usually, we want to 
destroy regions that are hidden away in the depths of 
the brain. Brain lesions of subcortical regions (regions 
located beneath the cortex) are usually produced by 
passing electrical current through a stainless steel wire 
that is coated with an insulating varnish except for the 
very tip. We guide the wire stereotaxically so that its end 
reaches the appropriate location. (Stereotaxic surgery is 
described in the next subsection.) Then we turn on a 
lesion-making device, which produces radio frequency 
(RF) current—alternating current of a very high fre-
quency. The passage of the current through the brain 
tissue produces heat that kills cells in the region sur-
rounding the tip of the electrode. (See Figure 5.1.)
Lesions produced by these means destroy every-
thing in the vicinity of the electrode tip, including neural 
cell bodies and the axons of neurons that pass through 
the region. A more selective method of producing brain 
lesions employs an excitatory amino acid such as kainic 
acid, which kills neurons by stimulating them to death. 
(As we saw in Chapter 4, kainic acid stimulates gluta-
mate receptors.) Lesions produced in this way are  
referred to as excitotoxic lesions. When an excitatory 
amino acid is injected through a cannula (a small metal 
tube) into a region of the brain, the chemical destroys 
have studied. This way, it should be easier to see the 
types of information provided by various research meth-
ods and to understand their advantages and disadvan-
tages. It will also permit me to describe the strategies that 
researchers employ as they follow up the results of one 
experiment by designing and executing another one.
Experimental Ablation
One of the most important research methods used to 
investigate brain functions involves destroying part of 
the brain and evaluating the animal’s subsequent behav-
ior. This method is called experimental ablation (from 
the Latin word ablatus, a “carrying away”). In most cases, 
experimental ablation does not involve the removal of 
brain tissue; instead, the researcher destroys some tissue 
and leaves it in place. Experimental ablation is the old-
est method used in neuroscience, and it remains in 
common use today.
Evaluating the Behavioral Effects  
of Brain Damage
A lesion is a wound or injury, and a researcher who de-
stroys part of the brain usually refers to the damage as a 
brain lesion. Experiments in which part of the brain is 
damaged and the animal’s behavior is subsequently ob-
served are called lesion studies. The rationale for lesion 
studies is that the function of an area of the brain can be 
inferred from the behaviors that the animal can no lon-
ger perform after the area has been damaged. For ex-
ample, if, after part of the brain has been destroyed, an 
animal can no longer perform tasks that require vision, 
we can conclude that the animal is blind—and that the 
damaged area plays some role in vision.
Just what can we learn from lesion studies? Our 
goal is to discover what functions are performed by dif-
ferent regions of the brain and then to understand how 
these functions are combined to accomplish particular 
behaviors. The distinction between brain function and 
behavior is an important one. Circuits within the brain 
perform functions, not behaviors. No one brain region 
or neural circuit is solely responsible for a behavior; 
each region performs a function (or set of functions) 
that contributes to performance of the behavior. For 
example, the act of reading involves functions required 
for controlling eye movements, focusing the lens of the 
eye, perceiving and recognizing words and letters, com-
prehending the meaning of the words, and so on. Some 
of these functions also participate in other behaviors; 
for example, controlling eye movement and focusing 
are required for any task that involves looking, and 
brain mechanisms used for comprehending the mean-
ings of words also participate in comprehending speech. 
x experimental ablation  The removal or destruction of a 
portion of the brain of a laboratory animal; presumably, the 
functions that can no longer be performed are the ones the region 
previously controlled.
x lesion study  A synonym for experimental ablation.
x excitotoxic lesion (ek sigh tow tok sik)  A brain lesion 
produced by intracerebral injection of an excitatory amino acid, 
such as kainic acid.

	
Experimental Ablation	
133
damage to the brain. When we pass an electrode or a 
cannula through the brain to get to our target, we in-
evitably cause a small amount of damage even before 
turning on the lesion maker or starting the infusion. 
Thus, we cannot simply compare the behavior of brain-
lesioned animals with that of unoperated control ani-
mals; the incidental damage to the brain regions above 
the lesion may actually be responsible for some of the 
behavioral deficits we see. What we do is operate on a 
group of animals and produce sham lesions. To do so, 
we anesthetize each animal, put it in the stereotaxic ap-
paratus (described below), cut open the scalp, drill the 
holes, insert the electrode or cannula, and lower it to 
neural cell bodies in the vicinity but spares axons that 
belong to different neurons that happen to pass nearby. 
(See Figure 5.2.) This selectivity permits the investigator 
to determine whether the behavioral effects of destroy-
ing a particular brain structure are caused by the death 
of neurons located there or by the destruction of axons 
that pass nearby. For example, some researchers discov-
ered that RF lesions of a particular region in the brain 
stem abolished REM sleep; therefore, they believed that 
this region was involved in the production of this stage 
of sleep. (REM sleep is the stage of sleep during which 
dreaming occurs.) But later studies showed that when 
kainic acid was used to destroy the neurons located 
there, the animals’ sleep was not affected. Therefore, the 
RF lesions must have altered sleep by destroying the 
axons that pass through the area.
Even more specific methods of targeting and killing 
particular types of neurons are available. For example, 
molecular biologists have devised ways to conjugate (attach 
together) saporin, a toxic protein, and antibodies that will 
bind with particular proteins found only on certain types 
of neurons in the brain. The antibodies target these pro-
teins, and the saporin kills the cells to which the proteins 
are attached.
Note that, when we produce subcortical lesions by 
passing RF current through an electrode or infusing a 
chemical through a cannula, we always cause additional 
figure 5.1  Radio Frequency Lesion
The arrows point to very small lesions produced by 
passing radio frequency current through the tips of 
stainless steel electrodes placed in the medial preoptic 
nucleus of a rat brain. The oblong hole in the middle of 
the photograph is the third ventricle. (Frontal section, 
cell-body stain.)
(From Turkenburg, J. L., Swaab, D. F., Endert, E., et al. Brain Research Bulletin, 
1988, 21, 215–224. Reprinted with permission.)
figure 5.2  Excitotoxic Lesion
(a) Section through a normal hippocampus of a rat brain. 
(b) A lesion produced by infusion of an excitatory amino 
acid in a region of the hippocampus. Arrowheads mark 
the ends of the region in which neurons have been 
destroyed.
(Courtesy of Benno Roozendaal, University of California, Irvine.)
(a)
(b)
x sham lesion  A placebo procedure that duplicates all the steps 
of producing a brain lesion except the one that actually causes the 
brain damage.

134	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
A stereotaxic atlas contains photographs or drawings 
that correspond to frontal sections taken at various  
distances rostral and caudal to bregma. For example, the 
page shown in Figure 5.4 is a drawing of a slice of  
the brain that contains a brain structure (shown in red) 
that we are interested in. If we wanted to place the tip of 
a wire in this structure (a bundle of axons called the fornix), 
we would have to drill a hole through the skull immedi-
ately above it. (See Figure 5.4.) Each page of the stereo-
taxic atlas is labeled according to the distance of the 
section anterior or posterior to bregma. The grid on 
each page indicates distances of brain structures ventral 
to the top of the skull and lateral to the midline. To place 
the tip of a wire in the fornix, we would drill a hole above 
the target and then lower the electrode through the hole 
until the tip was at the correct depth, relative to the skull 
height at bregma. (Compare Figures 5.3 and 5.4.) Thus, 
by finding a neural structure (which we cannot see in our 
the proper depth. In other words, we do everything we 
would do to produce the lesion except turn on the le-
sion maker or start the infusion. This group of animals 
serves as a control group; if the behavior of the animals 
with brain lesions is different from that of the sham- 
operated control animals, we can conclude that the  
lesions caused the behavioral deficits. (As you can see, a 
sham lesion serves the same purpose as a placebo does 
in a pharmacology study.)
Most of the time, investigators produce permanent 
brain lesions, but sometimes it is advantageous to disrupt 
the activity of a particular region of the brain temporarily. 
The easiest way to do so is to inject a local anesthetic or a 
drug called muscimol into the appropriate part of the 
brain. The anesthetic blocks action potentials in axons 
entering or leaving that region, thus effectively produc-
ing a temporary lesion (usually called a reversible brain 
lesion). Muscimol, a drug that stimulates GABA recep-
tors, inactivates a region of the brain by inhibiting the 
neurons located there. (You will recall that GABA is the 
most important inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain.)
Stereotaxic Surgery
So how do we get the tip of an electrode or cannula to 
a precise location in the depths of an animal’s brain? 
The answer is stereotaxic surgery. Stereotaxis literally 
means “solid arrangement”; more specifically, it refers 
to the ability to locate objects in space. A stereotaxic ap-
paratus contains a holder that fixes the animal’s head in 
a standard position and a carrier that moves an elec-
trode or a cannula through measured distances in all 
three axes of space. However, to perform stereotaxic 
surgery, one must first study a stereotaxic atlas.
The Stereotaxic Atlas
No two brains of animals of a given species are com-
pletely identical, but there is enough similarity among 
individuals to predict the location of particular brain 
structures relative to external features of the head. For 
instance, a subcortical nucleus of a rat might be so many 
millimeters ventral, anterior, and lateral to a point 
formed by the junction of several bones of the skull. 
Figure 5.3 shows two views of a rat skull: a drawing of the 
dorsal surface and, beneath it, a midsagittal view. (See 
Figure 5.3.) The skull is composed of several bones that 
grow together and form sutures (seams). The heads of 
newborn babies contain a soft spot at the junction of the 
coronal and sagittal sutures called the fontanelle. Once 
this gap closes, the junction is called bregma, from the 
Greek word meaning “front of head.” We can find 
bregma on a rat’s skull, too, and it serves as a convenient 
reference point. If the animal’s skull is oriented as 
shown in the illustration, a particular region of the brain 
is found in a fairly constant position, relative to bregma.
x stereotaxic surgery (stair ee oh tak sik)  Brain surgery using a 
stereotaxic apparatus to position an electrode or cannula in a 
specified position of the brain.
x bregma  The junction of the sagittal and coronal sutures of the 
skull; often used as a reference point for stereotaxic brain surgery.
x stereotaxic atlas  A collection of drawings of sections of the 
brain of a particular animal with measurements that provide 
coordinates for stereotaxic surgery.
figure 5.3  Rat Brain and Skull
Relationship of the skull sutures to the location of a target 
for an electrode placement in the brain. Top: Dorsal view. 
Bottom: Midsagittal view.
Edge of incision in skin
Coronal suture
Bregma
Sagittal
suture
Hole will be drilled
here above target
of lesion (Figure 5.4)
Target of lesion

	
Experimental Ablation	
135
destroy them, and drugs can be injected that stimulate 
neurons or block specific receptors. We can attach can-
nulas or wires permanently by following a procedure 
that will be described later in this chapter. In all cases, 
once surgery is complete, the wound is sewn together, 
and the animal is taken out of the stereotaxic apparatus 
and allowed to recover from the anesthetic.
Stereotaxic apparatuses are made for humans, by 
the way. Sometimes a neurosurgeon produces subcorti-
cal lesions—for example, to reduce the symptoms of 
Parkinson’s disease. Usually, the surgeon uses multiple 
landmarks and verifies the location of the wire (or other 
device) inserted into the brain by taking brain scans or 
recording the activity of the neurons in that region  
before producing a brain lesion. (See Figure 5.6.)
Histological Methods
After producing a brain lesion and observing its ef-
fects on an animal’s behavior, we must slice and stain 
the brain so that we can observe it under the micro-
scope and see the location of the lesion. Brain lesions 
often miss the mark, so we have to verify the precise 
location of the brain damage after testing the animal 
behaviorally. To do so, we must fix, slice, stain, and 
examine the brain. Together, these procedures are 
referred to as histological methods. (The prefix histo- refers 
to body tissue.)
animal) on one of the pages of a stereotaxic atlas, we can 
determine the structure’s location relative to bregma 
(which we can see). Note that, because of variations in 
different strains and ages of animals, the atlas gives only 
an approximate location. We always have to try out a new 
set of coordinates, slice and stain the animal’s brain, see 
the actual location of the lesion, correct the numbers, 
and try again. (Slicing and staining of brains are de-
scribed later.)
The Stereotaxic Apparatus
A stereotaxic apparatus operates on simple principles. The 
device includes a head holder, which maintains the animal’s 
skull in the proper orientation, a holder for the electrode, 
and a calibrated mechanism that moves the electrode 
holder in measured distances along the three axes: anterior–
posterior, dorsal–ventral, and lateral–medial. Figure 5.5  
illustrates a stereotaxic apparatus designed for small ani-
mals; various head holders can be used to outfit this device 
for such diverse species as rats, mice, hamsters,  
pigeons, and turtles. (See Figure 5.5.)
Once we obtain the coordinates from a stereotaxic 
atlas, we anesthetize the animal, place it in the appara-
tus, and cut the scalp open. We locate bregma, dial in 
the appropriate numbers on the stereotaxic apparatus, 
drill a hole through the skull, and lower the device into 
the brain by the correct amount. Now the tip of the can-
nula or electrode is where we want it to be, and we are 
ready to produce the lesion.
Of course, stereotaxic surgery may be used for pur-
poses other than lesion production. Wires placed in the 
brain can be used to stimulate neurons as well as to  
x stereotaxic apparatus  A device that permits a surgeon to 
position an electrode or cannula into a specific part of the brain.
figure 5.4  Stereotaxic Atlas
This sample page from a stereotaxic atlas of the rat brain 
shows the target (the fornix) in red. Labels have been 
removed for the sake of clarity.
(Adapted from Swanson, L. W. Brain Maps: Structure of the Rat Brain. New York: 
Elsevier, 1992.)
Dorsal
Target of lesion
Ventral
figure 5.5  Stereotaxic Apparatus
This apparatus is used for performing brain surgery on rats.
Adjusting
knobs
Skull
Electrode
in brain

136	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
into thin sections. Figure 5.7 shows a microtome. The 
knife holder slides forward on an oiled rail and takes a 
section off the top of the tissue mounted on the plat-
form. The platform automatically rises by a predeter-
mined amount as the knife and holder are pushed back 
so that the next forward movement of the knife takes off 
another section. (See Figure 5.7.)
After the tissue is cut, we attach the slices to glass 
microscope slides. We can then stain the tissue by put-
ting the entire slide into various chemical solutions.  
Finally, we cover the stained sections with a small amount 
of a transparent liquid known as a mounting medium and 
place a very thin glass coverslip over the sections. The 
mounting medium keeps the coverslip in position. 
Simulate histological methods on MyPsychLab to see 
videos of these procedures.
Staining
If you looked at an unstained section of brain tissue 
under a microscope, you would be able to see the out-
lines of some large cellular masses and the more promi-
nent fiber bundles. However, no fine details would be 
revealed. For this reason the study of microscopic neu-
roanatomy requires special histological stains. Research-
ers have developed many different stains to identify spe-
cific substances within and outside of cells. For verifying 
the location of a brain lesion, we will use one of the 
simplest: a cell-body stain.
Fixation and Sectioning
If we hope to study the tissue in the form it had at the 
time of the organism’s death, we must destroy the auto-
lytic enzymes (autolytic means “self-dissolving”), which 
will otherwise turn the tissue into mush. The tissue must 
also be preserved to prevent its decomposition by bacteria 
or molds. To achieve both of these objectives, we place 
the neural tissue in a fixative. The most commonly used 
fixative is formalin, an aqueous solution of formalde-
hyde, a gas. Formalin halts autolysis, hardens the very 
soft and fragile brain, and kills any microorganisms that 
might destroy it.
Before the brain is fixed (that is, put into a fixative 
solution), it is usually perfused. Perfusion of tissue (liter-
ally, “a pouring through”) entails removal of the blood 
and its replacement with another fluid. The animal’s brain 
is perfused because better histological results are obtained 
when no blood is present in the tissue. The animal whose 
brain is to be studied is humanely killed with an overdose 
of a general anesthetic. Blood vessels are opened so that 
the blood can be drained from them and replaced with a 
dilute salt solution. The brain is removed from the skull 
and placed in a container filled with the fixative.
Once the brain has been fixed, we must slice it into 
thin sections and stain various cellular structures to see 
anatomical details. Slicing is done with a microtome (liter-
ally, “that which slices small”). Slices prepared for exami-
nation under a light microscope are typically 10 to 80 μm 
in thickness; those prepared for the electron microscope 
are generally cut at less than l μm. (For some reason, slices 
of brain tissue are usually referred to as sections.)
A microtome contains three parts: a knife, a plat-
form on which to mount the tissue, and a mechanism 
that advances the knife (or the platform) the correct 
amount after each slice so that another section can be 
cut. In most cases the platform includes an attachment 
that freezes the brain to make it hard enough to be cut 
figure 5.6  Stereotaxic Surgery on a Human Patient
(Photograph courtesy of John W. Snell, University of Virginia Health System.)
x fixative  A chemical such as formalin; used to prepare and 
preserve body tissue.
x formalin (for ma lin)  The aqueous solution of formaldehyde 
gas; the most commonly used tissue fixative.
x perfusion (per few zhun)  The process by which an animal’s 
blood is replaced by a fluid such as a saline solution or a fixative in 
preparing the brain for histological examination.
x microtome (my krow tome)  An instrument that produces very 
thin slices of body tissues.
figure 5.7  A Microtome

	
Experimental Ablation	
137
A scanning electron microscope provides less magnifi-
cation than a standard transmission electron microscope, 
which transmits the electron beam through the tissue. 
However, it shows objects in three dimensions. The micro-
scope scans the tissue with a moving beam of electrons. 
The information from the reflection of the beam is re-
ceived by a detector, and a computer produces a remark-
ably detailed three-dimensional view. (See Figure 5.10.)
Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy
Conventional microscopy or transmission electron mi-
croscopy requires that the tissue be sliced into thin sec-
tions. The advent of the confocal laser scanning micro-
scope makes it possible to see details inside thick sections 
of tissue or even in slabs of tissue maintained in tissue 
cultures or in the upper layers of tissue in the exposed 
living brain. The confocal microscope requires that the 
cells or parts of cells of interest be stained with a fluorescent  
In the late nineteenth century Franz Nissl, a Ger-
man neurologist, discovered that a dye known as methy-
lene blue would stain the cell bodies of brain tissue. The 
material that takes up the dye, known as the Nissl sub-
stance, consists of RNA, DNA, and associated proteins 
located in the nucleus and scattered, in the form of 
granules, in the cytoplasm. Many dyes besides methy-
lene blue can be used to stain cell bodies found in slices 
of the brain, but the most frequently used is cresyl violet. 
Incidentally, the dyes were not developed specifically for 
histological purposes; they were originally formulated 
for use in dyeing cloth.
The discovery of cell-body stains made it possible to 
identify nuclear masses in the brain. Figure 5.8 shows a 
frontal section of a cat brain stained with cresyl violet. 
Note that you can observe fiber bundles by their lighter 
appearance; they do not take up the stain. (See Figure 5.8.) 
The stain is not selective for neural cell bodies; all cells are 
stained, neurons and glia alike. It is up to the investigator 
to determine which is which—by size, shape, and location.
Electron Microscopy
The light microscope is limited in its ability to resolve 
extremely small details. Because of the nature of light 
itself, magnification of more than approximately 1500 
times does not add any detail. To see such small ana-
tomical structures as synaptic vesicles and details of cell 
organelles, investigators must use a transmission electron 
microscope. A beam of electrons is passed through a 
thin slice of the tissue to be examined. The beam of 
electrons casts a shadow of the tissue on a fluorescent 
screen, which can be photographed or scanned into a 
computer. Electron photomicrographs produced in this 
way can provide information about structural details on 
the order of a few tens of nanometers. (See Figure 5.9.)
figure 5.8  Frontal Section of a Cat Brain
The section is stained with cresyl violet, a cell-body stain. 
The arrowheads point to nuclei, or groups of cell bodies.
(Histological material courtesy of Mary Carlson.)
figure 5.9  Electron Photomicrograph
This electron photomicrograph shows a section through 
an axodendritic synapse. Two synaptic regions are 
indicated by arrows, and a circle indicates a region of 
pinocytosis in an adjacent terminal button, presumably 
representing recycling of vesicular membrane. T = 
terminal button; f = microfilaments; M = mitochondrion.
(From Rockel, A. J., and Jones, E. G. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 1973, 
147, 61–92. Reprinted with permission.)
x transmission electron microscope  A microscope that passes 
a focused beam of electrons through thin slices of tissue to reveal 
extremely small details.
x scanning electron microscope  A microscope that provides 
three-dimensional information about the shape of the surface of a 
small object by scanning the object with a thin beam of electrons.
x confocal laser scanning microscope  A microscope that 
provides high-resolution images of various depths of thick tissue 
that contains fluorescent molecules by scanning the tissue with 
light from a laser beam.

138	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
dye. (This procedure, called immunocytochemistry, is de-
scribed in next section of this chapter.) For example, 
neurons that produce a particular peptide can be  
labeled with a fluorescent dye. A beam of light of a par-
ticular wavelength is produced by a laser and reflected 
off of a dichroic mirror—a special mirror that transmits 
light of certain wavelengths and reflects light of other 
wavelengths. Lenses in the microscope focus the laser 
light at a particular depth in the tissue. This light triggers 
fluorescence in the tissue, which passes through the 
lenses and is transmitted through the dichroic mirror to 
a pinhole aperture. This aperture blocks extraneous 
light caused by scattering within the tissue. The light that 
passes through the aperture is measured by a detector. 
Two moving mirrors cause the laser light to scan the tissue, 
which provides the computer with the information it 
needs to form an image of a slice of tissue located at a 
particular depth within the sample. If multiple scans are 
made while the location of the aperture is moved, a stack 
of images of slices through the tissue—remember, this 
can be living tissue—can be obtained. (See Figure 5.11.)
figure 5.10  Neurons and Glia
This scanning electron micrograph shows neurons and glia.
(From Tissues and Organs: A Text-Atlas of Scanning Electron Microscopy, by 
Richard G. Kessel and Randy H. Kardon. Copyright © 1979 by W. H. Freeman and 
Co. Reprinted by permission of Barbara Kessel and Randy Kardon.)
Neuron
Terminal buttons forming
synapses with neuron
figure 5.11  Confocal Microscope
A laser scanning confocal microscope is shown in this simplified schematic diagram.
Monitor
Computer
Detector
Filter
Pinhole
Diachronic
beamsplitter
Laser
Scanning
mirrors
Eyepiece
Objective
Specimen
Inverted
microscope

	
Experimental Ablation	
139
received by reading reports of experiments by other 
researchers published in scientific journals, we per-
formed stereotaxic surgery on two groups of female 
rats. We made a lesion in the ventromedial nucleus of 
the hypothalamus (VMH) of the rats in the experimental 
group and performed sham surgery on the rats in the 
control group. After a few days’ recovery we placed  
the animals (individually, of course) with male rats. The 
females in the control group responded positively to 
the males’ attention; they engaged in courting behavior 
followed by copulation. However, the females with the 
VMH lesions rejected the males’ attention and refused 
to copulate with them. We confirmed with histology 
that the VMH was indeed destroyed in the brains of the 
experimental animals. (One experimental rat did copu-
late, but we discovered later that the lesion had missed 
the VMH in that animal, so we discarded the data from 
that animal.)
The results of our experiment indicate that neu-
rons in the VMH appear to play a role in functions re-
quired for copulatory behavior in females. (By the way, 
it turns out that these lesions do not affect copulatory 
behavior in males.) So where do we go from here? 
What is the next step? In fact, there are many questions 
that we could pursue. One question concerns the sys-
tem of brain structures that participate in female copu-
latory behavior. Certainly, the VMH does not stand 
alone; it receives inputs from other structures and 
sends outputs to still others. Copulation requires inte-
gration of visual, tactile, and olfactory perceptions and 
organization of patterns of movements in response to 
those of the partner. In addition, the entire network 
requires activation by the appropriate sex hormones. 
What is the precise role of the VMH in this complicated 
system?
Before we can hope to answer this question, we must 
know more about the connections of the VMH with the 
rest of the brain. What structures send their axons to the 
VMH, and to what structures does the VMH, in turn, 
send its axons? Once we know what the connections are, 
we can investigate the role of these structures and the 
nature of their interactions. (See Figure 5.13.)
How do we investigate the connections of the VMH? 
The question cannot be answered by means of histo-
logical procedures that stain all neurons, such as cell-
body stains. If we look closely at a brain that has been 
prepared by these means, we see only a tangled mass of 
neurons. But in recent years, researchers have devel-
oped very precise methods that make specific neurons 
stand out from all of the others.
Tracing Efferent Axons
Eventually, the VMH must affect behavior. That is, neu-
rons in the VMH must send axons to parts of the brain 
that contain neurons that are responsible for muscular 
Figure 5.12 illustrates the use of confocal micros-
copy of the hippocampus of living anesthetized mice 
(Mizrahi et al., 2004). The skull was opened, and overly-
ing cortex was dissected away so that images could be 
taken of the interior of the hippocampus. Molecular 
genetic methods had been used to insert a gene into 
the animals’ DNA that produced a fluorescent protein 
dye in certain neurons in the hippocampus. Mizrahi 
and his colleagues obtained images of individual den-
drites of these neurons before and after they induced 
seizures in the animals by administering excitatory 
drugs. Images made before the seizures are shown in 
green, and images made 4 to 5 hours after the seizures 
are shown in red. As you can see, the animals in which 
the seizures were induced showed a loss of dendritic 
spines (arrows), but there was no loss of spines in con-
trol animals. (See Figure 5.12.)
Tracing Neural Connections
Let’s suppose that we were interested in discovering the 
neural mechanisms responsible for reproductive behavior. 
To start out, we wanted to study the physiology of sexual 
behavior of female rats. On the basis of some hints we 
figure 5.12  Branches of Dendrites
These photographs of branches of dendrites of 
hippocampal neurons of a living mouse taken through a 
laser scanning confocal microscope. The images show 
that seizures caused by injection of drugs caused the 
disappearance of some dendritic spines.
(From Mizrahi, A., Crowley, J. C., Shtoyerman, E., and Katz, L. C. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2004, 24, 3147–3151. Copyright © 2004 by the Society for 
Neuroscience. Reprinted by permission of the Society for Neuroscience.)
t=4 hr
t=5 hr
t=0
t=0

140	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
they travel by means of fast axoplasmic transport to the 
terminal buttons. Within a few days the cells are filled in 
their entirety with molecules of PHA-L: dendrites, soma, 
axons and all their branches, and terminal buttons. 
Then we kill the animal, slice the brain, and mount the 
sections on microscope slides. A special immunocytochem-
ical method is used to make the molecules of PHA-L 
visible, and the slides are examined under a microscope. 
(See Figure 5.14.)
Immunocytochemical methods take advantage of 
the immune reaction. The body’s immune system has 
the ability to produce antibodies in response to anti-
gens. Antigens are proteins (or peptides), such as those 
found on the surface of bacteria or viruses. Antibodies, 
which are also proteins, are produced by white blood 
cells to destroy invading microorganisms. Antibodies  
either are secreted by white blood cells or are located on 
their surface, in the way neurotransmitter receptors are 
located on the surface of neurons. When the antigens 
present on the surface of an invading microorganism 
come into contact with the antibodies that recognize 
them, the antibodies trigger an attack on the invader by 
the white blood cells.
Molecular biologists have developed methods for 
producing antibodies to any peptide or protein. The 
antibody molecules are attached to various types of dye 
molecules. Some of these dyes react with other chemicals 
and stain the tissue a brown color. Others are fluorescent; 
movements. The pathway is probably not direct; more 
likely, neurons in the VMH affect neurons in other 
structures, which influence those in yet other structures 
until, eventually, the appropriate motor neurons are 
stimulated. To discover this system, we want to be able 
to identify the paths followed by axons leaving the VMH. 
In other words, we want to trace the efferent axons of this 
structure.
We will use an anterograde labeling method to trace 
these axons. (Anterograde means “moving forward.”) An-
terograde labeling methods employ chemicals that are 
taken up by dendrites or cell bodies and are then trans-
ported through the axons toward the terminal buttons.
Over the years, neuroscientists have developed sev-
eral different methods for tracing the pathways followed 
by efferent axons. For example, to discover the destina-
tion of the efferent axons of neurons located within the 
VMH, we could inject a minute quantity of PHA-L (a 
protein found in kidney beans) into that nucleus. (We 
would use a stereotaxic apparatus to do so, of course.) 
The molecules of PHA-L are taken up by dendrites and 
are transported through the soma to the axon, where 
figure 5.13  Tracing Neural Circuits
Once we know that a particular brain region is involved in 
a particular function, we may ask what structures provide 
inputs to the region and what structures receive outputs 
from it.
VMH
?
?
x anterograde labeling method (ann ter oh grade)  A histologi-
cal method that labels the axons and terminal buttons of neurons 
whose cell bodies are located in a particular region.
x PHA-L  Phaseolus vulgaris leukoagglutinin; a protein derived 
from kidney beans and used as an anterograde tracer; taken up by 
dendrites and cell bodies and carried to the ends of the axons.
x immunocytochemical method  A histological method that uses 
radioactive antibodies or antibodies bound with a dye molecule to 
indicate the presence of particular proteins of peptides.
figure 5.14  Using PHA-L to Trace Efferent Axons
PHA-L is transported
by axoplasmic flow
Axons and terminal 
buttons can be seen
under the microscope
PHA-L is injected into a region of the brain
and taken up by dendrites and cell bodies

	
Experimental Ablation	
141
Tracing Afferent Axons
Tracing efferent axons from the VMH will tell us only 
part of the story about the neural circuitry involved in 
female sexual behavior: the part between the VMH and 
the motor neurons. What about the circuits before the 
VMH? Is the VMH somehow involved in the analysis of 
sensory information (such as the sight, odor, or touch of 
the male)? Or perhaps the activating effect of a female’s 
sex hormones on her behavior act through the VMH or 
through neurons whose axons form synapses there. To 
discover the parts of the brain that are involved in the 
“upstream” components of the neural circuitry, we need 
to find the inputs of the VMH—its afferent connections. 
To do so, we will employ a retrograde labeling method.
Retrograde means “moving backward.” Retrograde la-
beling methods employ chemicals that are taken up by 
terminal buttons and carried back through the axons 
toward the cell bodies. The method for identifying the 
afferent inputs to a particular region of the brain is 
similar to the method used for identifying its efferents. 
First, we inject a small quantity of a chemical called  
fluorogold into the VMH. The chemical is taken up by 
terminal buttons and is transported back by means of 
retrograde axoplasmic transport to the cell bodies. A few 
days later we kill the animal, slice its brain, and examine 
the tissue under light of the appropriate wavelength. 
The molecules of fluorogold fluoresce under this light. 
We discover that the medial amygdala is one of the re-
gions that provides input to the VMH. (See Figure 5.16.)
The anterograde and retrograde labeling methods 
that I have described identify a single link in a chain of 
neurons—neurons whose axons enter or leave a particu-
lar brain region. Transneuronal tracing methods identify a 
series of two, three, or more neurons that form serial  
synaptic connections with each other. The most effective retro­
grade transneuronal tracing method uses a pseudorabies 
virus—a weakened form of a pig herpes virus that was 
originally developed as a vaccine. For anterograde trans-
neuronal tracing, a variety of the herpes simplex virus, 
similar to the one that causes cold sores, is used. The  
virus is injected directly into a brain region, is taken up 
by neurons there, and infects them. The virus spreads 
they glow when they are exposed to light of a particular 
wavelength. To determine where the peptide or protein 
(the antigen) is located in the brain, the investigator 
places fresh slices of brain tissue in a solution that con-
tains the antibody/dye molecules. The antibodies at-
tach themselves to their antigen. When the investigator 
examines the slices with a microscope (under light of a 
particular wavelength in the case of fluorescent dyes), 
he or she can see which parts of the brain—even which 
individual neurons—contain the antigen.
Figure 5.15 shows how PHA-L can be used to identify 
the efferents of a particular region of the brain. Molecules 
of this chemical were injected into the VMH. Two days 
later, after the PHA-L had been taken up by the neurons 
in this region and transported to the ends of their axons, 
the animal was killed. Figure 5.15 shows a photomicro-
graph of the periaqueductal gray matter (PAG). This re-
gion contains some labeled axons and terminal buttons 
(gold color), which proves that some of the efferent axons 
of the VMH terminate in the PAG. (See Figure 5.15.)
To continue our study of the role of the VMH in 
female sexual behavior, we would find the structures 
that receive information from neurons in the VMH 
(such as the PAG) and see what happens when each of 
them is destroyed. Let’s suppose that damage to some of 
these structures also impairs female sexual behavior. We 
will inject these structures with PHA-L and see where 
their axons go. Eventually, we will discover the relevant 
pathways from the VMH to the motor neurons whose 
activity is necessary for copulatory behavior. (In fact, 
researchers have done so, and some of their results are 
presented in Chapter 10.)
figure 5.15  Anterograde Tracing Method
PHA-L was injected into the ventromedial nucleus of the 
hypothalamus, where it was taken up by dendrites and 
carried through the cells’ axons to their terminal buttons. 
The section shows labeled axons and terminal buttons in 
the periaqueductal gray matter.
(Courtesy of Kirsten Nielsen Ricciardi and Jeffrey Blaustein, University of 
Massachusetts.)
x retrograde labeling method  A histological method that 
labels cell bodies that give rise to the terminal buttons that form 
synapses with cells in a particular region.
x fluorogold (flew roh gold)  A dye that serves as a retrograde 
label; taken up by terminal buttons and carried back to the cell 
bodies.
x pseudorabies virus  A weakened form of a pig herpes virus 
used for retrograde transneuronal tracing, which labels a series of 
neurons that are interconnected synaptically.
x herpes simplex virus  A form of herpes virus used for 
anterograde transneuronal tracing, which labels a series of 
neurons that are interconnected synaptically.

142	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
species in order to make some inferences about the evo-
lution of various neural systems. Even if our primary in-
terest is in the functions of the human brain, we certainly 
cannot ask people to submit to brain surgery for the 
purposes of research. But diseases and accidents do oc-
casionally damage the human brain, and if we know 
where the damage occurs, we can study the people’s be-
havior and try to make the same sorts of inferences we 
make with deliberately produced brain lesions in labora-
tory animals. The problem is, where is the lesion?
In past years a researcher might have studied the be-
havior of a person with brain damage and never found out 
exactly where the lesion was located. The only way to be 
sure was to obtain the patient’s brain when he or she died 
and examine slices of it under a microscope. But it was 
often impossible to do this. Sometimes the patient out-
lived the researcher. Sometimes the patient moved out of 
town. Sometimes (often, perhaps) the family refused per-
mission for an autopsy. Because of these practical prob-
lems, study of the behavioral effects of damage to specific 
parts of the human brain made rather slow progress.
Recent advances in X-ray techniques and computers 
have led to the development of several methods for study-
ing the anatomy of the living brain. These advances per-
mit researchers to study the location and extent of brain 
damage while the patient is still living. The first method 
that was developed is called computerized tomography 
(CT) (from the Greek for tomos, “cut,” and graphein, “to 
throughout the infected neurons and is eventually re-
leased by the terminal buttons, passing the infection to 
other neurons that form synaptic connections with them.
After the animal is killed and the brain is sliced, im-
munocytochemical methods are used to localize a pro-
tein produced by the virus. For example, Daniels, Miselis, 
and Flanagan-Cato (1999) injected pseudorabies virus 
in the muscles responsible for female rats’ mating posture. 
After a few days, the rats were killed, and their brains 
were examined for evidence of viral infection. The study 
indicated that the virus found its way up the motor 
nerves to the motor neurons in the spinal cord, then to 
the reticular formation of the medulla, then to the peri-
aqueductal gray matter, and finally to the VMH. These 
results confirm the results of the anterograde and retro-
grade labeling methods I just described. (Labeled neurons 
were found in other structures as well, but they are not 
relevant to this discussion.)
Together, anterograde and retrograde labeling 
methods—including transneuronal methods—enable 
us to discover circuits of interconnected neurons. Thus, 
these methods help to provide us with a “wiring dia-
gram” of the brain. (See Figure 5.17.) Armed with other 
research methods (including some to be described later 
in this chapter), we can try to discover the functions of 
each component of this circuit.
Studying the Structure of the Living 
Human Brain
There are many good reasons to investigate the functions 
of brains of animals other than humans. For one thing, 
we can compare the results of studies made with different 
figure 5.16  Retrograde Tracing Method
Fluorogold was injected in the VMH, where it was taken 
up by terminal buttons and transported back through the 
axons to their cell bodies. The photograph shows these 
cell bodies, located in the medial amygdala.
(Courtesy of Yvon Delville, University of Massachusetts Medical School.)
figure 5.17  Results of Tracing Methods
The figure shows one of the inputs to the VMH and one 
of the outputs, as revealed by anterograde and 
retrograde labeling methods.
2b
2a
1b
1a
PAG
Other
structures?
Sexual
behavior
VMH
Medial
amygdala
Anterograde tracing:
inject PHA-L in VMH
Then see axons and
terminals in PAG
Retrograde tracing:
inject fluorogold in VMH
Then see cell bodies in
medial amygdala

	
Experimental Ablation	
143
the patient’s head, and the detector measures the amount 
of radioactivity that gets through it. The beam scans the 
head from all angles, and a computer translates the num-
bers it receives from the detector into pictures of the skull 
and its contents. (See Figure 5.18.)
Figure 5.19 shows a series of these CT scans taken 
through the head of a patient who sustained a stroke. 
The stroke damaged a part of the brain involved in bodily 
awareness and perception of space. The patient lost her 
awareness of the left side of her body and of items 
located on her left. You can see the damage as a white 
spot in the lower left corner of scan 5. (See Figure 5.19.)
An even more detailed, high-resolution picture of 
what is inside a person’s head is provided by a process 
called magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The MRI 
scanner resembles a CT scanner, but it does not use X-rays. 
write”). This procedure, usually referred to as a CT scan, 
works as follows: The patient’s head is placed in a large 
doughnut-shaped ring. The ring contains an X-ray tube 
and, directly opposite it (on the other side of the patient’s 
head), an X-ray detector. The X-ray beam passes through 
figure 5.18  Computerized Tomography (CT) Scanner
(© Larry Mulvihill/Rainbow.)
figure 5.19  CT Brain Scans
The patient has a lesion in the right occipital-parietal area (scan 5). The 
lesion appears white because it was accompanied by bleeding; blood 
absorbs more radiation than the surrounding brain tissue. Rostral is up, 
caudal is down; left and right are reversed. Scan 1 shows a section through 
the eyes and the base of the brain.
(Courtesy of J. McA. Jones, Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon.)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
x computerized tomography (CT)  The use of a device that 
employs a computer to analyze data obtained by a scanning beam 
of X-rays to produce a two-dimensional picture of a “slice” 
through the body.
x magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)  A technique whereby  
the interior of the body can be accurately imaged; involves the 
interaction between radio waves and a strong magnetic field.

144	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
permits the visualization of even small bundles of fibers 
and the tracing of fiber tracts. Above absolute zero, all 
molecules move in random directions because of ther-
mal agitation: The higher the temperature, the faster 
the random movement. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) 
takes advantage of the fact that the movement of water 
molecules in bundles of white matter will not be random 
but will tend to be in a direction parallel to the axons 
that make up the bundles. The MRI scanner uses infor-
mation about the movement of the water molecules to 
determine the location and orientation of bundles of 
axons in white matter. Figure 5.21 shows a sagittal view 
of some of the axons that project from the thalamus to 
the cerebral cortex in the human brain, as revealed by 
diffusion tensor imaging. The computer adds colors to 
distinguish different bundles of axons. (See Figure 5.21.)
Instead, it passes an extremely strong magnetic field 
through the patient’s head. When a person’s head is 
placed in this strong magnetic field, the nuclei of spin-
ning hydrogen atoms align themselves to the magnetic 
field. When a pulse of a radio frequency wave is then 
passed through the brain, these nuclei flip at an angle 
to the magnetic field and then flip back to their original 
position at the end of the radio pulse. As they do so, they 
release energy that they absorbed from the radio pulse. 
The released energy is sensed by a coil of wire that serves 
as a detector. Because different tissues contain different 
amounts of water (and hence different concentrations 
of hydrogen atoms) they emit different amounts of en-
ergy. The computer associated with the MRI scanner 
analyzes the signal and prepares pictures of slices of the 
brain. (See Figure 5.20.)
As you can see in Figure 5.20, MRI scans distinguish 
between regions of gray matter and white matter, so 
major fiber bundles (such as the corpus callosum) can 
be seen. However, small fiber bundles are not visible on 
these scans. A special modification of the MRI scanner 
x diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)  An imaging method that uses 
a modified MRI scanner to reveal bundles of myelinated axons in 
the living human brain.
figure 5.20  Midsagittal MRI Scan of a Human Brain
(Living Art Enterprises/Photo Researchers, Inc.) 
figure 5.21  Diffusion Tensor Imaging
This image shows a sagittal view of some of the axons 
that project from the thalamus to the cerebral cortex in 
the human brain, as revealed by diffusion tensor imaging.
(From Wakana, S., Jian, H., Nagae-Poetscher, L. M., van Zijl, P. C. M., and Mori, S. 
Radiology, 2004, 230, 77–87. Reprinted with permission.)
Thalamus
Section Summary
Experimental Ablation
The goal of research in behavioral neuroscience is to 
understand the brain functions required for the per-
formance of a particular behavior and then to learn 
the location of the neural circuits that perform these 
functions. The lesion method is the oldest one 
employed in such research, and it remains one of the 
most useful. A subcortical lesion is made under the 
guidance of a stereotaxic apparatus. The coordinates 

	
Experimental Ablation	
145
are obtained from a stereotaxic atlas, and the tip of 
an electrode or cannula is placed at the target. A 
lesion is made by passing radio frequency current 
through the electrode or infusing an excitatory amino 
acid through the cannula, producing an excitotoxic 
lesion. The advantage of excitotoxic lesions is that 
they destroy only neural cell bodies; axons passing 
through the region are not damaged. Injection of 
molecules of toxic saporin attached to an antibody 
targeted against a protein found in particular neurons 
in the brain produces even more specific lesions.
The location of a lesion must be determined after 
the animal’s behavior has been observed. The animal 
is killed by humane means, and the brain is perfused 
with a saline solution, removed, and placed in a fixa-
tive such as formalin. A microtome is used to slice the 
brain, which is usually frozen to make it hard enough 
to cut into thin sections. These sections are mounted 
on glass slides, stained with a cell-body stain, and 
examined under a microscope.
Light microscopes enable us to see cells and their 
larger organelles, but an electron microscope is 
needed to see small details, such as individual mito-
chondria and synaptic vesicles. Scanning electron 
microscopes provide a three-dimensional view of tis-
sue but at a lower magnification than transmission 
electron microscopes. Confocal laser-scanning micro-
scopes provide images of “slices” of tissues that can 
show the presence of particular molecules—even in 
living tissue.
The next step in a research program often 
requires the investigator to discover the afferent and 
efferent connections of the region of interest with the 
rest of the brain. Efferent connections (those that carry 
information from the region in question to other parts 
of the brain) are revealed with anterograde tracing 
methods, such as the one that uses PHA-L. Afferent 
connections (those that bring information to the 
region in question from other parts of the brain) are 
revealed with retrograde tracing methods, such as the 
one that uses fluorogold. Chains of neurons that form 
synaptic connections are revealed by transneuronal 
tracing method. The pseudorabies virus can be used 
as a retrograde tracer, and a variety of the herpes 
simplex virus can be used as an anterograde tracer.
Although brain lesions are not deliberately made 
in the human brain for the purposes of research, dis-
eases and accidents can cause brain damage, and if 
we know where the damage is located, we can study 
people’s behavior and make inferences about the 
location of the neural circuits that perform relevant 
functions. If the patient dies and the brain is available 
for examination, ordinary histological methods can be 
used. Otherwise, the living brain can be examined 
with CT scanners and MRI scanners. Diffusion tensor 
imaging (DTI) uses a modified MRI scanner to visual-
ize bundles of myelinated axons in the living human 
brain.
Table 5.1 summarizes the research methods pre-
sented in this section.
 Thought Questions
1.	 In the subsection “Tracing Neural Connections,” I 
wrote that “one experimental rat did copulate, but 
we discovered later that the lesion had missed the 
VMH in that animal, so we discarded the data from 
that animal.” Should the person who looks at the 
stained brain sections containing the lesions and 
decides whether the target was destroyed or 
missed know which animal each of these sections 
belonged to? Explain.
2.	 Would you like to see an MRI of your own brain? 
Why or why not?
table 5.1  Research Methods: Part I
Goal of Method
Method
Remarks
Destroy or inactivate specific brain region
Radio frequency lesion
Destroys all brain tissue near tip of electrode
  
Excitotoxic lesion; uses excitatory 
amino acid such as kainic acid
Destroys only cell bodies near tip of cannula; 
spares axons passing through the region
  
6-HD lesion 
Destroys catecholaminergic neurons near tip 
of cannula
(continued on next page)

146	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
Recording Neural Activity
Axons produce action potentials, and terminal buttons 
elicit postsynaptic potentials in the membrane of the 
cells with which they form synapses. These electrical 
events can be recorded (as we saw in Chapter 2), and 
changes in the electrical activity of a particular region 
can be used to determine whether that region plays a 
role in various behaviors. For example, recordings can 
be made during stimulus presentations, decision making, 
or motor activities.
Recordings can be made chronically, over an ex-
tended period of time after the animal recovers from 
surgery, or acutely, for a relatively short period of time 
Recording and Stimulating 
Neural Activity
The first section of this chapter dealt with the anatomy 
of the brain and the effects of damage to particular re-
gions. This section considers a different approach: 
studying the brain by recording or stimulating the activ-
ity of particular regions. Brain functions involve activity 
of circuits of neurons; thus, different perceptions and 
behavioral responses involve different patterns of activ-
ity in the brain. Researchers have devised methods to 
record these patterns of activity or artificially produce 
them.
 
Infusion of local anesthetic or 
drug that produces local neu-
ral inhibition
Temporarily inactivates specific brain region; 
animal can serve as its own control 
  
Infusion of saporin conjugated 
with an antibody
Destroys neurons that contain the antibody; 
produces very precise brain lesions
Place electrode or cannula in specific 
region within brain
Stereotaxic surgery 
Consult stereotaxic atlas for coordinates 
Find location of lesion 
Perfuse brain; fix brain; slice 
brain; stain sections
  
Identify axons leaving a particular region 
and the terminal buttons of these axons
Anterograde tracing method, 
such as PHA-L
  
Identify location of neurons whose axons 
terminate in a particular region
Retrograde tracing method, 
such as fluorogold
  
Identify chain of neurons that are inter-
connected synaptically 
 
 
Transneuronal tracing method; 
uses pseudorabies virus (for 
retrograde tracing) or herpes 
simplex virus (for anterograde 
tracing)
 
 
 
 
Find location of lesion in living human 
brain
Computerized tomography (CT 
scanner)
Shows “slice” of brain; uses X-rays 
 
 
Magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI scanner)
Shows “slice” of brain; better detail than CT 
scan; uses a magnetic field and radio waves
Find location of fiber bundles in living 
human brain
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) 
Shows bundles of myelinated axons; uses an 
MRI scanner
Visualize details of cells in thick sections 
of tissue 
Confocal laser scanning 
microscopy 
Can be used to see “slices” of tissue in liv-
ing brain; requires the presence of fluores-
cent molecules in the tissue
Goal of Method	
Method	
Remarks
table 5.1  (continued)

	
Recording and Stimulating Neural Activity	
147
Recordings with Macroelectrodes
Sometimes, we want to record the activity of a region of the 
brain as a whole, not the activity of individual neurons  
located there. To do this, we would use macroelectrodes. 
Macroelectrodes do not detect the activity of individual 
neurons; rather, the records that are obtained with these 
devices represent the postsynaptic potentials of many  
thousands—or millions—of cells in the area of the elec-
trode. These electrodes can consist of unsharpened wires 
inserted into the brain, screws attached to the skull, or even 
metal disks attached to the human scalp with a special paste 
that conducts electricity. Recordings taken from the scalp, 
especially, represent the activity of an enormous number  
of neurons, whose electrical signals pass through the 
meninges, skull, and scalp before reaching the electrodes.
Occasionally, neurosurgeons implant macroelec-
trodes directly into the human brain. The reason for 
doing so is to detect the source of abnormal electrical 
activity that is giving rise to frequent seizures. Once the 
source has been determined, the surgeon can open the 
skull and remove the source of the seizures—usually 
scar tissue caused by brain damage that occurred ear-
lier in life. Usually, the electrical activity of a human 
brain is recorded through electrodes attached to the 
scalp and displayed on a polygraph.
during which the animal is kept anesthetized. Acute re-
cordings, made while the animal is anesthetized, are 
usually restricted to studies of sensory pathways. Acute 
recordings seldom involve behavioral observations, 
since the behavioral capacity of an anesthetized animal 
is limited, to say the least.
Recordings with Microelectrodes
Drugs that affect serotonergic and noradrenergic neu-
rons also affect REM sleep. Suppose that, knowing this 
fact, we wondered whether the activity of serotonergic 
and noradrenergic neurons would vary during different 
stages of sleep. To find out, we would record the activity 
of these neurons with microelectrodes. Microelectrodes, 
usually made of thin wires, have a very fine tip, small 
enough to record the electrical activity of individual 
neurons. This technique is usually called single-unit 
recording (a unit refers to an individual neuron).
Because we want to record the activity of single neu-
rons over a long period of time in unanesthetized animals, 
we want more durable electrodes. We can purchase  
arrays of very fine wires, gathered together in a bundle, 
which can simultaneously record the activity of many 
different neurons. The wires are insulated so that only 
their tips are bare.
We implant the electrodes in the brains of animals 
through stereotaxic surgery. We attach them to miniatur-
ized electrical sockets and bond the sockets to the animals’ 
skull, using plastics that were originally developed for the 
dental profession. Then, after recovery from surgery, the 
animal can be “plugged in” to the recording system. Labo-
ratory animals pay no heed to the electrical sockets on 
their skulls and behave quite normally. (See Figure 5.22.)
Researchers often attach rather complex devices to 
the animals’ skulls when they implant microelectrodes. 
These devices include screw mechanisms that permit 
the experimenters to move the electrode—or array of 
electrodes—deeper into the brain so that they can re-
cord from several different parts of the brain during the 
course of their observations.
The electrical signals detected by microelectrodes 
are quite small and must be amplified. Amplifiers used 
for this purpose work just like the amplifiers in a stereo 
system, converting the weak signals recorded at the 
brain into stronger ones. These signals can be displayed 
on an oscilloscope and stored in the memory of a com-
puter for analysis at a later time.
What about the results of our recordings from sero-
tonergic and noradrenergic neurons? As you will learn 
in Chapter 9, if we record the activity of these neurons 
during various stages of sleep, we will find that their fir-
ing rates fall almost to zero during REM sleep. This ob-
servation suggests that these neurons have an inhibitory 
effect on REM sleep. That is, REM sleep does not occur 
until these neurons stop firing.
figure 5.22  Implantation of Electrodes
The drawing shows a permanently attached set of electrodes, 
with a connecting socket cemented to the rat’s skull.
Connecting socket
Electrodes
Skull
Dental plastic
x microelectrode  A very fine electrode, generally used to 
record activity of individual neurons.
x single-unit recording  Recording of the electrical activity of a 
single neuron.
x macroelectrode  An electrode used to record the electrical 
activity of large numbers of neurons in a particular region of the 
brain; much larger than a microelectrode.

148	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
The surgeon made an incision in Mrs. F.’s neck and 
exposed the carotid artery, at the point where the com-
mon carotid, coming from the heart, branched into the 
external and internal carotid arteries. He placed a plas-
tic band around the common carotid artery and 
clamped it shut, stopping the flow of blood. “How does 
it look, Ken?” he asked Dr. L. “No good—I see some 
slowing. You’d better shunt.”
The surgeon quickly removed the constricting band 
and asked the nurse for a shunt, a short length of plas-
tic tubing a little thinner than the artery. He made two 
small incisions in the artery well above and well below 
the region that contained the plaque, and inserted the 
shunt. Now he could work on the artery without stop-
ping the flow of blood to the brain. He made a longitu-
dinal cut in the artery, exposing a yellowish mass that 
he dissected away and removed. He sewed up the inci-
sion, removed the shunt, and sutured the small cuts he 
had made to accommodate it. “Everything still okay?” 
he asked Dr. L. “Yes, her EEG is fine.”
Most neurosurgeons prefer to do an endarterectomy 
by temporarily clamping the artery shut while they work 
on it. The work goes faster, and complications are less 
likely. Because the blood supply to the two hemi-
spheres of the brain are interconnected (with special 
communicating arteries), it is often possible to shut 
down one of the carotid arteries for a few minutes with-
out causing any damage. However, sometimes the 
blood flow from one side of the brain to the other is 
insufficient to keep the other side nourished with blood 
and oxygen. The only way the surgeon can know is to 
have the patient’s EEG monitored. If the brain is not 
receiving a sufficient blood supply, the EEG will show 
the presence of characteristic “slow waves.” That is 
what happened when Mrs. F.’s artery was clamped shut, 
and that is why the surgeon had to use a shunt tube. 
Without it, the procedure might have caused a stroke 
instead of preventing one.
By the way, Mrs. F. made a good recovery.
A polygraph contains a mechanism that moves a 
very long strip of paper past a series of pens. These pens 
are essentially the pointers of large voltmeters, moving 
up and down in response to the electrical signal sent to 
them by the biological amplifiers. (Often, the informa-
tion is stored in a computer and displayed on a monitor 
rather than on strips of paper.) Figure 5.23 illustrates a 
record of electrical activity recorded from macroelec-
trodes attached to various locations on a person’s scalp. 
(See Figure 5.23.) Such records are called electroenceph-
alograms (EEGs), or “writings of electricity from the 
head.” They can be used to diagnose epilepsy or study 
the stages of sleep and wakefulness, which are associated 
with characteristic patterns of electrical activity.
Another use of the EEG is to monitor the condition 
of the brain during procedures that could potentially 
damage it. I witnessed just such a procedure several 
years ago.
x electroencephalogram (EEG)  An electrical brain potential 
recorded by placing electrodes on the scalp.
Mrs. F. had sustained one mild heart attack, and subse-
quent tests indicated a considerable amount of athero-
sclerosis, commonly referred to as “hardening of the 
arteries.” Many of her arteries were narrowed by choles-
terol-rich atherosclerotic plaque. A clot formed in a par-
ticularly narrow portion of one of her coronary arteries, 
which caused her heart attack. As the months passed 
after her heart attack, Mrs. F. had several transient isch-
emic attacks, brief episodes of neurological symptoms that 
appear to be caused by blood clots forming and then 
dissolving in cerebral blood vessels. In her case, they 
caused numbness in her right arm and difficulty in talk-
ing. Her physician referred her to a neurologist, who 
ordered an angiogram. This procedure revealed that her 
left carotid artery was almost totally blocked. The neurol-
ogist referred Mrs. F. to a neurosurgeon, who urged her 
to have an operation that would remove the plaque from 
part of her left carotid artery and increase the blood flow 
to the left side of her brain.
The procedure is called a carotid endarterectomy. I 
was chatting with Mrs. F.’s neurosurgeon after a confer-
ence, and he happened to mention that he would be 
performing the operation later that morning. I asked 
whether I could watch, and he agreed. When I entered 
the operating room, scrubbed and gowned, I found 
Mrs. F. already anesthetized, and the surgical nurse had 
prepared the left side of her neck for the incision. In 
addition, several EEG electrodes had been attached to 
her scalp, and I saw that Dr. L., a neurologist who spe-
cializes in clinical neurophysiology, was seated at his 
EEG machine.
Magnetoencephalography
As you undoubtedly know, when electrical current flows 
through a conductor, it induces a magnetic field. This 
means that as action potentials pass down axons or as 
postsynaptic potentials pass down dendrites or sweep 
across the somatic membrane of a neuron, magnetic 

	
Recording and Stimulating Neural Activity	
149
too, largely as a result of increased operation of ion 
transporters in the membrane of the cells. This in-
creased metabolic rate can be measured. The experi-
menter injects radioactive 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) into 
the animal’s bloodstream. Because this chemical resem-
bles glucose (the principal food for the brain), it is 
taken into cells. Thus, the most active cells, which use 
glucose at the highest rate, will take up the highest con-
centrations of radioactive 2-DG. But unlike normal  
glucose, 2-DG cannot be metabolized, so it stays in the 
cell. The experimenter then kills the animal, removes 
the brain, slices it, and prepares it for autoradiography.
Autoradiography can be translated roughly as “writ-
ing with one’s own radiation.” Sections of the brain are 
mounted on microscope slides. The slides are then 
taken into a darkroom, where they are coated with a 
photographic emulsion (the substance found on photo-
graphic film). Several weeks later, the slides, with their 
coatings of emulsion, are developed, just like photo-
graphic film. The molecules of radioactive 2-DG show 
themselves as spots of silver grains in the developed 
emulsion because the radioactivity exposes the emul-
sion, just as X-rays or light will do.
fields are also produced. These fields are exceedingly 
small, but engineers have developed superconducting 
detectors (called SQUIDs, or “superconducting quan-
tum interference devices”) that can detect magnetic 
fields that are approximately one-billionth of the size of 
the earth’s magnetic field.
Magnetoencephalography is performed with neuro-
magnetometers, devices that contain an array of several 
SQUIDs, oriented so that a computer can examine 
their output and calculate the source of particular sig-
nals in the brain. The neuromagnetometer shown in 
Figure 5.24 contains 275 SQUIDs. These devices can be 
used clinically—for example, to find the sources of sei-
zures so that they can be removed surgically. They can 
also be used in experiments to measure regional brain 
activity that accompanies the perception of various 
stimuli or the performance of various behaviors or cog-
nitive tasks. (See Figure 5.24.)
An important advantage of magnetoencephalogra-
phy is its temporal resolution. Functional MRI provides 
excellent spatial resolution but relatively poor temporal 
resolution. That is, the image can accurately measure 
differences in activity of closely spaced regions of the 
brain, but the acquisition of an fMRI image takes a rela-
tively long time compared with the rapid flow of infor-
mation in the brain. The image produced by means of 
magnetoencephalography is much cruder than an fMRI, 
but it can be acquired much more rapidly and can con-
sequently reveal fast-moving events.
Recording the Brain’s Metabolic  
and Synaptic Activity
Electrical signals are not the only signs of neural activity. 
If the neural activity of a particular region of the brain 
increases, the metabolic rate of this region increases, 
figure 5.23  Record from a Polygraph
Paper moves
figure 5.24  Magnetoencephalography
An array of SQUIDs in this neuromagnetometer detects 
regional changes in magnetic fields produced by 
electrical activity of the brain.
x magnetoencephalography  A procedure that detects groups 
of synchronously activated neurons by means of the magnetic field 
induced by their electrical activity; uses an array of superconduct-
ing quantum interference devices, or SQUIDs.
x 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG) (dee ox ee gloo kohss)  A sugar that 
enters cells along with glucose but is not metabolized.
x autoradiography  A procedure that locates radioactive 
substances in a slice of tissue; the radiation exposes a photographic 
emulsion or a piece of film that covers the tissue.

150	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
tracer (fluorogold) into the VMH, we found that this 
region receives input from the medial amygdala. (See 
Figure 5.26.)
The metabolic activity of specific brain regions can be 
measured in human brains, too, by means of functional 
imaging—a computerized method of detecting meta-
bolic or chemical changes within the brain. The first 
functional imaging method to be developed was posi-
tron emission tomography (PET). First, the person re-
ceives an injection of radioactive 2-DG. (The chemical 
soon breaks down and leaves the cells. The dose given to 
humans is harmless.) The person’s head is placed in a 
machine similar to a CT scanner. When the radioactive 
molecules of 2-DG decay, they emit subatomic particles 
called positrons, which meet nearby electrons. The par-
ticles annihilate each other and emit two photons, which 
travel in directly opposite paths. Sensors arrayed around 
the person’s head detect these photons, and the scanner 
plots the locations from which these photons are being 
emitted. From this information, the computer produces 
a picture of a slice of the brain, showing the activity level 
of various regions in that slice. (See Figure 5.27.)
The most active regions of the brain contain the 
most radioactivity, showing this radioactivity in the form 
of dark spots in the developed emulsion. Figure 5.25 
shows an autoradiograph of a slice of a rat brain; the 
dark spots at the bottom (indicated by the arrow) are 
nuclei of the hypothalamus with an especially high  
metabolic rate. Chapter 9 describes the function of these 
nuclei. (See Figure 5.25.) 
Simulate autoradiography 
on MyPsychLab to see an animation of this procedure.
Another method of identifying active regions of the 
brain capitalizes on the fact that when neurons are acti-
vated (for example, by the terminal buttons that form 
synapses with them), particular genes in the nucleus called 
immediate early genes are turned on, and particular proteins 
are produced. These proteins then bind with the chromo-
somes in the nucleus. The presence of these nuclear pro-
teins indicates that the neuron has just been activated.
One of the nuclear proteins produced during neu-
ral activation is called Fos. You will remember that ear-
lier in this chapter we began an imaginary research 
project on the neural circuitry involved in the sexual 
behavior of female rats. Suppose we want to use the Fos 
method in this project to see what neurons are activated 
during a female rat’s sexual activity. We place female 
rats with males and permit the animals to copulate. 
Then we remove the rats’ brains, slice them, and follow 
a procedure that stains Fos protein. Figure 5.26 shows 
the results: Neurons in the medial amygdala of a female 
rat that has just mated show the presence of dark spots, 
indicating the presence of Fos protein. Thus, these neu-
rons appear to be activated by copulatory activity—perhaps 
by the physical stimulation of the genitals that occurs 
then. As you will recall, when we injected a retrograde 
figure 5.25  2-DG Autoradiogram
The frontal section of a rat brain (dorsal at the top) shows 
especially high regions of activity in the pair of nuclei in 
the hypothalamus, at the base of the brain.
(From Schwartz, W. J., and Gainer, H. Science, 1977, 197, 1089–1091. Reprinted 
with permission.)
figure 5.26  Localization of Fos Protein
The photomicrograph shows a frontal section of the brain 
of a female rat, taken through the medial amygdala. The 
dark spots indicate the presence of Fos protein, localized 
by means of immunocytochemistry. The synthesis of Fos 
protein was stimulated by permitting the animal to 
engage in copulatory behavior.
(Courtesy of Marc Tetel, Skidmore College.)
x Fos (fahs)  A protein produced in the nucleus of a neuron in 
response to synaptic stimulation.
x functional imaging  A computerized method of detecting 
metabolic or chemical changes in particular regions of the brain.
x positron emission tomography (PET)  A functional imaging 
method that reveals the localization of a radioactive tracer in a 
living brain.

	
Recording and Stimulating Neural Activity	
151
described in the next paragraph. However, PET scan-
ners can do something that functional MRI scanners 
cannot do: measure the concentration of particular 
chemicals in various parts of the brain. I will describe 
this procedure later in this chapter.
The brain-imaging method with the best spatial and 
temporal resolution is known as functional MRI (fMRI). 
Engineers have devised modifications to existing MRI 
scanners and their software that permit the devices to 
acquire images that indicate regional metabolism. Brain 
activity is measured indirectly, by detecting levels of oxy-
gen in the brain’s blood vessels. Increased activity of a 
brain region stimulates blood flow to that region, which 
increases the local blood oxygen level. The formal name 
of this type of imaging is BOLD: blood oxygen level– 
dependent signal. Functional MRI scans have a higher 
resolution than PET scans do, and they can be acquired 
much faster. Thus, they reveal more detailed information 
about the activity of particular brain regions. You will read 
about many functional imaging studies that employ fMRI 
scans in subsequent chapters of this book. (See Figure 5.28.)
Stimulating Neural Activity
So far, this section has been concerned with research 
methods that measure the activity of specific regions of 
the brain. But sometimes we may want to artificially 
change the activity of these regions to see what effects 
these changes have on the animal’s behavior. For example, 
female rats will copulate with males only if certain female 
One of the disadvantages of PET scanners is their 
operating cost. For reasons of safety the radioactive 
chemicals that are administered have very short half-
lives; that is, they decay and lose their radioactivity very 
quickly. For example, the half-life of radioactive 2-DG is 
110 minutes; the half-life of radioactive water (also used 
for PET scans) is only 2 minutes. Because these chemi-
cals decay so quickly, they must be produced on site, in 
an atomic particle accelerator called a cyclotron. There-
fore, to the cost of the PET scanner must be added the 
cost of the cyclotron and the salaries of the personnel 
who operate it.
Another disadvantage of PET scans is the relatively 
poor spatial resolution (the blurriness) of the images. 
The temporal resolution is also relatively poor. The pos-
itrons being emitted from the brain must be sampled 
for a fairly long time, which means that rapid, short-
lived events within the brain are likely to be missed. 
These disadvantages are not seen in functional MRI, 
figure 5.27  PET Scans
The top row shows three horizontal scans from a person 
at rest. The bottom row shows three scans from the same 
person while he was clenching and unclenching his right 
fist. The scans show increased uptake of radioactive 
2-deoxyglucose in regions of the brain that are devoted 
to the control of movement, which indicates increased 
metabolic rate in these areas. Different computer-
generated colors indicate different rates of uptake of 
2-DG, as shown in the scale at the bottom.
(Courtesy of the Brookhaven National Laboratory and the State University of  
New York, Stony Brook.)
60
48
36
24
12
0
Relaxed condition
Right fist clenched and unclenched
x functional MRI (fMRI)  A functional imaging method; a 
modification of the MRI procedure that permits the measurement 
of regional metabolism in the brain, usually by detecting changes 
in blood oxygen level.
figure 5.28  Functional MRI Scans
These scans of human brains show localized average 
increases in neural activity of males (left) and females 
(right) while they were judging whether pairs of written 
words rhymed.
(From Shaywitz, B. A., et al., Nature, 1995, 373, 607–609. Reprinted with permission.)

152	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
tion; chemical stimulation requires cannulas, tubes, spe-
cial pumps or syringes, and sterile solutions of excitatory 
amino acids. However, it has a distinct advantage over 
electrical stimulation: It activates cell bodies but not axons. 
Because only cell bodies (and their dendrites, of course) 
contain glutamate receptors, we can be assured that an 
injection of an excitatory amino acid into a particular re-
gion of the brain excites the cells there but not the axons 
of other neurons that happen to pass through the region. 
Thus, the effects of chemical stimulation are more local-
ized than are the effects of electrical stimulation.
You might have noticed that I just said that kainic 
acid, which I described earlier as a neurotoxin, can be 
used to stimulate neurons. These two uses are not really 
contradictory. Kainic acid produces excitotoxic lesions 
by stimulating neurons to death. Whereas large doses of 
a concentrated solution kill neurons, small doses of a 
dilute solution simply stimulate them.
What about the results of our hypothetical experiment? 
In fact (as we shall see in Chapter 10), VMH stimulation 
does substitute for female sex hormones. Perhaps, then, 
the female sex hormones exert their effects in this  
nucleus. We will see how to test this hypothesis in the final 
section of this chapter.
When chemicals are injected into the brain through 
cannulas, molecules of the chemicals diffuse over a region 
sex hormones are present. If we remove the rats’ ova-
ries, the loss of these hormones will abolish the rats’ 
sexual behavior. We found in our earlier studies that 
VMH lesions disrupt this behavior. Perhaps if we activate 
the VMH, we will make up for the lack of female sex 
hormones and the rats will copulate again.
Electrical and Chemical Stimulation
How do we activate neurons? We can do so by electrical 
or chemical stimulation. Electrical stimulation simply 
involves passing an electrical current through a wire in-
serted into the brain, as you saw in Figure 5.22. Chemi-
cal stimulation is usually accomplished by injecting a 
small amount of an excitatory amino acid, such as kainic 
acid or glutamic acid, into the brain. As you learned in 
Chapter 4, the principal excitatory neurotransmitter in 
the brain is glutamic acid (glutamate), and both of these 
substances stimulate glutamate receptors, thus activat-
ing the neurons on which these receptors are located.
Injections of chemicals into the brain can be done 
through an apparatus that is permanently attached to the 
skull so that the animal’s behavior can be observed sev-
eral times. We place a metal cannula (a guide cannula) 
in an animal’s brain and cement its top to the skull. At a 
later date we place a smaller cannula of measured length 
inside the guide cannula and then inject a chemical into 
the brain. Because the animal is free to move about, we 
can observe the effects of the injection on its behavior. 
(See Figure 5.29.) 
Simulate cannula implantation on 
MyPsychLab to see a video of this surgical procedure.
The principal disadvantage of chemical stimulation is 
that it is slightly more complicated than electrical stimula-
figure 5.29  An Intracranial Cannula
(a) A guide cannula is permanently attached to the skull. (b) At a later 
time a thinner cannula can be inserted through the guide cannula into 
the brain. Chemicals can be infused into the brain through this device.
Dental
plastic
Guide
cannula
Skull
Brain
Plastic
tubing
Chemical
(a)
(b)
x optogenetic method  The use of a genetically modified virus 
to insert light-sensitive ion channels into the membrane of 
particular neurons in the brain; can depolarize or hyperpolarize the 
neurons when light of the appropriate wavelength is applied.

	
Recording and Stimulating Neural Activity	
153
that includes many different types of neurons: excitatory 
neurons, inhibitory neurons, interneurons that partici-
pate in local circuits, projection neurons that communi-
cate with different regions of the brain, and neurons that 
release or respond to a wide variety of neurotransmitters 
and neuromodulators. Stimulating a particular brain re-
gion with electricity or an excitatory chemical affects all of 
these neurons, and the result is unlikely to resemble nor-
mal brain activity, which involves coordinated activation 
and inhibition of many different neurons. Ideally, we 
would like to be able to stimulate or inhibit selected popu-
lations of neurons in a given brain regions.
Optogenetic Methods
Recent developments are providing the means to do just 
what I said in the previous paragraph: Optogenetic methods 
can be used to stimulate or inhibit particular types of 
neurons in particular brain regions (Boyden et al., 2005; 
F. Zhang et al., 2007; Baker, 2011). Photosensitive pro-
teins have evolved in many organisms—even single-celled 
organisms such as algae and bacteria. Researchers have 
discovered that one of these proteins, Channelrhodopsin-2 
(ChR2), found in green algae, controls ion channels that, 
when open, permit the flow of sodium, potassium, and 
calcium ions. When blue light strikes a ChR2-ion chan-
nel, the channel opens, and the rush of positively 
charged sodium and calcium ions depolarizes the mem-
brane, causing excitation. A second photosensitive pro-
tein, Natronomonas pharaonis halorhodopsin (NpHR), is 
found in a bacterium. This protein controls a transporter 
that moves chloride into the cell when activated by yel-
low light. This influx of negatively charged ions hyperpo-
larizes the membrane, causing inhibition. The action of 
both of these photosensitive proteins begins and ends 
very rapidly when light of the appropriate wavelength is 
turned on and off. (See Figure 5.30.)
ChR2 and NpHR can be introduced into neurons 
by attaching the genes that code for them into the ge-
netic material of harmless viruses. The viruses are then 
injected into the brain, where they infect neurons and 
begin expressing the proteins, which are inserted into 
the cell membrane. The genes can be modified so that 
the proteins will be expressed only in particular types of 
neurons. In this way, researchers can observe the effects 
of turning on or off particular types of neurons in a 
particular region of the brain.
Of course, because ChR2 and NpHR are activated by 
light, researchers must be able to introduce light into the 
brain. If the neurons that express these photosensitive 
proteins are located in the cerebral cortex, a small hole 
can be drilled in the skull, and light-emitting diodes 
(LEDs) can be attached directly above the hole. To acti-
vate photosensitive proteins in the membranes of neurons 
deep within the brain, optical fibers can be implanted by 
means of stereotaxic surgery, just like electrodes or can-
nulas, and light can be transmitted through these fibers. 
figure 5.30  Photostimulation
(a) Photosensitive proteins can be inserted into neural 
membranes by means of genetically modified viruses. 
Blue light causes ChR2 ion channels to depolarize the 
membrane, and yellow light causes NpHR ion 
transporters to hyperpolarize it. (b) The graph shows the 
effects on the membrane potential of different 
wavelengths of light acting on ChR2 or NpHR proteins.  
(c) The graph shows action potentials elicited by pulses of 
blue light (blue arrows) and the inhibitory effects of the 
hyperpolarization caused by yellow light.
(Part (a) adapted from Hausser, M., and Smith, S. L. Nature, 2007, 446, 617–619, 
and parts (b) and (c) adapted from Zhang, F., Wang, L. P., Brauner, M., et al. 
Nature, 2007, 446, 633–639.)
Na+
Cl-
Ca2+
Outside of Cell
ChR2
NpHR
Yellow light
Blue light
0.2
0.4
0.8
0.6
0
1.0
Activation
Depolarization
Hyperpolarization
325
425
525
625
725
Time
Wavelength (nm)
Yellow light applied
(c)
(b)
(a)
NpHR
ChR2
Action potentials
Ion channel
Ion
transporter

154	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
cerebral cortex. The stimulating coil is placed on top of 
the skull so that the crossing point in the middle of the 
8 is located immediately above the region to be stimu-
lated. Pulses of electricity send magnetic fields that acti-
vate neurons in the cortex. Figure 5.31 shows an electro-
magnetic coil used in transcranial magnetic stimulation 
and its placement on a person’s head. (See Figure 5.31.)
The effects of TMS are very similar to those of direct 
stimulation of the exposed brain. For example, as we 
shall see in Chapter 6, stimulation of a particular region 
of the visual association cortex will disrupt a person’s abil-
ity to detect movements in visual stimuli. In addition, as 
we will see in Chapters 15 and 16, TMS has been used to 
treat the symptoms of neurological and mental disorders. 
Depending on the strength and pattern of stimulation, 
TMS can either excite the region of the brain over which 
the coil is positioned or interfere with its functions.
For example, Tsai et al. (2009) used optogenetic methods 
to insert ChR2 ion channels into the membranes of dopa-
minergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area of rats. 
(Other research has shown that these neurons play an 
essential role in behavioral reinforcement.) The investiga-
tors found that if these neurons were stimulated when the 
rats were in one of two chambers in a testing apparatus, 
the animals preferred to spend time in that chamber.
The development of these procedures has caused 
much excitement among neuroscientists because they 
promise ways to study the functions of particular neural 
circuits in the brain. Some investigators are also explor-
ing possible clinical uses of photosensitive proteins. For 
example, retinitis pigmentosa is a genetic disease that 
causes blindness in humans. People with this disease are 
born with normal vision, but they gradually become blind 
as the photoreceptor cells in their retinas degenerate. The 
retina contains two major categories of photoreceptors: 
rods, which are responsible for night vision, and cones, 
which are responsible for daytime vision. The rods of 
people with retinitis pigmentosa die, but although the 
cones lose their sensitivity to light, their cell bodies sur-
vive. Busskamp et al. (2010) used an optogenetic method 
to try to reestablish vision in mice with a genetic modifi-
cation that causes them to develop retinitis pigmentosa. 
The investigators targeted the animals’ cones with NpHR. 
(Because the membranes of photoreceptors are normally 
hyperpolarized by light, they chose to use this protein.) 
Electrical recording and behavioral studies found that 
the treatment at least partially reestablished the animals’ 
vision. Furthermore, the same treatment reestablished 
light sensitivity in retinal tissue removed from deceased 
people who had suffered from retinitis pigmentosa. 
These findings provide hope that further research may 
develop a treatment for this form of blindness.
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
As we saw earlier in this chapter, neural activity induces 
magnetic fields that can be detected by means of mag-
netoencephalography. Similarly, magnetic fields can be 
used to stimulate neurons by inducing electrical cur-
rents in brain tissue. Transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(TMS) uses a coil of wires, usually arranged in the shape 
of the numeral 8, to stimulate neurons in the human 
x transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)  Stimulation of the 
cerebral cortex by means of magnetic fields produced by passing 
pulses of electricity through a coil of wire placed next to the skull; 
interferes with the functions of the brain region that is stimulated.
figure 5.31  Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
Pulses of electricity through the coil produce a magnetic 
field that stimulates a region of the cerebral cortex under 
the crossing point in the middle of the figure 8.
(Photographs courtesy of the Kastner Lab, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey.)
Section Summary
Recording and Stimulating Neural Activity
When circuits of neurons participate in their normal 
functions, their electrical activity and metabolic activ-
ity increase. Thus, by observing these processes as an 
animal perceives various stimuli or engages in various 
behaviors, we can make some inferences about the 
functions performed by various regions of the brain. 

	
Recording and Stimulating Neural Activity	
155
Microelectrodes can be used to record the electrical 
activity of individual neurons. Chronic recordings 
require that the electrode be attached to an electrical 
socket, which is fastened to the skull with a plastic 
adhesive. Macroelectrodes record the activity of large 
groups of neurons. In rare cases, macroelectrodes are 
placed in the depths of the human brain, but most 
often they are placed on the scalp, and their activity 
is recorded on a polygraph.
Metabolic activity can be measured by giving an 
animal an injection of radioactive 2-DG, which accu-
mulates in metabolically active neurons. The presence 
of the radioactivity is revealed through autoradiogra-
phy: Slices of the brain are placed on microscope 
slides, covered with a photographic emulsion, left to 
sit for a while, and then developed like photographic 
negatives. When neurons are stimulated, they synthe-
size the nuclear protein Fos. The presence of Fos, 
revealed by a special staining method, provides 
another way to discover active regions of the brain. 
The metabolic activity of various regions of the living 
human brain can be revealed by the 2-DG method, 
but a PET scanner is used to detect the active 
regions. Functional MRI scanners depict localized 
brain activity by measuring regional blood oxygen 
levels. Functional MRI scans have much higher spatial 
and temporal resolution than PET scans do.
Researchers can stimulate various regions of the 
brain by implanting a macroelectrode and applying 
mild electrical stimulation. Alternatively, they can 
implant a guide cannula in the brain; after the animal 
has recovered from the surgery, they insert a smaller 
cannula and inject a weak solution of an excitatory 
amino acid into the brain. The advantage of this pro-
cedure is that only neurons whose cell bodies are 
located nearby will be stimulated; axons passing 
through the region will not be affected. Viruses can 
be used to deliver genes for photosensitive proteins 
that produce depolarizations or hyperpolarizations of 
the membranes of specific neurons when the proteins 
are stimulated by light. Transcranial magnetic stimula-
tion induces electrical activity in the human cerebral 
cortex, which temporarily disrupts the functioning of 
neural circuits located there.
Table 5.2 summarizes the research methods pre-
sented in this section.
 Thought Questions
1.	 Suppose that you had the opportunity to record an 
fMRI from a person (perhaps yourself) while the 
person was performing a behavior, thinking about 
something, or attending to a particular stimulus. 
Describe what you would have the person do.
2.	 Can you think of some ways that you could use 
optogenetic methods to investigate neural mecha-
nisms involved in the control of a behavior or sen-
sory system?
table 5.2  Research Methods: Part II
Goal of Method
Method
Remarks
Record electrical activity of single 
neurons 
Glass or metal microelectrodes 
 
Metal microelectrodes can be implanted 
permanently to record neural activity as 
animal moves
Record electrical activity of regions 
of brain
Metal macroelectrodes 
In humans, usually attached to the scalp 
with a special paste
Record magnetic fields induced by 
neural activity 
Magnetoencephalography; uses a 
neuromagnetometer, which contains 
an array of SQUIDs
Can determine the location of a group of 
neurons firing synchronously 
Record metabolic activity of regions 
of brain
2-DG autoradiography 
Measures local glucose utilization 
  
Measurement of Fos protein 
Identifies neurons that have recently been 
stimulated
(continued on next page)

156	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
AChE, the drugs prevent the rapid destruction of ACh 
after it is released by terminal buttons and thus prolong 
the postsynaptic potentials at acetylcholinergic synapses.
Now that we understand the action of the insecti-
cides, we know that these drugs act at acetylcholinergic 
synapses. What neurochemical methods should we use to 
discover the sites of action of the drugs in the brain? First, 
let’s consider methods by which we can localize particular 
neurochemicals, such as neurotransmitters and neuro-
modulators. (In our case we are interested in acetylcholine.) 
There are at least two basic ways of localizing neuro-
chemicals in the brain: localizing the chemicals them-
selves or localizing the enzymes that produce them.
Peptides (or proteins) can be localized directly by 
means of immunocytochemical methods, which were 
described in the first section of this chapter. Slices of 
brain tissue are exposed to an antibody for the peptide 
and linked to a dye (usually, a fluorescent dye). The 
slices are then examined under a microscope using light 
of a particular wavelength. For example, Figure 5.32 
shows the location of axons in the forebrain that con-
tain vasopressin, a peptide neurotransmitter. Two sets of 
axons are shown. One set, which forms a cluster around 
the third ventricle at the base of the brain, shows up as 
a rusty color. The other set, scattered through the lat-
eral septum, looks like strands of gold fibers. (As you 
can see, a properly stained brain section can be beautiful. 
See Figure 5.32.)
But we are interested in acetylcholine, which is not 
a peptide. Therefore, we cannot use immunocytochem-
ical methods to find this neurotransmitter. However, we 
can use these methods to localize the enzyme that  
Neurochemical Methods
Sometimes we are interested not in the general meta-
bolic activity of particular regions of the brain, but in the 
location of neurons that possess particular types of re-
ceptors or produce particular types of neurotransmitters 
or neuromodulators. We might also want to measure the 
amount of these chemicals secreted by neurons in par-
ticular brain regions during particular circumstances.
Finding Neurons That Produce  
Particular Neurochemicals
Suppose we learn that a particular drug affects behavior. 
How would we go about discovering the neural circuits 
that are responsible for the drug’s effects? To answer 
this question, let’s take a specific example. Physicians 
discovered several years ago that farm workers who had 
been exposed to certain types of insecticides (the or-
ganophosphates) had particularly intense and bizarre 
dreams and even reported having hallucinations while 
awake. A plausible explanation for these symptoms is 
that the drug stimulates the neural circuits involved in 
control of REM sleep—the phase of sleep during which 
dreaming occurs. (After all, dreams are hallucinations 
that we have while sleeping.)
The first question to ask relates to how the organo-
phosphate insecticides work. Pharmacologists have the 
answer: These drugs are acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. 
As you learned in Chapter 4, acetylcholinesterase in-
hibitors are potent acetylcholine agonists. By inhibiting 
table 5.2 
Goal of Method	
Method	
Remarks
  
2-DG PET scan 
Measures regional metabolic activity of 
human brain
  
 
Functional magnetic resonance  
imaging (fMRI) scan 
Measures regional metabolic activity of 
human brain; better spatial and temporal 
resolution than PET scan
Measure neurochemicals in the  
living human brain
PET scan 
Can localize any radioactive substance 
taken up in the human brain
Stimulate neural activity 
Electrical stimulation 
Stimulates neurons near the tip of the elec-
trode and axons passing through region
 
Chemical stimulation with excitatory 
amino acid
Stimulates only neurons near the tip of the 
cannula, not axons passing through region
 
Transcranial magnetic stimulation 
Stimulate neurons in the human cerebral cor-
tex with an electromagnet placed on the head
(continued)

	
Neurochemical Methods	
157
their receptors. Finally, we use autoradiographic meth-
ods to localize the radioactive ligand—and thus the re-
ceptors. Figure 5.34 shows an example of the results of 
this procedure. We see an autoradiogram of a slice of a 
rat’s brain that was soaked in a solution that contained 
radioactive morphine, which bound with the brain’s 
opiate receptors. (See Figure 5.34.)
The second procedure uses immunocytochemistry. 
Receptors are proteins; therefore, we can produce anti-
bodies against them. We expose slices of brain tissue to 
the appropriate antibody (labeled with a fluorescent 
dye) and look at the slices with a microscope under light 
of a particular wavelength.
Let’s apply the method for localizing receptors to 
the first line of investigation we considered in this chapter: 
the role of the ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) in the 
sexual behavior of female rats. As we saw, lesions of the 
VMH abolish this behavior. We also saw that the behavior 
does not occur if the rat’s ovaries are removed but that 
it can be activated by stimulation of the VMH with elec-
tricity or an excitatory amino acid. These results suggest 
that the sex hormones produced by the ovaries act on 
neurons in the VMH.
This hypothesis suggests two experiments. First, we 
could use the procedure shown in Figure 5.29 to place 
a small amount of the appropriate sex hormone directly 
into the VMH of female rats whose ovaries we had previ-
ously removed. As we shall see in Chapter 10, this proce-
dure works; the hormone does reactivate the animals’ 
sexual behavior. The second experiment would use au-
toradiography to look for the receptors for the sex  
produces it. The synthesis of acetylcholine is made pos-
sible by the enzyme choline acetyltransferase (ChAT). 
Thus, neurons that contain this enzyme almost certainly 
secrete ACh. Figure 5.33 shows acetylcholinergic neu-
rons in the pons that have been identified by means of 
immunocytochemistry; the brain tissue was exposed to 
an antibody to ChAT attached to a fluorescent dye. In 
fact, research using many of the methods described  
in this chapter indicate that these neurons play a role in 
controlling REM sleep. (See Figure 5.33.)
Localizing Particular Receptors
As we saw in Chapter 2, neurotransmitters, neuromodu-
lators, and hormones convey their messages to their 
target cells by binding with receptors on or in these 
cells. The location of these receptors can be determined 
by two different procedures.
The first procedure uses autoradiography. We ex-
pose slices of brain tissue to a solution containing a ra-
dioactive ligand for a particular receptor. Next, we rinse 
the slices so that the only radioactivity remaining in 
them is that of the molecules of the ligand bound to 
figure 5.32  Localization of a Peptide
The peptide is revealed by means of immunocytochemistry. 
The photomicrograph shows a portion of a frontal section 
through the rat forebrain. The gold- and rust-colored fibers 
are axons and terminal buttons that contain vasopressin,  
a peptide neurotransmitter.
(Courtesy of Geert DeVries, University of Massachusetts.)
figure 5.33  Localization of an Enzyme
An enzyme responsible for the synthesis of a neurotransmitter 
is revealed by immunocytochemistry. The photomicrograph 
shows a section through the pons. The orange neurons 
contain choline acetyltransferase, which implies that they 
produce (and thus secrete) acetylcholine.
(Courtesy of David A. Morilak and Roland Ciaranello, Nancy Pritzker Laboratory 
of Developmental and Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine.)

158	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
sealed at the bottom. Another small metal tube leads the 
solution away after it has circulated through the pouch. 
A drawing of such a probe is shown in Figure 5.35.
We use stereotaxic surgery to place a microdialysis 
probe in a rat’s brain so that the tip of the probe is  
located in the region we are interested in. We pump a 
small amount of a solution similar to extracellular fluid 
through one of the small metal tubes into the dialysis 
tubing. The fluid circulates through the dialysis tubing 
and passes through the second metal tube, from which 
it is taken for analysis. As the fluid passes through the 
dialysis tubing, it collects molecules from the extracel-
lular fluid of the brain, which are pushed across the 
membrane by the force of diffusion.
We analyze the contents of the fluid that has passed 
through the dialysis tubing by an extremely sensitive ana-
lytical method. This method is so sensitive that it can 
detect neurotransmitters (and their breakdown prod-
ucts) that have been released by the terminal buttons 
and have escaped from the synaptic cleft into the rest of 
the extracellular fluid. We find that the amount of dopa-
mine present in the extracellular fluid of the nucleus 
accumbens, located in the basal forebrain, does increase 
when we give a rat an injection of cocaine. In fact, we find 
that the amount of dopamine in this region increases 
when we administer any addictive drug, such as heroin, 
hormone. We would expose slices of rat brain to the 
radioactive hormone, rinse them, and perform autora-
diography. If we did so, we would indeed find radioactiv-
ity in the VMH. (And if we compared slices from the 
brains of female and male rats, we would find evidence 
of more hormone receptors in the females’ brains.) We 
could also use immunocytochemistry to localize the hor-
mone receptors, and we would obtain the same results.
Measuring Chemicals Secreted  
in the Brain
We know that cocaine—a particularly addictive drug—
blocks the reuptake of dopamine, which suggests that 
the extracellular concentration of dopamine increases in 
some parts of the brain when a person takes cocaine. To 
measure the amount of dopamine in particular regions 
of the brain, we use a procedure called microdialysis.
Dialysis is a process in which substances are sepa-
rated by means of an artificial membrane that is perme-
able to some molecules but not others. A microdialysis 
probe consists of a small metal tube that introduces a 
solution into a section of dialysis tubing—a piece of  
artificial membrane shaped in the form of a cylinder, 
figure 5.34  Autoradiogram of a Rat Brain
This horizontal section (rostral at top) was incubated in a 
solution containing radioactive morphine, a ligand for opiate 
receptors. The receptors are indicated by white areas.
(From Herkenham, M. A., and Pert, C. B. Journal of Neuroscience, 1982, 2,  
1129–1149. Reprinted with permission.)
x microdialysis  A procedure for analyzing chemicals present in 
the interstitial fluid through a small piece of tubing made of a 
semipermeable membrane that is implanted in the brain.
figure 5.35  Microdialysis
A dilute salt solution is slowly infused into the 
microdialysis tube, where it picks up molecules that 
diffuse in from the extracellular fluid. The contents of the 
fluid are then analyzed.
Dental
plastic
Fluid is pumped
through inner cannula
Fluid is collected
and analyzed
Skull
Brain
Dialysis tubing
Substances in extracellular
fluid diffuse through the
dialysis tubing

	
Neurochemical Methods	
159
I wish I could say that the fetal transplantation proce-
dure has cured people stricken with Parkinson’s disease 
and those whose brains were damaged with the contami-
nated drug. Unfortunately, as we will see in Chapter 15, 
the therapeutic effects of the transplant are often tempo-
rary, and with time, serious side effects often emerge.
nicotine, or alcohol. We even see increased dopamine 
secretion when the animal participates in a pleasurable 
activity such as eating when hungry, drinking when 
thirsty, or engaging in sexual activity. Such observations 
support the conclusion that the release of dopamine in 
the nucleus accumbens plays a role in reinforcement.
In a few special cases (for example, in monitoring 
brain chemicals of people with intracranial hemor-
rhages or head trauma) the microdialysis procedure 
has been applied to study of the human brain, but ethi-
cal reasons prevent us from doing so for research pur-
poses. Fortunately, there is a noninvasive way to mea-
sure neurochemicals in the human brain. Although 
PET scanners are expensive machines, they are also 
versatile. They can be used to localize any radioactive 
substance that emits positrons.
Figure 5.36 shows PET scans of the brain of Mr. B., 
the man described in the case that opened this chapter. 
A stereotaxic apparatus was used to transplant fetal  
dopamine-secreting neurons into his basal ganglia. As we  
saw, PET scans were taken of his brain before his surgery 
and a little more than a year afterward. He was given an 
injection of radioactive l-DOPA one hour before each 
scan was made. As you learned in Chapter 4, l-DOPA is 
taken up by the terminals of dopaminergic neurons, 
where it is converted to dopamine; thus, the radioactiv-
ity shown in the scans indicates the presence of dopa-
mine-secreting terminals in the basal ganglia. The scans 
show the amount of radioactivity before (part a) and 
after (part b) he received the transplant. As you can see, 
the basal ganglia contained substantially more dopamine 
after the surgery. (See Figure 5.36.)
figure 5.36  PET Scans of a Patient with 
Parkinsonian Symptoms
The scans show uptake of radioactive l-DOPA in the 
basal ganglia of a patient with parkinsonian symptoms 
induced by a toxic chemical before and after receiving a 
transplant of fetal dopaminergic neurons. (a) Preoperative 
scan. (b) Scan taken 13 months postoperatively. The 
increased uptake of l-DOPA indicates that the fetal 
transplant was secreting dopamine.
(Adapted from Widner, H., Tetrud, J., Rehncrona, S., et al. New England Journal 
of Medicine, 1992, 327, 1556–1563. Scans reprinted with permission.)
(a)
(b)
Section Summary
Neurochemical Methods
Neurochemical methods can be used to determine 
the location of an enormous variety of substances in 
the brain. They can identify neurons that secrete a 
particular neurotransmitter or neuromodulator and 
those that possess receptors that respond to the 
presence of these substances. Peptides and proteins 
can be directly localized, through immunocytochemi-
cal methods; the tissue is exposed to an antibody 
that is linked to a molecule that fluoresces under light 
of a particular wavelength. Other substances can be 
detected by immunocytochemical localization of an 
enzyme that is required for their synthesis.
Receptors for neurochemicals can be localized by 
two means. The first method uses autoradiography to 
reveal the distribution of a radioactive ligand to which 
the tissue has been exposed. The second method 
uses immunocytochemistry to detect the presence of 
the receptors themselves, which are proteins.
The secretions of neurotransmitters and neuro-
modulators can be measured by implanting the tip of 
a microdialysis probe in a particular region of the 
brain. A PET scanner can be used to perform similar 
observations of the human brain. People are given an 
injection of a radioactive tracer such as a drug that 
(continued on next page)

160	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
binds with a particular receptor or a chemical that is 
incorporated into a particular neurotransmitter, and a 
PET scanner reveals the location of the tracer in the 
brain.
Table 5.3 summarizes the research methods pre-
sented in this section.
 Thought Question
Using methods you learned about in all of this chapter 
so far, describe a behavior, cognitive process, or per-
ceptual ability that you would like to study. Describe 
the kinds of experiments you would perform and say 
what kinds of information each method might provide.
table 5.3  Research Methods: Part III
Goal of Method
Method
Remarks
Measure neurotransmitters and neuro-
modulators released by neurons
Microdialysis 
A wide variety of substances can be  
analyzed
Identify neurons producing a particular 
neurotransmitter or neuromodulator
Immunocytochemical localization 
of peptide or protein
Requires a specific antibody 
  
 
Immunocytochemical localization 
of enzyme responsible for syn-
thesis of substance
Useful if substance is not a peptide  
or protein 
Identify neurons that contain a particular 
type of receptor
Autoradiographic localization of 
radioactive ligand
  
 
Immunocytochemical localization 
of receptor
Requires a specific antibody 
Genetic methods 
 
Twin studies 
 
Comparison of concordance rates of 
monozygotic and dizygotic twins estimates 
heritability of trait
  
Adoption studies 
Similarity of offspring and adoptive and bio-
logical parents estimates heritability of trait
  
Targeted mutations 
Inactivation, insertion, or increased expres-
sion of a gene
Antisense oligonucleotides 
Bind with messenger RNA; prevent  
synthesis of protein
Genetic Methods
All behavior is determined by interactions between an 
individual’s brain and his or her environment. Many 
behavioral characteristics—such as talents, personality 
variables, and mental disorders—seem to run in fami-
lies. This fact suggests that genetic factors may play a 
role in the development of physiological differences 
that are ultimately responsible for these characteristics. 
In some cases the genetic link is very clear: A defective 
gene interferes with brain development, and a neurological 
abnormality causes behavioral deficits. In other cases 
the links between heredity and behavior are much 
more subtle, and special genetic methods must be used 
to reveal them.
Twin Studies
A powerful method for estimating the influence of he-
redity on a particular trait is to compare the concordance 
rate for this trait in pairs of monozygotic and dizygotic 
twins. Monozygotic twins (identical twins) have identical 

	
Genetic Methods	
161
being studied will resemble both their biological and 
adoptive parents.
Genomic Studies
The human genome consists of the DNA that encodes 
our genetic information. Because of the accumulation 
of mutations over past generations of our species, no 
two people, with the exception of monozygotic twins, 
have identical genetic information. The particular form 
of an individual gene is called an allele (from the Greek 
allos, “other”). For example, different alleles of the gene 
responsible for the production of iris pigment produce 
pigments with different colors. Genomic studies attempt 
to determine the location in the genome of genes  
responsible for various physical and behavioral traits.
Linkage studies identify families whose members vary 
with respect to a particular trait—for example, the pres-
ence or absence of a particular hereditary disease. A  
variety of markers, sequences of DNA whose locations are  
already known, are compared with the nature of an indi-
vidual person’s trait. For example, the gene responsible 
for Huntington’s disease, a neurological disorder discussed 
in Chapter 15, was found to be located near a known 
marker on the short arm of chromosome 4. Researchers 
studied people in an extended family in Venezuela that 
contained many members with Huntington’s disease 
and found that the presence or absence of the disease 
correlated with the presence or absence of the marker.
Genomewide association studies have been made possi-
ble by the development of methods to obtain the DNA 
sequence of the entire human genome. These studies 
permit researchers to compare all or portions of the ge-
nomes of different individuals to determine whether dif-
ferences in the people’s genomes correlate with the pres-
ence or absence of diseases (or other traits). As we will see 
in Chapter 16, these studies are beginning to reveal the 
location of genes that control characteristics that contrib-
ute to the development of various mental disorders.
Targeted Mutations
A genetic method developed by molecular biologists 
has put a powerful tool in the hands of neuroscien-
tists. Targeted mutations are mutated genes produced 
in the laboratory and inserted into the chromosomes 
genotypes—that is, their chromosomes, and the genes 
they contain, are identical. In contrast, the genetic sim-
ilarity between dizygotic twins (fraternal twins) is, on 
the average, 50 percent. Investigators study records to 
identify pairs of twins in which at least one member has 
the trait—for example, a diagnosis of a particular men-
tal disorder. If both twins have been diagnosed with this 
disorder, they are said to be concordant. If only one has 
received this diagnosis, the twins are said to be discor-
dant. Thus, if a disorder has a genetic basis, the percent-
age of monozygotic twins who are concordant for the 
diagnosis will be higher than that for dizygotic twins. 
For example, as we will see in Chapter 16, the concor-
dance rate for schizophrenia in twins is at least four 
times higher for monozygotic twins than for dizygotic 
twins, a finding that provides strong evidence that 
schizophrenia is a heritable trait. Twin studies have 
found that many individual characteristics, including 
personality traits, prevalence of obesity, incidence of 
alcoholism, and a wide variety of mental disorders, are 
influenced by genetic factors.
Adoption Studies
Another method for estimating the heritability of a par-
ticular behavioral trait is to compare people who were 
adopted early in life with their biological and adoptive 
parents. All behavioral traits are affected to some de-
gree by hereditary factors, environmental factors, and 
an interaction between hereditary and environmental 
factors. Environmental factors are both social and bio-
logical in nature. For example, the mother’s health, 
nutrition, and drug-taking behavior during pregnancy 
are prenatal environmental factors, and the child’s diet, 
medical care, and social environment (both inside and 
outside the home) are postnatal environmental factors. 
If a child is adopted soon after birth, the genetic factors 
will be associated with the biological parents, the prena-
tal environmental factors will be associated with the bio-
logical mother, and most of the postnatal environmen-
tal factors will be associated with the adoptive parents.
Adoption studies require that the investigator knows 
the identity of the parents of the people being studied 
and is able to measure the behavioral trait in the bio-
logical and adoptive parents. If the people being studied 
strongly resemble their biological parents, we conclude 
that the trait is probably influenced by genetic factors. 
To be certain, we will have to rule out possible differ-
ences in the prenatal environment of the adopted chil-
dren. If, instead, the people resemble their adoptive 
parents, we conclude that the trait is influenced by envi-
ronmental factors. (It would take further study to deter-
mine just what these environmental factors might be.) 
Of course, it is possible that both hereditary and  
environmental factors play roles, in which case the people 
x genome  The complete set of genes that compose the DNA of 
a particular species.
x allele  The nature of the particular sequence of base pairs of 
DNA that constitutes a gene; for examples, the genes that code for 
blue or brown iris pigment are different alleles of a particular gene.
x targeted mutation  A mutated gene (also called a “knockout 
gene”) produced in the laboratory and inserted into the chromo-
somes of mice; fails to produce a functional protein.

162	
Chapter 5  Methods and Strategies of Research 
the host species, or they can produce entirely new 
proteins.
Antisense Oligonucleotides
Another genetic method involves the production of 
molecules that block the production of proteins encoded 
by particular genes by injecting antisense oligonucleotides. 
The most common type of antisense oligonucleotides 
are modified strands of RNA or DNA that will bind with 
specific molecules of messenger RNA and prevent them 
from producing their protein. Once the molecules of 
mRNA are trapped in this way, they are destroyed by 
enzymes present in the cell. The term antisense refers to 
the fact that the synthetic oligonucleotides contain a 
sequence of bases complementary to those contained by 
a particular gene or molecule of mRNA.
of mice. In some cases, the genes (also called knock-
out genes) are defective: These genes fail to produce 
a functional protein. In many cases the target of the 
mutation is an enzyme that controls a particular chem-
ical reaction. For example, we will see in Chapter 13 
that lack of a particular enzyme interferes with learn-
ing. This result suggests that the enzyme is partly  
responsible for changes in the structure of synapses 
required for learning to occur. In other cases the target 
of the mutation is a protein that itself serves useful 
functions in the cell. For example, we will see in Chap-
ter 18 that a particular type of cannabinoid receptor is 
involved in the reinforcing and analgesic effects of 
opiates. Researchers can even produce conditional 
knockouts that cause the animal’s genes to stop express-
ing a particular gene when the animal is given a par-
ticular drug. This permits the targeted gene to express 
itself normally during the animal’s development and 
then be knocked out at a later time. Investigators can 
also use methods of genetic engineering to insert new 
genes into the DNA of mice. These genes can cause 
increased production of proteins normally found in 
x antisense oligonucleotide (oh li go new klee oh tide)  Modi-
fied strand of RNA or DNA that binds with a specific molecule of 
mRNA and prevents it from producing its protein.
Section Summary
Genetic Methods
Because genes direct an organism’s development, 
genetic methods are very useful in studies of the 
physiology of behavior. Twin studies compare the 
concordance rates of monozygotic (identical) and 
dizygotic (fraternal) twins for a particular trait. A 
higher concordance rate for monozygotic twins pro-
vides evidence that the trait is influenced by hered-
ity. Adoption studies compare people who were 
adopted during infancy with their biological and 
adoptive parents. If the people resemble their bio-
logical parents, evidence is seen for genetic factors. 
If the people resemble their adoptive parents, evi-
dence is seen for a role of factors in the family envi-
ronment. Linkage studies and genomewide associa-
tion studies make it possible to identify the locations 
of genes that are responsible for a variety of behav-
ioral and physical traits.
Targeted mutations permit neuroscientists to 
study the effects of a presence or absence of a partic-
ular protein—for example, an enzyme, structural pro-
tein, or receptor—on an animal’s physiological and 
behavioral characteristics. Genes that cause the  
production of foreign proteins or increase production 
of native proteins can be “knocked out” or they can 
be “knocked in”—inserted into the genome of strains 
of animals. Antisense oligonucleotides can be used to 
block the production of particular proteins.
Table 5.4 summarizes the research methods pre-
sented in this section.
 Thought Questions
1.	 You have probably read news reports about studies 
of the genetics of human behavioral traits or seen 
them on television. What does it really mean when 
a laboratory reports the discovery of, say, a “gene 
for shyness”?
2.	 Most rats do not appear to like the taste of alcohol, 
but researchers have bred some rats that will drink 
alcohol in large quantities. Can you think of ways to 
use these animals to investigate the possible role of 
genetic factors in susceptibility to alcoholism?

	
Review Questions	
163
table 5.4  Research Methods: Part IV
Goal of Method
Method
Remarks
Genetic methods 
Twin studies 
Comparison of concordance rates of monozygotic and 
dizygotic twins estimates heritability of trait
 
Adoption studies 
Similarity of offspring and adoptive and biological  
parents estimates heritability of trait
 
Targeted mutations
Inactivation, insertion, or increased expression of a gene
 
Antisense oligonucleotides
Bind with messenger RNA; prevent synthesis of protein
Review Questions
1.  Discuss the research method of experimental ablation: 
the rationale, the evaluation of behavioral effects 
resulting from brain damage, and the production  
of brain lesions.
2.  Describe stereotaxic surgery.
3.  Describe research methods for preserving, section-
ing, and staining the brain and for studying its parts 
and interconnections.
4.  Describe research methods for tracing efferent and 
afferent axons and for studying the living human brain.
5.  Describe how the neural activity of the brain is mea-
sured and recorded, both electrically and chemically.
6.  Describe how neural activity in the brain is stimulated, 
both chemically and electrically, and the behavioral 
effects of electrical brain stimulation.
7.  Discuss research techniques to identify genetic  
factors that may influence behavior.
Study and Review on MyPsychLab

164	
Chapter 6  Vision
Vision
Outline
6
 The Stimulus
 Anatomy of the Visual System
The Eyes
Photoreceptors
Connections Between Eye  
and Brain
Section Summary
 Coding of Visual  
Information in the Retina
Coding of Light and Dark
Coding of Color
Section Summary
 Analysis of Visual Information: 
Role of the Striate Cortex
Anatomy of the Striate Cortex
Orientation and Movement
Spatial Frequency
Retinal Disparity
Color
Modular Organization  
of the Striate Cortex
Section Summary
 Analysis of Visual Information: 
Role of the Visual Association 
Cortex
Two Streams of Visual Analysis
Perception of Color
Perception of Form
Perception of Movement
Perception of Spatial Location
Section Summary
chapter

A
s we saw in Chapter 3, the brain performs two 
major functions: It controls the movements of 
the muscles, producing useful behaviors, and it 
regulates the body’s internal environment. To perform 
both these tasks, the brain must be informed about what 
is happening both in the external environment and 
within the body. Such information is received by the 
sensory systems. This chapter and the next are devoted 
to a discussion of the ways in which sensory organs detect 
changes in the environment and the ways in which the 
brain interprets neural signals from these organs.
We receive information about the environment 
from sensory receptors—specialized neurons that de-
tect a variety of physical events. (Do not confuse sensory 
Dr. L., a young neuropsychologist, was presenting the case 
of Mrs. R. to a group of medical students doing a rotation 
in the neurology department at the medical center. The 
chief of the department had shown them Mrs. R.’s CT scans, 
and now Dr. L. was addressing the students. He told them 
that Mrs. R.’s stroke had not impaired her ability to talk or 
to move about, but it had affected her vision.
A nurse ushered Mrs. R. into the room and helped her 
find a seat at the end of the table.
“How are you, Mrs. R. ?” asked Dr. L.
“I’m fine. I’ve been home for a month now, and I can 
do just about everything that I did before I had my stroke.”
“Good. How is your vision?”
“Well, I’m afraid that’s still a problem.”
“What seems to give you the most trouble?”
“I just don’t seem to be able to recognize things. 
When I’m working in my kitchen, I know what everything is 
as long as no one moves anything. A few times my 
husband tried to help me by putting things away, and I 
couldn’t see them any more.” She laughed. “Well, I could 
see them, but I just couldn’t say what they were.”
Dr. L. took some objects out of a paper bag and 
placed them on the table in front of her.
“Can you tell me what these are?” he asked. “No,” he 
said, “please don’t touch them.”
Mrs. R. stared intently at the objects. “No, I can’t 
rightly say what they are.”
Dr. L. pointed to one of them, a wristwatch. “Tell me 
what you see here,” he said.
Mrs. R. looked thoughtful, turning her head one way and 
then the other. “Well, I see something round, and it has two 
things attached to it, one on the top and one on the bot-
tom.” She continued to stare at it. “There are some things 
inside the circle, I think, but I can’t make out what they are.”
“Pick it up.”
She did so, made a wry face, and said, “Oh. It’s a 
wristwatch.” At Dr. L.’s request, she picked up the rest of 
the objects, one by one, and identified each of them 
correctly.
“Do you have trouble recognizing people, too?” asked 
Dr. L.
“Oh, yes!” she sighed. “While I was still in the hospital, 
my husband and my son both came in to see me, and I 
couldn’t tell who was who until my husband said some-
thing—then I could tell which direction his voice was coming 
from. Now I’ve trained myself to recognize my husband. I 
can usually see his glasses and his bald head, but I have to 
work at it. And I’ve been fooled a few times.” She laughed. 
“One of our neighbors is bald and wears glasses, too, and 
one day when he and his wife were visiting us, I thought he 
was my husband, so I called him ‘honey.’ It was a little 
embarrassing at first, but everyone understood.”
“What does a face look like to you?” asked Dr. L.
“Well, I know that it’s a face, because I can usually see 
the eyes, and it’s on top of a body. I can see a body pretty 
well, by how it moves.” She paused a moment. “Oh, yes, I 
forgot, sometimes I can recognize a person by how he 
moves. You know, you can often recognize friends by the 
way they walk, even when they’re far away. I can still do 
that. That’s funny, isn’t it? I can’t see people’s faces very 
well, but I can recognize the way they walk.”
Dr. L. made some movements with his hands. “Can 
you tell what I’m pretending to do?” he asked.
“Yes, you’re mixing something—like some cake batter.”
He mimed the gestures of turning a key, writing, and 
dealing out playing cards, and Mrs. R. recognized them 
without any difficulty.
“Do you have any trouble reading?” he asked.
“Well, a little, but I don’t do too badly.”
Dr. L. handed her a magazine, and she began to read 
the article aloud—somewhat hesitantly but accurately. 
“Why is it,” she asked, “that I can see the words all right 
but have so much trouble with things and with people’s 
faces?”
x sensory receptor  A specialized neuron that detects  
a particular category of physical events.

166	
Chapter 6  Vision
the other sensory modalities: audition, the vestibular 
senses, the somatosenses, gustation, and olfaction.
The Stimulus
As we all know, our eyes detect the presence of light. 
For humans, light is a narrow band of the spectrum of 
electromagnetic radiation. Electromagnetic radiation 
with a wavelength of between 380 and 760 nm (a nano-
meter, nm, is one-billionth of a meter) is visible to us. 
(See Figure 6.1.) Other animals can detect different 
ranges of electromagnetic radiation. For example, hon-
eybees can detect differences in ultraviolet radiation 
reflected by flowers that appear white to us. The range 
of wavelengths we call light is not qualitatively different 
from the rest of the electromagnetic spectrum; it is sim-
ply the part of the continuum that we humans can see.
The perceived color of light is determined by three 
dimensions: hue, saturation, and brightness. Light travels 
at a constant speed of approximately 300,000 kilometers 
(186,000 miles) per second. Thus, if the frequency of 
oscillation of the wave varies, the distance between the 
peaks of the waves will vary similarly but in inverse fash-
ion. Slower oscillations lead to longer wavelengths, and 
faster ones lead to shorter wavelengths. Wavelength de-
termines the first of the three perceptual dimensions of 
light: hue. The visible spectrum displays the range of 
hues that our eyes can detect.
Light can also vary in intensity, which corresponds 
to the second perceptual dimension of light: brightness. 
If the intensity of the electromagnetic radiation is  
receptors with receptors for neurotransmitters, neuro-
modulators, and hormones. Sensory receptors are spe-
cialized neurons, and the other types of receptors are 
specialized proteins that bind with certain molecules.) 
Stimuli impinge on the receptors and, through various 
processes, alter their membrane potentials. This process 
is known as sensory transduction because sensory events 
are transduced (“transferred”) into changes in the cells’ 
membrane potential. These electrical changes are called 
receptor potentials. Most receptors lack axons; a por-
tion of their somatic membrane forms synapses with the 
dendrites of other neurons. Receptor potentials affect 
the release of neurotransmitters and hence modify the 
pattern of firing in neurons with which these cells form 
synapses. Ultimately, the information reaches the brain.
People often say that we have five senses: sight, hear-
ing, smell, taste, and touch. Actually, we have more than 
five, but even experts disagree about how the lines be-
tween the various categories should be drawn. Certainly, 
we should add the vestibular senses; as well as providing 
us with auditory information, the inner ear supplies in-
formation about head orientation and movement. The 
sense of touch (or, more accurately, somatosensation) de-
tects changes in pressure, warmth, cold, vibration, limb 
position, and several different kinds of events that dam-
age tissue (that is, produce pain). Everyone agrees that 
we can detect all of these stimuli; the issue is whether we 
should say that they are detected by separate senses.
This chapter considers vision, the sensory modality 
that receives the most attention from psychologists, 
anatomists, and physiologists. One reason for this atten-
tion derives from the fascinating complexity of the sen-
sory organs of vision and the relatively large proportion 
of the brain that is devoted to the analysis of visual infor-
mation. Approximately 20 percent of the cerebral cor-
tex plays a direct role in the analysis of visual informa-
tion (Wandell, Dumoulin, and Brewer, 2007). Another 
reason, I am sure, is that vision is so important to us as 
individuals. A natural fascination with such a rich source 
of information about the world leads to curiosity about 
how this sensory modality works. Chapter 7 deals with 
figure 6.1  The Electromagnetic Spectrum
Wavelength in nanometers
400
500
600
700
The visible spectrum
Gamma
rays
X rays
Ultraviolet
rays
Radar
Television and radio
broadcast bands
AC circuits
Infrared
rays
x sensory transduction  The process by which sensory stimuli 
are transduced into slow, graded receptor potentials.
x receptor potential  A slow, graded electrical potential 
produced by a receptor cell in response to a physical stimulus.
x hue  One of the perceptual dimensions of color; the dominant 
wavelength.
x brightness  One of the perceptual dimensions of color; intensity.

	
Anatomy of the Visual System	
167
preventing a contact lens that has slipped off the cornea 
from “falling behind the eye”). Figure 6.4 illustrates the 
anatomy of the eye. (See Figure 6.4.)
The eyes make three types of movements: vergence 
movements, saccadic movements, and pursuit move-
ments. Vergence movements are cooperative movements 
that keep both eyes fixed on the same target—or, more 
precisely, that keep the image of the target object on 
corresponding parts of the two retinas. If you hold up a 
finger in front of your face, look at it, and then bring 
your finger closer to your face, your eyes will make ver-
gence movements toward your nose. If you then look at 
an object on the other side of the room, your eyes will 
rotate outward, and you will see two separate blurry im-
ages of your finger.
When you scan the scene in front of you, your gaze 
does not roam slowly and steadily across its features. In-
stead, your eyes make jerky saccadic movements—you 
shift your gaze abruptly from one point to another. (Sac-
cade comes from the French word for “jerk.”) When you 
read a line in this book, your eyes stop several times, 
moving very quickly between each stop. You cannot con-
sciously control the speed of movement between stops; 
during each saccade the eyes move as fast as they can. 
increased, the apparent brightness increases, too. The 
third dimension, saturation, refers to the relative purity 
of the light that is being perceived. If all the radiation is 
of one wavelength, the perceived color is pure, or fully 
saturated. Conversely, if the radiation contains all visible 
wavelengths, it produces no sensation of hue—it ap-
pears white. Colors with intermediate amounts of satura-
tion consist of different mixtures of wavelengths. Figure 6.2 
shows some color samples, all with the same hue but 
with different levels of brightness and saturation. (See 
Figure 6.2.)
Anatomy of the Visual System
For an individual to see, an image must be focused on 
the retina, the inner lining of the eye. This image causes 
changes in the electrical activity of millions of neurons 
in the retina, which results in messages being sent 
through the optic nerves to the rest of the brain. (I said 
“the rest” because the retina is actually part of the brain; 
it and the optic nerve are in the central—not periph-
eral—nervous system.) This section describes the anat-
omy of the eyes, the photoreceptors in the retina that 
detect the presence of light, and the connections be-
tween the retina and the brain.
The Eyes
The eyes are suspended in the orbits, bony pockets in the 
front of the skull. They are held in place and moved by 
six extraocular muscles attached to the tough, white 
outer coat of the eye called the sclera. (See Figure 6.3.) 
Normally, we cannot look behind our eyeballs and see 
these muscles because their attachments to the eyes are 
hidden by the conjunctiva. These mucous membranes 
line the eyelid and fold back to attach to the eye (thus 
figure 6.2  Saturation and Brightness
This figure shows examples of colors with the same 
dominant wavelength (hue) but different levels of 
saturations or brightness.
Decreasing
saturation
Increasing
saturation
Increasing
brightness
Decreasing
brightness
figure 6.3  The Extraocular Muscles, Which Move 
the Eyes
Extraocular
muscles
x saturation  One of the perceptual dimensions of color; purity.
x vergence movement  The cooperative movement of the eyes, 
which ensures that the image of an object falls on identical 
portions of both retinas.
x saccadic movement (suh kad ik)  The rapid, jerky movement of 
the eyes used in scanning a visual scene.

168	
Chapter 6  Vision
rods do not detect different colors and provide vision of 
poor acuity, they are more sensitive to light. In a very 
dimly lighted environment we use our rod vision; there-
fore, in very dim light we are color-blind and lack foveal 
vision. (See Table 6.1.)
Another feature of the retina is the optic disk, where 
the axons conveying visual information gather together 
and leave the eye through the optic nerve. The optic 
disk produces a blind spot because no receptors are lo-
cated there. We do not normally perceive our blind 
spots, but their presence can be demonstrated. If you 
have not found yours, you may want to try the exercise 
described in Figure 6.5.
Only by performing a pursuit movement—say, by look-
ing at your finger while you move it around—can you 
make your eyes move more slowly. 
The white outer layer of most of the eye, the sclera, 
is opaque and does not permit entry of light. However, 
the cornea, the outer layer at the front of the eye, is 
transparent. The amount of light that enters is regu-
lated by the size of the pupil, which is an opening in the 
iris, the pigmented ring of muscles situated behind the 
cornea. The lens, situated immediately behind the iris, 
consists of a series of transparent, onionlike layers. Its 
shape can be altered by contraction of the ciliary muscles. 
These changes in shape permit the eye to focus images 
of near or distant objects on the retina—a process called 
accommodation.
After passing through the lens, light traverses the 
main part of the eye, which is filled with vitreous humor 
(“glassy liquid”), a clear, gelatinous substance. After 
passing through the vitreous humor, light falls on the 
retina, the interior lining of the back of the eye. In the 
retina are located the receptor cells, the rods and cones 
(named for their shapes), collectively known as photore­
ceptors.
The human retina contains approximately 120 mil-
lion rods and 6 million cones. Although they are greatly 
outnumbered by rods, cones provide us with most of the 
visual information about our environment. In particu-
lar, they are responsible for our daytime vision. They 
provide us with information about small features in the 
environment and thus are the source of vision of the 
highest sharpness, or acuity (from the Latin acus, “nee-
dle”). The fovea, or central region of the retina, which 
mediates our most acute vision, contains only cones. 
Cones are also responsible for color vision—our ability 
to discriminate light of different wavelengths. Although 
figure 6.4  The Human Eye
Optic nerve
Blood vessels
Sclera
Layers of retina
Conjunctiva (merges
with inside of
eyelids)
Cornea
Iris
Lens
Pupil
(opening
in iris)
Vitreous humor
(upper half
has been
removed)
x pursuit movement  The movement that the eyes make to 
maintain an image of a moving object on the fovea.
x accommodation  Changes in the thickness of the lens of the 
eye, accomplished by the ciliary muscles, that focus images of near 
or distant objects on the retina.
x retina  The neural tissue and photoreceptive cells located on 
the inner surface of the posterior portion of the eye.
x rod  One of the receptor cells of the retina; sensitive to light of 
low intensity.
x cone  One of the receptor cells of the retina; maximally 
sensitive to one of three different wavelengths of light and hence 
encodes color vision.
x photoreceptor  One of the receptor cells of the retina; 
transduces photic energy into electrical potentials.
x fovea (foe vee a)  The region of the retina that mediates the 
most acute vision of birds and higher mammals. Color-sensitive 
cones constitute the only type of photoreceptor found in the fovea.
x optic disk  The location of the exit point from the retina of the 
fibers of the ganglion cells that form the optic nerve; responsible 
for the blind spot.

	
Anatomy of the Visual System	
169
cells, 24–29 types of amacrine cells, and 10–15 types of 
ganglion cells (Masland, 2001).
Photoreceptors
Figure 6.7 shows a drawing of two rods and a cone. Note 
that each photoreceptor consists of an outer segment con-
nected by a cilium to the inner segment, which contains 
the nucleus. (See Figure 6.7.) The outer segment contains 
several hundred lamellae, or thin plates of membrane. 
(Lamella is the diminutive form of lamina, “thin layer.”)
Close examination of the retina shows that it con-
sists of several layers of neuron cell bodies, their axons 
and dendrites, and the photoreceptors. Figure 6.6  
illustrates a cross section through the primate retina, 
which is divided into three main layers: the photorecep-
tive layer, the bipolar cell layer, and the ganglion cell 
layer. Note that the photoreceptors are at the back of 
the retina; light must pass through the overlying layers 
to get to them. Fortunately, these layers are transparent. 
(See Figure 6.6.)
The photoreceptors form synapses with bipolar 
cells, neurons whose two arms connect the shallowest 
and deepest layers of the retina. In turn, bipolar cells 
form synapses with the ganglion cells, neurons whose 
axons travel through the optic nerves (the second cra-
nial nerves) and carry visual information into the rest of 
the brain. In addition, the retina contains horizontal 
cells and amacrine cells, both of which transmit infor-
mation in a direction parallel to the surface of the retina 
and thus combine messages from adjacent photorecep-
tors. (Look again at Figure 6.6.)
The primate retina contains approximately 55 dif-
ferent types of neurons: one type of rod, three types of 
cones, two types of horizontal cells, ten types of bipolar 
table 6.1  Locations and Response Characteristics of Photoreceptors
Cones
Rods
Most prevalent in the central retina; found in the fovea
Most prevalent in the peripheral retina; not found in the fovea
Sensitive to moderate to high levels of light
Sensitive to low levels of light
Provide information about hue
Provide only monochromatic information
Provide excellent acuity
Provide poor acuity
figure 6.5  A Test for the Blind Spot
With your left eye closed, look at the plus sign with your right eye and move the page 
nearer to and farther from you. When the page is about 20 cm from your face, the 
green circle disappears because its image falls on the blind spot of your right eye.
+
+
+
Fovea
Optic disk
(Blind spot)
x bipolar cell  A bipolar neuron located in the middle layer of 
the retina, conveying information from the photoreceptors to the 
ganglion cells.
x ganglion cell  A neuron located in the retina that receives visual 
information from bipolar cells; its axons give rise to the optic nerve.
x horizontal cell  A neuron in the retina that interconnects adjacent 
photoreceptors and the outer processes of the bipolar cells.
x amacrine cell (amm a krine)  A neuron in the retina that 
interconnects adjacent ganglion cells and the inner processes of 
the bipolar cells.
x lamella  A layer of membrane containing photopigments; 
found in rods and cones of the retina.

170	
Chapter 6  Vision
“rose,” not to rod. Before it is bleached by the action 
of light, rhodopsin has a pinkish hue.) Retinal is syn-
thesized from vitamin A, which explains why carrots, 
which are rich in this vitamin, are said to be good for 
your eyesight.
When a molecule of rhodopsin is exposed to light, 
it breaks into its two constituents: rod opsin and retinal. 
When that happens, the rod opsin changes from its rosy 
color to a pale yellow; hence, we say that the light bleaches 
the photopigment. The splitting of the photopigment 
produces the receptor potential: hyperpolarization of 
the membrane of the photoreceptor.
In the vertebrate retina, photoreceptors provide 
input to both bipolar cells and horizontal cells. Figure 
6.8 shows the neural circuitry from a photoreceptor to 
a ganglion cell. The circuitry is much simplified and 
omits the horizontal cells and amacrine cells. The first 
two types of cells in the circuit—photoreceptors and 
bipolar cells—do not produce action potentials. In-
stead, their release of the neurotransmitter (gluta-
mate) is regulated by the value of their membrane 
Let’s consider the nature of transduction of vi-
sual information. The first step in the chain of events 
that leads to visual perception involves a special 
chemical called a photopigment. Photopigments are 
special molecules embedded in the membrane of the 
lamellae; a single human rod contains approximately 
10 million of them. The molecules consist of two 
parts: an opsin (a protein) and retinal (a lipid). 
There are several forms of opsin; for example, the 
photopigment of human rods, rhodopsin, consists of 
rod opsin plus retinal. (Rhod- refers to the Greek rhodon, 
figure 6.6  Details of Retinal Circuitry
(Adapted from Dowling, J. E., and Boycott, B. B. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B, 1966, 166, 80–111.)
Photoreceptor Layer
Bipolar Cell Layer
Ganglion Cell Layer
Photoreceptors
Bipolar
cell
Ganglion
cell
Amacrine
cell
Horizontal
cell
Light
Back
of Eye
Cone
Rod
Outer
segment
Inner
segment
figure 6.7  Photoreceptors
Lamellae
Lamellae
Cone inner
segment
Rod inner
segment
Nucleus
Mitochondria
Connecting
cilium
Back of retina
Light
x photopigment  A protein dye bonded to retinal, a substance 
derived from vitamin A; responsible for transduction of visual 
information.
x opsin (opp sin)  A class of protein that, together with retinal, 
constitutes the photopigments.
x retinal (rett i nahl)  A chemical synthesized from vitamin A; 
joins with an opsin to form a photopigment.
x rhodopsin (roh dopp sin)  A particular opsin found in rods.

	
Anatomy of the Visual System	
171
light. As we will see, other ganglion cells decrease their 
firing rate in response to light. These neurons are con-
nected to bipolar cells that form different types of syn-
apses with the photoreceptors. The functions of these 
two types of circuits are discussed in the next section, 
“Coding of Visual Information in the Retina.”
Connections Between  
Eye and Brain
The axons of the retinal ganglion cells bring informa-
tion to the rest of the brain. They ascend through the 
optic nerves and reach the dorsal lateral geniculate 
nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus. This nucleus receives 
its name from its resemblance to a bent knee (genu is 
Latin for “knee”). It contains six layers of neurons, each 
of which receives input from only one eye. The neurons 
in the two inner layers contain cell bodies that are 
larger than those in the outer four layers. For this rea-
son the inner two layers are called the magnocellular 
layers, and the outer four layers are called the parvocel­
lular layers (parvo- refers to the small size of the cells). 
A third set of neurons in the koniocellular sublayers are 
found ventral to each of the magnocellular and parvo-
cellular layers. (Konis is Greek word for “dust.”) As we 
will see later, these three sets of layers belong to differ-
ent systems, which are responsible for the analysis of 
different types of visual information. They receive in-
put from different types of retinal ganglion cells. (See 
Figure 6.9.)
The neurons in the LGN send their axons through 
a pathway known as the optic radiations to the primary 
visual cortex—the region surrounding the calcarine 
fissure (calcarine means “spur-shaped”), a horizontal fis-
sure located in the medial and posterior occipital lobe. 
potential; depolarizations increase the release, and hy-
perpolarizations decrease it. The contents of the cir-
cles indicate what would be seen on an oscilloscope 
screen recording changes in the cells’ membrane po-
tentials in response to a spot of light shining on the 
photoreceptor.
The hyperpolarizing effect of light on the mem-
brane of a photoreceptor is shown in the left circle. In 
the dark, photoreceptors constantly release their neurot­
ransmitter. When light strikes molecules of the phot-
opigment, the hyperpolarization that ensues reduces 
the amount of neurotransmitter released by the photo-
receptor. Because the neurotransmitter normally hyper­
polarizes the dendrites of the bipolar cell, a reduction in its 
release causes the membrane of the bipolar cell to depo-
larize. Thus, light hyperpolarizes the photoreceptor 
and depolarizes the bipolar cell. (See Figure 6.8.) The 
depolarization of the bipolar cell causes it to release 
more neurotransmitter, which depolarizes the mem-
brane of the ganglion cell and raises this cell’s rate of 
firing. Thus, light shining on the photoreceptor excites 
the ganglion cell and increases the rate of firing of its 
axon.
The circuit shown in Figure 6.8 illustrates a gan-
glion cell whose firing rate increases in response to 
figure 6.8  Neural Circuitry in the Retina
Light striking a photoreceptor produces a 
hyperpolarization, so the photoreceptor releases less 
neurotransmitter. Because the neurotransmitter normally 
hyperpolarizes the membrane of the bipolar cell, the 
reduction causes a depolarization. This depolarization 
causes the bipolar cell to release more neurotransmitter, 
which excites the ganglion cell.
(Adapted from Dowling, J. E., in The Neurosciences: Fourth Study Program, edit-
ed by F. O. Schmitt and F. G. Worden. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1979.)
Ganglion
cell
To brain
Light
Bipolar cell
Recording
of action
potentials
Depolarizing
membrane
potential
Hyperpolarizing
membrane
potential
Stimulus
Photoreceptor
x dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN)  A group of cell 
bodies within the lateral geniculate body of the thalamus; receives 
inputs from the retina and projects to the primary visual cortex.
x magnocellular layer  One of the inner two layers of neurons in 
the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus; transmits information 
necessary for the perception of form, movement, depth, and small 
differences in brightness to the primary visual cortex.
x parvocellular layer  One of the four outer layers of neurons in 
the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus; transmits information 
necessary for perception of color and fine details to the primary 
visual cortex.
x koniocellular sublayer (koh nee oh sell yew lur)  One of the 
sublayers of neurons in the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus found 
ventral to each of the magnocellular and parvocellular layers; 
transmits information from short-wavelength (“blue”) cones to the 
primary visual cortex.
x calcarine fissure (kal ka rine)  A horizontal fissure on the inner 
surface of the posterior cerebral cortex; the location of the primary 
visual cortex.

172	
Chapter 6  Vision
receives information from the right. It is not correct to say 
that each hemisphere receives visual information solely 
from the contralateral eye. (Look again at Figure 6.11.)
Besides the primary retino-geniculo-cortical path-
way, fibers from the retina take several other pathways. 
For example, one pathway to the hypothalamus syn-
chronizes an animal’s activity cycles to the 24-hour 
rhythms of day and night. (We will study this system in 
Chapter 9.) Other pathways, especially those that travel 
to the optic tectum and the pretectal nuclei, coordinate 
eye movements, control the muscles of the iris (and thus 
the size of the pupil) and the ciliary muscles (which 
control the lens), and help to direct our attention to 
sudden movements in the periphery of our visual field.
The primary visual cortex is often called the striate 
cortex because it contains a dark-staining layer (striation) 
of cells. (See Figure 6.10.)
Figure 6.11 shows a diagrammatical view of a horizon-
tal section of the human brain. The optic nerves join to-
gether at the base of the brain to form the X-shaped optic 
chiasm (khiasma is the Greek for “cross”). There, axons 
from ganglion cells serving the inner halves of the retina 
(the nasal sides) cross through the chiasm and ascend to 
the LGN on the opposite side of the brain. The axons 
from the outer halves of the retina (the temporal sides) 
remain on the same side of the brain. (See Figure 6.11.) 
The lens inverts the image of the world projected on the 
retina (and similarly reverses left and right). Therefore, 
because the axons from the nasal halves of the retinas 
cross to the other side of the brain, each hemisphere re-
ceives information from the contralateral half (opposite 
side) of the visual scene. That is, if a person looks straight 
ahead, the right hemisphere receives information from 
the left half of the visual field, and the left hemisphere 
figure 6.9  Lateral Geniculate Nucleus
This photomicrograph shows a section through the right lateral geniculate nucleus of a 
rhesus monkey (cresyl violet stain). Layers 1, 4, and 6 receive input from the 
contralateral (left) eye, and layers 2, 3, and 5 receive input from the ipsilateral (right) 
eye. Layers 1 and 2 are the magnocellular layers; layers 3–6 are the parvocellular layers. 
The koniocellular sublayers are found ventral to each of the parvocellular and 
magnocellular layers. The receptive fields of all six principal layers are in almost perfect 
registration; cells located along the line of the unlabeled arrow have receptive fields 
centered on the same point.
(Photomicrograph from Hubel, D. H., Wiesel, T. N., and Le Vay, S. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London, B, 1977, 278, 131–163. Reprinted with permission.)
3
4
5 6
1
2
Lateral
geniculate
nucleus
Striate cortex
x optic chiasm (ky az’ m)  A cross-shaped connection between 
the optic nerves, located below the base of the brain, just anterior 
to the pituitary gland.
x striate cortex (stry ate)  The primary visual cortex.

	
Anatomy of the Visual System	
173
figure 6.10  Striate Cortex
This photomicrograph shows a cross section through the 
striate cortex of a rhesus macaque monkey. The ends of 
the striate cortex are shown by arrows.
(From Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. Proceedings of the Royal Society  
of London, B, 1977, 198, 1–59. Reprinted with permission.)
2 mm
figure 6.11  The Primary Visual Pathway
Visual field
of right eye
Visual field
of left eye
Region of overlap
of two visual fields
Optic nerve
Lateral
geniculate
nucleus
Information from
right half of
visual field (yellow)
Primary
visual
cortex
Information from
left half of
visual field (green)
Optic chiasm
Section Summary
The Stimulus and Anatomy of the Visual System
Light consists of electromagnetic radiation, similar to 
radio waves but of a different frequency and wave-
length. Color can vary in three perceptual dimen-
sions: hue, brightness, and saturation, which corre-
spond to the physical dimensions of wavelength, 
intensity, and purity.
The photoreceptors in the retina—the rods and 
the cones—detect light. Muscles move the eyes so 
that images of particular parts of the environment fall 
on the retina. Accommodation is accomplished by the 
ciliary muscles, which change the shape of the lens. 
Photoreceptors communicate through synapses with 
bipolar cells, which communicate through synapses 
with ganglion cells. In addition, horizontal cells and 
amacrine cells combine messages from adjacent pho-
toreceptors.
When light strikes a molecule of photopigment in 
a photoreceptor, the retinal molecule detaches from 
the opsin molecule. This detachment hyperpolarizes 
the membrane of the photoreceptor. As a result, the 
rate of firing of the ganglion cell changes, signaling 
the detection of light.
Visual information from the retina reaches the 
striate cortex surrounding the calcarine fissure after 
being relayed through the magnocellular, parvocellu-
lar, and koniocellular layers of the LGN. Several other 
regions of the brain, including the hypothalamus and 
the tectum, also receive visual information. These 
regions help to regulate activity during the day–night 
cycle, coordinate eye and head movements, control 
attention to visual stimuli, and regulate the size of 
the pupils.
 Thought Question
People who try to see faint, distant lights at night are 
often advised to look just to the side of the location 
where they expect to see the lights. Can you explain 
the reason for this advice?

174	
Chapter 6  Vision
suddenly-appearing stimuli (Schiller and Malpeli, 1977); 
thus, these cells do not appear to play a direct role in 
form perception. (See Figure 6.13.)
Figure 6.13 also illustrates a rebound effect that oc-
curs when the light is turned off again. Neurons whose 
firing is inhibited while the light is on will show a brief 
burst of excitation when it is turned off. In contrast, 
neurons whose firing is increased will show a brief pe-
riod of inhibition when the light is turned off. (Look 
again at Figure 6.13.)
The two major categories of ganglion cells (ON 
and OFF) and the organization of their receptive 
fields into contrasting center and surround provide 
useful information to the rest of the visual system. Let 
us consider these two types of ganglion cells first. As 
Schiller (1992) notes, ganglion cells normally fire at a 
relatively low rate. Then, when the level of illumina-
tion in the center of their receptive field increases or 
decreases (for example, when an object moves or the 
eye makes a saccade), they signal the change. In par-
ticular, ON cells signal increases and OFF cells signal 
decreases, but both signal them by an increased rate of 
firing. Such a system is particularly efficient. Theoreti-
cally, a single type of ganglion cell could fire at an  
Coding of Visual Information 
in the Retina
This section describes the way in which cells of the retina 
encode information they receive from the photoreceptors.
Coding of Light and Dark
One of the most important methods for studying the 
physiology of the visual system is the use of microelec-
trodes to record the electrical activity of single neu-
rons. As we saw in the previous section, some ganglion 
cells become excited when light falls on the photore-
ceptors that communicate with them. The receptive 
field of a neuron in the visual system is the part of the 
visual field that an individual neuron “sees”—that is, 
the place in which a visual stimulus must be located to 
produce a response in that neuron. Obviously, the loca-
tion of the receptive field of a particular neuron de-
pends on the location of the photoreceptors that pro-
vide it with visual information. If a neuron receives 
information from photoreceptors located in the fovea, 
its receptive field will be at the fixation point—the 
point at which the eye is looking. If the neuron receives 
information from photoreceptors located in the pe-
riphery of the retina, its receptive field will be located 
off to one side.
At the periphery of the retina many individual  
receptors converge on a single ganglion cell, bringing 
information from a relatively large area of the retina—
and hence a relatively large area of the visual field. 
However, the fovea contains approximately equal numbers 
of ganglion cells and cones. These receptor-to-axon  
relationships explain the fact that our foveal (central) 
vision is very acute but our peripheral vision is much 
less precise. (See Figure 6.12.)
Over seventy years ago, Hartline (1938) discovered 
that the frog retina contained three types of ganglion 
cells. ON cells responded with an excitatory burst when 
the retina was illuminated, OFF cells responded when 
the light was turned off, and ON/OFF cells responded 
briefly when the light went on and again when it went 
off. Kuffler (1952, 1953), recording from ganglion cells 
in the retina of the cat, discovered that their receptive 
field consists of a roughly circular center, surrounded by 
a ring. Stimulation of the center or surrounding fields 
had contrary effects: ON cells were excited by light fall-
ing in the central field (center) and were inhibited by 
light falling in the surrounding field (surround), whereas 
OFF cells responded in the opposite manner. ON/OFF 
ganglion cells were briefly excited when light was turned 
on or off. In primates most of these ON/OFF cells proj-
ect primarily to the superior colliculus, which is primar-
ily involved in visual reflexes in response to moving or 
x receptive field  That portion of the visual field in which the 
presentation of visual stimuli will produce an alteration in the firing 
rate of a particular neuron.
figure 6.12  Foveal Versus Peripheral Acuity
Ganglion cells in the fovea receive input from a smaller 
number of photoreceptors than those in the periphery 
and hence provide more acute visual information.
Receptive field in center
of retina (fovea)
Photoreceptors
Bipolar
cells
Ganglion
cells
Receptive field in
periphery of retina

	
Coding of Visual Information in the Retina	
175
do not exist in the illustration; they are added by our 
visual system because of the center-surround organiza-
tion of the receptive fields of the retinal ganglion cells. 
(See Figure 6.14.)
Figure 6.15 explains how this phenomenon works. 
We see the centers and surrounds of the receptive fields 
of several ganglion cells. (In reality these receptive 
fields would be overlapping, but the simplified arrange-
ment is easier to understand. This example also in-
cludes only ON cells—again, for the sake of simplicity.) 
The image of the transition between lighter and darker 
regions falls across some of these receptive fields. The 
cells whose centers are located in the brighter region 
but whose surrounds are located at least partially in the 
darker region will have the highest rate of firing. (See 
Figure 6.15.)
intermediate rate and signal changes in the level of 
illumination by increases or decreases in rate of firing. 
However, in this case, the average rate of firing of the 
one million axons in each optic nerve would have to 
be much higher.
Several studies have shown that ON cells and OFF 
cells do, indeed, signal different kinds of information. 
Schiller, Sandell, and Maunsell (1986) injected mon-
keys with a drug that selectively blocks synaptic transmis-
sion in ON bipolar cells. They found that the animals 
had difficulty detecting spots that were made brighter 
than the background but had no difficulty detecting 
spots that were slightly darker than the background. In 
addition, Dolan and Schiller (1989) found that an injec-
tion of this drug completely blocked vision in very dim 
light, which is normally mediated by rods. Thus, rod bi-
polar cells must all be of the ON type. (If you think 
about it, that arrangement makes sense; in very dim 
light we are more likely to see brighter objects against a 
dark background than dark objects against a light back-
ground.)
The second characteristic of the receptive fields of 
ganglion cells—their center-surround organization—
enhances our ability to detect the outlines of objects 
even when the contrast between the object and the 
background is low. Figure 6.14 illustrates this phenom-
enon. This figure shows six gray squares arranged in 
order of brightness. The right side of each square looks 
lighter than the left side, which makes the borders be-
tween the squares stand out. But these exaggerated borders 
figure 6.13  ON and OFF Ganglion Cells
This figure shows responses of ON and OFF ganglion cells to stimuli presented 
in the center or the surround of the receptive field.
(Adapted from Kuffler, S. W. Cold Spring Harbor Symposium for Quantitative Biology, 1952, 17, 281–292.)
0
0
ON Cell
ON area
ON area
OFF area
OFF area
OFF Cell
Surround
Center
1. Spot of light in
    center
2. Spot of light in
    surround
Light
Light
Receptive
field
Time
Time
0.5
0.5
1.0
1.0
(s)
(s)
Action
potentials
(a)
(b)
figure 6.14  Enhancement of Contrast
Although each gray square is of uniform darkness, the 
right edge of each square looks somewhat lighter, and 
the left edge looks somewhat darker. This effect appears 
to be caused by the opponent center-surround 
arrangement of the receptive fields of the retinal 
ganglion cells.

176	
Chapter 6  Vision
Young, a British physicist and physician, proposed that 
the eye detected different colors because it contained 
three types of receptors, each sensitive to a single hue. 
His theory was referred to as the trichromatic (three-
color) theory. It was suggested by the fact that for a hu-
man observer any color can be reproduced by mixing 
various quantities of three colors judiciously selected 
from different points along the spectrum.
I must emphasize that color mixing is different from 
pigment mixing. If we combine yellow and blue pigments 
(as when we mix paints), the resulting mixture is green. 
Color mixing refers to the addition of two or more light 
sources. If we shine a beam of red light and a beam of 
bluish green light together on a white screen, we will see 
yellow light. If we mix yellow and blue light, we get white 
light. When white appears on a color television screen 
or computer monitor, it actually consists of tiny dots of 
red, blue, and green light. (See Figure 6.16.)
Another fact of color perception suggested to a  
German physiologist, Ewald Hering (1905/1965), that hue  
might be represented in the visual system as opponent 
colors; red versus green and yellow versus blue. People 
interested in color perception have long regarded yel-
low, blue, red, and green as primary colors—colors that 
seem unique and do not appear to be blends of other 
colors. (Black and white are primary, too, but we per-
ceive them as colorless.) All other colors can be de-
scribed as mixtures of these primary colors. The trichro-
matic system cannot explain why yellow is included in this 
group—why it is perceived as a pure color. In addition, 
some colors appear to blend, whereas others do not. For 
example, one can speak of a bluish green or a yellowish 
green, and orange appears to have both red and yellow 
qualities. Purple resembles both red and blue. But try to 
imagine a reddish green or a bluish yellow. It is impos-
sible; these colors seem to be opposite to each other. 
Again, these facts are not explained by the trichromatic 
theory. As we shall see in the following section, the visual 
system uses both trichromatic and opponent-color sys-
tems to encode information related to color.
Photoreceptors: Trichromatic Coding
Physiological investigations of retinal photoreceptors in 
higher primates have found that Young was right: Three 
different types of photoreceptors (three different types 
of cones) are responsible for color vision. Investigators 
have studied the absorption characteristics of individual 
photoreceptors, determining the amount of light of dif-
ferent wavelengths that is absorbed by the photopig-
ments. These characteristics are controlled by the par-
ticular opsin a photoreceptor contains; different opsins 
absorb particular wavelengths more readily. Figure 6.17 
shows the absorption characteristics of the four types of 
photoreceptors in the human retina: rods and the three 
types of cones. (See Figure 6.17.)
Coding of Color
So far, we have been examining the monochromatic 
properties of ganglion cells—that is, their responses to 
light and dark. But, of course, objects in our environ-
ment selectively absorb some wavelengths of light and 
reflect others, which, to our eyes, gives them different 
colors. The retinas of humans and many species of non-
human primates contain three different types of cones, 
which provides them (and us) with the most elaborate 
form of color vision (Jacobs, 1996; Hunt et al., 1998). 
Although monochromatic (black-and-white) vision is 
perfectly adequate for most purposes, color vision gave 
our primate ancestors the ability to distinguish ripe fruit 
from unripe fruit and made it more difficult for other 
animals to hide themselves by means of camouflage 
(Mollon, 1989). In fact, the photopigments of primates 
with three types of cones seem well suited for distin-
guishing red and yellow fruits against a background of 
green foliage (Regan et al., 2001).
Color Mixing
Various theories of color vision have been proposed for 
many years—long before it was possible to disprove or 
validate them by physiological means. In 1802, Thomas 
figure 6.15  Neural Basis of Enhancement  
of Contrast
This figure shows a schematic explanation of the 
phenomenon shown in Figure 6.14. Only ON cells are 
shown; OFF cells are responsible for the darker 
appearance of the left side of the darker square.
All of the surrounds of the ON cells whose
receptive fields fall within the lighter gray
are evenly illuminated; this illumination
partially inhibits the firing of these cells
A portion of the inhibitory surrounds of the
      ON cells near the border receives less
       illumination; thus, these cells have the
                                   highest rate of firing

	
Coding of Visual Information in the Retina	
177
Evidence suggests that the first cone opsin to evolve 
was most sensitive to long wavelengths of light. These 
“red” cones were supplemented by the evolution of 
“blue” cones, which provides the limited color vision 
found in most mammals (Haverkamp et al., 2005). The 
trichromatic color vision found in humans and Old 
World monkeys was made possible when the “red” opsin 
gene was duplicated and one of the copies mutated into 
the gene that produced the “green” opsin (Solomon 
and Lennie, 2007). (You will recall from Chapter 3 that 
an important factor in evolutionary development is ge-
netic duplication, which permits the process of natural 
selection to “experiment” with mutations of the extra 
gene. In this case the gene for the old “red” opsin was 
retained, and the new gene for the “green” opsin pro-
duced a third category of color-sensitive cones).
Genetic defects in color vision result from anomalies in 
one or more of the three types of cones (Wissinger and 
Sharpe, 1998; Nathans, 1999). The first two kinds of  
defective color vision described here involve genes on the 
X chromosome; thus, because males have only one X chro-
mosome, they are much more likely to have this disorder. 
(Females are likely to have a normal gene on one of their 
X chromosomes, which compensates for the defective 
one.) People with protanopia (“first-color defect”)  
confuse red and green. They see the world in shades of yel-
low and blue; both red and green look yellowish to them. 
The peak sensitivities of the three types of cones are 
approximately 420 nm (blue-violet), 530 nm (green), 
and 560 nm (yellow-green). The peak sensitivity of the 
short-wavelength cone is actually 440 nm in the intact 
eye because the lens absorbs some short-wavelength 
light. For convenience the short-, medium-, and long-
wavelength cones are traditionally called “blue,” “green,” 
and “red” cones, respectively.
figure 6.16  Additive Color Mixing and Paint Mixing
When blue, red, and green lights of the proper intensity are all shone together, the result is 
white light. When red, blue, and yellow paints are mixed together, the result is a dark gray.
figure 6.17  Absorbance of Light by Rods and Cones
The graph shows the relative absorbance of light of 
various wavelengths by rods and the three types of cones 
in the human retina.
(Based on data from Dartnall, Bowmaker, and Mollon, 1983.)
Wavelength (nm)
400
500
600
0.5
1.0
Relative absorbance
“Green”
 cone
“Red”
 cone
496 531 559 nm
Rod
“Blue”
 cone
419
x protanopia (pro tan owe pee a)  An inherited form of 
defective color vision in which red and green hues are confused; 
“red” cones are filled with “green” cone opsin.

178	
Chapter 6  Vision
Figure 6.19 helps to explain how particular hues are 
detected by the “red,” “green,” and “blue” cones and 
translated into excitation or inhibition of the red-green 
and yellow-blue ganglion cells. The diagram does not 
show the actual neural circuitry, which includes the reti-
nal neurons that connect the cones with the ganglion 
cells. The arrows in Figure 6.19 refer merely to the effects 
of the light falling on the retina.
Detection and coding of pure red, green, or blue 
light is the easiest to understand. For example, red light 
excites “red” cones, which causes the excitation of red-
green ganglion cells. (See Figure 6.19 a.) Green light 
excites “green” cones, which causes the inhibition of red-
green cells. (See Figure 6.19  b.) But consider the effect of 
yellow light. Because the wavelength that produces the 
sensation of yellow is intermediate between the wave-
lengths that produce red and green, it will stimulate 
both “red” and “green” cones about equally. Yellow-blue 
ganglion cells are excited by both “red” and “green” 
cones, so their rate of firing increases. However, red-
green ganglion cells are excited by red and inhibited by 
green, so their firing rate does not change. The brain 
detects an increased firing rate from the axons of yel-
low-blue ganglion cells, which it interprets as yellow. 
(See Figure 6.19 c.) Blue light simply inhibits the activity 
of yellow-blue ganglion cells. (See Figure 6.19  d.)
The opponent-color system employed by the gan-
glion cells explains why we cannot perceive a reddish 
green or a bluish yellow: An axon that signals red or 
green (or yellow or blue) can either increase or de-
crease its rate of firing; it cannot do both at the same 
Their visual acuity is normal, which suggests that their reti-
nas do not lack “red” or “green” cones. This fact and their 
sensitivity to lights of different wavelengths suggest that 
their “red” cones are filled with “green” cone opsin. People 
with deuteranopia (“second-color defect”) also confuse red 
and green and also have normal visual acuity. Their “green” 
cones appear to be filled with “red” cone opsin. (In other 
words, their vision is dichromatic, or “two color,” like that 
of our ancestors and most present-day mammals.)
Mancuso et al. (2009) attempted to perform gene 
therapy on adult squirrel monkeys whose retinas lacked 
the gene for “red” cone pigment. Although most female 
squirrel monkeys have trichromatic color vision, males 
have only dichromatic vision and cannot distinguish red 
from green. Mancuso and her colleagues used a geneti-
cally modified virus to insert a human gene for the pig-
ment of that “red” cone into the retinas of male mon-
keys. Color vision tests before and after surgery 
confirmed that the gene insertion converted the mon-
keys from dichromats into trichromats: They could now 
distinguish between red and green.
Tritanopia (“third-color defect”) is rare, affecting 
fewer than 1 in 10,000 people. This disorder involves a 
faulty gene that is not located on an X chromosome; 
thus, it is equally prevalent in males and females. People 
with tritanopia have difficulty with hues of short wave-
lengths and see the world in greens and reds. To them 
a clear blue sky is a bright green, and yellow looks pink. 
Their retinas lack “blue” cones. Because the retina con-
tains so few of these cones, their absence does not no-
ticeably affect visual acuity.
Retinal Ganglion Cells:  
Opponent-Process Coding
At the level of the retinal ganglion cell the three-color 
code gets translated into an opponent-color system. Daw 
(1968) and Gouras (1968) found that these neurons re-
spond specifically to pairs of primary colors, with red 
opposing green and blue opposing yellow. Thus, the ret-
ina contains two kinds of color-sensitive ganglion cells: 
red-green and yellow-blue. Some color-sensitive ganglion 
cells respond in a center-surround fashion. For example, 
a cell might be excited by red and inhibited by green in 
the center of their receptive field while showing the op-
posite response in the surrounding ring. (See Figure 6.18.) 
Other ganglion cells that receive input from cones do not 
respond differentially to different wavelengths but simply 
encode relative brightness in the center and surround. 
These cells serve as “black-and-white detectors.”
The response characteristics of retinal ganglion 
cells to light of different wavelengths are obviously  
determined by the particular circuits that connect the 
three types of cones with the two types of ganglion cells. 
These circuits involve different types of bipolar cells, 
amacrine cells, and horizontal cells.
x deuteranopia (dew ter an owe pee a)  An inherited form of 
defective color vision in which red and green hues are confused; 
“green” cones are filled with “red” cone opsin.
x tritanopia (try tan owe pee a)  An inherited form of defective 
color vision in which hues with short wavelengths are confused; 
“blue” cones are either lacking or faulty.
figure 6.18  Receptive Fields of Color-Sensitive 
Ganglion Cells
When a portion of the receptive field is illuminated with 
the color shown, the cell’s rate of firing increases. When a 
portion is illuminated with the complementary color, the 
cell’s rate of firing decreases.
Yellow on,
blue off
Blue on,
yellow off
Red on,
green off
Green on
red off

	
Coding of Visual Information in the Retina	
179
The most important cause of negative afterimages 
is adaptation in the rate of firing of retinal ganglion 
cells. When ganglion cells are excited or inhibited for 
a prolonged period of time, they later show a rebound 
effect, firing faster or slower than normal. For exam-
ple, the green of the radish in Figure 6.20 inhibits 
some red-green ganglion cells. When this region of 
the retina is then stimulated with the neutral-colored 
light reflected off the white rectangle, the red-green 
ganglion cells—no longer inhibited by the green 
light—fire faster than normal. Thus, we see a red  
afterimage of the radish.
time. A reddish green would have to be signaled by a 
ganglion cell firing slowly and rapidly at the same time, 
which is obviously impossible.
Adaptation: Negative Afterimages
Figure 6.20 demonstrates an interesting property of the 
visual system: the formation of a negative afterimage. 
Stare at the cross in the center of the image on the left 
for approximately 30 seconds. Then quickly look at the 
cross in the center of the white rectangle to the right. 
You will have a fleeting experience of seeing the red and 
green colors of a radish—colors that are complementary, 
or opposite, to the ones on the left. (See Figure 6.20.) 
Complementary items go together to make up a whole. 
In this context complementary colors are those that 
make white (or shades of gray) when added together.  
(
Simulate complementary colors in MyPsychLab to see 
this phenomenon even more vividly.)
figure 6.19  Color Coding in the Retina
(a) Red light stimulating a “red” cone, which causes excitation of a red-green ganglion 
cell. (b) Green light stimulating a “green” cone, which causes inhibition of a red-green 
ganglion cell. (c) Yellow light stimulating “red” and “green” cones equally but not 
affecting “blue” cones. The stimulation of “red” and “green” cones causes excitation 
of a yellow-blue ganglion cell. (d) Blue light stimulating a “blue” cone, which causes 
inhibition of a yellow-blue ganglion cell. The arrows labeled E and I represent neural 
circuitry within the retina that translates excitation of a cone into excitation or inhibition 
of a ganglion cell. For clarity, only some of the circuits are shown.
E
E
E
I
I
I
E
Red light
stimulates
“red” cone
Green light
stimulates
“green” cone
Yellow light
stimulates “red” and
“green” cones equally
Blue light
stimulates
“blue” cone
Cones
Ganglion cells
Red-green ganglion cell
is excited; signals red
Red-green ganglion cell
is inhibited; signals green
Yellow-blue ganglion cell
is excited; signals yellow
Yellow-blue ganglion cell
is inhibited; signals blue
Excitation and inhibition cancel
each other; no change in signal
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
x negative afterimage  The image seen after a portion of the 
retina is exposed to an intense visual stimulus; consists of colors 
complementary to those of the physical stimulus.
x complementary colors  Colors that make white or gray when 
mixed together.

180	
Chapter 6  Vision
figure 6.20  A Negative Afterimage
Stare for approximately 30 seconds at the plus sign in the center of the left figure; then 
quickly transfer your gaze to the plus sign in the center of the right figure. You will see 
colors that are complementary to the originals.
+
Section Summary
Coding of Visual Information in the Retina
Recordings of the electrical activity of single neu-
rons in the retina indicate that each ganglion cell 
receives information from photoreceptors—just one 
in the fovea and many more in the periphery. The 
receptive field of most retinal ganglion cells con-
sists of two concentric circles, with the cells becom-
ing excited when light falls in one region and 
becoming inhibited when it falls in the other. This 
arrangement enhances the ability of the nervous 
system to detect contrasts in brightness. ON cells 
are excited by light in the center, and OFF cells are 
excited by light in the surround. ON cells detect 
light objects against dark backgrounds; OFF cells 
detect dark objects against light backgrounds. ON/
OFF cells play an important role in responding to 
movement.
Color vision occurs as a result of information pro-
vided by three types of cones, each of which is sensi-
tive to light of a certain wavelength: long, medium, or 
short. The absorption characteristics of the cones are 
determined by the particular opsin that their phot-
opigment contains. Most forms of defective color 
vision appear to be caused by alterations in cone 
opsins. The “red” cones of people with protanopia 
are filled with “green” cone opsin, and the “green” 
cones of people with deuteranopia are filled with 
“red” cone opsin. The retinas of people with tritan-
opia appear to lack “blue” cones. An attempt at gene 
therapy successfully converted the dichromatic vision 
of male squirrel monkeys into trichromatic vision.
Most color-sensitive ganglion cells respond in an 
opposing center-surround fashion to the pairs of pri-
mary colors: red and green, and blue and yellow. The 
responses of these neurons is determined by the reti-
nal circuitry connecting them with the photoreceptors. 
Negative afterimages produced by staring at a col-
ored stimulus and then looking at a neutral back-
ground provide an image with colors complementary 
to the original stimulus. This phenomenon is caused 
by adaptation of retinal cells that show rebound activ-
ity in the opposite direction from that produced by 
sight of the original stimulus.
 Thought Question
Why is color vision useful? Birds, some fish, and 
some primates have full, three-cone color vision. 
Considering our own species, what other benefits 
(besides the ability to recognize ripe fruit, which I 
mentioned earlier in this section) might come from 
the evolution of color vision?

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Striate Cortex	
181
perception (see Hubel and Wiesel, 1977, 1979). Hubel 
and Wiesel discovered that neurons in the visual cortex 
did not simply respond to spots of light; they selectively 
responded to specific features of the visual world. That is, 
the neural circuitry within the visual cortex combines 
information from several sources (for example, from 
axons carrying information received from several differ-
ent ganglion cells) in such a way as to detect features 
that are larger than the receptive field of a single gan-
glion cell or a single cell in the LGN. The following 
subsections describe the visual characteristics that re-
searchers have studied so far: orientation and move-
ment, spatial frequency, retinal disparity, and color.
Orientation and Movement
Most neurons in the striate cortex are sensitive to orienta-
tion. That is, if a line or an edge (the border of a light 
and a dark region) is positioned in the cell’s receptive 
field and rotated around its center, the cell will respond 
only when the line is in a particular position—a particu-
lar orientation. Some neurons respond best to a vertical 
line, some to a horizontal line, and some to a line ori-
ented somewhere in between. Figure 6.22 shows the  
Analysis of Visual Information: 
Role of the Striate Cortex
The retinal ganglion cells encode information about the 
relative amounts of light falling on the center and sur-
round regions of their receptive field and, in many cases, 
about the wavelength of that light. The striate cortex 
performs additional processing of this information, 
which it then transmits to the visual association cortex.
Anatomy of the Striate Cortex
The striate cortex consists of six principal layers (and 
several sublayers), arranged in bands parallel to the sur-
face. These layers contain the nuclei of cell bodies and 
dendritic trees that show up as bands of light or dark in 
sections of tissue that have been dyed with a cell-body 
stain. (See Figure 6.21.)
If we consider the striate cortex of one hemisphere as 
a whole—if we imagine that we remove it and spread it 
out on a flat surface—we find that it contains a map of the 
contralateral half of the visual field. (Remember that 
each side of the brain sees the opposite side of the visual 
field.) The map is distorted; approximately 25 percent of 
the striate cortex is devoted to the analysis of information 
from the fovea, which represents a small part of the visual 
field. (The area of the visual field seen by the fovea is ap-
proximately the size of a large grape held at arm’s length.)
The pioneering studies of David Hubel and Torsten 
Wiesel at Harvard University during the 1960s began a 
revolution in the study of the physiology of visual  
figure 6.21  Striate Cortex
This photomicrograph of a small section of striate cortex 
shows the six principal layers. The letter W refers to the 
white matter that underlies the visual cortex; beneath the 
white matter is layer VI of the striate cortex on the 
opposite side of the gyrus.
(From Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 
B, 1977, 198, 1–59. Reprinted with permission.)
I
III
IVa
II
IVb
IVc
V
VI
W
VI
V
figure 6.22  Orientation Sensitivity
An orientation-sensitive neuron in the striate cortex will 
become active only when a line of a particular orientation 
appears within its receptive field. For example, the 
neuron depicted in this figure responds best to a bar  
that is vertically oriented.
(Adapted from Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. Journal of Physiology [London], 
1959, 148, 574–591.)
Stimulus
On
Off

182	
Chapter 6  Vision
continued to respond while the line was moved within the 
receptive field. In fact, many complex cells increased their 
rate of firing when the line was moved perpendicular to 
its angle of orientation—often only in one direction. 
Thus, these neurons also served as movement detectors. 
In addition, complex cells responded equally well to white 
lines against black backgrounds and black lines against 
white backgrounds. (See Figure 6.23  b.) Finally, hyper­
complex cells responded to lines of a particular orientation 
but had an inhibitory region at the end (or ends) of the 
lines, which meant that the cells detected the location of 
ends of lines of a particular orientation. (See Figure 6.23c.)
Spatial Frequency
Although the early studies by Hubel and Wiesel sug-
gested that neurons in the primary visual cortex detected 
lines and edges, subsequent research found that they 
actually responded best to sine-wave gratings (De Valois, 
Albrecht, and Thorell, 1978). Figure 6.24 compares a 
sine-wave grating with a more familiar square-wave grat-
ing. A square-wave grating consists of a simple set of 
rectangular bars that vary in brightness; the brightness 
along the length of a line perpendicular to them would 
vary in a stepwise (square-wave) fashion. (See Figure 
6.24 a.) A sine-wave grating looks like a series of fuzzy, 
unfocused parallel bars. Along any line perpendicular to 
the long axis of the grating, the brightness varies accord-
ing to a sine-wave function. (See Figure 6.24 b.)
responses of a neuron in the striate cortex when lines 
were presented at various orientations. As you can see, 
this neuron responded best when a vertical line was 
presented in its receptive field. (See Figure 6.22.)
Some orientation-sensitive neurons have receptive 
fields organized in an opponent fashion. Hubel and Wie-
sel referred to them as simple cells. For example, a line of 
a particular orientation (say, a dark 45° line against a 
white background) might excite a cell if placed in the 
center of the receptive field but inhibit the cell if moved 
away from the center. (See Figure 6.23  a.) Another type of 
neuron, which the researchers referred to as a complex 
cell, also responded best to a line of a particular orienta-
tion but did not show an inhibitory surround; that is, it 
figure 6.23  Orientation-Sensitive Neurons
This figure shows the response characteristics of neurons in the primary visual cortex: 
(a) simple cell, (b) complex cell, (c) hypercomplex cell.
Inhibitory
regions
Simple cell
is excited
Simple cell
is inhibited
Hypercomplex 
cell is excited
Complex cell is excited by all three stimuli
(b)
(a)
(c)
Inhibitory
region
Hypercomplex 
cell is inhibited
x simple cell  An orientation-sensitive neuron in the striate 
cortex whose receptive field is organized in an opponent fashion.
x complex cell  A neuron in the visual cortex that responds to 
the presence of a line segment with a particular orientation 
located within its receptive field, especially when the line moves 
perpendicularly to its orientation.
x hypercomplex cell  A neuron in the visual cortex that responds 
to the presence of a line segment with a particular orientation that 
ends at a particular point within the cell’s receptive field.
x sine-wave grating  A series of straight parallel bands varying 
continuously in brightness according to a sine-wave function, 
along a line perpendicular to their lengths.
figure 6.24  Parallel Gratings
This figure compared two kinds of gratings:  
(a) Square-wave grating, and (b) sine-wave grating.
(a)
(b)

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Striate Cortex	
183
the types of information provided by high and low spa-
tial frequencies. Small objects, details within a large ob-
ject, and large objects with sharp edges provide a signal 
rich in high frequencies, whereas large areas of light 
and dark are represented by low frequencies. An image 
that is deficient in high-frequency information looks 
fuzzy and out of focus, like the image seen by a near-
sighted person who is not wearing corrective lenses. 
This image still provides much information about forms 
and objects in the environment; thus, the most impor-
tant visual information is that contained in low spatial 
frequencies. When low-frequency information is removed, 
the shapes of images are very difficult to perceive. (As 
we will see, the evolutionary older magnocellular system 
provides low-frequency information.)
Many experiments have confirmed that the concept 
of spatial frequency plays a central role in visual percep-
tion, and mathematical models have shown that the in-
formation present in a scene can be represented very 
efficiently if it is first encoded in terms of spatial fre-
quency. Thus, the brain probably represents the infor-
mation in a similar way. Here I will describe just one 
example to help show the validity of the concept. Look 
at the two pictures in Figure 6.27. You can see that the 
picture on the right looks much more like the face of 
Abraham Lincoln, the nineteenth-century U.S. Presi-
dent, than the one on the left does. Yet the two pictures 
contain the same information. The creators of the pic-
tures, Harmon and Julesz (1973), used a computer to 
construct the figure on the left, which consists of a series 
of squares, each representing the average brightness of 
a portion of a picture of Lincoln. The one on the right 
A sine-wave grating is designated by its spatial fre-
quency. We are accustomed to the expression of fre-
quencies (for example, of sound waves or radio waves) 
in terms of time or distance (such as cycles per second 
or wavelength in cycles per meter). But because the im-
age of a stimulus on the retina varies in size according 
to how close it is to the eye, the visual angle is generally 
used instead of the physical distance between adjacent 
cycles. Thus, the spatial frequency of a sine-wave grating 
is its variation in brightness measured in cycles per de-
gree of visual angle. (See Figure 6.25.)
Most neurons in the striate cortex respond best 
when a sine-wave grating of a particular spatial fre-
quency is placed in the appropriate part of the visual 
field. Different neurons detect different spatial frequen-
cies. For orientation-sensitive neurons the grating must 
be aligned at the appropriate angle of orientation. Al-
brecht (1978) mapped the shapes of receptive fields of 
simple cells by observing their response while moving a 
very thin flickering line of the appropriate orientation 
through their receptive fields. He found that many of 
them had multiple inhibitory and excitatory regions sur-
rounding the center. The profile of the excitatory and 
inhibitory regions of the receptive fields of such neu-
rons looked like a modulated sine wave—precisely what 
would be needed to detect a few cycles of a sine-wave 
grating. (See Figure 6.26.) In most cases a neuron’s  
receptive field is large enough to include between 1.5 
and 3.5 cycles of the grating (De Valois, Thorell, and 
Albrecht, 1985).
What is the point of having neural circuits that ana-
lyze spatial frequency? A complete answer requires some 
rather complicated mathematics, so I will give a simpli-
fied one here. (If you are interested, you can consult a 
classic book by De Valois and De Valois, 1988.) Consider 
x spatial frequency  The relative width of the bands in a 
sine-wave grating, measured in cycles per degree of visual angle.
figure 6.25  Visual Angle and Spatial Frequency
Angles are drawn between the sine waves, with the apex 
at the viewer’s eye. The visual angle between adjacent 
sine waves is smaller when the waves are closer together.
figure 6.26  The Experiment by Albrecht, 1978
(a) The stimulus presented to the animal. (b) The 
response of a simple cell in the primary visual cortex.
(Adapted from De Valois, R. L., and De Valois, K. K. Spatial Vision. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1988.)
10
10
5
5
0
1
1
0
Thin flickering line
moved across
receptive field
Relative sensitivity
Distance from center of receptive field
(in degrees of visual angle)
(a)
(b)

184	
Chapter 6  Vision
as we move our heads all contribute to depth perception 
and do not require binocular vision. However, binocu-
lar vision provides a vivid perception of depth through 
the process of stereoscopic vision, or stereopsis. If you 
have used a stereoscope (such as a View-Master) or have 
seen a three-dimensional movie, you know what I mean. 
Stereopsis is particularly important in the visual guid-
ance of fine movements of the hands and fingers, such 
as we use when we thread a needle.
Most neurons in the striate cortex are binocular—
that is, they respond to visual stimulation of either eye. 
Many of these binocular cells, especially those found in 
a layer that receives information from the magnocellu-
lar system, have response patterns that appear to con-
tribute to the perception of depth (Poggio and Poggio, 
1984). In most cases the cells respond most vigorously 
when each eye sees a stimulus in a slightly different loca-
tion. That is, the neurons respond to retinal disparity, a 
stimulus that produces images on slightly different parts 
of the retina of each eye. This is exactly the information 
that is needed for stereopsis: Each eye sees a three- 
dimensional scene slightly differently, and the presence 
of retinal disparity indicates differences in the distance 
of objects from the observer.
Color
In the striate cortex, information from color-sensitive 
ganglion cells is transmitted, through the parvocellular 
and koniocellular layers of the LGN, to special cells 
grouped together in cytochrome oxidase (CO) blobs. 
CO blobs were discovered by Wong-Riley (1978), who 
found that a stain for cytochrome oxidase, an enzyme 
that is present in mitochondria, showed a patchy distri-
bution. (The presence of high levels of cytochrome oxi-
dase in a cell indicates that the cell normally has a high 
rate of metabolism.) Subsequent research with the stain 
(Horton and Hubel, 1980; Humphrey and Hendrick-
son, 1980) revealed the presence of a polka-dot pattern 
of dark columns extending through layers 2 and 3 and 
(more faintly) layers 5 and 6. The columns are oval in 
cross section, approximately 150 × 200 μm in diameter, 
and spaced at 0.5-mm intervals (Fitzpatrick, Itoh, and 
Diamond, 1983; Livingstone and Hubel, 1987).
Figure 6.28 shows a photomicrograph of a slice 
through the striate cortex (also called V1 because it is 
is simply a transformation of the first one in which high 
frequencies have been removed. Sharp edges contain 
high spatial frequencies, so the transformation elimi-
nates them. In the case of the picture on the left, these 
frequencies have nothing to do with the information 
contained in the original picture; thus, they can be seen 
as visual “noise.” The filtration process (accomplished 
by a computer) removes this noise—and makes the im-
age much clearer to the human visual system. Presum-
ably, the high frequencies produced by the edges of the 
squares in the left figure stimulate neurons in the striate 
cortex that are tuned to high spatial frequencies. When 
the visual association cortex receives this noisy informa-
tion, it has difficulty perceiving the underlying form.
If you want to watch the effect of filtering the extra-
neous high-frequency noise, try the following demon-
stration. Put the book down and look at the pictures in 
Figure 6.27 from across the room. The distance “erases” 
the high frequencies, because they exceed the resolving 
power of the eye, and the two pictures look identical. 
Now walk toward the book, focusing on the left figure. 
As you get closer, the higher frequencies reappear, and 
this picture looks less and less like the face of Lincoln. 
(Look again at Figure 6.27.)
Retinal Disparity
We perceive depth by many means, most of which in-
volve cues that can be detected monocularly, that is, by 
one eye alone. For example, perspective, relative retinal 
size, loss of detail through the effects of atmospheric 
haze, and relative apparent movement of retinal images 
figure 6.27  Spatial Filtering
The two pictures contain the same amount of low-
frequency information, but extraneous high-frequency 
information has been filtered from the picture on the 
right. If you look at the pictures from across the room, 
they look identical.
(From Harmon, L. D., and Julesz, B. Science, 1973, 180, 1191–1197. Copyright 
1973 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted 
with permission.)
x retinal disparity  The fact that points on objects located at 
different distances from the observer will fall on slightly different 
locations on the two retinas; provides the basis for stereopsis.
x cytochrome oxidase (CO) blob  The central region of a 
module of the primary visual cortex, revealed by a stain for 
cytochrome oxidase; contains wavelength-sensitive neurons;  
part of the parvocellular system.

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Striate Cortex	
185
information from other modules, performs some calcula-
tions, and then passes the results to other modules. In 
recent years, investigators have been learning the charac-
teristics of the modules that are found in the visual cortex.
The striate cortex is divided into approximately 
2500 modules, each approximately 0.5 × 0.7 mm and 
containing approximately 150,000 neurons. The neu-
rons in each module are devoted to the analysis of vari-
ous features contained in one very small portion of the 
visual field. Collectively, these modules receive informa-
tion from the entire visual field, the individual modules 
serving like the tiles in a mosaic mural. Input from the 
parvocellular, koniocellular, and magnocellular layers 
of the LGN is received by different sublayers of the stri-
ate cortex: The parvocellular input is received by layer 
4C, the magnocellular input is received by layer 4C, 
and the koniocellular input is received by layers 2 and 3 
(Nassi and Callaway, 2009).
The modules actually consist of two segments, each 
surrounding a CO blob. Neurons located within the blobs 
have a special function: Most of them are sensitive  
to color, and all of them are sensitive to low spatial fre-
quencies. They are relatively insensitive to other visual 
features: They do not respond selectively to different ori-
entations and have relatively large receptive fields, which 
means that they do not provide information useful for 
form perception. In addition, their receptive fields are  
monocular—they receive visual information from only one 
eye (Kaas and Collins, 2001; Landisman and Ts’o, 2002).
Outside the CO blob, neurons show sensitivity to 
orientation, movement, spatial frequency, and binocu-
lar disparity, but most do not respond to color (Living-
stone and Hubel, 1984; Born and Tootell, 1991;  
Edwards, Purpura, and Kaplan, 1995). Each half of the 
module receives input from only one eye, but the cir-
cuitry within the module combines the information 
from both eyes, which means that most of the neurons 
are binocular. Depending on their locations within the 
module, neurons receive varying percentages of input 
from each of the eyes.
If we record from neurons anywhere within a single 
module, we will find that their receptive fields overlap. 
Thus, all the neurons in a module analyze information 
from the same region of the visual field. Furthermore, if 
we insert a microelectrode straight down into an inter-
blob region of the striate cortex (that is, in a location in 
a module outside one of the CO blobs), we will find both 
simple and complex cells, but all of the orientation-sensi-
tive cells will respond to lines of the same orientation. In 
addition, they will all have the same ocular dominance—
that is, the same percentage of input from each of the 
the first area of visual cortex) and an adjacent area of 
visual association cortex (area V2) of a macaque mon-
key. The visual cortex has been flattened out and stained 
for the mitochondrial enzyme. You can clearly see the 
CO blobs within the striate cortex. The distribution of 
CO-rich neurons in area V2 consists of three kinds of 
stripes: thick stripes, thin stripes, and pale stripes. The thick 
and thin stripes stain heavily for cytochrome oxidase; 
the pale stripes do not. (See Figure 6.28.)
Researchers previously believed that the parvocellular 
system transmitted all information pertaining to color to 
the striate cortex. However, we now know that the parvo-
cellular system receives information only from “red” and 
“green” cones; additional information from “blue” cones 
is transmitted through the koniocellular system (Hendry 
and Yoshioka, 1994; Chatterjee and Callaway, 2003).
To summarize, neurons in the striate cortex re-
spond to several different features of a visual stimulus, 
including orientation, movement, spatial frequency, 
retinal disparity, and color. Now let us turn our atten-
tion to the way in which this information is organized 
within the striate cortex.
Modular Organization  
of the Striate Cortex
Most investigators believe that the brain is organized in 
modules, which probably range in size from a hundred 
thousand to a few million neurons. Each module receives 
figure 6.28  Blobs and Stripes in Visual Cortex
A photomicrograph (actually, a montage of several 
different tissue sections) showing a slice through the 
primary visual cortex (area V1) and a region of visual 
association cortex (V2) of a macaque monkey, stained for 
cytochrome oxidase. Area V1 shows spots (“blobs”), and 
area V2 shows three types of stripes: thick, thin (both 
dark), and pale.
(From Sincich, L. C., and Horton, J. C. Annual Review of Neuroscience, Volume 28 
© 2005, 303–326 by Annual Reviews www.annualreviews.org)
5 mm
Thin stripe
Thick stripe
Pale stripe
V2
V1
x ocular dominance  The extent to which a particular neuron 
receives more input from one eye than from the other.

186	
Chapter 6  Vision
How does spatial frequency fit into this organiza-
tion? Edwards, Purpura, and Kaplan (1995) found 
that neurons within the CO blobs responded to low 
spatial frequencies but were sensitive to small differ-
ences in brightness. Outside the blobs, sensitivity to 
spatial frequency varied with the distance from the 
center of the nearest blob. Higher frequencies were 
associated with greater distances. (See Figure 6.30.) 
However, neurons outside the blobs were less sensi-
tive to contrast; the difference between the bright 
and dark areas of the sine-wave grating had to be 
greater for these neurons than for neurons within 
the blobs.
eyes. If we move our electrode around the module, we 
will find that these two characteristics—orientation sensi-
tivity and ocular dominance—vary systematically and are 
arranged at right angles to each other. (See Figure 6.29.)
figure 6.29  One Module of the Primary Visual 
Cortex
Parvocellular
input
Magnocellular
input
Koniocellular
input
1
2 and 3
4A
4B
4C
4C
5 and 6
α
β
Input from
right eye
Input from
left eye
Orientation
sensitivities
Layers of the Striate Cortex
Blobs
figure 6.30  Organization of Spatial Frequency
Optimal spatial frequency of neurons in striate cortex is 
shown as a function of the distance of the neuron from 
the center of the nearest cytochrome oxidase blob.
(Based on data from Edwards, Pupura, and Kaplan, 1995.)
100
200
300
400
Distance from center of CO blob (µm)
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
Optimal spatial frequency (cycles/deg)
Section Summary
The striate cortex (area V1) consists of six layers and 
several sublayers. Visual information is received from 
the magnocellular, parvocellular, and koniocellular 
layers of the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN). 
Information from V1 is sent to area V2, the first region 
of the visual association cortex. The magnocellular 
system is phylogenetically older, color-blind, and sen-
sitive to movement, depth, and small differences in 
brightness. The parvocellular and koniocellular systems 
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Striate Cortex
are of more recent origin. The parvocellular system 
receives information from “red” and “green” cones 
and is able to discriminate finer details. The koniocel-
lular system provides additional information about 
color, received from “blue” cones.
The striate cortex (area V1) is organized into mod-
ules, each surrounding a pair of CO blobs, which are 
revealed by a stain for cytochrome oxidase, an 
enzyme found in mitochondria. Each half of a module 

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Visual Association Cortex	
187
pathways that travel up the hierarchy, from regions of 
the visual association cortex back to the striate cortex. 
First, try the following demonstration. Stare at an object 
(for example, an illuminated light bulb) that has enough 
contrast with the background to produce an afterimage. 
Then look at a nearby surface, such as the back of your 
hand. Before the afterimage fades away, look at a more 
distant surface, such as the far wall of the room (assum-
ing that you are indoors). You will see that the afterim-
age looks much larger when it is seen against a distant 
background. The investigators presented subjects with 
stimuli like those shown in Figure 6.31: spheres posi-
tioned against a background in locations that made 
them look closer to or farther from the observer. Al-
though the spheres were actually the same size, their 
location on the background made the one that was ap-
parently farther away look larger than the other one. 
(See Figure 6.31.)
Murray and his colleagues used functional MRI 
(fMRI) to record activation of the striate cortex while 
the subjects looked at the spheres. They found that 
looking at the sphere that appeared to be larger acti-
vated a larger area of the striate cortex. We know that 
perception of apparent distance in a background like 
that shown in Figure 6.31 cannot take place in the stri-
ate cortex but requires neural circuitry found in the vi-
sual association cortex. This fact means that computa-
tions made in higher levels of the visual system can act 
back on the striate cortex and modify the activity taking 
place there.
Figure 6.32 shows the location of the striate cortex 
and several regions in the extrastriate cortex of the hu-
man brain. The views of brain in Figures 6.32(a) and 
6.32(b) are nearly normal in appearance. Figures 
6.32(c) and 6.32(d) show “inflated” cortical surfaces, 
enabling us to see regions that are normally hidden in 
the depths of sulci and fissures. The hidden regions are 
Analysis of Visual Information: 
Role of the Visual Association 
Cortex
Although the striate cortex is necessary for visual per-
ception, perception of objects and of the totality of the 
visual scene does not take place there. Each of the thou-
sands of modules of the striate cortex sees only what is 
happening in one tiny part of the visual field. Thus, for 
us to perceive objects and entire visual scenes, the infor-
mation from these individual modules must be com-
bined. That combination takes place in the visual asso-
ciation cortex.
Two Streams of Visual Analysis
Visual information received from the striate cortex is 
analyzed in the visual association cortex. Neurons in the 
striate cortex send axons to the extrastriate cortex, the 
region of the visual association cortex that surrounds 
the striate cortex. The primate extrastriate cortex con-
sists of several regions, each of which contains one or 
more independent maps of the visual field. Each region 
is specialized, containing neurons that respond to par-
ticular features of visual information, such as orienta-
tion, movement, spatial frequency, retinal disparity, or 
color. So far, investigators have identified over two 
dozen distinct regions and subregions of the visual cor-
tex of the rhesus monkey. These regions are arranged 
hierarchically, beginning with the striate cortex (Grill-
Spector and Malach, 2004; Wandell, Dumoulin, and 
Brewer, 2007). Most of the information passes up the 
hierarchy; each region receives information from  
regions located beneath it in the hierarchy (closer to 
the striate cortex), analyzes the information, and passes 
the results on to “higher” regions for further analysis. 
Some information is also transmitted in the opposite 
direction, but axons that descend the hierarchy are 
much less numerous than those that ascend it.
The results of a functional-imaging study by Murray, 
Boyaci, and Kersten (2006) demonstrate a phenome-
non that owes its existence to information that follows 
receives information from one eye; but, because infor-
mation is shared, most of the neurons respond to 
information from both eyes. The neurons in the CO 
blobs are sensitive to color and to low-frequency sine-
wave gratings, whereas those between the blobs are 
sensitive to sine-wave gratings of higher spatial fre-
quencies, orientation, retinal disparity, and movement.
 Thought Question
Look at the scene in front of you, and try to imagine 
how its features are encoded by neurons in your stri-
ate cortex. Try to picture how the objects you see can 
be specified by an analysis of orientation, spatial fre-
quency, and color.
x extrastriate cortex  A region of visual association cortex; 
receives fibers from the striate cortex and from the superior 
colliculi and projects to the inferior temporal cortex.

188	
Chapter 6  Vision
caudal to the dotted red line and green lines in Figure 
6.32(c) and 6.32(d). (See Figure 6.32.)
The outputs of the striate cortex (area V1) are sent 
to area V2, a region of the extrastriate cortex just adja-
cent to V1. As we saw in Figure 6.28, a dye for cyto-
chrome oxidase reveals blobs in V1 and three kinds of 
stripes in V2. Neurons in V1 blobs project to thin stripes, 
and neurons outside the blobs in V1 project to thick 
stripes and pale stripes (Sincich, Jocson, and Horton, 
2010). Thus, neurons in the thin stripes of V2 receive 
information concerning color, and those in the thick 
stripes and pale stripes receive information about orien-
tation, spatial frequency, movement, and retinal dispar-
ity. (See Figure 6.33.)
The receptive fields of neurons in V2 are several 
times larger in diameter than those of neurons in the 
striate cortex, which suggests that V2 cells receive input 
from several V1 cells. Approximately 70 percent of  
orientation-sensitive neurons in V2 encode the presence 
of stimuli with same orientation throughout their recep-
tive field. However, a significant minority respond to 
stimuli with one orientation in part of the receptive field 
and to those with a different orientation in the rest of 
the field (Anzai, Peng, and Van Essen, 2007). Presum-
ably, these cells are able to recognize elements of more 
complex stimuli, such as their corners.
At this point, the visual association cortex divides 
into two pathways. On the basis of their own research 
figure 6.31  Display Used by Murray, Boyaci,  
and Kersten (2006)
The ball that appears to be farther away looks larger than 
the closer one, even though the images they cast on the 
retina are exactly the same size.
(From Sterzer, P., and Rees, G. Nature Neuroscience, 2006, 9, 302–304. Reprinted 
with permission.)
figure 6.32  Striate Cortex and Regions of Extrastriate Cortex
These views of a human brain show (a) a nearly normal lateral view, (b) a nearly normal 
midsagittal view, (c) an “inflated” lateral view, (d) an “inflated” midsagittal view, and (e) 
an unrolling of the cortical surface caudal to the dotted red line and green lines shown 
in (c) and (d).
(From Tootell, B. H., and Hadjikhani, N. Cerebral Cortex, 2001, 11, 298–311. Reprinted with permission.)
V2dV3V3a V7
V4d?
MT+
V8
V4v
VP
V2v
V1
V1
1cm
B
D
C
A
E
shown in dark gray, while regions that are normally  
visible (the surfaces of gyri) are shown in light gray. 
Figure 6.32(e) shows an unrolling of the cortical surface 

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Visual Association Cortex	
189
As we saw, the parvocellular, koniocellular, and 
magnocellular systems provide different kinds of infor-
mation. The magnocellular system is found in all mam-
mals, whereas the parvocellular and koniocellular sys-
tems are found only in some primates. These systems 
receive information from different types of ganglion 
cells, which are connected to different types of bipolar 
cells and photoreceptors. Only the cells in the parvocel-
lular and koniocellular system receive information 
about wavelength from cones; thus, these systems pro-
vide information concerning color. Cells in the parvo-
cellular system also show high spatial resolution and low 
temporal resolution; that is, they are able to detect very 
fine details, but their response is slow and prolonged. 
The koniocellular system, which receives information 
and a review of the literature, Ungerleider and Mishkin 
(1982) concluded that the visual association cortex 
contains two streams of analysis: the dorsal stream and 
the ventral stream. Subsequent anatomical studies have 
confirmed this conclusion (Baizer, Ungerleider, and 
Desimone, 1991). The streams begin to diverge after 
area V2. The ventral stream begins with the neurons in 
the pale and thin stripes of area V2, continues forward 
to area V4, and then projects to a variety of subareas of 
the inferior temporal cortex. The dorsal stream begins 
with the neurons in the thick stripes of area V2 and as-
cends into regions of the posterior parietal cortex. 
Some axons conveying information received from the 
magnocellular system bypass area V2: They project 
from area V1 directly to area V5 (also called area MT), 
a region of the dorsal stream devoted to the analysis of 
movement. The ventral stream recognizes what an ob-
ject is and what colors it has, and the dorsal stream 
recognizes where the object is located and, if it is mov-
ing, its speed and direction of movement.
The dorsal and ventral streams of the visual asso-
ciation cortex play distinctly different roles in visual 
processing. The primary behavioral function of the 
dorsal stream is to provide visual information that 
guides navigation and skilled movements directed  
toward objects, and that of the ventral stream is to pro-
vide visual information about the size, shape, color, and 
texture of objects (including, as we shall see, other 
people). (See Figure 6.34.)
figure 6.33  Connections Between Areas  
V1 and V2
(Adapted from Sincich and Horton, Annual Review of Neuroscience, 2005, 28, 
303–326.)
Th
ic
k 
st
ri
pe
Pa
le
 s
tri
pe
Th
in
 s
tri
pe
V2
V1
CO blob
Interblob
region
x dorsal stream  A system of interconnected regions of visual 
cortex involved in the perception of spatial location, beginning with 
the striate cortex and ending with the posterior parietal cortex.
x ventral stream  A system of interconnected regions of visual 
cortex involved in the perception of form, beginning with the 
striate cortex and ending with the inferior temporal cortex.
x inferior temporal cortex  The highest level of the ventral 
stream of the visual association cortex; involved in perception of 
objects, including people’s bodies and faces.
x posterior parietal cortex  The highest level of the dorsal 
stream of the visual association cortex; involved in perception of 
movement and spatial location.
figure 6.34  Human Visual System
This figure shows the human visual system from the eye 
to the two streams of the visual association cortex.
Dorsal Stream
Ventral Stream
Striate cortex
(primary visual
cortex)
Second level of visual
association cortex in 
posterior parietal lobe
Dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus
Thalamus
Eye
Optic
nerve
Inferior temporal
cortex: Second
level of visual
association cortex
Extrastriate
cortex

190	
Chapter 6  Vision
encountered so far, these neurons respond to a variety 
of wavelengths, not just the wavelengths that correspond 
to red, green, yellow, and blue.
The appearance of the colors of objects remains 
much the same whether we observe them under artificial 
light, under an overcast sky, or at noon on a cloudless 
day. This phenomenon is known as color constancy. 
Our visual system does not simply respond according to 
the wavelength of the light reflected by objects in each 
part of the visual field; instead, it compensates for the 
source of the light. This compensation appears to be 
made by simultaneously comparing the color composi-
tion of each point in the visual field with the average 
color of the entire scene. If the scene contains a particu-
larly high level of long-wavelength light (as it would if an 
object were illuminated by the light of a setting sun), 
then some long-wavelength light is “subtracted out” of 
the perception of each point in the scene. This compen-
sation helps us to see what is actually out there.
Schein and Desimone (1990) performed a careful 
study of the response characteristics of neurons in area 
V4 of the monkey extrastriate cortex, which receives 
input from the pale and thin stripes of area V2. They 
found that these neurons responded to specific colors. 
Some also responded to colored bars of specific orien-
tation; thus, area V4 seems to be involved in the analy-
sis of form as well as color. The color-sensitive neurons 
had a rather unusual secondary receptive field: a large 
region surrounding the primary field. When stimuli 
were presented in the secondary receptive field, the 
neuron did not respond. However, stimuli presented 
there could suppress the neuron’s response to a stimu-
lus presented in the primary field. For example, if a cell 
would fire when a red spot was presented in the pri-
mary field, it would fire at a slower rate (or not at all) 
when an additional red stimulus was presented in the 
surrounding secondary field. In other words, these 
only from “blue” cones, which are much less numerous 
than “red” and “green” cones, does not provide infor-
mation about fine details. In contrast, neurons in the 
magnocellular system are color-blind. They are not able 
to detect fine details, but they can detect smaller con-
trasts between light and dark. They are also especially 
sensitive to movement. (See Table 6.2.) The dorsal 
stream receives mostly magnocellular input, but the 
ventral stream receives approximately equal input from 
the magnocellular and the parvocellular/koniocellular 
systems.
Many neurons throughout almost all regions of the 
visual cortex are responsive to binocular disparity, 
which, as we saw earlier, serves as the basis for stereo-
scopic depth perception (Parker, 2007; Roe et al., 2007). 
The disparity-sensitive neurons found in the dorsal 
stream, which is involved in spatial perception, respond 
to large, extended visual surfaces, whereas those found 
in the ventral stream, which is involved in object percep-
tion, respond to the contours of three-dimensional  
objects.
Perception of Color
As we saw earlier, neurons within the CO blobs in the 
striate cortex respond differentially to colors. Like the 
ganglion cells in the retina (and the parvocellular and 
koniocellular neurons in the dorsal lateral geniculate 
nucleus), these neurons respond in opponent fashion. 
This information is analyzed by the regions of the visual 
association cortex that constitute the ventral stream.
Studies with Laboratory Animals
In the monkey brain, color-sensitive neurons in the CO 
blobs of the striate cortex send color-related informa-
tion to the thin stripes in area V2. Neurons in V2 send 
information to an adjacent region of the extrastriate 
cortex called V4. Zeki (1980) found that neurons in this 
region respond selectively to colors, but their response 
characteristics are much more complex than those of 
neurons in V1 or V2. Unlike the neurons we have  
table 6.2  Properties of the Magnocellular, Parvocellular, and Koniocellular Divisions of the Visual System
Property
Magnocellular Division
Parvocellular Division
Koniocellular Division
Color
No
Yes (from “red” and “green” cones)
Yes (from “blue” cones)
Sensitivity to contrast
High
Low
Low
Spatial resolution (ability 
to detect fine details)
Low 
High 
Low 
Temporal resolution
Fast (transient response)
Slow (sustained response)
Slow (sustained response)
x color constancy  The relatively constant appearance of the 
colors of objects viewed under varying lighting conditions.

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Visual Association Cortex	
191
color”). If the brain damage is unilateral, people will lose 
color vision in only half of the visual field.
As we just saw, Heywood, Gaffan, and Cowey (1995) 
found a region of the inferior temporal cortex of the 
monkey brain whose damage disrupted the ability to 
make color discriminations. The analogous region ap-
pears to play a critical role in color perception in hu-
mans. An fMRI study by Hadjikhani et al. (1998) found 
a color-sensitive region that included the lingual and 
fusiform gyri, in a location corresponding to area TEO 
in the monkey’s cortex, which they called area V8. An 
analysis of ninety-two cases of achromatopsia by Bouvier 
and Engel (2006) confirmed that damage to this region 
(which is adjacent to and partly overlaps the fusiform face 
area, discussed later in this chapter) disrupts color vi-
sion. (Refer back to Figure 6.32.)
The function of our ability to perceive different 
colors is to help us perceive different objects in our en-
vironment. Thus, to perceive and understand what is in 
front of us, we must have information about color com-
bined with other forms of information. Some people 
with brain damage lose the ability to perceive shapes but 
can still perceive colors. For example, Zeki et al. (1999) 
described a patient who could identify colors but was 
otherwise blind. Patient P. B. received an electrical 
shock that caused both cardiac and respiratory arrest. 
He was revived, but the period of anoxia caused exten-
sive damage to his extrastriate cortex. As a result, he lost 
all form perception. However, even though he could 
not recognize objects presented on a video monitor, he 
could still identify their colors.
Perception of Form
The analysis of visual information that leads to the per-
ception of form begins with neurons in the striate cor-
tex that are sensitive to orientation and spatial fre-
quency. These neurons send information to area V2 and 
then on to the subregions of the visual association cor-
tex that constitute the ventral stream.
Studies with Laboratory Animals
In primates the recognition of visual patterns and identi-
fication of particular objects take place in the inferior 
temporal cortex, located on the ventral part of the tempo-
ral lobe. This region of visual association cortex is located 
at the end of the ventral stream. It is here that analyses of 
form and color are put together, and perceptions of three-
dimensional objects and backgrounds are achieved. The 
inferior temporal cortex consists of two major regions: a 
cells responded to particular wavelengths of light but 
subtracted out the amount of that wavelength that was 
present in the background. As Schein and Desimone 
point out, this subtraction could serve as the basis for 
color constancy.
Walsh et al. (1993) confirmed this prediction; damage 
to area V4 does disrupt color constancy. The investigators 
found that, although monkeys could still discriminate be-
tween different colors after area V4 had been damaged, 
their performance was impaired when the color of the 
overall illumination was changed. But the fact that the mon-
keys could still perform a color discrimination task under 
constant illumination means that some region besides area 
V4 must be involved in color vision. 
Simulate color 
constancy on MyPsychLab to see the effects of the color of 
overall illumination on color perception.
A study by Heywood, Gaffan, and Cowey (1995) sug-
gested that a portion of the inferior temporal cortex just 
anterior to area V4—a region of the monkey brain that 
is usually referred to as area TEO—plays a critical role 
in visual discrimination. The investigators destroyed 
area TEO, leaving area V4 intact, and observed severe 
impairment in color discrimination. The monkeys had 
no difficulty in discriminating shades of gray, so the 
deficit was restricted to impaired color perception.
Conway, Moeller, and Tsao (2007) performed a de-
tailed analysis of the responsiveness of neurons in a 
large region of the visual association cortex in monkeys, 
including areas V4 and TEO. Using fMRI, the investiga-
tors identified color “hot spots”—small scattered regions 
that were strongly activated by changes in the color of 
visual stimuli. Next, they recorded the response charac-
teristics of neurons inside and outside these spots, which 
they called globs. (I’m sure the similarity between the 
terms “blobs” and “globs” was intentional.) They found 
that glob neurons were indeed responsive to colors but 
also had some weak sensitivity to shapes. In contrast, 
interglob neurons (those located outside globs) did not 
respond to colors but were strongly selective to shape. 
Thus, within a large region of visual association cortex, 
patches of neurons were strongly sensitive to colors or to 
shape but not to both. The fact that color-sensitive globs 
are spread across a wide area of visual association cortex 
probably explains why only rather large brain lesions 
cause severe disruptions in perception of color.
Studies with Humans
Lesions of a restricted region of the human extrastriate 
cortex can cause loss of color vision without disruption 
of visual acuity. The patients describe their vision as re-
sembling a black-and-white film. In addition, they cannot 
even imagine colors or remember the colors of objects 
they saw before their brain damage occurred (Damasio 
et al., 1980; Heywood and Kentridge, 2003). The condi-
tion is known as cerebral achromatopsia (“vision without 
x cerebral achromatopsia (ay krohm a top see a)  Inability to 
discriminate among different hues; caused by damage to area V8 
of the visual association cortex.

192	
Chapter 6  Vision
though she had relatively normal visual acuity. However, 
she could still read, even small print, which indicates 
that reading involves different brain regions than object 
perception does. (Chapter 14 discusses research that has 
identified brain regions involved in visual recognition of 
letters and words.) When she was permitted to hold an 
object that she could not recognize visually, she could 
immediately recognize it by touch and say what it is, 
which proves that she had not lost her memory for the 
object or simply forgotten how to say its name.
Analysis of Specific Categories of Visual Stimuli.  
Visual agnosia is caused by damage to the parts of the 
visual association cortex that contribute to the ventral 
stream. In fact, damage to specific regions of the ven-
tral stream can impair the ability to recognize specific 
categories of visual stimuli. Of course, even if specific 
regions of the visual association cortex are involved in 
analyzing specific categories of stimuli, the boundaries 
of brain lesions will seldom coincide the boundaries of 
brain regions with particular functions.
With the advent of functional imaging, investigators 
have studied the responses of the normal human brain and 
have discovered several regions of the ventral stream that 
are activated by the sight of particular categories of visual 
stimuli. For example, researchers have identified regions of 
the inferior temporal and lateral occipital cortex that are 
specifically activated by categories such as animals, tools, 
cars, flowers, letters and letter strings, faces, bodies, and 
scenes. (See Tootell, Tsao, and Vanduffel, 2003, and Grill-
Spector and Malach, 2004, for a review.) However, not all 
of these findings have been replicated, and, of course, 
general-purpose regions contain circuits that can learn to 
recognize shapes that do not fall into these categories. A 
relatively large region of the ventral stream of the visual 
association cortex, the lateral occipital complex (LOC), 
appears to respond to a wide variety of objects and shapes.
A functional-imaging study by Downing et al. 
(2006) suggests that there are few regions of the visual 
association cortex devoted to the analysis of specific 
categories of stimuli. The investigators presented im-
ages of objects from nineteen different categories to 
normal subjects and found only three regions that 
showed the greatest activation to the sight of specific 
categories: faces, bodies, and scenes. Bell et al. (2009) 
found that in both the human and the monkey brain, 
regions that responded to faces and body parts were 
adjacent to each other, as were those that responded to 
objects and scenes of places.
posterior area (TEO) and an anterior area (TE). Damage 
to these regions causes severe deficits in visual discrimina-
tion (Mishkin, 1966; Gross, 1973; Dean, 1976).
As we saw earlier, the analysis of visual information 
is hierarchical: Area V1 is concerned with the analysis of 
elementary aspects of information in very small regions 
of the visual field, and successive regions analyze more 
complex characteristics. The size of the receptive fields 
also grows as the hierarchy is ascended. The receptive 
fields of neurons in area TEO are larger than those in 
area V4, and the receptive fields of neurons in area TE 
are the largest of all, often encompassing the entire 
contralateral half of the visual field (Boussaoud, Desim-
one, and Ungerleider, 1991). In general, these neurons 
respond best to three-dimensional objects (or photo-
graphs of them). They respond poorly to simple stimuli 
such as spots, lines, or sine-wave gratings. Most of them 
continue to respond even when complex stimuli are 
moved to different locations, are changed in size, are 
placed against a different background, or are partially 
occluded by other objects (Rolls and Baylis, 1986; 
Kovács, Vogels, and Orban, 1995). Thus, they appear to 
participate in the recognition of objects rather than the 
analysis of specific features.
The fact that neurons in the primate inferior tem-
poral cortex respond to very specific complex shapes 
suggests that the development of the circuits responsi-
ble for detecting them must involve learning. Indeed, 
that seems to be the case. For example, several studies 
have found neurons in the inferior temporal cortex that 
respond specifically to objects that the monkeys have 
already seen many times but not to unfamiliar objects 
(Kobatake, Tanaka, and Tamori, 1992; Logothetis, 
Pauls, and Poggio, 1995; Baker, Behrman, and Olson, 
2002). The role of the inferior temporal cortex in learn-
ing will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 13.
Studies with Humans
Study of people who have sustained brain damage to 
the visual association cortex has told us much about the 
organization of the human visual system. In recent 
years our knowledge has been greatly expanded by 
functional-imaging studies.
Visual Agnosia.  Damage to the human visual associa-
tion cortex can cause a category of deficits known as 
visual agnosia. Agnosia (“failure to know”) refers to an 
inability to perceive or identify a stimulus by means of a 
particular sensory modality, even though its details can 
be detected by means of that modality and the person 
retains relatively normal intellectual capacity.
Mrs. R., whose case was described in the opening of 
this chapter, had visual agnosia caused by damage to the 
ventral stream of her visual association cortex. As we saw, 
she could not identify common objects by sight, even 
x visual agnosia (ag no zha)  Deficits in visual perception in the 
absence of blindness; caused by brain damage.
x lateral occipital complex (LOC)  A region of the extrastriate 
cortex, involved in perception of objects other than people’s 
bodies and faces.

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Visual Association Cortex	
193
who these people are and will usually recognize them 
when they hear the person’s voice. As one patient said, “I 
have trouble recognizing people from just faces alone. I 
look at their hair color, listen to their voices . . . I use cloth-
ing, voice, and hair. I try to associate something with a 
person one way or another . . . what they wear, how their 
hair is worn” (Buxbaum, Glosser, and Coslett, 1999, p. 43).
Studies with brain-damaged people and functional-
imaging studies suggest that these special face-recogniz-
ing circuits are found in the fusiform face area (FFA), 
located in the fusiform gyrus on the base of the temporal 
lobe. For example, Grill-Spector, Knouf, and Kanwisher 
(2004) obtained fMRI scans of the brains of people who 
looked at pictures of faces and several other categories of 
objects. Figure 6.35 shows the results, projected on an 
“inflated” ventral view of the cerebral cortex. The black 
outlines show the regions of the fusiform cortex that were 
activated by viewing faces, drawn on all images of the 
brain for comparison with the activation produced by 
other categories of objects. As you can see, images of faces 
activated the regions indicated by these outlines better 
than other categories of visual stimuli. (See Figure 6.35.)
Perhaps the strangest piece of evidence for a special 
face-recognition region comes from a report by Moscovitch, 
Winocur, and Behrmann (1997), who studied a man with a 
visual agnosia for objects but not for faces. For example, he 
recognized the face shown in Figure 6.36 but not the flow-
ers, fruits, and vegetables that compose it. (See Figure 6.36.) 
Presumably, some regions of his visual association cortex 
were damaged, but the fusiform face region was not.
A functional-imaging study by Cox, Meyers, and 
Sinha (2004) found that visual cues correlated with 
faces can activate the fusiform face area. They found 
that photographs that implied the presence of a face (a 
blurry gray shape above a photograph of a man’s torso) 
activated the FFA even though no facial features were 
present. This finding suggests not simply that the FFA is 
prewired to recognize facial features, but also that the 
activity of this region can be affected by previously 
learned information. (See Figure 6.37.)
Some people suffer from congenital prosopagnosia—
the inability to recognize faces without obvious damage to 
the FFA. Such people often report that their inability to 
recognize people they have met several times is perceived 
by the other people as an insult. Our ability to recognize 
other people’s faces is so automatic that it is difficult for 
us to understand that someone we have met many times 
can fail to recognize us, so we conclude that the recognition 
The distinction between the behavioral functions of 
the dorsal and ventral streams is vividly illustrated by a 
case report by Karnath et al. (2009). Patient J. S. sus-
tained a stroke that damaged the medial occipitotempo-
ral cortex, including the fusiform and lingual gyrus, bilat-
erally. The ventral stream was seriously damaged, but the 
dorsal stream was intact. The patient was unable to recog-
nize objects or faces and could no longer read. He could 
not recognize shapes or orientations of visual stimuli. His 
ability to reach for and pick up objects was preserved, and 
if he knew in advance what they were, he could handle 
them appropriately. For example, if he knew where his 
clothes were, he could pick them up and get dressed. He 
could shake hands when someone else extended his 
hand to him. He could walk around his neighborhood, 
enter a store, and give a written list to the clerk.
A common symptom of visual agnosia is prosopagnosia, 
inability to recognize particular faces (prosopon is Greek for 
“face”). That is, patients with this disorder can recognize 
that they are looking at a face, but they cannot say whose 
face it is—even if it belongs to a relative or close friend. 
They see eyes, ears, a nose, and a mouth, but they cannot 
recognize the particular configuration of these features 
that identifies an individual face. They still remember 
x prosopagnosia (prah soh pag no zha)  Failure to recognize 
particular people by the sight of their faces.
x fusiform face area (FFA)  A region of the visual association 
cortex located in the inferior temporal; involved in perception of 
faces and other complex objects that require expertise to 
recognize.
figure 6.35  Responses to Categories of Visual Stimuli
These functional MRI scans show the regions of the 
human visual cortex that respond to six categories of 
visual stimuli. Neural activity is shown on “inflated” 
ventral views of the cerebral cortex. The fusiform face 
area is shown as a black outline, derived from the 
responses to faces shown in the upper left scan.
(From Grill-Spector, K., Knouf, N., and Kanwisher, N. Nature Neuroscience, 2004, 
7, 555–561. Reprinted with permission.)
Right
Left
Faces
Houses
Guitars
Cars
Birds
Flowers
Fus

194	
Chapter 6  Vision
failure is really a snub. Behrman et al. (2007) found that 
the anterior fusiform gyrus is smaller in people with con-
genital prosopagnosia, and a diffusion tensor imaging 
study by Thomas et al. (2009) found evidence that people 
with congenital prosopagnosia show decreased connectiv-
ity within the occipitotemporal cortex.
Another interesting region of the ventral stream is 
the extrastriate body area (EBA), which is just posterior 
to the FFA and partly overlaps it. Downing et al. (2001) 
found that this region was specifically activated by pho-
tographs, silhouettes, or stick drawings of human bod-
ies or body parts and not by control stimuli such as 
photographs or drawings of tools, scrambled silhou-
ettes, or scrambled stick drawings of human bodies. 
Figure 6.38 shows the magnitude of the fMRI response 
in the nonoverlapping regions of the FFA and EBA to 
several categories of stimuli (Schwarzlose, Baker, and 
Kanwisher (2005). As you can see, the FFA responded 
to faces more than any of the other categories, and the 
figure 6.36  Visual Object Agnosia Without 
Prosopagnosia
A patient could recognize the face in this painting but not 
the flowers, fruits, and vegetables that compose it
(Giuseppe Arcimboldo. 1527–1593. Vertumnus. Erich Lessing/Art Resource, New York.)
figure 6.37  Implied Faces
The fusiform face area was activated by actual faces (e) 
and by a blurry gray shape in the appropriate position 
that implied the presence of a face (a).
(From Cox, D., Meyers, E., and Sinha, P. Science, 2004, 304, 115–117. Copyright 
© 2004 American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted with 
permission.)
a
b
c
d
e
f
figure 6.38  Perception of Faces and Bodies
The fusiform face area (FFA) and extrastriate body area 
(EBA) were activated by images of faces, headless 
bodies, body parts, and assorted objects.
(Adapted from Schwarzlose, R. F., Baker, C. I., and Kanwisher, N. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2005, 23, 11055–11059.)
Mean relative metabolism
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
1.0
Assorted objects
Assorted objects
Faces
Faces
Headless bodies
Headless bodies
Body parts
Body parts
Faces
Headless
 bodies
Body parts
Assorted 
objects
Fusiform Face Area (FFA)
Extrastriate Body Area (EBA)
x extrastriate body area (EBA)  A region of the visual association 
cortex located in the lateral occipitotemporal cortex; involved in 
perception of the human body and body parts other than faces.
x parahippocampal place area (PPA)  A region of limbic cortex 
on the medial temporal lobe; involved in perception of particular 
places (“scenes”).

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Visual Association Cortex	
195
Are Faces Special?  As we just saw, the ability to recog-
nize faces by sight depends on a specific region of the 
fusiform gyrus. But must we conclude that the develop-
ment of this region is a result of natural selection and that 
the FFA comes prewired with circuits devoted to the anal-
ysis of faces? Several kinds of evidence suggest that the 
answer is no—that the face-recognition circuits develop 
as a result of the experience we have of seeing people’s 
faces. Because of the extensive experience we have of 
looking at faces, we are all experts at recognizing them.
What about people who have become experts at 
recognizing other types of objects? It appears that rec-
ognition of specific complex stimuli by experts, too, is 
disrupted by lesions that cause prosopagnosia: inability 
of a farmer to recognize his cows, inability of a bird 
expert to recognize different species of birds, and in-
ability of a driver to recognize his own car except by 
reading its license plate (Bornstein, Stroka, and Mu-
nitz, 1969; Damasio, Damasio, and Van Hoesen, 1982). 
Two functional-imaging studies (Gauthier et al., 2000; 
Xu, 2005) found that when bird or car experts (but not 
nonexperts) viewed pictures of birds or cars, the fusi-
form face area was activated. Another study (Gauthier 
et al., 1999) found that when people had spent a long 
time becoming familiar with computer-generated ob-
jects they called “greebles,” viewing the greebles acti-
vated the fusiform face area. (See Figure 6.40.) Tarr and 
Gauthier (2000) suggested we should relabel the FFA as 
the flexible fusiform area.
EBA showed the greatest response to headless bodies 
and body parts. (See Figure 6.38.)
Urgesi, Berlucchi, and Aglioti (2004) used transcra-
nial magnetic stimulation to temporarily disrupt the 
normal neural activity of the EBA. (As we saw in Chapter 5, 
the TMS procedure applies a strong localized magnetic 
field to the brain by passing an electrical current through 
a coil of wire placed on the scalp.) The investigators 
found that the disruption temporarily impaired people’s 
ability to recognize photographs of body parts, but not 
parts of faces or motorcycles.
As we will see in Chapter 13, the hippocampus and 
nearby regions of the medial temporal cortex are in-
volved in spatial perception and memory. Several stud-
ies have identified a parahippocampal place area (PPA), 
located in a region of limbic cortex bordering the ven-
tromedial temporal lobe, that is activated by the sight of 
scenes and backgrounds. For example, Steeves et al. 
(2004) studied Patient D. F., a 47-year-old woman who 
had sustained brain damage caused by accidental car-
bon monoxide poisoning fourteen years earlier. Bilat-
eral damage to her lateral occipital cortex (an impor-
tant part of the ventral stream) caused a profound 
visual agnosia for objects. However, she was able to 
recognize both natural and human-made scenes 
(beaches, forests, deserts, cities, markets, and rooms). 
Functional imaging showed activation of her intact 
PPA. These results suggest that scene recognition does 
not depend on recognition of particular objects found 
within the scene, because D. F. was incapable of recog-
nizing these objects. Figure 6.39 shows the activation in 
her brain and that of a control subject. (See Figure 6.39.)
figure 6.39  The Parahippocampal Place Area
The scans show activation of the parahippocampal cortex 
in Patient D. F., a woman with a profound visual agnosia 
for objects, in response to viewing scenes (a) and similar 
responses in a control subject (b).
(From Steeves, J. K. E., Humphrey, G. K., Culham, J. C., et al. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 2004, 16, 955–965. Reprinted by permission.)
L
R
(a)
(b)
figure 6.40  Greebles
”Greebles” are computer-created objects from the study 
by Gauthier and Tarr (1997). Greebles were categorized 
by family and gender, and different individuals each had 
their own particular shapes. Two greebles of the same 
gender and family would resemble each other more 
closely than any other two greebles.
(From Gauthier, I., and Tarr, M. J. Vision Research, 1997, 37, 1673–1682. 
Copyright © 1997. Reprinted with permission of Elsevier Science.)
Samar
Osmit
Galli
Radok
Tasio
Plok
Glip
Gender
Family
Two greebles of the same
gender and same family

196	
Chapter 6  Vision
used. An asterisk above a stimulus indicates that the ba-
bies spent more time looking at it than at the other 
member of the pair. If neither stimulus is marked with 
an asterisk, that means that the baby indicated no pref-
erence—and as you can see, these pairs of stimuli bore 
the least resemblance to a face illuminated from above. 
(See Figure 6.42.)
A review of the literature by Johnson (2005) sug-
gests that a baby’s preference for faces is controlled by 
a fast, low-spatial-frequency, subcortical pathway that 
is present in newborn infants. This circuit survives in 
many adults with prosopagnosia caused by cortical 
damage, who can realize that they are looking at a 
face even though they cannot recognize it and can 
even recognize facial expressions such as happiness, 
fear, or anger. (This phenomenon is discussed in 
A functional-imaging study (Golby et al., 2001) 
found higher activation of the fusiform face area when 
people viewed pictures of faces of members of their 
own race (African Americans or European Americans). 
Indeed, the subjects in this study were able to recognize 
faces of people of their own race more accurately than 
faces of people of the other race. Presumably, this dif-
ference reflected the fact that people have more experi-
ence of seeing other members of their own race, which 
indicates that expertise does appear to play a role in 
face recognition.
There is no doubt that a region of the fusiform gy-
rus plays an essential role in the analysis of particular 
faces. In fact, a face-responsive area exists in a similar 
location in the monkey brain, and this area contains 
neurons that respond to the faces of both monkeys and 
humans (Tsao et al., 2006). Two issues are still disputed 
by investigators interested in the FFA. First, is analysis of 
faces the sole function of this region, or is it really a 
“flexible fusiform area” involved in visual analysis of cat-
egories of very similar stimuli that can be discriminated 
only by experts? The activation of the FFA by greebles in 
the brains of greeble experts suggests that the FFA is an 
expertise area rather than an exclusively face area. How-
ever, according to Kanwisher and Yovel (2006), “Since 
Greebles resemble faces (and/or bodies), they are a 
poor choice of stimulus to distinguish between the face-
specificity and expertise hypotheses” (p. 2113). Perhaps 
a more important issue is the relative roles of genetic 
programming and experience in development of a brain 
region critically involved in face perception.
A functional-imaging study indicates that although 
the relative size of the LOC, which responds to objects 
other than faces and bodies, is the same in children and 
adults, the left FFA does not reach its eventual size until 
adulthood, and the ability to recognize faces is directly 
related to the expansion of the FFA (Golarai et al., 
2007). These findings are consistent with the suggestion 
that the ability to recognize faces is a learned skill that 
grows with experience. Figure 6.41 shows the regions on 
the left and right fusiform cortex of an 8-year-old child 
and an adult. You can see the age-related size difference 
and also the difference between the size of this region in 
the left and right hemispheres. (See Figure 6.41.)
Evidence indicates that newborn babies prefer to 
look at stimuli that resemble faces, which suggests the 
presence of prewired circuits in the human brain that 
dispose babies to look at faces and hence learn to recog-
nize them. Farroni et al. (2005) presented newborn ba-
bies (between 13 and 168 hours old) with pairs of stim-
uli and found that they preferred to look at the ones 
that bore the closest resemblance to faces viewed in 
their normal, upright orientation, with the lighting 
coming from above, as it normally does. Figure 6.42 il-
lustrates the stimuli that Farroni and her colleagues 
figure 6.41  Fusiform Gyrus Responses to Faces
This “inflated” ventral view of the brain of an 8-year-old 
child and an adult from the study by Golarai et al. (2007) 
shows the regions of the fusiform gyrus that responded 
to the sight of faces. The FFA is much larger in adults.
(Courtesy of Golijeh Golarai, Department of Psychology, Stanford University.)
Adult
Rostral
Caudal
RH
LH
RH
LH
FFA
FFA
FFA
FFA
8-year-old child
figure 6.42  Preference of Newborn Babies for 
Viewing Stimuli That Resemble Faces
An asterisk above a stimulus indicates that the babies 
spent more time looking at it than the other member of 
the pair. If neither stimulus is marked with an asterisk, the 
baby indicated no preference.
(Adapted from Farroni, T., Johnson, M. H., Menon, E., Zulian, L., Faraguna, D., 
and Csibra, G. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2005, 102, 
17245–17250.)
*
*
*
*
*
*

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Visual Association Cortex	
197
As we will see in Chapter 17, people with autistic 
disorder fail to develop normal social relations with 
other people. Indeed, in severe cases they give no signs 
that they recognize that other people exist. Grelotti, 
Gauthier, and Schultz (2002) found that people with 
autistic disorder showed a deficit in the ability to recog-
nize faces and that looking at faces failed to activate the 
fusiform gyrus. The authors speculate that the lack of 
interest in other people, caused by the brain abnormali-
ties responsible for autism, resulted in a lack of motiva-
tion that normally promotes the acquisition of expertise 
in recognizing faces as a child grows up. Chapter 17 
discusses autistic disorder in more detail.
Williams syndrome is a genetic condition caused by 
a mutation on Chromosome 7. People with this disorder 
usually show intellectual deficits, but they often show an 
intense interest in music. They are generally very socia-
ble, charming, and kind. They show great interest in 
other people and spend more time looking closely at 
their faces. They are generally better at recognizing faces 
than people without the syndrome. A functional imaging 
study by Golarai et al. (2010) found (not surprisingly) 
that the fusiform face area was enlarged in people with 
Williams syndrome and that the size of the FFA was posi-
tively correlated with a person’s ability to recognize faces.
more detail in Chapter 11, which deals with emotion.) 
The subcortical pathway guarantees that babies will 
look at faces, which increases social bonding with 
other humans as well as facilitating the development 
of face-sensitive circuits in the cerebral cortex.
A study by Le Grand et al. (2001) discovered that the 
experience of seeing faces very early in life plays a critical 
role in the development of the skills necessary for recog-
nizing them later in life. The investigators tested the 
ability of people (aged 9–21 years) who had been born 
with congenital cataracts to recognize subtle differences 
between pairs of faces. These people had been unable to 
see more than light and dark until they received eye 
surgery at 62–187 days of age that made normal vision 
possible. The early visual deprivation resulted in a severe 
deficit, compared with the performance of control sub-
jects, in recognizing the facial differences.
A follow-up study by Le Grand et al. (2003) tested 
people who were born with cataracts in only one eye. 
Because of the immaturity of the newborn brain, visual 
information received by one eye is transmitted only to 
the contralateral visual cortex. (You may recall that I 
said earlier in this chapter that it is not correct to say 
that each hemisphere receives visual information solely 
from the contralateral eye. However, my admonition 
does not apply to newborn babies.) This means that the 
right hemisphere of a person born with a cataract in the 
left eye does not receive patterned visual information 
until the cataract is removed. Le Grand and his col-
leagues predicted that because the right fusiform gyrus 
is critical for facial recognition, people born with cata-
racts in their left eye would show a deficit in recognizing 
faces but that people born with cataracts in the right eye 
would show normal discrimination—and that is exactly 
what they found.
By the way, there are three basic ways in which we 
can recognize individual faces: differences in features 
(for example, the size and shape of the eyes, nose, and 
mouth), differences in contour (the overall shape of the 
face), and differences in configuration of features (for 
example, the spacing of the eyes, nose, and mouth). 
Figure 6.43 illustrates these differences in a series of 
composite faces from the study by Le Grand et al. 
(2003). (You can see that the face on the far left is the 
same in each of the rows.) The top row of faces contain 
different features: eyes and mouths from photos of dif-
ferent people. (The noses are all the same.) The middle 
row of faces are all of the same person, but the contours 
of the faces have different shapes. The bottom row con-
tains different configurations of features from one indi-
vidual. In these faces, the spacing between the eyes and 
between the eyes and the mouth has been altered. Dif-
ferences in configuration are the most difficult to de-
tect, and the people with early visual deprivation showed 
a deficit in configural recognition. (See Figure 6.43.)
figure 6.43  Composite Faces
The faces in the top row contain different features: eyes 
and mouths from photos of different people. The middle 
row of faces are all of the same person, but the contours 
of the faces have different shapes. The bottom row 
contains different configurations of features from one 
individual: The spacing between the eyes and between 
the eyes and the mouth have been altered.
(From Le Grand, R., Mondloch, C. J., Maurer, D., and Brent, H. P. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2003, 6, 1108–1112. Reprinted with permission.)

198	
Chapter 6  Vision
environment or as objects in our environment move in 
relation to us, the sizes, shapes, and locations of environ-
mental features on our retinas change. Imagine the im-
age seen by a video camera as you walk along a street, 
pointing the lens of the camera straight in front of you. 
Suppose your path will pass just to the right of a mail-
box. The image of the mailbox will slowly get larger. Fi-
nally, as you pass the mailbox, its image will veer to the 
left and disappear. Points on the sidewalk will move 
downward, and branches of trees that you pass under 
will move upward. Analysis of the relative movement of 
the visual elements of your environment—the optic 
flow—will tell you where you are heading, how fast you 
are approaching different items in front of you, and 
whether you will pass to the left or right (or under or 
over) these items. The point toward which we are mov-
ing does not move, but all other points in the visual 
scene move away from it. Therefore, this point is called 
the center of expansion. If we keep moving in the same 
direction, we will eventually bump into an object that 
Perception of Movement
We need to know not only what things are, but also 
where they are and where they are going. Without the 
ability to perceive the direction and velocity of move-
ment of objects, we would have no way to predict where 
they will be. We would be unable to catch the objects (or 
avoid letting them catch us). This section examines the 
perception of movement; the final section examines the 
perception of location.
Studies with Laboratory Animals
One of the regions of the extrastriate cortex—area V5, 
also known as area MT, for medial temporal—contains 
neurons that respond to movement. Damage to this re-
gion severely disrupts a monkey’s ability to perceive mov-
ing stimuli (Siegel and Andersen, 1986). Area V5 receives 
input directly from the striate cortex and from several 
regions of the extrastriate cortex. It also receives input 
from the superior colliculus, which is involved in visual 
reflexes, including reflexive control of eye movements.
Accurately determining the velocity and direction 
of movement of an object is an important ability. That 
moving object could be a prey animal trying to run away, 
a predator trying to catch you, or a projectile you are 
trying to catch (or keep from hitting you). If we are to 
accurately track moving objects, the information re-
ceived by V5 must be up to date. In fact, the axons that 
transmit information from the magnocellular system are 
thick and heavily myelinated, which increases the rate at 
which they conduct action potentials. Petersen, Miezin, 
and Allman (1988) recorded the responses of neurons 
in areas V4 and V5. As you can see in Figure 6.44, visual 
information reached the V5 neurons sooner than it 
reached those in area V4, whose neurons are involved in 
the analysis of form and color. (See Figure 6.44.)
The input from the superior colliculus contributes 
in some way to the movement sensitivity of neurons in 
area V5. Rodman, Gross, and Albright (1989, 1990) 
found that destruction of the striate cortex or the supe-
rior colliculus alone does not eliminate the movement 
sensitivity of V5 neurons, but destruction of both areas 
does. The roles played by these two sources of input are 
not yet known. Clearly, both inputs provide useful infor-
mation; Seagraves et al. (1987) found that monkeys still 
could detect movement after lesions of the striate cortex 
but had difficulty estimating its rate.
A region adjacent to area V5, area MST, or medial 
superior temporal, receives information about movement 
from V5 and performs a further analysis. MST neurons 
respond to complex patterns of movement, including 
radial, circular, and spiral motion (see Vaina, 1998, for 
a review). One important function of this region—in 
particular, the dorsolateral MST, or MSTd—appears to 
be analysis of optic flow. As we move around in our  
figure 6.44  Responses of Neurons in Areas  
V4 and V5
Note that neurons in the motion-sensitive area V5 responded 
sooner to stimuli presented in their receptive field, and their 
firing ceased sooner, than neurons in the form- and color-
sensitive area V4. The faster, briefer response is what one 
would expect of neurons involved in perceiving a moving 
object’s velocity and direction of movement.
(Adapted from Petersen, S., Miezin, F., and Allman, J. Transient and sustained 
responses in four extrastriate visual areas of the owl monkey. Experimental Brain 
Research, 1988, 70, 55–60.)
0
V4
V5
Stimulus
on
Time (msec)
500
Firing rate
x optic flow  The complex motion of points in the visual field 
caused by relative movement between the observer and environ-
ment; provides information about the relative distance of objects 
from the observer and of the relative direction of movement.

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Visual Association Cortex	
199
Walsh et al. (1998) used transcranial magnetic stimu-
lation (TMS) to temporarily inactivate area MT/MST in 
normal human subjects. The investigators found that dur-
ing the stimulation people were unable to detect which of 
several objects displayed on a computer screen was mov-
ing. When the current was off, the subjects had no trouble 
detecting the motion. The current had no effect on the 
subjects’ ability to detect stimuli that varied in their form. 
(
Simulate motion aftereffects on MyPsychLab to see 
an interesting movement-related phenomenon.)
Optic Flow.  As we saw in the previous subsection, 
neurons in area MSTd of the monkey brain respond to 
optic flow, an important source of information about 
the direction in which the animal is heading. A func-
tional-imaging study by Peuskens et al. (2001) found 
that area MT/MST became active when people judged 
their heading while viewing a display showing optic 
flow. Vaina and her colleagues (Jornales et al., 1997; 
Vaina, 1998) found that people with lesions that 
included this region were able to perceive motion but 
could not perceive heading from optic flow.
Form from Motion.  Perception of movement can  
even help us to perceive three-dimensional forms—a  
lies at the center of expansion. We can also use optic 
flow to determine whether an object approaching us will 
hit us or pass us by.
Bradley et al. (1996) recorded from single units in 
MSTd of monkeys and found that particular neurons 
responded selectively to expansion foci located in par-
ticular regions of the visual field. These neurons com-
pensated for eye movements, which means that their 
activity identified the location in the environment to-
ward which an animal was moving. (The ability of the 
visual system to compensate for eye movements is dis-
cussed in the next subsection of this chapter.) Britten 
and van Wezel (1998) found that electrical stimulation 
of MSTd disrupted monkeys’ ability to perceive the ap-
parent direction in which they were heading; thus, these 
neurons do indeed seem to play an essential role in 
heading estimation derived from optic flow.
Studies with Humans
Perception of Motion.  Functional-imaging studies 
suggest that a motion-sensitive area V5 (usually called 
MT/MST) is found within the inferior temporal sulcus 
of the human brain (Dukelow et al., 2001). However, a 
more recent study suggests that this region is located in 
the lateral occipital cortex, between the lateral and infe-
rior occipital sulci (Annese, Gazzaniga, and Toga, 
2005). Annese and his colleagues examined sections of 
the brains of deceased subjects that had been stained 
for the presence of myelin. As we just saw, area V5 
receives a dense projection of thick, heavily myelinated 
axons, and the location of this region was revealed by 
the myelin stain. (See Figure 6.45.)
Bilateral damage to the human brain that includes 
area V5 produces an inability to perceive movement—
akinetopsia. For example, Zihl et al. (1991) reported 
the case of a woman with bilateral lesions of the lateral 
occipital cortex and area MT/MST.
x akinetopsia  Inability to perceive movement, caused by damage 
to area V5 (also called MST) of the visual association cortex.
figure 6.45  The Location of Visual Area V5
The location of this area in the human brain (also called 
MT/MST or MST+), was identified by a stain that showed 
the presence of a dense projection of thick, heavily 
myelinated axons. (LOS = lateral occipital sulcus, IOS = 
inferior occipital sulcus.)
(From Annese, J., Gazzaniga, M. S., and Toga, A. W. Cerebral Cortex, 2005, 15, 
1043–1044. Reprinted with permission.)
IOS
LOS
Patient L. M. had an almost total loss of movement per-
ception. She was unable to cross a street without traffic 
lights, because she could not judge the speed at which 
cars were moving. Although she could perceive move-
ments, she found moving objects very unpleasant to 
look at. For example, while talking with another person, 
she avoided looking at the person’s mouth because she 
found its movements very disturbing. When the investi-
gators asked her to try to detect movements of a visual 
target in the laboratory, she said, “First the target is 
completely at rest. Then it suddenly jumps upwards and 
downwards” (Zihl et al., 1991, p. 2244). She was able to 
see that the target was constantly changing its position, 
but she was unaware of any sensation of movement.

200	
Chapter 6  Vision
something in a bowl or deal out some playing cards) even 
though they cannot recognize objects by sight. They may 
be able to recognize friends by the way the friends walk, 
even though they cannot recognize the friends’ faces.
Lê et al. (2002) reported the case of patient S. B., a 
30-year-old man whose ventral stream was damaged ex-
tensively bilaterally by encephalitis when he was 3 years 
old. As a result, he was unable to recognize objects, faces, 
textures, or colors. However, he could perceive move-
ment and could even catch a ball that was thrown to him. 
Furthermore, he could recognize other people’s arm and 
hand movements that mimed common activities such as 
cutting something with a knife or brushing one’s teeth, 
and he could recognize people he knew by their gait.
Biological Motion.  As we saw earlier in this chapter, 
neurons in the extrastriate body area (EBA) are acti-
vated by the sight of human body parts. A functional-
imaging study by Pelphrey et al. (2005) showed subjects 
a computer-generated image of a person who made 
hand, eye, and mouth movements. (Note that the sub-
jects were perceiving motion made by a human being, 
not form from the motion of individual points of light 
as described in the previous subsection.) The investiga-
tors found that movements of different body parts acti-
vated different locations just anterior to the EBA.
Compensation for Eye Movements.  So far, this dis-
cussion has been confined to movement of objects in 
the visual field. But if a person moves his or her eyes, 
phenomenon known as form from motion. Johansson 
(1973) demonstrated just how much information we can 
derive from movement. He dressed actors in black and 
attached small lights to several points on their bodies, 
such as their wrists, elbows, shoulders, hips, knees, and 
feet. He made movies of the actors in a darkened room 
while they were performing various behaviors, such as 
walking, running, jumping, limping, doing push-ups, and 
dancing with a partner who was also equipped with lights. 
Even though observers who watched the films could see 
only a pattern of moving lights against a dark background, 
they could readily perceive the pattern as belonging to a 
moving human and could identify the behavior the actor 
was performing. Subsequent studies (Kozlowski and Cut-
ting, 1977; Barclay, Cutting, and Kozlowski, 1978) showed 
that people could even tell, with reasonable accuracy, the 
sex of the actor wearing the lights. The cues appeared to 
be supplied by the relative amounts of movement of the 
shoulders and hips as the person walked. (
Simulate 
form from motion on MyPsychLab to see a demonstration of 
this phenomenon.)
McCleod et al. (1996) suggest that the ability to 
perceive form from motion does not involve area V5. 
They reported that patient L. M. (studied by Zihl et al., 
1991) could recognize people depicted solely by moving 
points of light even though she could not perceive the move-
ments themselves. Vaina and her colleagues (reported by 
Vaina, 1998) found a patient with a lesion in the medial 
right occipital lobe who showed just the opposite deficits: 
Patient R. A. could perceive movement—even complex 
radial and circular optic flow—but could not perceive 
form from motion. Thus, perception of motion and 
perception of form from motion involve different re-
gions of the visual association cortex.
A functional-imaging study by Grossman et al. 
(2000) found that when people viewed a video that 
showed form from motion, a small region on the ventral 
bank of the posterior end of the superior temporal sul-
cus became active. More activity was seen in the right 
hemisphere, whether the images were presented to the 
left or right visual field. Grossman and Blake (2001) 
found that this region became active even when people 
imagined that they were watching points of light repre-
senting form from motion. (See Figure 6.46.) Grossman, 
Battelli, and Pascual-Leone (2005) found that inactiva-
tion of this area with transcranial magnetic stimulation 
disrupted perception of form from motion.
Perception of form from motion might not seem like 
a phenomenon that has any importance outside the labo-
ratory. However, this phenomenon does occur under 
natural circumstances, and it appears to involve brain 
mechanisms different from those involved in normal ob-
ject perception. For example, as we saw in the prologue 
to this chapter, people with visual agnosia can often still 
perceive actions (such as someone pretending to stir 
figure 6.46  Responses to Viewing Form  
from Motion
This figure shows horizontal and lateral views of neural 
activity that occurred while the subject was viewing 
videos of biological motion such as those shown in the 
simulation Form from Motion on MyPsychLab. Maximum 
activity is seen in a small region on the ventral bank of 
the posterior end of the superior temporal sulcus, 
primarily in the right hemisphere.
(From Grossman, E. D., and Blake, R. Vision Research, 2001, 41, 1475–1482. 
Reprinted with permission.)

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Visual Association Cortex	
201
eyes and the limbs. The dorsal stream of the visual asso-
ciation cortex terminates in the posterior parietal cortex.
The anatomy of the posterior parietal cortex is shown 
in Figure 6.47. We see an “inflated” dorsal view of the left 
hemisphere of a human brain. Five regions within the 
intraparietal sulcus (IPS) are of particular interest: AIP, 
LIP, VIP, CIP, and MIP (anterior, lateral, ventral, caudal, 
and medial IPS) are indicated. (See Figure 6.47.)
Single-unit studies with monkeys and functional-
imaging studies with humans indicate that neurons in the 
IPS are involved in visual attention and control of saccadic 
eye movements (LIP and VIP), visual control of reaching 
and pointing (VIP and MIP), visual control of grasping 
and manipulating hand movements (AIP), and perception 
of depth from stereopsis (CIP) (Snyder, Batista, and 
Andersen, 2000; Culham and Kanwisher, 2001; Astafiev 
et al., 2003; Tsao et al., 2003; Frey et al., 2005).
head, or whole body, the image on the retina will move 
even if everything within the person’s visual field 
remains stable. Often, of course, both kinds of move-
ments will occur at the same time. The problem for the 
visual system is to determine which of these images are 
produced by movements of objects in the environment 
and which are produced by the person’s own eye, head, 
and body movements.
To illustrate this problem, think about how the page 
of this book looks as you read it. If we could make a 
videotape of one of your retinas, we would see that the 
image of the page projected there is in constant move-
ment as your eyes make several saccades along a line 
and then snap back to the beginning of the next line. 
Yet the page seems perfectly still to you. On the other 
hand, if you look at a single point on the page (say, a 
period at the end of a sentence) and then move the 
page around while following the period with your eyes, 
you perceive the book as moving, even though the  
image on your retina remains relatively stable. (Try it.) 
Then think about the images on your retina while you 
are driving in busy traffic, constantly moving your eyes 
around to keep track of your own location and that of 
other cars moving in different directions at different 
speeds. You are perceiving not only the simple move-
ment of objects, but optic flow as well, which helps you 
keep track of the trajectories of the objects relative to 
each other and to yourself.
Haarmeier et al. (1997) reported the case of a pa-
tient with bilateral damage to the extrastriate cortex 
who could not compensate for image movement caused 
by head and eye movements. When the patient moved 
his eyes, it looked to him as if the world was moving in 
the opposite direction. Without the ability to compen-
sate for head and eye movements, any movement of a 
retinal image was perceived as movement of the envi-
ronment. On the basis of evidence from EEG and MEG 
(magnetoencephalography) studies in human subjects 
and single-unit recordings in monkeys, Thier et al. 
(2001) suggest that this compensation involves extrastri-
ate cortex located at the junction of the temporal and 
parietal lobes near a region involved in the analysis of 
signals from the vestibular system. Indeed, the investiga-
tors note that when patients with damage to this region 
move their eyes, the lack of compensation for these 
movements makes them feel very dizzy.
Perception of Spatial Location
The parietal lobe is involved in spatial and somatosensory 
perception, and it receives visual, auditory, somatosen-
sory, and vestibular information to perform these tasks. 
Damage to the parietal lobes disrupts performance on a 
variety of tasks that require perceiving and remembering 
the locations of objects and controlling movements of the 
x intraparietal sulcus (IPS)  The end of the dorsal stream of the 
visual association cortex; involved in perception of location, visual 
attention, and control of eye and hand movements.
figure 6.47  The Posterior Parietal Cortex
An “inflated” dorsal view of the left hemisphere of a human 
brain shows the anatomy of the posterior parietal cortex.
(Adapted from Astafiev, S. V., Shulman, G. L., Stanley, C. M., et al. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2003, 23, 4689–4699.)
AIP
LIP
VIP
CIP
V4
MT
MIP
Rostral
Medial
Temporal
lobe
Frontal
lobe
Region of
intraparietal
sulcus

202	
Chapter 6  Vision
the same object shown in different orientations (for ex-
ample, one tipped 45 degrees to the right of vertical and 
the other tipped 45 degrees to the left). In contrast, a 
region of the dorsal stream distinguished between differ-
ent orientations but ignored changes in the identity of 
the two objects. A follow-up study published the next year 
(Rice et al., 2007) showed subjects photographs of two 
different types of objects: graspable ones, such as forks 
and hammers, and nongraspable ones, such as tractors 
and pieces of furniture. The investigators found that, as 
before, the region of the dorsal stream ignored changes 
in the identity of the objects but distinguished between 
orientations. However, the region distinguished between 
the orientations only of stimuli that a person could grasp. 
This region did not distinguish between the orientations 
of photos of stimuli that could not be picked up, such as 
tractors and pieces of furniture.
A fascinating (and delightful) study with young 
children demonstrates the importance of communica-
tion between the dorsal and ventral streams of the  
visual system (DeLoache, Uttal, and Rosengren, 2004). 
The experimenters let children play with large toys: an 
indoor slide that they could climb and slide down, a 
chair that they could sit on, and a toy car that they 
could enter. After the children played in and on the 
large toys, the children were taken out of the room, the 
Goodale and his colleagues (Goodale and Milner, 
1992; Goodale et al., 1994; Goodale and Westwood, 
2004) suggested that the primary function of the dorsal 
stream of the visual cortex is to guide actions rather 
than simply to perceive spatial locations. As Ungerleider 
and Mishkin (1982) originally put it, the ventral and 
dorsal streams tell us “what” and “where.” Goodale and 
his colleagues suggested that the better terms are “what” 
and “how.” First, they noted that the visual cortex of the 
posterior parietal lobe is extensively connected to re-
gions of the frontal lobe involved in controlling eye 
movements, reaching movements of the limbs, and 
grasping movements of the hands and fingers. Second, 
they noted that damage to the dorsal stream can pro-
duce deficits in visually guided movements. (Chapter 8 
discusses in more detail the role of the posterior parietal 
cortex in control of movements.) They cited the case of 
a woman with damage to the dorsal stream who had no 
difficulty recognizing line drawings (that is, her ventral 
stream was intact) but who had trouble picking up ob-
jects (Jakobson et al., 1991). The patient could easily 
perceive the difference in size of wooden blocks that 
were set out before her, but she failed to adjust the dis-
tance between her thumb and forefinger to the size of 
the block she was about to pick up. In contrast, a patient 
with profound visual agnosia caused by damage to the 
ventral stream could not distinguish between wooden 
blocks of different sizes but could adjust the distance 
between her thumb and forefinger when she picked 
them up. She made this adjustment by means of vision, 
before she actually touched them (Milner et al., 1991; 
Goodale et al., 1994). A functional-imaging study of this 
patient (James et al., 2003) showed normal activity in 
the dorsal stream while she was picking up objects— 
especially in the anterior intraparietal sulcus (AIP), 
which is involved in manipulating and grasping.
The suggestion by Goodale and his colleagues 
seems a reasonable one. Certainly, the dorsal stream is 
involved in perception of the location of object’s space—
but then, if its primary role is to direct movements, it 
must be involved in location of these objects, or else how 
could it direct movements toward them? In addition, it 
must contain information about the size and shape of 
objects, or else how could it control the distance be-
tween thumb and forefinger?
Two functional-imaging studies provide further evi-
dence that the dorsal stream is involved in visual control 
of movement. Valyear et al. (2006) presented photo-
graphs of pairs of elongated stimuli, one after the other, 
and noted which regions of the brain responded to the 
difference between the two stimuli. They found that a 
region of the ventral stream responded differentially to 
pairs of stimuli that differed in their form (for example, 
a fork versus a clarinet) but did not distinguish between 
figure 6.48  Components of the Ventral  
and Dorsal Streams of the Visual Cortex
The figure shows some major components of the ventral 
and dorsal streams. The view is similar to that seen in 
Figure 6.32(e).
(Adapted from Tootell, R. B. H., Tsao, D., and Vanduffel, W. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2003, 23, 3981–3989.)
Lip
V7
V3A
V1
VP
V4v
V8
PPA
LO
FFA
MT/MST
V4d
EBA
V3
V2

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Visual Association Cortex	
203
information is not adequately shared between these 
two systems.
I realize that I have presented a large amount of 
information in this section—and I’m sure you do, too. 
The importance of the visual system is attested to by the 
fact that approximately 25 percent of our cerebral cor-
tex is devoted to this sense modality and by the many 
discoveries being made in the laboratories that are busy 
discovering interesting things about vision. Figure 6.48. 
shows the location of the regions that make up the ven-
tral stream and some of the dorsal stream. (The rest of 
the dorsal stream lies in the intraparietal sulcus, which 
is illustrated in Figure 6.47.) Table 6.3 lists these regions 
and summarizes their major functions.
large toys were replaced with identical miniature ver-
sions, and the children were then brought back into 
the room. When the children played with the minia-
ture toys, they acted as if they were the large versions: 
They tried to climb onto the slide, climb into the car, 
and sit on the chair. 
Simulate dissociation of per-
ception and action on MyPsychLab to see a video of a 
2-year-old boy trying to climb into the toy car. He says 
“In!” several times and turns to his mother, apparently 
asking her to help him. The authors suggest that this 
child’s behavior reflects incomplete maturation of con-
nections between the dorsal and ventral streams. The 
ventral stream recognizes the identity of the objects, 
and the dorsal stream recognizes their size, but the 
table 6.3  Regions of the Human Visual Cortex and Their Functions
Region of Human Visual Cortex
Name of Region (If Different)
Function
V1 
 
Striate cortex 
 
Small modules that analyze orientation, 
movement, spatial frequency, retinal  
disparity, and color
V2
 
Further analysis of information from V1
Ventral Stream
 
 
V3+VP
 
Further analysis of information from V2
V3A 
  
Processing of visual information across 
entire visual field of contralateral eye
V4d/V4v 
 
 
V4 dorsal/ventral 
 
 
Analysis of form 
Processing of color constancy 
V4d = lower visual field,  
V4v = upper visual field
V8
 
Color perception
LO
Lateral occipital complex
Object recognition
FFA 
Fusiform face area 
Face recognition, object recognition by 
experts (“flexible fusiform area”)
PPA
Parahippocampal place area
Recognition of particular places
EBA
Extrastriate body area
Perception of body parts other than face
Dorsal Stream
 
 
V7 
  
Visual attention 
Control of eye movements
MT/MST 
 
Medial temporal/medial superior 
temporal (named for locations in 
monkey brain)
Perception of motion 
Perception of biological motion and  
optic flow in specific subregions
LIP 
Lateral intraparietal area 
Visual attention  
Control of saccadic eye movements
(continued on next page)

204	
Chapter 6  Vision
VIP 
 
 
Ventral intraparietal area 
 
 
Control of visual attention to particular 
locations 
Control of eye movements 
Visual control of pointing
AIP 
Anterior intraparietal area 
Visual control of hand movements:  
grasping, manipulation
MIP 
Middle intraparietal area 
Parietal reach region (monkeys)
Visual control of reaching 
CIP 
Caudal intraparietal area 
Caudal parietal disparity region
Perception of depth from stereopsis 
table 6.3  Regions of the Human Visual Cortex and Their Functions (continued)
Region of Human Visual Cortex	
Name of Region (If Different)	
Function
Section Summary
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Visual Association Cortex
The visual cortex consists of area V1 (striate cortex), 
area V2, and two streams of visual association cortex. 
The ventral stream, which ends with the inferior tem-
poral cortex, is involved with perception of objects. 
Lesions of this region disrupt visual object perception. 
Also, single neurons in the inferior temporal cortex 
respond best to complex stimuli and continue to do 
so even if the object is moved to a different location, 
changed in size, placed against a different back-
ground, or partially hidden. The dorsal stream, which 
ends with the posterior parietal cortex, is involved 
with perception of movement, location, visual atten-
tion, and control of eye and hand movements. There 
are at least two dozen different subregions of the 
visual cortex, arranged in a hierarchical fashion. Each 
region analyzes a particular characteristic of visual 
information and passes the results of this analysis to 
other regions in the hierarchy. However, some infor-
mation from the association cortex is sent back to the 
striate cortex. Neurons in the thin stripes of V2 
receive information concerning color from the blobs 
in the striate cortex (V1), and those in the thick stripes 
and pale stripes receive information about orienta-
tion, spatial frequency, movement, and retinal dispar-
ity from the interblob regions of V1. Neurons in the 
pale and thin stripes project to area V4, the start of 
the ventral stream.
Damage to area V4 abolishes color constancy 
(accurate perception of color under different lighting 
conditions), and damage to area V8 causes cerebral 
achromatopsia, a loss of color vision but not of form 
perception. A condition opposite to achromatopsia 
can also be seen: A patient with extensive damage to 
the extrastriate cortex was functionally blind but could 
still recognize colors. His brain damage apparently 
destroyed regions of the visual association cortex that 
are responsible for form perception but not those for 
color perception.
Functional-imaging studies indicate that specific 
regions of the cortex are involved in perception of 
form, movement, and color, and these studies are 
enabling us to discover the correspondences between 
the anatomy of the human visual system and that of 
laboratory animals. Humans who have sustained dam-
age to the ventral stream of visual association cortex 
have difficulty recognizing objects by sight, even 
though fine details can often be detected—a disorder 
known as visual agnosia. Prosopagnosia—failure to 
recognize faces—is caused by damage to the fusiform 
face area (FFA), a region on the base of the right tem-
poral lobe. Congenital prosopagnosia appears to be 
associated with an FFA that is smaller than normal, 
and people with Williams syndrome have a special 
interest in people and their faces, recognize faces 

	
Analysis of Visual Information: Role of the Visual Association Cortex	
205
well, and have a FFA that is larger than normal. The 
development of this region may be a result of exten-
sive experience looking at faces; expertise with other 
complex stimuli such as artificial creatures (greebles) 
causes the development of circuits devoted to the 
perception of these stimuli as well.
The extrastriate body area (EBA), a region adja-
cent to the FFA, contains neurons that respond to the 
sight of bodies or body parts, and the parahippocam-
pal place area (PPA) responds to scenes that depict 
particular places. Newborn babies prefer to look at 
facelike stimuli, a preference that may involve subcor-
tical mechanisms. Babies deprived of visual input for 
the first few months of life because of congenital cat-
aracts demonstrate impaired discrimination of faces 
later in life. The fusiform face area fails to develop in 
people with autism, presumably because of insuffi-
cient motivation to become expert in recognizing 
other people’s faces.
Damage to area V5 (also called area MT) disrupts 
an animal’s ability to perceive movement, and dam-
age to the posterior parietal cortex disrupts percep-
tion of the spatial location of objects. Damage to the 
human visual association cortex corresponding to 
area V5 disrupts perception of movement, producing 
a disorder known as akinetopsia. In addition, transcra-
nial magnetic stimulation of V5 causes a temporary 
disruption, and functional-imaging studies show that 
perception of moving stimuli activate this region. In 
both monkeys and humans, area MSTd, a region of 
extrastriate cortex that is adjacent to area V5, appears 
to be specialized for perceiving optic flow, one of the 
cues we use to perceive the direction in which we are 
heading.
The ability to perceive form from motion—recog-
nition of complex movements of people indicated by 
lights attached to parts of their body—is probably 
related to the ability to recognize people by the way 
they walk. This ability apparently depends on a region 
of cerebral cortex on the ventral bank of the posterior 
end of the superior temporal sulcus. The visual  
association cortex receives information about eye 
movements from the motor system and information 
about movement of retinal images from the visual 
cortex and determines which movements are caused 
by head and eye movements and which are caused 
by movements in the environment. A patient with 
extrastriate damage was unable to compensate for 
eye movements; when he moved his eyes, he per-
ceived movement in the environment. The location of 
the region responsible for this compensation appears 
to be in the extrastriate cortex at the junction of the 
temporal and parietal lobes.
Some people with visual agnosia caused by dam-
age to the ventral stream can still perceive the mean-
ings of mimed actions or recognize friends by the way 
the friends walk, which indicates that the dorsal 
stream of these people’s visual cortex is largely intact. 
Most of the visual association cortex at the end of the 
dorsal stream is located in the intraparietal sulcus: LIP 
and VIP are involved in visual attention and control of 
saccadic eye movements, VIP and MIP are involved in 
visual control of reaching and pointing, AIP is 
involved in visual control of grasping and manipulat-
ing, and CIP is involved in perception of depth from 
stereopsis.
Goodale and his colleagues suggest that the pri-
mary function dorsal stream of visual association cortex 
is better characterized as “how” rather than “where”; 
the role of the posterior parietal cortex in control of 
reaching, grasping, and manipulation requires visually 
derived information of movement, depth, and location.
 Thought Question
Some psychologists are interested in “top-down” 
processes in visual perception—that is, the effects of 
context on perceiving ambiguous stimuli. For exam-
ple, if you are in a dimly lighted kitchen and see a 
shape that could be either a loaf of bread or a coun-
try mailbox, you will be more likely to perceive the 
object as a loaf of bread. Where in the brain might 
contextual information affect perception?

206	
Chapter 6  Vision
1.  Describe the characteristics of light and color, outline the 
anatomy of the eye and its connections with the brain, 
and describe the transduction of visual information.
2.  Describe the coding of visual information by photore-
ceptors and ganglion cells in the retina.
3.  Discuss the striate cortex and how its neurons 
respond to orientation and movement, spatial fre-
quency, and texture.
4.  Discuss how neurons in the striate cortex respond to 
retinal disparity and color and describe the modular 
organization of striate cortex.
Review Questions
5.  Describe the anatomy of the visual association  
cortex and discuss the location and functions of 
the two streams of visual analysis that take place 
there.
6.  Discuss the perception of color by neurons in the 
ventral stream.
7.  Describe the role of the ventral stream in the percep-
tion of faces, bodies, objects, and scenes of places.
8.  Describe how neurons in the dorsal stream respond 
to movement and location and discuss the effects of 
brain damage on perception of these features.
Study and Review on MyPsychLab
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Visual System
The human brain devotes more cortex to the visual system than any other sen-
sory modality. Qualitatively different aspects of vision are carried and analyzed 
by distinct neural circuits. The Visual System module of the virtual brain shows 
brain regions involved in the detection, analysis, and perception of visual stimuli.

Audition, the Body Senses, 
and the Chemical Senses
Outline
7
 Audition
The Stimulus
Anatomy of the Ear
Auditory Hair Cells and the 
Transduction of Auditory 
Information
The Auditory Pathway
Perception of Pitch
Perception of Loudness
Perception of Timbre
Perception of Spatial Location
Perception of Complex  
Sounds
Section Summary
 Vestibular System
Anatomy of the Vestibular 
Apparatus
The Receptor Cells
The Vestibular Pathway
Section Summary
 Somatosenses
The Stimuli
Anatomy of the Skin and Its 
Receptive Organs
Perception of Cutaneous 
Stimulation
The Somatosensory Pathways
Perception of Pain
Section Summary
 Gustation
The Stimuli
Anatomy of the Taste Buds and 
Gustatory Cells
Perception of Gustatory 
Information
The Gustatory Pathway
Section Summary
 Olfaction
The Stimulus
Anatomy of the Olfactory 
Apparatus
Transduction of Olfactory 
Information
Perception of Specific Odors
Section Summary
chapter

O
ne chapter was devoted to vision, but the rest of 
the sensory modalities must share a chapter. 
This unequal allocation of space reflects the 
relative importance of vision to our species and the rela-
tive amount of research that has been devoted to it. This 
chapter is divided into five major sections, which discuss 
audition, the vestibular system, the somatosenses, gusta-
tion, and olfaction.
Audition
For most people, audition is the second most important 
sense. The value of verbal communication makes audi-
tion even more important than vision in some respects; 
for example, a blind person can join others in conversa-
tion far more easily than a deaf person can. (Of course, 
deaf people can use sign language to converse with each 
other.) Acoustic stimuli also provide information about 
things that are hidden from view, and our ears work just 
as well in the dark. This section describes the nature of 
the stimulus, the sensory receptors, the brain mecha-
nisms devoted to audition, and some of the details of 
the physiology of auditory perception.
The Stimulus
We hear sounds, which are produced by objects that  
vibrate and set molecules of air into motion. When an  
object vibrates, its movements cause molecules of air 
Nine-year-old Sara tried to think of something else, but the 
throbbing pain in her thumb was relentless. Earlier in the 
day, her brother had slammed the car door on it.
“Why does it have to hurt so much, Daddy?” she 
asked piteously.
“I wish I could help you, sweetheart,” he answered. 
“Pain may be useful, but it sure isn’t fun.”
“What do you mean, useful?” she asked in astonish-
ment. “You mean it’s good for me?” She looked at her 
father reproachfully.
“Well, this probably isn’t the time to tell you about the 
advantages of pain, because it’s hard to appreciate them 
when you’re suffering.” A glimmer of interest began to 
grow in her eyes. For as long as she could remember, Sara 
loved to have her father explain things to her, even when 
his explanations got a little confusing.
“You know,” he said, “there are some people who 
never feel any pain. They are born that way.”
“Really?” Her eyes widened. “They’re lucky!”
“No, they really aren’t. Without the sense of pain, they 
keep injuring themselves. When they touch something hot, 
they don’t know enough to let go, even when their hand is 
getting burned. If the water in the shower gets too hot, 
they don’t realize they’re getting scalded. If their shoes 
don’t fit right, they get huge blisters without knowing 
what’s happening. If they fall and sprain their ankle—or 
even break a bone—they don’t feel that something bad 
has happened to them, and their injury will just get worse. 
Some people who have no ability to feel pain have died 
when their appendix burst because they didn’t know that 
something bad was happening inside them.”
Sara looked thoughtful. Her father’s explanation 
seemed to be distracting her from her pain.
“Parents of children who can’t feel pain say that it’s 
difficult to teach them to avoid danger. When a child does 
something that causes pain, she quickly learns to avoid 
repeating her mistake. Remember when you were 3 years 
old and walked on the grill of the heater in the cabin floor? 
You had just gotten out of the shower, and you burned the 
bottoms of your feet.”
“I think so,” she said. “Yes, you bought me a bag of 
candy corn to make me forget how much it hurt.”
“That’s right. Your mom and I had told you that the grill 
was dangerous when the heater was on, but it took an 
actual experience to teach you to stay away. We feel pain 
when parts of our bodies are damaged. The injured cells 
make a chemical that’s picked up by nerve endings, and the 
nerves send messages to the brain to warn it that some-
thing bad is happening. Our brains automatically try to get 
us away from whatever it is that hurts us—and we also learn 
to become afraid of it. After you burned your feet on the 
grill, you stayed away from it even when you were wearing 
shoes. Kids who can’t feel pain can learn to stay away from 
dangerous things, but it’s not an automatic, gut-level kind 
of learning. They have to pay attention all the time, and if 
they let down their guard, it’s easy for them to injure 
themselves. Pain isn’t fun, but it’s hard to survive without it.”
“I guess so,” said Sara reluctantly. She looked at her 
bandaged thumb, and the sudden realization of how much 
it hurt brought tears to her eyes again. “But the pain could 
go away now, because it’s already taught me everything I 
need to know.”

	
Audition	
209
surrounding it alternately to condense and rarefy (pull 
apart), producing waves that travel away from the object 
at approximately 700 miles per hour. If the vibration 
ranges between approximately 30 and 20,000 times per 
second, these waves will stimulate receptor cells in our 
ears and will be perceived as sounds. (See Figure 7.1.)
In Chapter 6 we saw that light has three perceptual 
dimensions—hue, brightness, and saturation—that cor-
respond to three physical dimensions. Similarly, sounds 
vary in their pitch, loudness, and timbre. The perceived 
pitch of an auditory stimulus is determined by the fre-
quency of vibration, which is measured in hertz (Hz), or 
cycles per second. (The term honors Heinrich Hertz, a 
nineteenth-century German physicist.) Loudness is a 
function of intensity—the degree to which the condensa-
tions and rarefactions of air differ from each other. More 
vigorous vibrations of an object produce more intense 
sound waves and hence louder ones. Timbre provides 
information about the nature of the particular sound—
for example, the sound of an oboe or a train whistle. 
Most natural acoustic stimuli are complex, consisting of 
several different frequencies of vibration. The particular 
mixture determines the sound’s timbre. (See Figure 7.2.)
The auditory system does a phenomenal job of ana-
lyzing the vibrations that reach our ear. For example, we 
can understand speech, recognize a person’s emotion 
from his or her voice, appreciate music, detect the ap-
proach of a vehicle or another person, or recognize an 
animal’s call. We can recognize not only what the source 
of a sound is but where it is located.
Anatomy of the Ear
Figure 7.3 shows a section through the ear and auditory 
canal and illustrates the apparatus of the middle and in-
ner ear. (See Figure 7.3.) Sound is funneled via the pinna 
(external ear) through the ear canal to the tympanic 
membrane (eardrum), which vibrates with the sound.
The middle ear consists of a hollow region behind the 
tympanic membrane, approximately 2 ml in volume. It 
contains the bones of the middle ear, called the ossicles, 
which are set into vibration by the tympanic membrane. 
The malleus (hammer) connects with the tympanic 
membrane and transmits vibrations via the incus (anvil) 
and stapes (stirrup) to the cochlea, the structure that 
contains the receptors. The baseplate of the stapes 
presses against the membrane behind the oval window, 
the opening in the bony process surrounding the cochlea. 
(Look again at Figure 7.3.)
The cochlea is part of the inner ear. It is filled with 
fluid; therefore, sounds transmitted through the air 
must be transferred into a liquid medium. This process 
normally is very inefficient—99.9 percent of the energy 
of airborne sound would be reflected away if the air 
impinged directly against the oval window of the co-
chlea. The chain of ossicles serves as an extremely effi-
cient means of energy transmission. The bones provide 
a mechanical advantage, with the baseplate of the stapes 
figure 7.1  Sound Waves
Changes in air pressure from sound waves move the 
eardrum in and out. Air molecules are closer together in 
regions of higher pressure and farther apart in regions of 
lower pressure.
Compressed
Sound waves
Rarefied (negative
pressure)
Eardrum
figure 7.2  Physical and Perceptual Dimensions of 
Sound Waves
loud
soft
low
high
simple
complex
Timbre
Complexity
Pitch
Frequency
Loudness
Amplitude
(intensity)
Physical
Dimension
Perceptual
Dimension
x pitch  A perceptual dimension of sound; corresponds to the 
fundamental frequency.
x hertz (Hz)  Cycles per second.
x loudness  A perceptual dimension of sound; corresponds to 
intensity.
x timbre (tim ber or tamm ber)  A perceptual dimension of 
sound; corresponds to complexity.
x tympanic membrane  The eardrum.
x ossicle (ahss i kul)  One of the three bones of the middle ear.
x malleus  The “hammer”; the first of the three ossicles.
x incus  The “anvil”; the second of the three ossicles.
x stapes (stay peez)  The “stirrup”; the last of the three ossicles.
x cochlea (cock lee uh)  The snail-shaped structure of the inner 
ear that contains the auditory transducing mechanisms.
x oval window  An opening in the bone surrounding the cochlea 
that reveals a membrane, against which the baseplate of the 
stapes presses, transmitting sound vibrations into the fluid within 
the cochlea.

210	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
system, no vibration would be transmitted through the 
oval window, because liquids are essentially incompress-
ible. However, there is a membrane-covered opening, 
the round window, that allows the fluid inside the co-
chlea to move back and forth. The baseplate of the sta-
pes vibrates against the membrane behind the oval win-
dow and introduces sound waves of high or low 
frequency into the cochlea. The vibrations cause part of 
the basilar membrane to flex back and forth. Pressure 
changes in the fluid underneath the basilar membrane 
are transmitted to the membrane of the round window, 
which moves in and out in a manner opposite to the 
movements of the oval window. That is, when the base-
plate of the stapes pushes in, the membrane behind the 
round window bulges out. As we will see in a later sub-
section, different frequencies of sound vibrations cause 
different portions of the basilar membrane to flex. (See 
Figure 7.5.)
making smaller but more forceful excursions against the 
oval window than the tympanic membrane makes 
against the malleus.
The name cochlea comes from the Greek word 
kokhlos, or “land snail.” It is indeed snail-shaped, consist-
ing of two and three-quarters turns of a gradually taper-
ing cylinder, 35 mm (1.37 in.) long. The cochlea is di-
vided longitudinally into three sections, the scala vestibuli 
(“vestibular stairway”), the scala media (“middle stair-
way”), and the scala tympani (“tympanic stairway”), as 
shown in Figure 7.4. The receptive organ, known as the 
organ of Corti, consists of the basilar membrane, the hair 
cells, and the tectorial membrane. The auditory receptor 
cells are called hair cells, and they are anchored, via rod-
like Deiters’s cells, to the basilar membrane. The cilia of 
the hair cells pass through the reticular membrane, and 
the ends of some of them attach to the fairly rigid tecto-
rial membrane, which projects overhead like a shelf. 
(See Figure 7.4.) Sound waves cause the basilar mem-
brane to move relative to the tectorial membrane, which 
bends the cilia of the hair cells. This bending produces 
receptor potentials.
Georg von Békésy—in a lifetime of brilliant studies 
on the cochleas of various animals, from human cadav-
ers to elephants—found that the vibratory energy ex-
erted on the oval window causes the basilar membrane 
to bend (von Békésy, 1960). Because of the physical 
characteristics of the basilar membrane, the portion 
that bends the most is determined by the frequency of 
the sound: High-frequency sounds cause the base of the 
membrane—the end nearest the oval window—to bend.
Figure 7.5 shows this process in a cochlea that has 
been partially straightened. If the cochlea were a closed 
figure 7.3  The Auditory Apparatus
Ossicles (middle
ear bones)
Oval
window
Auditory
nerve
Cochlea
Eustachian tube
(connects with throat)
Round
window
Tympanic
membrane
Ear canal
Pinna
Bone
Malleus
Incus
Stapes
Vestibule
x organ of Corti  The sensory organ on the basilar membrane 
that contains the auditory hair cells.
x hair cell  The receptive cell of the auditory apparatus.
x Deiters’s cell (dye terz)  A supporting cell found in the organ 
of Corti; sustains the auditory hair cells.
x basilar membrane (bazz i ler)  A membrane in the cochlea of 
the inner ear; contains the organ of Corti.
x tectorial membrane (tek torr ee ul)  A membrane located 
above the basilar membrane; serves as a shelf against which the 
cilia of the auditory hair cells move.
x round window  An opening in the bone surrounding the 
cochlea of the inner ear that permits vibrations to be transmitted, 
via the oval window, into the fluid in the cochlea.

	
Audition	
211
reticular membrane in a photograph taken by means of 
a scanning electron microscope. Note the three rows of 
outer hair cells on the right and the single row of inner 
hair cells on the left. (See Figure 7.6.)
Sound waves cause both the basilar membrane 
and the tectorial membrane to flex up and down. 
These movements bend the cilia of the hair cells in 
one direction or the other. The tips of the cilia of 
outer hair cells are attached directly to the tectorial 
membrane. The cilia of the inner hair cells do not 
touch the overlying tectorial membrane, but the rela-
tive movement of the two membranes causes the fluid 
within the cochlea to flow past them, making them 
bend back and forth, too.
Cilia contain a core of actin filaments surrounded 
by myosin filaments, and these proteins make the cilia 
stiff and rigid (Flock, 1977). Adjacent cilia are linked 
Some people suffer from a middle ear disease that 
causes the bone to grow over the round window. Be-
cause their basilar membrane cannot easily flex back 
and forth, these people have a severe hearing loss. How-
ever, their hearing can be restored by a surgical proce-
dure called fenestration (“window making”), in which a 
tiny hole is drilled in the bone where the round window 
should be.
Auditory Hair Cells and  
the Transduction of Auditory  
Information
Two types of auditory receptors, inner and outer auditory 
hair cells, are located on the basilar membrane. Hair 
cells contain cilia (“eyelashes”), fine hairlike append-
ages, arranged in rows according to height. The human 
cochlea contains approximately 3500 inner hair cells 
and 12,000 outer hair cells. The hair cells form synapses 
with dendrites of bipolar neurons whose axons bring 
auditory information to the brain. Figure 7.6 shows the 
appearance of the inner and outer hair cells and the 
figure 7.4  The Organ of Corti
This cross section through the cochlea shows the organ of Corti.
Outer
hair cells
Tectorial membrane
(vibrations exert stretch
on cilia of hair cells)
Cilia of
hair cell
Inner
hair cell
Basilar
membrane
Axons of auditory nerve
Organ of Corti
Auditory nerve
Spiral ganglion
Bone
Membrane surrounding
cochlea
Slice Through Cochlea
Scala
media
Scala vestibuli
Scala tympani
x cilium  A hairlike appendage of a cell involved in movement or 
in transducing sensory information; found on the receptors in the 
auditory and vestibular system.

212	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
potential cation channel, subfamily A, type 1. (I mention 
the TRP family of receptors because, as we shall see 
later in this chapter, this family includes receptors  
involved in perception of touch, temperature, and 
taste.) When the bundle of cilia is straight, the prob-
ability of an individual ion channel being open is 
approximately 10 percent. This means that a small 
amount of the cations K+ and Ca2+ diffuses into the 
cilium. When the bundle moves toward the tallest 
one, the increased tension on the tip links opens all 
the ion channels, the flow of cations into the cilia  
increases, and the membrane depolarizes. As a result, 
the release of neurotransmitter by the hair cell increases. 
When the bundle moves in the opposite direction, 
to each other by elastic filaments known as tip links. 
Each tip link is attached to the end of one cilium and 
to the side of an adjacent cilium. The points of attach-
ment, known as insertional plaques, look dark under 
an electron microscope. As we will see, receptor po-
tentials are triggered at the insertional plaques. (See 
Figure 7.7.)
Normally, tip links are slightly stretched, which 
means that they are under a small amount of tension. 
Thus, movement of the bundle of cilia in the direc-
tion of the tallest of them further stretches these link-
ing fibers, whereas movement in the opposite direc-
tion relaxes them. The bending of the bundle of cilia 
causes receptor potentials (Pickles and Corey, 1992; 
Hudspeth and Gillespie, 1994; Gillespie, 1995; Jaramillo, 
1995). Unlike the fluid that surrounds most neurons, 
the fluid that surrounds the auditory hair cells is rich 
in potassium. Each insertional plaque contains a sin-
gle cation channel, which Corey et al. (2004) identi-
fied as TRPA1, a member of the transient receptor 
figure 7.5  Responses to Sound Waves
When the stapes pushes against the membrane behind the oval window, the 
membrane behind the round window bulges outward. Different high-frequency and 
medium-frequency sound vibrations cause flexing of different portions of the basilar 
membrane. In contrast, low-frequency sound vibrations cause the tip of the basilar 
membrane to flex in synchrony with the vibrations.
Eardrum
Round
window
A particular region of the basilar
membrane flexes back and forth
in response to sound of a particular
frequency
Cochlea uncurled to
show basilar membrane
Incus
Oval
window
Stapes vibrates against
membrane behind oval
window
Basilar membrane
Malleus
Sound waves
x tip link  An elastic filament that attaches the tip of one cilium 
to the side of the adjacent cilium.
x insertional plaque  The point of attachment of a tip link to a 
cilium.

	
Audition	
213
The Auditory Pathway
Connections With The Cochlear Nerve
The organ of Corti sends auditory information to the 
brain by means of the cochlear nerve, a branch of the 
auditory nerve (eighth cranial nerve). The neurons that 
give rise to the afferent axons that travel through this 
nerve are of the bipolar type. Their cell bodies reside in 
the cochlear nerve ganglion. (This ganglion is also called 
the spiral ganglion because it consists of clumps of cell 
bodies arranged in a spiral caused by the curling of the 
cochlea.) These neurons have axonal processes, capable 
of sustaining action potentials, that protrude from both 
ends of the soma. The end of one process acts like a 
dendrite, responding with excitatory postsynaptic  
potentials when the neurotransmitter is released by the 
auditory hair cells. The excitatory postsynaptic poten-
tials trigger action potentials in the auditory nerve  
axons, which form synapses with neurons in the medulla. 
(Refer back to Figure 7.4.)
Each cochlear nerve contains approximately 50,000 
afferent axons. The dendrites of approximately 95 per-
cent of these axons form synapses with the inner hair 
cells (Dallos, 1992). These axons are thick and myelin-
ated. The other 5 percent of the sensory fibers in the 
cochlear nerve form synapses with the much more  
numerous outer hair cells, at a ratio of approximately 
one fiber per thirty outer hair cells. These axons are 
thin and unmyelinated. Thus, although the inner hair 
cells represent only 29 percent of the total number of 
receptor cells, their connections with auditory nerves 
suggest that they are of primary importance in the trans-
mission of auditory information to the central nervous 
system (CNS).
Physiological and behavioral studies confirm the 
inferences made from the synaptic connections of the 
two types of hair cells: The inner hair cells are neces-
sary for normal hearing. In fact, Deol and Gluecksohn-
Waelsch (1979) found that a mutant strain of mice 
whose cochleas contain only outer hair cells appar-
ently cannot hear at all. Subsequent research indi-
cates that the outer hair cells are effector cells, involved 
in altering the mechanical characteristics of the basi-
lar membrane and thus influencing the effects of 
sound vibrations on the inner hair cells. I will discuss 
the role of outer hair cells in the section on place cod-
ing of pitch.
The cochlear nerve contains efferent axons as 
well as afferent ones. The source of the efferent axons 
is the superior olivary complex, a group of nuclei in 
the medulla; thus, the efferent fibers constitute the 
toward the shortest cilium, the relaxation of the tip 
links allows the opened ion channels to close. The 
influx of cations ceases, the membrane hyperpolar-
izes, and the release of neurotransmitter decreases. 
(See Figure 7.8.)
figure 7.6  Organ of Corti
This scanning electron photomicrograph of a portion of 
the organ of Corti shows the cilia of the inner and outer 
hair cells.
(Photomicrograph courtesy of I. Hunter-Duvar, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario.)
Reticular
membrane
Hair cell
Cilia of outer hair cells
Cilia of inner hair cells
figure 7.7  Transduction Apparatus in Hair Cells
These electron micrographs show (a) longitudinal section 
through three adjacent cilia, where tip links, elastic 
filaments attached to insertional plaques, link adjacent 
cilia; and (b) a cross section through several cilia, showing 
an insertional plaque.
(From Hudspeth, A. J., and Gillespie, P. G. Neuron, 1994, 12, 1–9.)
Insertional
plaque
Insertional
plaque
Cilium
Cilium
Tip link
(a)
(b)
x cochlear nerve  The branch of the auditory nerve that 
transmits auditory information from the cochlea to the brain.

214	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
system. Rather than giving a detailed verbal description 
of the pathways, I will refer you to Figure 7.9. Note that 
axons enter the cochlear nucleus of the medulla and 
synapse there. Most of the neurons in the cochlear nucleus 
send axons to the superior olivary complex, also located 
olivocochlear bundle. The fibers form synapses di-
rectly on outer hair cells and on the dendrites that 
serve the inner hair cells. The neurotransmitter at the 
afferent synapses is glutamate. The efferent terminal 
buttons secrete acetylcholine, which has an inhibitory 
effect on the hair cells.
The Central Auditory System
The anatomy of the subcortical components of the audi-
tory system is more complicated than that of the visual 
figure 7.8  Transduction in Hair Cells of the Inner Ear
(a) The figure shows the appearance of the cilia of an auditory hair cell. (b) Movement 
of the bundle of cilia toward the tallest one increases the firing rate of the cochlear 
nerve axon attached to the hair cell, while movement away from the tallest one 
decreases it. (c) Movement toward the tallest cilium increases tension on the tip links, 
which opens the ion channels and increases the influx of K+ and Ca2+ ions. Movement 
toward the shortest cilium removes tension from the tip links, which permits the ion 
channels to close, stopping the influx of cations.
Open probability = 0 percent
Open probability = 10 percent
Open probability = 100 percent
(c)
Tip link
Small amounts of
K+ and Ca2+ enter
ion channel
Larger amounts of
K+ and Ca2+ enter
ion channel
(b)
Action Potentials in Cochlear Nerve Axon
Low rate
Medium rate
High rate
(a)
Force
Force
Tip link
Cilia
x olivocochlear bundle  A bundle of efferent axons that travel 
from the olivary complex of the medulla to the auditory hair cells 
on the cochlea.

	
Audition	
215
is represented most laterally there. Because, as we will 
see, different parts of the basilar membrane respond 
best to different frequencies of sound, this relationship 
between cortex and basilar membrane is referred to as 
tonotopic representation (tonos means “tone,” and topos 
means “place”).
As we saw in Chapter 6, the visual cortex is arranged 
in a hierarchy. Modules in the striate cortex (primary 
visual cortex) analyze features of visual information and 
pass the results of this analysis to subregions of the  
extrastriate cortex, which perform further analyses and  
pass information on to other regions, culminating in the 
highest levels of visual association cortex in the parietal 
and inferior temporal lobes. The dorsal stream, which 
ends in the parietal cortex, is involved in perception of 
location (“where”), while the ventral stream, which ends 
in the inferior temporal cortex, is involved in percep-
tion of form (“what”).
The auditory cortex seems to be similarly arranged. 
The primary auditory cortex lies hidden on the upper 
bank of the lateral fissure. The core region, which con-
tains the primary auditory cortex, actually consists of 
three regions, each of which receives a separate tono-
topic map of auditory information from the ventral divi-
sion from the medial geniculate nucleus (Kaas, Hackett, 
and Tramo, 1999; Hackett, Preuss, and Kaas, 2001; 
Poremba et al., 2003; Petkov et al., 2006). The first level 
of auditory association cortex, the belt region, surrounds 
the primary auditory cortex, much as the extrastriate 
cortex surrounds the primary visual (striate) cortex. 
The belt region, which consists of at least seven divi-
sions, receives information both from the primary audi-
tory cortex and from the dorsal and medial divisions of 
the medial geniculate nucleus. The highest level of audi-
tory association cortex, the parabelt region, located ven-
tral to the lateral parabelt, receives information from 
the belt region and from the divisions of the medial 
geniculate nucleus that also project to the belt region. 
(See Figure 7.10.)
in the medulla. Axons of neurons in these nuclei pass 
through a large fiber bundle called the lateral lemniscus 
to the inferior colliculus, located in the dorsal midbrain. 
Neurons there send their axons to the medial genicu-
late nucleus of the thalamus, which sends its axons to 
the auditory cortex of the temporal lobe. As you can see, 
there are many synapses along the way to complicate the 
story. Each hemisphere receives information from both 
ears but primarily from the contralateral one. Auditory 
information is relayed to the cerebellum and reticular 
formation as well.
If we unrolled the basilar membrane into a flat 
strip and followed afferent axons serving successive 
points along its length, we would reach successive 
points in the nuclei of the auditory system and ulti-
mately successive points along the surface of the pri-
mary auditory cortex. The basal end of the basilar 
membrane (the end toward the oval window, which 
responds to the highest frequencies) is represented 
most medially in the auditory cortex, and the apical end 
figure 7.9  Pathways of the Auditory System
The major pathways are indicated by heavy arrows.
Lateral
fissure
Auditory
cortex
Medial geniculate
nucleus
Inferior colliculus
Dorsal cochlear
nucleus
Ventral
cochlear
nucleus
Auditory
nerve
Superior
olivary
complex
Trapezoid
body
Lateral
lemniscus
Cerebrum
Midbrain
Medulla
x cochlear nucleus  One of a group of nuclei in the medulla that 
receive auditory information from the cochlea.
x superior olivary complex  A group of nuclei in the medulla; 
involved with auditory functions, including localization of the 
source of sounds.
x lateral lemniscus  A band of fibers running rostrally through 
the medulla and pons; carries fibers of the auditory system.
x tonotopic representation (tonn oh top ik)  A topographically 
organized mapping of different frequencies of sound that are 
represented in a particular region of the brain.
x core region  The primary auditory cortex, located on a gyrus 
on the dorsal surface of the temporal lobe.
x belt region  The first level of auditory association cortex; 
surrounds the primary auditory cortex.
x parabelt region  The second level of auditory association 
cortex; surrounds the belt region.

216	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
These results suggest that at least some frequencies 
of sound waves are detected by means of a place code. 
In this context a code represents a means by which neu-
rons can represent information. Thus, if neurons at one 
end of the basilar membrane are excited by higher fre-
quencies and those at the other end are excited by lower 
frequencies, we can say that the frequency of the sound 
is coded by the particular neurons that are active. In turn, 
the firing of particular axons in the cochlear nerve tells 
the brain about the presence of particular frequencies 
of sound.
Evidence for place coding of pitch comes from sev-
eral sources. High doses of the antibiotic drugs kanamy-
cin and neomycin produce degeneration of the auditory 
hair cells. The damage begins at the basal end of the 
cochlea and progresses toward the apical end; this pat-
tern can be verified by killing experimental animals af-
ter dosing them with the antibiotic for varying amounts 
of time. Stebbins et al. (1969) found that the progressive 
death of hair cells induced by an antibiotic closely paral-
lels a progressive hearing loss: The highest frequencies 
are the first to go, and the lowest are the last.
Good evidence for place coding of pitch in the hu-
man cochlea comes from the effectiveness of cochlear 
implants. Cochlear implants are devices that are used to 
restore hearing in people with deafness caused by dam-
age to the hair cells. The external part of a cochlear 
implant consists of a microphone and a miniaturized 
As we saw in Chapter 6, the visual association cortex, 
is arranged in two streams—dorsal and ventral—which 
are involved in perception of the form and location of 
visual stimuli, respectively. The auditory association cor-
tex is similarly arranged in two streams. The anterior 
stream, which begins in the anterior parabelt region, is 
involved with analysis of complex sounds. The posterior 
stream, which begins in the posterior parabelt region, is 
involved with sound localization (Rauschecker and 
Tian, 2000; Rauschecker and Scott, 2009). (Look again 
at Figure 7.10.) Research on the functions of these 
streams is described later.
Perception of Pitch
As we have seen, the perceptual dimension of pitch  
corresponds to the physical dimension of frequency. 
The cochlea detects frequency by two means: moderate 
to high frequencies by place coding and low frequencies 
by rate coding. These two types of coding are described 
next.
Place Coding
The work of von Békésy and researchers who followed 
him have shown us that, because of the mechanical 
construction of the cochlea and basilar membrane, 
acoustic stimuli of different frequencies cause different 
parts of the basilar membrane to flex back and forth. 
Figure 7.11 illustrates the amount of deformation along 
the length of the basilar membrane produced by stimu-
lation with tones of various frequencies. Note that 
higher frequencies produce more displacement at the 
basal end of the membrane (the end closest to the stapes). 
(See Figure 7.11.)
figure 7.10  The Auditory Cortex
Premotor
cortex
Superior temporal
sulcus
Parabelt
Parietal
lobe
Core Belt
Anterior
stream
Posterior 
stream
Inferior
frontal 
cortex
figure 7.11  Anatomical Coding of Pitch
Stimuli of different frequencies maximally deform 
different regions of the basilar membrane.
(Adapted from von Békésy, G. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 1949, 
21, 233–245.)
Frequency (Hz)
20
50
100
200
500
1000
2000
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Distance from the stapes (mm)
x place code  The system by which information about different 
frequencies is coded by different locations on the basilar membrane.
x cochlear implant  An electronic device surgically implanted in 
the inner ear that can enable a deaf person to hear.

	
Audition	
217
electronic signal processor. The internal part contains a 
very thin, flexible array of 16–22 electrodes, which the 
surgeon carefully inserts into the cochlea in such a way 
that it follows the snail-like curl and ends up resting 
along the entire length of the basilar membrane. Each 
electrode in the array stimulates a different part of the 
basilar membrane. Information from the signal proces-
sor is passed to the electrodes by means of flat coils of 
wire, implanted under the skin. (See Figure 7.12.)
The primary purpose of a cochlear implant is to re-
store a person’s ability to understand speech. Because 
most of the important acoustical information in speech 
is contained in frequencies that are too high to be accu-
rately represented by a rate code, the multichannel elec-
trode was developed in an attempt to duplicate the place 
coding of pitch on the basilar membrane (Copeland and 
Pillsbury, 2004). When different regions of the basilar 
membrane are stimulated, the person perceives sounds 
with different pitches. The signal processor in the exter-
nal device analyzes the sounds detected by the micro-
phone and sends separate signals to the appropriate por-
tions of the basilar membrane. This device can work well; 
most people with cochlear implants can understand 
speech well enough to use a telephone (Shannon, 2007).
Many people in the Deaf community, who communicate 
with each other by means of signing, have negative 
feelings toward oral communication. The difficult task of 
deciphering lip movements makes them feel tense. 
figure 7.12  A Child with a Cochlear Implant
The microphone and processor are worn over the ear, 
and the headpiece contains a coil that transmits signals 
to the implant.
As we saw earlier, outer hair cells are effector cells 
that do not directly contribute to the sense of hearing. 
They contain contractile proteins, just as muscle fibers 
do, and like muscle fibers, they are capable of motion. 
In fact, they can contract by up to 10 percent of their 
length (Brownell et al., 1985; Zenner, Zimmermann, 
and Schmitt, 1985). When the basilar membrane vi-
brates, movement of the cilia of the outer hair cells 
opens and closes ion channels, producing changes in 
the membrane potential that cause the cilia to shorten 
and lengthen. Because the tips of their cilia are embed-
ded in the tectorial membrane, these changes in length 
amplify the vibrations of the basilar membrane. As a 
consequence, the signal that is received by inner hair 
cells is enhanced.
Figure 7.13 illustrates the importance of outer hair 
cells to the sensitivity and frequency selectivity of inner 
hair cells (Fettiplace and Hackney, 2006). The three  
V-shaped tuning curves indicate the sensitivity of individual  
inner hair cells, as shown by the response of individual 
afferent auditory nerve axons to pure tones. The low 
points of the three solid curves indicate that the hair 
cells will respond to a faint sound only if it is of a specific 
frequency—for these cells, either 0.5 kHz (red curve), 
They realize that their pronunciation is imperfect and 
that their voices sound strange to others. They feel at a 
disadvantage with respect to hearing people in a spo-
ken conversation. In contrast, they feel relaxed and at 
ease when communicating with other deaf people.
Like other people who closely identify with their cul-
tures, members of the Deaf community feel pride in their 
common heritage and react to perceived threats. Some 
deaf people say that if they were given the opportunity to 
hear, they would refuse it. Some deaf parents have 
expressed happiness when they learned that their children 
were born deaf too. They no longer needed to fear that 
their children would not be a part of their own Deaf culture.
Some members of the Deaf community perceive 
the cochlear implant as a serious threat to their culture. 
This device is most useful for two groups: people who 
became deaf in adulthood and very young children 
(Moore and Shannon, 2009). Cochlear implants in post-
lingually deaf adults pose no threat to the Deaf commu-
nity because these people never were members of the 
culture. But putting a cochlear implant in a young child 
means that the child’s early education will be commit-
ted to the oralist approach. In addition, many deaf peo-
ple resent the implication that deafness is something 
that needs to be repaired. They see themselves as dif-
ferent but not at all defective.

218	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
to recognize the tunes.) As we would expect, the sub-
jects’ perceptions were best when the tip of the basilar 
membrane was stimulated, and only low frequencies 
could be distinguished by this method. (
Simulate 
perception of pitch on MyPsychLab.)
Perception of Loudness
The cochlea is an extremely sensitive organ. In very 
quiet environments a young, healthy ear is limited in its 
ability to detect sounds in the air by the masking noise 
of blood rushing through the cranial blood vessels 
rather than by the sensitivity of the auditory system itself. 
The softest sounds that can be detected appear to move 
the tip of the hair cells between 1 and 100 picometers 
(trillionths of a meter). They achieve their maximum 
response when the tips are moved 100 nanometers 
(Corwin and Warchol, 1991).
The axons of the cochlear nerve appear to inform 
the brain of the loudness of a stimulus by altering their 
rate of firing. Louder sounds produce more intense vi-
brations of the eardrum and ossicles, which produce a 
more intense shearing force on the cilia of the auditory 
hair cells. As a result, these cells release more neu-
rotransmitter, producing a higher rate of firing by the 
cochlear nerve axons. This explanation seems simple 
for the axons involved in place coding of pitch; in this 
case, pitch is signaled by which neurons fire, and loud-
ness is signaled by their rate of firing. However, the 
neurons in the apex of the basilar membrane that sig-
nal the lowest frequencies do so by their rate of firing. 
If they fire more frequently, they signal a higher pitch. 
Therefore, most investigators believe that the loudness 
of low-frequency sounds is signaled by the number of 
axons arising from these neurons that are active at a 
given time.
Perception of Timbre
Although laboratory investigations of the auditory sys-
tem often employ pure sine waves as stimuli, these waves 
are seldom encountered outside the laboratory. Instead, 
we hear sounds with a rich mixture of frequencies—
sounds of complex timbre. For example, consider the 
sound of a clarinet playing a particular note. If we hear 
it, we can easily say that it is a clarinet and not a flute  
or a violin. The reason we can do so is that these three 
instruments produce sounds of different timbre, which 
our auditory system can distinguish.
Figure 7.14 shows the waveform from a clarinet play-
ing a steady note (top). The shape of the waveform repeats 
2.0 kHz (green curve), or 8.0 kHz (blue curve). If the 
sound is louder, the cells will respond to frequencies 
above and below their preferred frequencies. The 
dashed line indicates the response of the “blue” neuron 
after the outer hair cells have been destroyed. As you 
can see, this cell loses both sensitivity and selectivity: It 
will respond only to loud sounds but to a wide range of 
frequencies. (See Figure 7.13.)
Rate Coding
We have seen that the frequency of a sound can be de-
tected by place coding. However, the lowest frequencies 
do not appear to be accounted for in this manner. 
Lower frequencies are detected by neurons that fire in 
synchrony to the movements of the apical end of the 
basilar membrane. Thus, lower frequencies are detected 
by means of rate coding.
The most convincing evidence of rate coding of 
pitch also comes from studies of people with cochlear 
implants. Pijl and Schwarz (1995a, 1995b) found that 
stimulation of a single electrode with pulses of electric-
ity produced sensations of pitch that were proportional 
to the frequency of the stimulation. In fact, the sub-
jects could even recognize familiar tunes produced by 
modulating the pulse frequency. (The subjects had 
become deaf later in life, after they had already learned 
figure 7.13  Tuning Curves
The figure shows the responses of single axons in the 
cochlear nerve that receive information from inner hair 
cells on different locations of the basilar membrane. The 
cells are more frequency selective at lower sound 
intensities. The dashed line shows the loss of sensitivity 
and selectivity of the high-frequency neuron after 
destruction of the outer hair cells.
(Adapted from Fettiplace, R., and Hackney, C. M. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 
2006, 7, 19–29.)
80
40
60
20
0
100
0.1
1.0
10
Frequency (kHz)
Threshold (dB)
OHC loss
x rate code  The system by which information about different 
frequencies is coded by the rate of firing of neurons in the 
auditory system.

	
Audition	
219
nerve, which is subsequently identified by circuits in 
the auditory association cortex.
Actually, the recognition of complex sounds is not 
quite that simple. Figure 7.14 shows the analysis of a 
sustained sound of a clarinet. But most sounds (includ-
ing those produced by a clarinet) are dynamic; that is, 
their beginning, middle, and end are different from 
each other. The beginning of a note played on a clari-
net (the attack) contains frequencies that appear and 
disappear in a few milliseconds. And at the end of the 
note (the decay), some harmonics disappear before 
others. If we are to recognize different sounds, the 
auditory cortex must analyze a complex sequence of 
multiple frequencies that appear, change in ampli-
tude, and disappear. And when you consider the fact 
that we can listen to an orchestra and identify several 
instruments that are playing simultaneously, you can 
appreciate the complexity of the analysis performed by 
the auditory system. We will revisit this process later in 
this chapter.
Perception of Spatial Location
So far, I have discussed coding of pitch, loudness, and 
timbre only (the last of which is actually a complex fre-
quency analysis). The auditory system also responds to 
other qualities of acoustic stimuli. For example, our ears 
are very good at determining whether the source of a 
sound is to the right or left of us. Three physiological 
mechanisms detect the location of sound sources: We 
use phase differences for low frequencies (less than ap-
proximately 3000 Hz) and intensity differences for high 
frequencies. In addition, we use an analysis of timbre to 
determine the height of the source of a sound and rec-
ognize whether it is in front of us or behind us.
Localization By Means of Arrival Time 
And Phase Differences
If we are blindfolded, we can still determine with rather 
good accuracy the location of a stimulus that emits a 
click. We are most accurate at judging the azimuth—that 
is, the horizontal (left or right) angle of the source of 
the sound relative to the midline of our body. Neurons 
in our auditory system respond selectively to different 
arrival times of the sound waves at the left and right ears. 
If the source of the click is to the right or left of the 
midline, the sound pressure wave will reach one ear 
sooner and initiate action potentials there first. Only if 
itself regularly at the fundamental frequency, which cor-
responds to the perceived pitch of the note. A Fourier 
analysis of the waveform shows that it actually consists of a 
series of sine waves that includes the fundamental fre-
quency and many overtones, multiples of the fundamental 
frequency. Different instruments produce overtones with 
different intensities. (See Figure 7.14.) Electronic synthesiz-
ers simulate the sounds of real instruments by producing a 
series of overtones of the proper intensities, mixing them, 
and passing them through a loudspeaker.
When the basilar membrane is stimulated by the 
sound of a clarinet, different portions respond to each 
of the overtones. This response produces a unique 
anatomically coded pattern of activity in the cochlear 
x fundamental frequency  The lowest, and usually most intense, 
frequency of a complex sound; most often perceived as the 
sound’s basic pitch.
x overtone  The frequency of complex tones that occurs at 
multiples of the fundamental frequency.
figure 7.14  Sound Waves from Clarinet
The figure shows the shape of a sound wave from a 
clarinet (top) and the individual frequencies into which it 
can be analyzed.
(Reprinted from Stereo Review, copyright © 1977 by Diamandis Communications Inc.)
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
16
17
18
19
20
15
1
Waveform
from clarinet
Fundamental
frequency
Overtones
Simple waves 
that make up
sound of 
clarinet

220	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
A possible mechanism to explain the ability of the 
nervous system to detect very short delays in the arrival 
times of two signals was first proposed by Jeffress 
(1948). He suggested that neurons received informa-
tion from two sets of axons coming from the two ears. 
Each neuron served as a coincidence detector; it re-
sponded only if it received signals simultaneously from 
synapses belonging to both sets of axons. If a signal 
reached the two ears simultaneously, neurons in the 
middle of the array would fire. However, if the signal 
reached one ear before the other, then neurons far-
ther away from the “early” ear would be stimulated. 
(See Figure 7.16.)
In fact, that is exactly how the mechanism works. 
Carr and Konishi (1989, 1990) obtained anatomical 
evidence in support of Jeffress’s hypothesis from the 
brain of the barn owl, a nocturnal bird that can detect 
very accurately the source of a sound (such as that 
made by an unfortunate mouse). Figure 7.17 shows a 
drawing of the distribution of the branches of two ax-
ons, one from each ear, projecting to the nucleus lami-
naris, the barn owl analog of the mammalian medial 
superior olive. As you can see, axons from the ipsilat-
eral and contralateral ears penetrate the nucleus from 
opposite directions; therefore, dorsally located neurons 
within the nucleus are stimulated by sounds that first 
the stimulus is straight ahead will the ears be stimulated 
simultaneously. Many neurons in the auditory system 
respond to sounds presented to either ear. Some of 
these neurons, especially those in the superior olivary 
complex of the medulla, respond according to the dif-
ference in arrival times of sound waves produced by 
clicks presented binaurally (that is, to both ears). Their 
response rates reflect differences as small as a fraction of 
a millisecond.
Of course, we can hear continuous sounds as well 
as clicks, and we can also perceive the location of their 
source. We detect the source of continuous low-pitched 
sounds by means of phase differences. Phase differ-
ences refer to the simultaneous arrival, at each ear, of 
different portions (phases) of the oscillating sound 
wave. For example, if we assume that sound travels at 
700 miles per hour through the air, adjacent cycles of 
a 1000-Hz tone are 12.3 inches apart. Thus, if the 
source of the sound is located to one side of the head, 
one eardrum is pulled out while the other is pushed in. 
The movement of the eardrums will reverse, or be 180° 
out of phase. If the source were located directly in front 
of the head, the movements would be perfectly in 
phase (0° out of phase). (See Figure 7.15.) Because 
some auditory neurons respond only when the ear-
drums (and thus the bending of the basilar membrane) 
are at least somewhat out of phase, neurons in the su-
perior olivary complex in the brain are able to use the 
information they provide to detect the source of a 
continuous sound.
x phase difference  The difference in arrival times of sound 
waves at each of the eardrums.
figure 7.15  Sound Localization
This method localizes the source of low-frequency and medium-frequency sounds 
through phase differences. (a) Source of a 1000-Hz tone to the right. The pressure 
waves on each eardrum are out of phase; one eardrum is pushed in while the other is 
pushed out. (b) Source of a sound directly in front. The vibrations of the eardrums are 
synchronized (in phase).
Left eardrum
pulled out
Right eardrum
pushed in
Both eardrums
pushed in
(a)
(b)

	
Audition	
221
Localization By Means of Timbre
We just saw that left–right localization of the source of 
high- and low-frequency sounds is accomplished by two 
different mechanisms. But how can we determine the 
elevation of the source of a sound and perceive whether 
it is in front of us or behind us? One answer is that we can 
turn and tilt our heads, thus transforming the discrimi-
nation into a left–right decision. But we have another 
means by which we can determine elevation and distin-
guish front from back: analysis of timbre. This method 
involves a part of the auditory system that I have not said 
much about: the external ear (pinna). People’s external 
ears contain several folds and ridges. Most of the sound 
waves that we hear bounce off the folds and ridges of the 
pinna before they enter the ear canal. Depending on the 
angle at which the sound waves strike these folds and 
ridges, different frequencies will be enhanced or attenu-
ated. In other words, the pattern of reflections will 
change with the location of the source of the sound, 
which will alter the timbre of the sound that is perceived. 
Sounds coming from behind the head will sound differ-
ent from those coming from above the head or in front 
of it, and sounds coming from above will sound different 
from those coming from the level of our ears.
Figure 7.18 shows the effects of elevation on the inten-
sity of sounds of various frequencies received at an ear 
(Oertel and Young, 2004). The experimenters placed a 
small microphone in a cat’s ear and recorded the sound 
produced by an auditory stimulus presented at various  
elevations relative to the cat’s head. They used a computer 
reach the contralateral ear. (Compare Figures 7.16 and 
7.17.) Carr and Konishi recorded from single units 
within the nucleus and found that the response charac-
teristics of the neurons located there were perfectly 
consistent with these anatomical facts. (
Simulate 
sound localization on MyPsychLab.)
Localization By Means of Intensity  
Differences
The auditory system cannot readily detect binaural 
phase differences of high-frequency stimuli; the differ-
ences in phases of such rapid sine waves are just too 
short to be measured by the neurons. However, high-
frequency stimuli that occur to the right or left of the 
midline stimulate the ears unequally. The head absorbs 
high frequencies, producing a “sonic shadow,” so the 
ear closest to the source of the sound receives the most 
intense stimulation. Some neurons in the auditory sys-
tem respond differentially to binaural stimuli of differ-
ent intensity in each ear, which means that they provide 
information that can be used to detect the source of 
tones of high frequency.
The neurons that detect binaural differences in 
loudness are located in the superior olivary complex. 
But whereas neurons that detect binaural differences 
in phase or arrival time are located in the medial supe-
rior olivary complex, these neurons are located in the 
lateral superior olivary complex. Information from 
both sets of neurons is sent to other levels of the audi-
tory system.
figure 7.16  Model of a Coincidence Detector
This model detector can determine differences in arrival times at each ear of an 
auditory stimulus.
Dendrite
Cell body
Right ear leads
Incoming
axon
This neuron is
stimulated when
click reaches two
ears simultaneously
Left ear leads
Axons of
coincidence
detectors
From
left
ear
From
right
ear

222	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
grow, the size of their ears changes. Thus, each individual 
must learn to recognize the subtle changes in the timbre 
of sounds that originate in locations in front of the head, 
behind it, above it, or below it. The neural circuits that 
accomplish this task are not genetically programmed—
they must be acquired as a result of experience.
An experiment by Zwiers, Van Opstal, and Cruys-
berg (2001) found evidence for the role of experience in 
calibrating the sensitivity of the auditory system to 
changes in elevation. They found that blind people had 
more difficulty judging the elevation of sounds than 
sighted people did, especially if some noise was present. 
Presumably, the increased accuracy of sighted people 
reflected the fact that they had had the opportunity to 
calibrate the changes in timbre of sounds caused by 
changes in the height of their sources, which they could 
see. In contrast, the ability of blind people to perceive the 
horizontal location of the sources of sounds was as good 
as that of sighted people. After all, blind people have 
much experience navigating to and around the sources of 
sounds located at ground level (and objects that reflect 
sounds, such as that of a tapping cane). These perceptions 
can be calibrated by physical contact with these objects.
to plot the ear’s transfer functions—a graph that compares 
the intensity of various frequencies of sound received by 
the ear to the intensity of these frequencies received by a 
microphone in open air. What is important in Figure 7.18 
is not the shape of the transfer functions, but the fact that 
these functions varied with the elevation of the source of 
the sound. The transfer function for a sound directly in 
front of the cat (0° of elevation) is shown in green. This 
curve is shown at the 60°, 30°, and –30° positions as well so 
that they can be compared with the curves obtained with 
the sound source at these locations, too (red, orange, and 
blue, respectively). That sounds complicated, I know, but 
if you look at the figure, you will clearly see that the timbre 
of sounds that reaches the cat’s ear changed along with 
elevation of the source of the sound. (See Figure 7.18.)
People’s ears differ in shape; thus, the changes in the 
timbre of a sound coming from different locations will 
also differ from person to person. In addition, as children 
figure 7.18  Changes in Timbre of Sounds  
with Changes in Elevation
The graphs are transfer functions, which compare the intensity 
of various frequencies of sound received by the ear to the 
intensity of these frequencies received by a microphone in 
open air. For ease of comparison, the 0° transfer function 
(green) is superimposed on the transfer functions obtained at 
60° (red), 30° (orange), and –30° (blue). The differences in the 
transfer functions at various elevations provide cues that aid in 
perception of the location of a sound source.
(Adapted from Oertel, D., and Young, E. D. Trends in Neuroscience, 2004, 27, 104–110.)
30
–30
0
Gain (dB)
1
10
Frequency (kHz)
60°
30°
–30°
0°
Elevation
figure 7.17  Evidence for a Coincidence Detector 
in the Brain of a Barn Owl
Compare the branches of the axons with those of Figure 
7.16. The drawing was prepared from microscopic 
examination of sections of stained tissue.
(Adapted from Carr, C. E., and Konishi, M. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, USA, 1989, 85, 8311–8315.)
Incoming axon from
contralateral ear
Incoming axon
from ipsilateral
ear
Dorsal
surface
of brain
Nucleus
Laminaris
Nucleus
Magnocellularis

	
Audition	
223
conduct this information rapidly and accurately (Trus-
sell, 1999). Their axons contain special low-threshold 
voltage-gated potassium channels that produce very 
short action potentials. Their terminal buttons are large 
and release large amounts of glutamate, and the postsyn-
aptic membrane contains neurotransmitter-dependent 
ion channels that act unusually rapidly; thus, these syn-
apses produce very strong EPSPs. The terminal buttons 
form synapses with the somatic membrane of the post-
synaptic neurons, which minimizes the distance between 
the synapses and the axon—and the delay in conducting 
information to the axon of the postsynaptic neuron.
As I mentioned earlier in this chapter, the auditory 
cortex, like the visual cortex, is organized into two streams: 
an anterior stream, involved in perception of complex 
sounds; and a posterior stream, involved in perception of 
form. In a single-unit recording study with monkeys, Raus-
checker and Tian (2000) found that neurons in the “what” 
system discriminated between different monkey calls, while 
neurons in the “where” system discriminated between dif-
ferent locations of loudspeakers presenting these calls.
Figure 7.19 compares the regions of the monkey 
brain that are devoted to the processing of visual and 
auditory information. As you can see, the visual and  
auditory “where” streams overlap in the parietal lobe. 
This overlap is undoubtedly related to the fact that mon-
keys (and humans too) can use the convergence of sight 
and sound to recognize which of several objects in the 
environment is making a noise. In addition, we can learn 
the association between the sight of an object and the 
sounds it makes. Information from both the visual and 
auditory systems is also projected to specific regions of 
the frontal lobes—again, with a region where both sys-
tems overlap. The role of the frontal lobes in learning 
and memory is discussed in Chapter 13. (See Figure 7.19.)
Kumpik, Kacelnik, and King (2010) obtained fur-
ther evidence for the role of learning in the ability to 
recognize the location of the source of sounds. They 
found that when one ear was partially plugged, people 
had difficulty localizing sounds. However, if they prac-
ticed several days for a period of time with the plug in, 
they learned to accurately localize sounds.
Perception of Complex Sounds
Hearing has three primary functions: to detect sounds, 
to determine the location of their sources, and to recog-
nize the identity of these sources—and thus their mean-
ing and relevance to us (Heffner and Heffner, 1990; 
Yost, 1991). Let us consider the third function: recogniz-
ing the identity of a sound source. Unless you are in a 
completely silent location, pay attention to what you can 
hear. Right now, I am sitting in an office and can hear 
the sound of a fan in a computer, the tapping of the keys 
as I write this, the footsteps of someone passing outside 
the door, and the voices of some people talking in the 
hallway. How can I recognize these sources? The axons 
in my cochlear nerve contain a constantly changing pat-
tern of activity corresponding to the constantly chang-
ing mixtures of frequencies that strike my eardrums. 
Somehow, the auditory system of my brain recognizes 
particular patterns that belong to particular sources, 
and I perceive each of them as an independent entity.
Perception of Environmental  
Sounds And Their Location
The task of the auditory system in identifying sound 
sources, is one of pattern recognition. The auditory system 
must recognize that particular patterns of constantly 
changing activity belong to different sound sources. 
And as we saw, few patterns are simple mixtures of fixed 
frequencies. For example, notes of different pitches pro-
duce different patterns of activity in our cochlear nerve, 
yet we recognize each of the notes as belonging to a 
clarinet. In addition, the notes played on a clarinet have 
a characteristic attack and decay. And consider the com-
plexity of sounds that occur in the environment: cars 
honking, birds chirping, people coughing, doors slam-
ming, and so on. (I will discuss speech recognition—an 
even more complicated task—in Chapter 14.) Needless 
to say, we are far from understanding how pattern rec-
ognition of such complex sounds works.
Perception of complex sounds appears to be accom-
plished by circuits of neurons in the auditory cortex. 
However these sounds are recognized, it is clear that the 
circuits that perform the analysis must receive accurate 
information. Recognition of complex sounds requires 
that the timing of changes in the components of the 
sounds be preserved all the way to the auditory cortex. 
In fact, the neurons that convey information to the audi-
tory cortex contain special features that permit them to 
figure 7.19  Sensory Processing
The figure shows regions of the monkey brain that are 
devoted to the processing of visual and auditory information. 
vIPFC = ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, dIPFC = dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex.
V1
Ventral
 stream
“what”
Dorsal 
stream
“where”
Inferior 
temporal
cortex
Superior 
temporal
cortex
dlPFC
vlPFC
Posterior
stream
“where”
A1
Anterior
stream
“what”

224	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
disrupted the cats’ ability to recognize an auditory stim-
ulus, and deactivation of a region of the “where” path-
way disrupted their ability to recognize its location.
The superior auditory abilities of blind people has 
long been recognized: Loss of vision appears to increase 
the sensitivity of the auditory system. A functional imag-
ing study by Klinge et al. (2010) found that input to the 
auditory cortex was identical in blind and sighted peo-
ple, but that neural connections between the auditory 
cortex and the visual cortex were stronger in blind peo-
ple. In addition, the visual cortex showed enhanced re-
sponsiveness to auditory stimuli. These findings suggest 
that the analysis of auditory stimuli can be extended to 
the visual cortex in blind people.
Perception of Music
Perception of music is a special form of auditory percep-
tion. Music consists of sounds of various pitches and 
timbres played in a particular sequence with an underly-
ing rhythm. Particular combinations of musical notes 
played simultaneously are perceived as consonant or 
dissonant, pleasant or unpleasant. The intervals between 
notes of musical scales follow specific rules, which may 
vary in the music of different cultures. In Western music, 
melodies played using notes that follow one set of rules 
(the major mode) usually sound happy, while those 
played using another set of rules (the minor mode) 
generally sound sad. In addition, a melody is recognized 
by the relative intervals between its notes, not by their 
absolute value. A melody is perceived as unchanging 
even when it is played in different keys—that is, when 
As we saw in Chapter 6, lesions of the visual associa-
tion cortex can selectively impair various aspects of  
visual perception. Damage to the ventral stream can 
produce visual agnosias—the inability to recognize objects 
even though the visual acuity may be good—and lesions 
of the dorsal stream disrupt performance on a variety of 
tasks that require perceiving and remembering the loca-
tions of objects. Lesions of the auditory association cortex 
can produce deficits analogous to these—impairment 
of various aspects of auditory perception, even though 
the individuals are not deaf.
Clarke et al. (2000) reported the cases of three patients 
with brain damage that affected different portions of the 
auditory cortex. The investigators tested the patients’ 
ability to recognize environmental sounds, to identify the 
locations from which the sounds were coming, and to 
detect when the source of a sound was moving. Patient F. D. 
had difficulty recognizing environmental sounds but 
could identify sound location or movement. Patient C. Z. 
could recognize environmental sounds but could not 
identify sound location or movement. Finally, although 
patient M. A. was not deaf, she showed deficits in all three 
tasks: recognition, localization, and perception of move-
ment. Although the lesions in these patients were too 
large for us to determine the exact locations of the brain 
regions responsible for perception of environmental 
sounds and the location of their sources, we can certainly 
conclude that different regions of the auditory cortex are 
involved in perceiving what and where.
A review of thirty-eight functional-imaging studies 
with human subjects (Arnott et al., 2004) reported a 
consistent result: Perception of the identity of sounds 
activated the “what” stream of the auditory cortex and 
perception of the location of sounds activated the 
“where” stream. A functional MRI (fMRI) study by Alain, 
He, and Grady (2008) supports this conclusion. The  
investigators presented people with sounds of animals, 
humans, and musical instruments (for example, the 
bark of a dog, a cough, and the sound of a flute) in one 
of three locations: 90° to the left, straight ahead, or 90° 
to the right. On some blocks of trials the subjects were 
asked to press a button when they heard two sounds of 
any kind from the same location. On other blocks of tri-
als they were asked to indicate when they heard the same 
kind of sound twice in a row, regardless of its location. As 
Figure 7.20 shows, judgments of location activated dorsal 
regions (“where”), and judgments of the nature of a 
sound activated ventral regions (“what”). (See Figure 7.20.)
Lomber and Malhotra (2008) operated on cats,  
implanting coils of small metal tubes under the skull 
and against the cerebral cortex. The ends of the tubes 
protruded above the skin of the animals’ heads so that a 
cold liquid could be circulated through the tubes and 
chill the cortex, temporarily deactivating the area under 
the coil. Deactivation of a region of the “what” pathway 
figure 7.20  “Where” versus “What”
The figure shows regional brain activity in response to 
judgments of category (blue) and location (red) of 
sounds. IFG = inferior frontal gyrus, IPL = inferior parietal 
lobule, MFG = middle frontal gyrus, SFG = superior 
frontal gyrus, SPL = superior parietal lobule, STG = 
superior temporal gyrus.
(From Alain, C., He, Y., and Grady, C. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2008, 
20, 285–295. Reprinted with permission.)
MFG
IFG
IFG
STG
What
Where
IPL
SPL
SFG
Left hemisphere
Right hemisphere

	
Audition	
225
were hearing changed key. (See Figure 7.21.) Brain activ-
ity also altered when babies heard dissonant music, 
which adults find unpleasant.
the pitches of all the notes are raised or lowered without 
changing the relative intervals between them. Thus, mu-
sical perception requires recognition of sequences of 
notes, their adherence to rules that govern permissible 
pitches, harmonic combinations of notes, and rhythmi-
cal structure. Because the duration of musical pieces is 
several seconds to many minutes, musical perception 
involves a substantial memory capacity. Thus, the neural 
mechanisms required for musical perception must obvi-
ously be complex.
Studies with monkeys and humans have found that 
the primary auditory cortex responds to pure tones of 
different frequencies but that recognition of the pitch 
of complex sounds is accomplished only by the auditory 
association cortex (Bendor and Wang, 2006). Functional-
imaging studies with humans indicate that pitch dis-
crimination takes place in a region of the superior tem-
poral gyrus rostral and lateral to the primary auditory 
cortex, in a region of the “what” stream.
Different regions of the brain are involved in differ-
ent aspects of musical perception (Peretz and Zatorre, 
2005). For example, the inferior frontal cortex appears 
to be involved in recognition of harmony, the right audi-
tory cortex appears to be involved in perception of the 
underlying beat in music, and the left auditory cortex 
appears to be involved in perception of rhythmic pat-
terns that are superimposed on the rhythmic beat. 
(Think of a drummer indicating the regular, underlying 
beat by operating the foot pedal of the bass drum and 
superimposing a more complex pattern of beats on 
smaller drums with the drumsticks.) In addition, the 
cerebellum and basal ganglia are involved in timing of 
musical rhythms, as they are in the timing of movements.
Everyone learns a language, but only some people 
become musicians. Musical training obviously makes 
changes in the brain—changes in motor systems in-
volved in singing or playing an instrument, and changes 
in the auditory system involved in recognizing subtle 
complexities of harmony, rhythm, and other character-
istics of musical structure. Here, I will consider aspects 
of musical expertise related to audition. Some of the 
effects of musical training can be seen in changes in the 
structure or activity of portions of the auditory system of 
the brain. For example, a study by Schneider et al. 
(2002) found that the volume of the primary auditory 
cortex of musicians was 130 percent larger than that of 
nonmusicians, and the neural response in this area to 
musical tones was 102 percent greater in musicians. 
Moreover, both of these measures were positively re-
lated to a person’s musical aptitude.
Evidence suggests that neural circuits used to pro-
cess music are already present in newborn infants. A 
functional imaging study by Perani et al. (2010) found 
that 1- to 3-day-old infants showed changes in brain activ­
ity (primarily in the right hemisphere) when music they 
figure 7.21  Consonance Versus Dissonance  
in Newborn Infants
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Relative activity
Left
Right
Original 
music
Altered
music
Patient I. R., a right-handed woman in her early forties, 
sustained bilateral damage during surgical treatment of 
aneurysms located on her middle cerebral arteries. 
Aneurysms (discussed in more detail in Chapter 15) are 
balloonlike swellings on blood vessels that are some-
times subject to rupture, which can have fatal conse-
quences. The surgery successfully clipped off the  
aneurysms but resulted in damage to most of the left 
superior temporal gyrus, some of the inferior frontal and 
parietal lobes bordering the lateral fissure. Damage to 
the right hemisphere was less severe but included the 
anterior third of the superior temporal gyrus and the 
right inferior and middle frontal gyri.
Ten years after the surgery, Peretz and her  
colleagues studied the effects of the patient’s brain 
damage on her musical ability (Peretz, Gagnon, and 
Bouchard, 1998). Although Patient I. R. had normal 
hearing, could understand speech and converse  
normally, and could recognize environmental sounds, 
she showed a nearly complete amusia—loss of the 
ability to perceive or produce melodic or rhythmic 
aspects of music. She had been raised in a musical 
environment; both her grandmother and brother 
were professional musicians. After her surgery, she 
lost the ability to recognize melodies that she had 
x amusia (a mew zia)  Loss or impairment of musical abilities, 
produced by hereditary factors or brain damage.

226	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
Approximately 4 percent of the population exhibits 
congenital amusia—a severe and persistent deficit in  
musical ability (but not in perception of speech or envi-
ronmental sounds) that becomes apparent early in life. 
People with amusia cannot recognize or even tell the  
difference between tunes, and they even try to avoid  
social situations that involve music. As one woman reported,
When the music finished the sound was always 
gone—as though it had never happened. And this 
bewildered me with a sense of failure, of failure to 
hold on to what I had just heard. Others told me 
that if I tried to remember I would. But I never 
did. I have no idea what people mean when they 
say: “I have a tune going round in my head.” I 
have never had a tune tell out its music in my 
head let alone repeat itself! (Stewart, 2008, p. 128)
Musical ability in general and congenital amusia in 
particular appear to have a genetic basis. Drayna et al. 
(2001) had pairs of twins listen to simple popular melo-
dies and determine which ones contained some wrong—
and discordant—notes. They found that the correlation 
between the scores of the twin pairs was .67 for monozy-
gotic twins but only .44 for dizygotic twins. These results 
indicate a heritability index in this kind of musical abil-
ity of approximately .75 (on a scale of 0–1.0). Peretz, 
Cummings, and Dubé (2007) found that 39 percent  
of first-degree relatives (siblings, parents, or children) 
of people with amusia also had amusia, compared with 
an incidence of only 3 percent in the first-degree rela-
tives of people in control families.
been familiar with previously, including simple 
pieces such as “Happy Birthday.” She was no longer 
able to sing.
Remarkably, despite her inability to recognize 
melodic and rhythmic aspects of music, she insisted 
that she still enjoyed listening to music. Peretz and 
her colleagues discovered that I. R. was still able to 
recognize emotional aspects of music. Although she 
could not recognize pieces that the experimenters 
played for her, she recognized whether the music 
sounded happy or sad. She could also recognize hap-
piness, sadness, fear, anger, surprise, and disgust in a 
person’s tone of voice. The ability to recognize emo-
tion in music contrasts with her inability to recognize 
dissonance in music—a quality that normal listeners 
find intensely unpleasant. Peretz and her colleagues 
(2001) discovered that I. R. was totally insensitive to 
changes in music that irritate normal listeners. Even 
4-month-old babies prefer consonant music to disso-
nant music, which shows that recognition of disso-
nance develops very early in life (Zentner and Kagan, 
1998.) 
Simulate emotion and dissonance in 
music on MyPsychLab to listen to music that varies in 
emotional content (happy, sad, peaceful, and scary) 
and dissonance. I think it’s fascinating that Patient I. R. 
could not distinguish between the dissonant and con-
sonant versions but could still identify happy and sad 
music.
Section Summary
Audition
The receptive organ for audition is the organ of Corti, 
located on the basilar membrane. When sound strikes 
the tympanic membrane, it sets the ossicles into 
motion, and the baseplate of the stapes pushes 
against the membrane behind the oval window. 
Pressure changes thus applied to the fluid within the 
cochlea cause a portion of the basilar membrane to 
flex, causing the basilar membrane to move laterally 
with respect to the tectorial membrane that over-
hangs it. These events cause movements in the fluid 
within the cochlea, which, in turn, causes the cilia of 
the inner hair cells to wave back and forth. These 
mechanical forces open cation channels in the tips of 
the hair cells and thus produce receptor potentials.
The inner hair cells form synapses with the den-
drites of the bipolar neurons whose axons give rise to 
the cochlear branch of the eighth cranial nerve. The 
central auditory system involves several brain stem 
nuclei, including the cochlear nuclei, superior olivary 
complexes, and inferior colliculi. The medial genicu-
late nucleus relays auditory information to the primary 
auditory cortex on the medial surface of the temporal 
lobe. The primary auditory cortex contains three sep-
arate tonotopic representations of auditory informa-
tion and is surrounded by two levels of auditory asso-
ciation cortex: the belt region, which contains seven 
divisions, and the parabelt region. As we saw in 
Chapter 6, the visual association cortex is divided into 

	
Vestibular System	
227
two streams, one analyzing color and form and the 
other analyzing location and movement. Similarly, the 
auditory association cortex is organized into streams 
that analyze the nature of sounds (“what”) and the 
location of their sources (“where”).
Pitch is encoded by two means. High-frequency 
sounds cause the base of the basilar membrane (near 
the oval window) to flex; low-frequency sounds cause 
the apex (opposite end) to flex. Because high and low 
frequencies thus stimulate different groups of auditory 
hair cells, frequency is encoded anatomically. 
Cochlear implants use the principle of place coding to 
restore hearing in deaf people. The lowest frequen-
cies cause the apex of the basilar membrane to flex 
back and forth in time with the acoustic vibrations. 
Movement of the basilar membrane pulls directly on 
the cilia of the outer hair cells and changes their 
membrane potential. This change causes contractions 
or relaxations of contractile proteins within the cell, 
which amplify movements of the basilar membrane 
and enhances the responses of the inner hair cells.
The auditory system can discriminate between 
sounds with different timbres by detecting the individ-
ual overtones that constitute the sounds and producing 
unique patterns of neural firing in the auditory system.
Left–right localization is performed by analyzing 
binaural differences in arrival time, in phase relations, 
and in intensity. The location of the azimuth of the 
sources of brief sounds (such as clicks) and sounds of 
frequencies below approximately 3000 Hz is detected 
by neurons in the medial superior olivary complex, 
which respond most vigorously when one ear receives 
the click first or when the phase of a sine wave 
received by one ear leads that received by the other. 
The location of the azimuth of the sources of high- 
frequency sounds is detected by neurons in the lateral 
superior olivary complex, which respond most vigor-
ously when one organ of Corti is stimulated more 
intensely than the other. Localization of the elevation 
of the sources of sounds can be accomplished by 
turning the head or by perception of subtle differ-
ences in the timbre of sounds coming from different 
directions. The folds and ridges in the external ear 
(pinna) reflect different frequencies into the ear canal, 
changing the timbre of the sound according to the 
location of its source.
To recognize the source of sounds, the auditory 
system must recognize the constantly changing pat-
terns of activity received from the axons in the 
cochlear nerve. Electrophysiological, behavioral, and 
functional-imaging studies indicate that the anterior 
“what” stream is involved in the analysis of the 
sound, and the posterior “where” stream is involved 
in perception of its location. Localized lesions of the 
auditory association cortex can impair people’s ability 
to recognize environmental sounds, sound location, 
or sound movement.
Perception of music requires recognition of 
sequences of notes, their adherence to rules govern-
ing permissible pitches, harmonic combinations of 
notes, and rhythmical structure. Perception of pitch 
activates regions of the superior temporal gyrus  
rostral and lateral to the primary auditory cortex. 
Other regions of the brain—especially in the right 
hemisphere—are involved in perception of the under-
lying beat of music and the specific rhythmic patterns 
of a particular piece. Musical training appears to 
increase the size and responsiveness of the primary 
auditory cortex. A case study indicates that recognition 
of emotion in music involves some brain mechanisms 
independent of those that recognize dissonance. 
Musical ability, and the occurrence of congenital  
amusia, appear to have a genetic basis.
 Thought Question
A naturalist once noted that when a male bird stakes 
out his territory, he sings with a very sharp, staccato 
song that says, in effect, “Here I am, and stay 
away!” In contrast, if a predator appears in the  
vicinity, many birds will emit alarm calls that consist 
of steady whistles that start and end slowly. Knowing 
what you do about the two means of localizing 
sounds, why do these two types of calls have different 
characteristics?
Vestibular System
The vestibular system has two components: the vestibu-
lar sacs and the semicircular canals. They represent  
the second and third components of the labyrinths of 
the inner ear. (We just studied the first component, the 
cochlea.) The vestibular sacs respond to the force of 
gravity and inform the brain about the head’s orientation. 
x vestibular sac  One of a set of two receptor organs in each 
inner ear that detect changes in the tilt of the head.

228	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
two vestibular sacs: the utricle (“little pouch”) and the 
saccule (“little sack”). (See Figure 7.22.) The semicircu-
lar canals approximate the three major planes of the 
head: sagittal, transverse, and horizontal. Receptors in 
each canal respond maximally to angular acceleration 
in one plane. The semicircular canal consists of a mem-
branous canal floating within a bony one; the membra-
nous canal contains a fluid called endolymph. An  
enlargement called the ampulla contains the organ in 
which the sensory receptors reside. The sensory recep-
tors are hair cells similar to those found in the cochlea. 
Their cilia are embedded in a gelatinous mass called 
the cupula, which blocks part of the ampulla. (Look 
again at Figure 7.22.)
To explain the effects of angular acceleration on 
the semicircular canals, I will first describe an “experi-
ment.” If we place a glass of water on the exact center 
of a turntable and then start the turntable spinning, 
the water in the glass will, at first, remain stationary 
(the glass will move with respect to the water it con-
tains). Eventually, however, the water will begin rotating 
The semicircular canals respond to angular accelera-
tion—changes in the rotation of the head—but not to 
steady rotation. They also respond (but rather weakly) 
to changes in position or to linear acceleration.
The functions of the vestibular system include bal-
ance, maintenance of the head in an upright position, 
and adjustment of eye movement to compensate for 
head movements. Vestibular stimulation does not pro-
duce any readily definable sensation; certain low- 
frequency stimulation of the vestibular sacs can produce 
nausea, and stimulation of the semicircular canals can 
produce dizziness and rhythmic eye movements (nystag-
mus). However, we are not directly aware of the informa-
tion received from these organs. This section describes 
the vestibular system: the vestibular apparatus, the 
receptor cells, and the vestibular pathway in the brain.
Anatomy of the Vestibular Apparatus
Figure 7.22 shows the labyrinths of the inner ear, which 
include the cochlea, the semicircular canals, and the  
figure 7.22  Receptive Organ of the Semicircular Canals
Semicircular
canals
Vestibular sacs
(utricle and saccule)
Vestibular
nerve
Semicircular
canals
Cochlea
Filled with
endolymph
Section of
ampulla
Cupula
Hair
cells
Axons of
ampullary nerve

	
Vestibular System	
229
The Receptor Cells
The hair cells of the semicircular canal and vestibular 
sacs are similar in appearance. Each hair cell contains 
several cilia, graduated in length from short to long. 
These hair cells resemble the auditory hair cells found 
in the cochlea, and their transduction mechanism is 
also similar: A shearing force of the cilia opens ion chan-
nels, and the entry of potassium ions depolarizes the 
ciliary membrane. All three forms of hair cells employ 
the same receptor molecules: TRPA1, which I described 
earlier in this chapter. Figure 7.24 shows two views of a 
hair cell of a bullfrog saccule made by a scanning elec-
tron microscope. (See Figure 7.24.)
The Vestibular Pathway
The vestibular and cochlear nerves constitute the two 
branches of the eighth cranial nerve (auditory nerve). 
The bipolar cell bodies that give rise to the afferent  
axons of the vestibular nerve (a branch of the eighth 
with the container. If we then stop the turntable, the 
water will continue spinning for a while because of its 
inertia.
The semicircular canals operate on the same prin-
ciple. The endolymph within these canals, like the water 
in the glass, resists movement when the head begins to 
rotate. This inertial resistance pushes the endolymph 
against the cupula, causing it to bend, until the fluid 
begins to move at the same speed as the head. If the 
head rotation is then stopped, the endolymph, still cir-
culating through the canal, pushes the cupula the other 
way. Angular acceleration is thus translated into bend-
ing of the cupula, which exerts a shearing force on the 
cilia of the hair cells. (Of course, unlike the glass of  
water in my example, we do not normally spin around 
in circles; the semicircular canals measure very slight 
and very brief rotations of the head.)
The vestibular sacs (the utricle and saccule) work 
very differently. These organs are roughly circular, and 
each contains a patch of receptive tissue. The recep-
tive tissue is located on the “floor” of the utricle and 
on the “wall” of the saccule when the head is in an 
upright position. The receptive tissue, like that of the 
semicircular canals and cochlea, contains hair cells. 
The cilia of these receptors are embedded in an over-
lying gelatinous mass, which contains something 
rather unusual: otoconia, which are small crystals of 
calcium carbonate. (See Figure 7.23.) The weight of the 
crystals causes the gelatinous mass to shift in position 
as the orientation of the head changes. Thus, move-
ment produces a shearing force on the cilia of the  
receptive hair cells.
x semicircular canal  One of the three ringlike structures of the 
vestibular apparatus that detect changes in head rotation.
x utricle (you trih kul)  One of the vestibular sacs.
x saccule (sak yule)  One of the vestibular sacs.
x ampulla (am pull uh)  An enlargement in a semicircular canal; 
contains the cupula and the crista.
x cupula (kew pew luh)  A gelatinous mass found in the ampulla 
of the semicircular canals; moves in response to the flow of the 
fluid in the canals.
figure 7.23  Receptive Tissue of the Vestibular Sacs: the Utricle and the Saccule
Semicircular
canals
Vestibular
nerve
Utricle
Saccule
Efferent
axon
Hair cell
Filamentous
base
Otoconia
Otolithic
membrane
Supporting
cell
Cilia
Afferent
axon

230	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
vestibular nuclei send their axons to the cerebellum, 
spinal cord, medulla, and pons. There also appear to be 
vestibular projections to the temporal cortex, but the 
precise pathways have not been determined. Most inves-
tigators believe that the cortical projections are respon-
sible for feelings of dizziness; the activity of projections 
to the lower brain stem can produce the nausea and 
vomiting that accompany motion sickness. Projections 
to brain stem nuclei controlling neck muscles are clearly 
involved in maintaining an upright position of the head.
Perhaps the most interesting connections are those 
to the cranial nerve nuclei (third, fourth, and sixth) that 
control the eye muscles. As we walk or (especially) run, 
the head is jarred quite a bit. The vestibular system  
exerts direct control on eye movement to compensate 
for the sudden head movements. This process, called 
the vestibulo-ocular reflex, maintains a fairly steady retinal 
image. Test this reflex yourself: Look at a distant object 
and hit yourself (gently) on the side of the head. Note 
that your image of the world jumps a bit but not too 
much. People who have suffered vestibular damage and 
who lack the vestibulo-ocular reflex have difficulty seeing 
anything while walking or running. Everything becomes 
a blur of movement.
cranial nerve) are located in the vestibular ganglion, 
which appears as a nodule on the vestibular nerve.
Most of the axons of the vestibular nerve synapse 
within the vestibular nuclei in the medulla, but some 
axons travel directly to the cerebellum. Neurons of the 
figure 7.24  Saccular Hair Cells
These scanning electron microscope views of hair cells of  
a bullfrog saccule show (a) an oblique view of a normal 
bundle of vestibular hair cells and (b) a top view of a bundle 
of hair cells from which the longest has been detached.
(From Hudspeth, A. J., and Jacobs, R. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, USA, 1979, 76, 1506–1509. Reprinted with permission.)
(a)
(b)
x vestibular ganglion  A nodule on the vestibular nerve that 
contains the cell bodies of the bipolar neurons that convey 
vestibular information to the brain.
Section Summary
Vestibular System
The semicircular canals are filled with fluid. When the 
head begins rotating or comes to rest after rotation, 
inertia causes the fluid to push the cupula to one side 
or the other. This movement exerts a shearing force 
on the cupula, the organ that contains the vestibular 
hair cells. The vestibular sacs contain a patch of 
receptive tissue that contains hair cells whose cilia are 
embedded in a gelatinous mass. The weight of the 
otoconia in the gelatinous mass shifts when the head 
tilts, causing a shearing force on some of the cilia of 
the hair cells.
Each hair cell contains one long cilium and sev-
eral shorter ones. These cells form synapses with  
dendrites of bipolar neurons whose axons travel 
through the vestibular nerve. The receptors also 
receive efferent terminal buttons from neurons 
located in the cerebellum and medulla, but the func-
tion of these connections is not known. Vestibular 
information is received by the vestibular nuclei in the 
medulla, which relay it on to the cerebellum, spinal 
cord, medulla, pons, and temporal cortex. These 
pathways are responsible for control of posture, head 
movements, and eye movements and the puzzling 
phenomenon of motion sickness.
 Thought Question
Why can slow, repetitive vestibular stimulation cause 
nausea and vomiting? Obviously, there are connec-
tions between the vestibular system and the area pos-
trema, which (as you learned in Chapter 2) controls 
vomiting. Can you think of any useful functions that 
might be served by these connections?

	
Somatosenses	
231
heart, and blood vessels that are sensitive to nutrients 
and minerals. This information, which plays a role in 
the control of metabolism and water and mineral bal-
ance, is described in Chapter 12.
Anatomy of the Skin and Its  
Receptive Organs
The skin is a complex and vital organ of the body—
one that we tend to take for granted. We cannot sur-
vive without it; extensive skin burns are fatal. Our 
cells, which must be bathed by a warm fluid, are pro-
tected from the hostile environment by the skin’s 
outer layers. The skin participates in thermoregula-
tion by producing sweat, thus cooling the body, or by 
restricting its circulation of blood, thus conserving 
heat. Its appearance varies widely across the body, 
from mucous membrane to hairy skin to the smooth, 
hairless skin of the palms and the soles of the feet, 
which is known as glabrous skin. (The word derives 
from the Latin glaber, “smooth, bald.”) Skin consists of 
subcutaneous tissue, dermis, and epidermis and con-
tains various receptors scattered throughout these lay-
ers. Glabrous skin contains a dense, complex mixture 
of receptors, which reflects the fact that we use the 
palms of our hands and the inside surfaces of our fin-
gers to actively explore the environment: We use our 
hands and fingers to hold and touch objects. In con-
trast, the rest of our body most often contacts the  
environment passively; that is, other things come into 
contact with it.
Figure 7.25 shows the appearance of free nerve  
endings and the four types of encapsulated receptors 
(Merkel’s disks, Ruffini corpuscles, Meissner’s corpus-
cles, and Pacinian corpuscles). The locations and  
Somatosenses
The somatosenses provide information about what is 
happening on the surface of our body and inside it. 
The cutaneous senses (skin senses) include several sub-
modalities commonly referred to as touch. Proprioception 
and kinesthesia provide information about body posi-
tion and movement. I will describe the contribution of 
sensory receptors in the skin to these perceptual sys-
tems in this section. The muscle receptors and their 
role in feedback from limb position and movement are 
discussed in this section and in Chapter 8. The organic 
senses arise from receptors in and around the internal 
organs. Because the cutaneous senses are the most 
studied of the somatosenses, both perceptually and 
physiologically, I will devote most of my discussion to 
them.
The Stimuli
The cutaneous senses respond to several different types 
of stimuli: pressure, vibration, heating, cooling, and 
events that cause tissue damage (and hence pain). Feel-
ings of pressure are caused by mechanical deformation 
of the skin. Vibration is produced in the laboratory or 
clinic by tuning forks or mechanical devices, but it 
more commonly occurs when we move our fingers 
across a rough surface. Thus, we use vibration sensitiv-
ity to judge an object’s roughness. Obviously, sensations 
of warmth and coolness are produced by objects that 
raise or lower skin temperature from normal. Sensa-
tions of pain can be caused by many different types of 
stimuli, but it appears that most cause at least some 
tissue damage.
One source of kinesthesia is the stretch receptors 
found in skeletal muscles that report changes in muscle 
length to the central nervous system. Receptors within 
joints between adjacent bones respond to the magni-
tude and direction of limb movement. However, the 
most important source of kinesthetic feedback appears 
to come from receptors that respond to changes in the 
stretching of the skin during movements of the joints or 
of the muscles themselves, such as those in the face 
( Johansson and Flanagan, 2009). Muscle length detec-
tors, located within the muscles, do not give rise to 
conscious sensations; their information is used to con-
trol movement. These receptors will be discussed sepa-
rately in Chapter 8.
We are aware of some of the information received 
by means of the organic senses, which can provide us 
with unpleasant sensations such as stomachaches or 
gallbladder attacks, or pleasurable ones such as those 
provided by a warm drink on a cold winter day. We are 
unaware of some information, such as that provided 
from receptors in the digestive system, kidneys, liver, 
x cutaneous sense (kew tane ee us)  One of the somatosenses; 
includes sensitivity to stimuli that involve the skin.
x proprioception  Perception of the body’s position and posture.
x kinesthesia  Perception of the body’s own movements.
x organic sense  A sense modality that arises from receptors 
located within the inner organs of the body.
x glabrous skin (glab russ)  Skin that does not contain hair; 
found on the palms and the soles of the feet.
x Merkel’s disk  A touch-sensitive cutaneous receptor, important 
for detection of form and roughness, especially by fingertips.
x Ruffini corpuscle  A touch-sensitive cutaneous receptor, 
important in detecting stretching or static force against the skin, 
important in proprioception.
x Meissner’s corpuscle  A touch-sensitive cutaneous receptor, 
important in detecting edge contours or Braille-like stimuli, 
especially by fingertips.
x Pacinian corpuscle (pa chin ee un)  A vibration-sensitive 
cutaneous receptor, important in detecting vibration from an 
object being held.

232	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
Touch
Stimuli that cause vibration in the skin or changes  
in pressure against it (tactile stimuli) are detected by 
mechanoreceptors—the encapsulated receptors shown 
in Figure 7.25 and some types of free nerve endings. 
Most investigators believe that the encapsulated nerve 
endings serve only to modify the physical stimulus trans-
duced by the dendrites that reside within them. But what 
is the mechanism of transduction? How does movement 
of the dendrites of mechanoreceptors produce changes 
in membrane potentials? It appears that the movement 
causes ion channels to open, and the flow of ions into or 
out of the dendrite causes a change in the membrane 
potential. You will recall that TRPA1, a member of the 
TRP (transient receptor potential) family of receptor 
proteins, is responsible for transduction of mechanical 
information in auditory and vestibular hair cells.
Most information about tactile stimulation is pre-
cisely localized—that is, we can perceive the location on 
our skin where we are being touched. However, a study 
by Olausson et al. (2002) discovered a new category of 
tactile sensation.
functions of these receptors are listed in Table 7.1. (See 
Figure 7.25 and Table 7.1.)
Perception of Cutaneous Stimulation
The three most important qualities of cutaneous stimu-
lation are touch, temperature, and pain. These qualities, 
along with itch, are described in the sections that follow.
figure 7.25  Cutaneous Receptors
Hair
Ruffini
corpuscles
Sweat
gland
Merkel's
disks
Free nerve
endings
Meissner's
corpuscle
Pacinian
corpuscle
Subcutaneous
fat
Vein
Artery
Hairy Skin
Glabrous Skin
Epidermis
Dermis
table 7.1  Categories of Cutaneous Receptors
Speed of 
Adaptation
Size and Nature  
of Receptive Field
Identity of Receptor
Location of Receptor
Function of Receptor
Slow (SA I) 
Small, sharp borders 
Merkel’s disk 
Hairy and glabrous skin 
Detection of form and rough-
ness, especially by fingertips
Slow (SA II) 
 
Large, diffuse borders 
 
Ruffini corpuscles 
 
Hairy and glabrous 
skin 
Detection of static force 
against skin, skin stretching, 
proprioception
Rapid (RA I) 
 
Small, sharp borders 
 
Meissner’s corpuscles 
 
Glabrous skin 
 
Detection of edge contours, 
Braille-like stimuli, especially 
by fingertips
Rapid (RA II) 
 
Large, diffuse borders 
 
Pacinian corpuscles 
 
Hairy and glabrous 
skin 
Detection of vibration, infor-
mation from end of elongated 
object being held, such as tool
 
 
Hair follicle ending
Base of hair follicle
Detection of movement of hair
  
 
  
 
Free nerve ending 
 
Hairy and glabrous 
skin 
Detection of thermal stimuli 
(coolness or warmth), noxious 
stimuli (pain), tickle
 
 
Free nerve ending
Hairy skin
Detection of pleasurable 
touch from gentle stroking 
with soft object
x mechanoreceptor  A sensory neuron that responds to 
mechanical stimuli: for example, those that produce pressure, 
stretch, or vibration of the skin or stretch of muscles or tendons.

	
Somatosenses	
233
warm, furry animal or touching a baby or a lover. When 
our hairy skin contacts the skin of another person, it is 
more likely that that person is touching us. In contrast, 
when our glabrous skin contacts the skin of another 
person, it is more likely that we are touching them. 
Thus, we might expect receptors in hairy skin to provide 
pleasurable sensations when someone caresses us but 
expect receptors in glabrous skin to provide pleasurable 
sensations when we caress someone else.
Our cutaneous senses are used much more often to 
analyze shapes and textures of stimulus objects that are 
moving with respect to the surface of the skin. Some-
times, the object itself moves; but more often, we do the 
moving ourselves. If I placed an object in your palm and 
asked you to keep your hand still, you would have a great 
deal of difficulty recognizing the object by touch alone. 
If I said that you could now move your hand, you would 
manipulate the object, letting its surface slide across your 
palm and the pads of your fingers. You would be able to 
describe the object’s three-dimensional shape, hardness, 
texture, slipperiness, and so on. Obviously, your motor 
system must cooperate, and you need kinesthetic sensa-
tion from your muscles and joints, besides the cutaneous 
information. If you squeeze the object and feel a lot of 
well-localized pressure in return, it is hard. If you feel a 
less intense, more diffuse pressure in return, it is soft. If 
it produces vibrations as it moves over the ridges on your 
fingers, it is rough. If very little effort is needed to move 
the object while pressing it against your skin, it is slip-
pery. If it does not produce vibrations as it moves across 
your skin, but moves in a jerky fashion, and if it takes 
effort to remove your fingers from its surface, it is sticky. 
Thus, our somatosenses work dynamically with the mo-
tor system to provide useful information about the na-
ture of objects that come into contact with our skin.
Studies of people who make especially precise use of 
their fingertips show changes in the regions of somato-
sensory cortex that receive information from this part of 
the body. For example, violinists must make very precise 
movements of the four fingers of the left hand, which 
are used to play notes by pressing the strings against the 
fingerboard. Tactile feedback and proprioceptive feed-
back are very important in accurately moving and posi-
tioning these fingers so that sounds of the proper pitch 
are produced. In contrast, placement of the thumb, 
which slides along the bottom of the neck of the violin, 
is less critical. In a study of violin players, Elbert et al. 
(1995) found that the portions of their right somatosen-
sory cortex that receive information from the four fin-
gers of their left hand were enlarged relative to the cor-
responding parts of the left somatosensory cortex. The 
amount of somatosensory cortex that receives informa-
tion from the thumb was not enlarged. (The right hand 
holds the bow, and the violist makes precise movements 
with the arm and wrist, but tactile information from the 
fingers of this hand is much less important.)
The investigators concluded that, besides conveying 
information about noxious and thermal stimuli, small-
diameter unmyelinated axons constitute a “system for 
limbic touch that may underlie emotional, hormonal 
and affiliative responses to caresslike, skin-to-skin con-
tact between individuals” (Olausson et al., 2002, p. 900). 
And, as we saw, G. L. could no longer perceive tickle. 
Tickling sensations, which were previously believed to 
be transmitted by these small axons, are apparently 
transmitted by the large, myelinated axons that were 
destroyed in patient G. L.
Olausson and his colleagues (Löken et al., 2009) 
note that the sensory endings that detect pleasurable 
stroking are found only in hairy skin, and that stroking 
of glabrous skin does not provide these sensations. How-
ever, I can think of pleasurable tactile stimuli that can 
be experienced through the glabrous skin of the palms 
and fingers—for example, those provided by stroking a 
At age 31, patient G. L., a 54-year-old woman, had 
“suffered a permanent and specific loss of large myelin-
ated afferents after episodes of acute polyradiculitis and 
polyneuropathy that affected her whole body below the 
nose. A sural nerve biopsy indicated a complete loss of 
large-diameter myelinated fibers. . . . Before the present 
study, she denied having any touch sensibility below 
the nose, and she lost the ability to perceive tickle 
when she became ill. She states that her perceptions of 
temperature, pain and itch are intact” (Olausson et al., 
2002, pp. 902–903).
G. L. could indeed detect the stimuli that are  
normally attributed to small-diameter unmyelinated 
axons—temperature, pain, and itch—but she could not 
detect vibratory or normal tactile stimuli. But when the 
hairy skin on her forearm or the back of her hand was 
stroked with a soft brush, she reported a faint, pleasant 
sensation. However, she could not determine the direc-
tion of the stroking or its precise location. An fMRI anal-
ysis showed that this stimulation activated the insular 
cortex, a region that is known to be associated with 
emotional responses and sensations from internal 
organs. The somatosensory cortex was not activated. 
When regions of hairy skin of control subjects were 
stimulated this way, fMRI showed activation of the  
primary and secondary somatosensory cortex as well  
as the insular cortex because the stimulation activated 
both large and small axons. The glabrous skin on the 
palm of the hand is served only by large-diameter, 
myelinated axons. When this region was stroked with  
a brush, G. L. reported no sensation at all, presumably 
because of the absence of small, unmyelinated axons.

234	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
assessed sensitivity to cold by placing the mice in a box 
that contained two chambers connected by an opening 
through which the animals could pass. The floors of the 
chambers consisted of temperature-controlled metal 
plates. Normal mice preferred to spend time on a plate 
held at 30° C and avoided a 20° C plate. However, the 
mice without TRPM8 receptors showed no preference 
until the temperature on the cool plate dropped to 15° C. 
In addition, electrical recordings of cutaneous C fibers 
of the mutant mice showed no evidence of cold-sensitive 
neurons.
Pain
The story of pain is quite different from that of tem-
perature and pressure; pain is a very complicated sensa-
tion. It is obvious that our awareness of pain and our 
emotional reaction to it are controlled by mechanisms 
Temperature
Feelings of warmth and coolness are relative, not abso-
lute, except at the extremes. There is a temperature 
level that, for a particular region of skin, will produce a 
sensation of temperature neutrality—neither warmth 
nor coolness. This neutral point is not an absolute value 
but depends on the prior history of thermal stimulation 
of that area. If the temperature of a region of skin  
is raised by a few degrees, the initial feeling of warmth is 
replaced by one of neutrality. If the skin temperature  
is lowered to its initial value, it now feels cool. Thus,  
increases in temperature lower the sensitivity of warmth  
receptors and raise the sensitivity of cold receptors. The 
converse holds for decreases in skin temperature. This 
adaptation to ambient temperature can be demon-
strated easily by placing one hand in a bucket of warm 
water and the other in a bucket of cool water until some 
adaptation has taken place. If you then simultaneously 
immerse both hands in water at room temperature, it 
will feel warm to one hand and cool to the other.
There are two categories of thermal receptors: those 
that respond to warmth and those that respond to cool-
ness. Cold sensors in the skin are located just beneath 
the epidermis, and warmth sensors are located more 
deeply in the skin. Information from cold sensors is 
conveyed to the CNS by thinly myelinated A fibers, and 
information from warmth sensors is conveyed by unmy-
elinated C fibers. We can detect thermal stimuli over a 
very wide range of temperatures, from less than 8° C 
(noxious cold) to over 52° C (noxious heat). Investiga-
tors have long believed that no single receptor could 
detect such a range of temperatures, and recent re-
search indicates that this belief was correct. At present 
we know of six mammalian thermoreceptors—all mem-
bers of the TRP family (Bandell, Macpherson, and Pata-
poutian, 2007; Romanovsky, 2007). (See Figure 7.26 and 
Table 7.2.)
Some of the thermal receptors respond to particu-
lar chemicals as well as to changes in temperature. For 
example, the M in TRPM8 stands for menthol, a com-
pound found in the leaves of many members of the mint 
family. As you undoubtedly know, peppermint tastes 
cool in the mouth, and menthol is added to some ciga-
rettes to make the smoke feel cooler (and perhaps to try 
to delude smokers into thinking that the smoke is less 
harsh and damaging to the lungs). Menthol provides a 
cooling sensation because it binds with and stimulates 
the TRPM8 receptor and produces neural activity that 
the brain interprets as coolness. As we will see in the 
next subsection, chemicals can produce the sensation of 
heat also.
Bautista et al. (2007) prepared mice with a targeted 
mutation (knockout) of the TRPM8 receptor gene. 
They found that the mutation severely impaired the re-
sponse of the mice to environmental cold. The investigators 
figure 7.26  Activity of Thermosensitive Receptors
The activity of cold-activated (blue) and heat-activated 
(orange) temperature-sensitive TRP channels are shown 
as a function of temperature.
(Adapted from Romanovsky, A. A. American Journal of Physiology, 2007, 292, 
R37–R46.)
50
0
100
10
20
30
40
50
0
Temperature (°C)
Activity of channel (percent)
TRPA1
TRPMS
TRPV4
TRPM2
TRPV2
TRPV3 TRPV1
TRPM4
+
TRPM5
table 7.2  Categories of Mammalian Thermal 
Receptors
Name of 
Receptor
Type of 
Stimulus
Temperature 
Range
TRPV2
Noxious heat
Above 52° C
TRPV1, capsaicin
Heat
Above 43° C
TRPV3
Warmth
Above 31° C
TRPV4
Warmth
Above 25° C
TRPM8, menthol
Coolness
Below 28° C

	
Somatosenses	
235
seventeenth-century German physician as an “unpleas-
ant sensation that elicits the desire or reflex to scratch” 
(Ikoma et al., 2006, p. 535.) If an adult sees a child 
scratching at an insect bite or other form of skin irrita-
tion, the adult is likely to say, “Stop that—it will only 
make it worse!” The scratching may indeed make the 
irritation worse, but the immediate effect of scratching 
is to reduce the itching. Davidson et al. (2009) found 
that scratching inhibited the activity of neurons in the 
spinothalamic tract of monkeys that transmit itch sensa-
tions to the brain. Presumably, the scratch response to 
stimuli that produce itching helps rid skin of irritating 
debris or parasites (Davidson and Giesler, 2010). 
Scratching reduces itching because pain suppresses itch-
ing (and, ironically, itching reduces pain). Histamine 
and other chemicals released by skin irritation and  
allergic reactions are important sources of itching.  
Experiments have shown that painful stimuli such as 
heat and electrical shock can reduce sensations of itch 
produced by an injection of histamine into the skin, 
even when the painful stimuli are applied up to 10 cm 
from the site of irritation (Ward, Wright, and McMahon, 
1996; Nilsson, Levinsson, and Schouenborg, 1997). On 
the other hand, the administration of an opiate into the 
epidural space around the spinal cord diminishes pain 
but often produces itching as an unwelcome side effect 
(Chaney, 1995). Naloxone, a drug that blocks opiate 
receptors, has been used to reduce cholestatic pruritus, a 
condition of itching that sometimes accompanies preg-
nancy (Bergasa, 2005).
Little is known about the receptors that are respon-
sible for the sensation of itch, but at least two different 
types of neurons transmit itch-related information to the 
CNS. Johanek et al. (2007) produced itch in volunteers 
with intradermal injections of histamine and applica-
tions of cowhage spicules—tiny, needlelike plant fibers 
that contain an enzyme that breaks down proteins in the 
skin. Both treatments produce intense itch, but only his-
tamine produces an area of vasodilation. Pretreatment of 
a patch of skin with a topical antihistamine prevented 
histamine from producing an itch at that spot but had no 
effect on the itch produced by cowhage. In contrast, 
pretreatment of a patch of skin with capsaicin prevented 
cowhage-induced itch but not histamine-induced itch.
The Somatosensory Pathways
Somatosensory axons from the skin, muscles, or internal 
organs enter the central nervous system via spinal 
nerves. Those located in the face and head primarily 
enter through the trigeminal nerve (fifth cranial nerve). 
The cell bodies of the unipolar neurons are located in 
the dorsal root ganglia and cranial nerve ganglia. Axons 
that convey precisely localized information, such as fine 
touch, ascend through the dorsal columns in the white 
within the brain. For example, we can have a tooth  
removed painlessly under hypnosis, which has no effect on  
the sensitivity of pain receptors. Stimuli that produce 
pain also tend to trigger species-typical escape and with-
drawal responses. Subjectively, these stimuli hurt, and we 
try hard to avoid or escape from them. However, some-
times we are better off ignoring pain and getting on with 
important tasks. In fact, our brains possess mechanisms 
that can reduce pain, partly through the action of the 
endogenous opioids. These mechanisms are described 
in more detail in a later section of this chapter.
Pain reception, like thermoreception, is accom-
plished by the networks of free nerve endings in the 
skin. There appear to be at least three types of pain re-
ceptors (usually referred to as nociceptors, or “detectors 
of noxious stimuli”). High-threshold mechanoreceptors 
are free nerve endings that respond to intense pressure, 
which might be caused by something striking, stretch-
ing, or pinching the skin. A second type of free nerve 
ending appears to respond to extremes of heat, to acids, 
and to the presence of capsaicin, the active ingredient in 
chile peppers. (Note that we say that chile peppers make 
food taste “hot.”) This type of fiber contains TRPV1  
receptors (Kress and Zeilhofer, 1999). The V stands for  
vanilloid—a group of chemicals of which capsaicin is a 
member. Caterina et al. (2000) found that mice with a 
knockout of the gene for the TRPV1 receptor showed 
less sensitivity to painful high-temperature stimuli and 
would drink water to which capsaicin had been added. 
The mice responded normally to noxious mechanical 
stimuli. Presumably, the TRPV1 receptor is responsible 
for pain produced by burning of the skin and to changes 
in the acid/base balance within the skin. These recep-
tors are responsible for the irritating effect of chemicals 
such as ammonia on the mucous membranes of the 
nose (Dhaka et al., 2009). TRPV1 receptors also appear 
to play a role in regulation of body temperature. In ad-
dition, Ghilardi et al. (2005) found that a drug that 
blocks TRPV1 receptors reduced pain in patients with 
bone cancer, which is apparently caused by the produc-
tion of acid by the tumors.
Another type of nociceptive fiber contains TRPA1 
receptors, which, as we saw earlier in this chapter, are 
found in the cilia of auditory and vestibular hair cells. 
TRPA1 receptors are sensitive to pungent irritants found 
in mustard oil, wintergreen oil, horseradish, and garlic 
and to a variety of environmental irritants, including 
those found in vehicle exhaust and tear gas (Bautista et 
al., 2006; Nilius et al., 2007). The primary function of 
this receptor appears to be to provide information about 
the presence of chemicals that produce inflammation.
Itch
Another noxious sensation, itch (or, more formally, pru-
ritus) is caused by skin irritation. Itch was defined by a 

236	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
objects by touch. However, unlike patient E. C., he 
could draw objects that he touched even though he 
could not recognize what they were. (See Figure 7.28.) 
The fact that he could draw the objects means that his 
ability to perceive three-dimensional objects by touch 
must have been intact. However, the brain damage 
prevented the information analyzed by the somatosen-
sory association cortex to be transmitted to parts of 
the brain responsible for control of language—and 
for consciousness.
matter of the spinal cord to nuclei in the lower medulla. 
From there, axons cross the brain and ascend through 
the medial lemniscus to the ventral posterior nuclei of the 
thalamus, the relay nuclei for somatosensation. Axons 
from the thalamus project to the primary somatosensory 
cortex, which in turn sends axons to the secondary  
somatosensory cortex. In contrast, axons that convey 
poorly localized information, such as pain or tempera-
ture, form synapses with other neurons as soon as they 
enter the spinal cord. The axons of these neurons cross 
to the other side of the spinal cord and ascend through 
the spinothalamic tract to the ventral posterior nuclei of 
the thalamus. (See Figure 7.27.)
Recall from Chapter 6 that the primary visual cortex 
contains columns of cells, each of which responds to 
particular features, such as orientation, ocular domi-
nance, or spatial frequency. Within these columns are 
blobs that contain cells that respond to particular colors. 
The somatosensory cortex also has a columnar arrange-
ment; in fact, cortical columns were discovered there by 
Mountcastle (1957) before they were found in the visual 
and auditory cortex. Within a column, neurons respond 
to a particular type of stimulus (for example, tempera-
ture or pressure) applied to a particular part of the body.
Dykes (1983) has reviewed research indicating that 
the primary and secondary somatosensory cortical areas 
are divided into at least five (and perhaps as many as 
ten) different maps of the body surface. Within each 
map, cells respond to a particular submodality of so-
matosensory receptors. Separate areas have been identi-
fied that respond to slowly adapting cutaneous recep-
tors, rapidly adapting cutaneous receptors, receptors 
that detect changes in muscle length, receptors located 
in the joints, and Pacinian corpuscles.
As we saw in Chapter 6, damage to the visual asso-
ciation cortex can cause visual agnosia, and as we saw 
earlier in this chapter, damage to the auditory associa-
tion cortex can cause auditory agnosia. You will not be 
surprised to learn that damage to the somatosensory 
association cortex can cause tactile agnosia. Reed,  
Caselli, and Farah (1996) described patient E. C., a 
woman with left parietal lobe damage who was unable to 
recognize common objects by touch. For example, the 
patient identified a pine cone as a brush, a ribbon as a 
rubber band, and a snail shell as a bottle cap. The deficit 
was not due to a simple loss of tactile sensitivity; the  
patient was still sensitive to light touch and to warm and 
cold objects, and she could easily discriminate objects by 
their size, weight, and roughness.
Nakamura et al. (1998) described patient M. T., 
who had a different type of tactile agnosia. Patient M. T. 
had bilateral lesions of the angular gyrus, a region of 
the parietal lobe surrounding the caudal end of the 
lateral fissure. This patient, like patient E. C., had 
normal tactile sensitivity, but he could not identify 
figure 7.27  Somatosensory Pathways
The figure shows the somatosensory pathways from the 
spinal cord to the somatosensory cortex. Note that 
precisely localized information (such as fine touch) and 
imprecisely localized information (such as pain and 
temperature) are transmitted by different pathways.
Primary somatosensory
cortex
Ventral posterior
nucleus of thalamus
Medial
lemniscus
Spinothalamic
tract (pain,
temperature)
Nuclei of the
dorsal columns
Dorsal columns
(precise touch,
kinesthesia)
Dorsal root
ganglion
Spinal Cord
Medulla
Midbrain

	
Somatosenses	
237
Perception of Pain
Pain is a curious phenomenon. It is more than a mere 
sensation; it can be defined only by some sort of with-
drawal reaction or, in humans, by verbal report. Pain 
can be modified by opiates, by hypnosis, by the adminis-
tration of pharmacologically inert sugar pills, by emo-
tions, and even by other forms of stimulation, such as 
acupuncture. Recent research efforts have made re-
markable progress in discovering the physiological bases 
of these phenomena.
We might reasonably ask why we experience pain. 
The answer is that in most cases pain serves a construc-
tive role. For example, inflammation, which often ac-
companies injuries to skin or muscle, greatly increases 
sensitivity of the inflamed region to painful stimuli. This 
effect motivates the individual to minimize movement 
of the injured part and avoid contact with other objects. 
The effect is to reduce the likelihood of further injury.
Cox et al. (2006) studied three families from north-
ern Pakistan whose members included several people 
with a complete absence of pain and discovered the loca-
tion of the gene responsible for this disorder. The gene, 
an autosomal recessive allele located on chromosome 2, 
encodes for a voltage-dependent sodium channel, 
Nax1.7. The case that brought the families to their atten-
tion was a 10-year-old boy who performed a “street the-
ater” during which he would thrust knives through his 
arms and walk on burning coals without feeling any pain. 
He died just before his fourteenth birthday after jump-
ing off the roof of a house. All six of the affected people 
in the three families had injuries to their lips or tongues 
caused by self-inflicted bites. They all suffered from 
bruises and cuts, and many sustained bone fractures that 
they did not notice until the injuries impaired their mo-
bility. Despite their total lack of pain from any type of 
noxious stimulus, they had normal sensations of touch, 
warmth, coolness, proprioception, tickle, and pressure.
Some environmental events diminish the percep-
tion of pain. For example, Beecher (1959) noted that 
many wounded American soldiers back from the battle 
at Anzio, Italy, during World War II reported that they 
felt no pain from their wounds. They did not even want 
medication. It would appear that their perception of 
pain was diminished by the relief they felt from surviving 
such a terrible ordeal. There are other instances in 
which people report the perception of pain but are not 
bothered by it. Some tranquilizers have this effect, and 
damage to parts of the brain does too.
Pain appears to have three different perceptual  
and behavioral effects (Price, 2000). First is the sensory 
component—the pure perception of the intensity of a 
painful stimulus. The second component is the immedi-
ate emotional consequences of pain—the unpleasant-
ness or degree to which the individual is bothered by 
As I mentioned earlier, recognition of objects by 
touch requires cooperation between the somatosensory 
and motor systems. When we attempt to identify objects 
by touch alone, we explore them with moving fingers. 
Valenza et al. (2001) reported the case of a patient with 
brain damage to the right hemisphere that produced a 
disorder they called tactile apraxia. As we will see in 
Chapter 8, apraxia refers to a difficulty in carrying out 
purposeful movements in the absence of paralysis or 
muscular weakness. When the experimenters gave the 
patient objects to identify by touch with her left hand, 
the patient explored the objects with her fingers in a 
disorganized fashion. (Exploration and identification 
using her right hand were normal.) If the experiment-
ers guided the patient’s fingers and explored an object 
the way people normally do, she was able to recognize 
the object’s shape. Thus, her deficit was caused by a 
movement disorder, not by damage to brain mecha-
nisms involved in tactile perception.
figure 7.28  Tactile Agnosia
(a) Drawings of wrenches felt but not seen by M. T., 
Although the patient did not recognize the objects 
as wrenches, he was able to draw them accurately. 
(b) Drawings of objects felt but not seen by E. C. 
The patient could neither recognize the objects by 
touch nor draw them accurately.
(From Nakamura, J., Endo, K., Sumida, T., and Hasegawa, T. Cortex, 1998,  
34, 375–388, and Reed, C. L., Caselli, R. J., and Farah, M. J. Brain, 1996, 119, 
875–888. Reprinted with permission.)
(a)
Plug
adaptor
Staple
remover
Casette tape
(b)
(a)
Plug
adaptor
Staple
remover
Casette tape
(b)

238	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
water. Under one condition, the researchers used hypno-
sis to diminish the unpleasantness of the pain. The hyp-
nosis worked; the subjects said that the pain was less  
unpleasant, even though it was still as intense. Meanwhile,  
the investigators used a PET scanner to measure regional 
activation of the brain. They found that the painful stim-
ulus increased the activity of both the primary somato-
sensory cortex and the ACC. When the subjects were 
hypnotized and found the pain less unpleasant, the activ-
ity of the ACC decreased, but the activity of the primary 
somatosensory cortex remained high. Presumably, the 
primary somatosensory cortex is involved in the percep-
tion of pain, and the ACC is involved in its immediate 
emotional effects—its unpleasantness. (See Figure 7.30.)
In another study from the same laboratory, Hofbauer 
et al. (2001) produced the opposite effect. They presented 
subjects with a painful stimulus and used hypnotic sugges-
tion to reduce the perceived intensity of the pain. They 
found that the suggestion reduced subjects’ ratings of pain  
and also decreased the activation of the somatosensory 
cortex. Thus, changes in perceived intensity of pain are 
reflected in changes in activation of the somatosensory 
cortex, whereas changes in perceived unpleasantness of 
pain is reflected in changes in activation of the ACC.
Several functional-imaging studies have shown that 
under certain conditions, stimuli associated with pain 
can activate the ACC even when no actual painful stimu-
lus is applied. Osaka et al. (2004) found that the ACC 
was activated when subjects heard Japanese words that 
vividly denote various types of pain (for example, a 
throbbing pain, a splitting headache, or the pain caused 
by being stuck with thorns). In a test of romantically  
involved couples, Singer et al. (2004) found that when 
women received a painful electrical shock to the back of 
their hand, their ACC, anterior insular cortex, thalamus, 
and somatosensory cortex became active. When they saw 
their partners receive a painful shock but did not receive 
one themselves, the same regions (except for the  
somatosensory cortex) became active. Thus, the emotional 
component of pain—in this case, a vicarious experience 
of pain, provoked by empathy with the feelings of some-
one a person loved—caused responses in the brain similar 
to the ones caused by actual pain. Just as we saw in the 
study by Rainville et al. (1997), the somatosensory cortex 
is activated only by an actual noxious stimulus.
The final component of pain—the emotional con-
sequences of chronic pain—appears to involve the pre-
frontal cortex. As we will see in Chapter 11, damage to 
the prefrontal cortex impairs people’s ability to make 
plans for the future and to recognize the personal sig-
nificance of situations in which they are involved. Along 
with the general lack of insight, people with prefrontal 
damage tend not to be concerned with the implications 
of chronic conditions—including chronic pain—for 
their future.
the painful stimulus. It is this characteristic that was re-
duced in some of the soldiers at Anzio. The third com-
ponent is the long-term emotional implications of 
chronic pain—the threat that such pain represents to 
one’s future comfort and well-being.
These three components of pain appear to involve 
different brain mechanisms. The purely sensory compo-
nent of pain is mediated by a pathway from the spinal 
cord to the ventral posterolateral thalamus to the pri-
mary and secondary somatosensory cortex. The immedi-
ate emotional component of pain appears to be medi-
ated by pathways that reach the anterior cingulate cortex 
(ACC) and insular cortex. The long-term emotional 
component appears to be mediated by pathways that 
reach the prefrontal cortex. (See Figure 7.29.)
Let’s look at some evidence for brain mechanisms 
involved in short-term and long-term emotional re-
sponses to pain. Several studies have found that painful 
stimuli activate the insular cortex and the ACC. In addi-
tion, Ostrowsky et al. (2002) found that electrical stimu-
lation of the insular cortex caused reports of painful 
burning and stinging sensations. Damage to this region 
decreases people’s emotional response to pain (Berthier, 
Starkstein, and Leiguarda, 1988): They continue to feel 
the pain but do not seem to recognize that it is harmful. 
They do not withdraw from pain or the threat of pain.
Rainville et al. (1997) produced pain sensations in 
human subjects by having them put their arms in ice 
figure 7.29  The Three Components of Pain
A simplified, schematic diagram shows the brain 
mechanisms involved in the three components of pain: 
the sensory component, the immediate emotional 
component, and the long-term emotional component.
(Adapted from Price, D. B. Science, 2000, 288, 1769–1772.)
Primary
somatosensory
cortex
Insular
cortex
Prefrontal
cortex
Anterior
cingulate
cortex
Dorsomedial
thalamic nucleus
Ventral posterior
thalamic nucleus
Secondary
somatosensory
cortex
Nociceptive
information
from spinal
cord
Long-term
emotional
implications
Unpleasantness
(immediate emotional
consequences)
Pain sensations
(sensory component)

	
Somatosenses	
239
phantom limbs, including pain, pressure, warmth, cold, 
wetness, itching, sweatiness, and prickliness.
The classic explanation for phantom limbs has been 
activity of the sensory axons belonging to the amputated 
limb. Presumably, the nervous system interprets this ac-
tivity as coming from the missing limb. When nerves are 
cut and connections cannot be reestablished between 
the proximal and distal portions, the cut ends of the 
proximal portions form nodules known as neuromas. 
The treatment for phantom pain has been to cut the 
nerves above these neuromas, to cut the dorsal roots 
that bring the afferent information from these nerves 
into the spinal cord, or to make lesions in somatosen-
sory pathways in the spinal cord, thalamus, or cerebral 
cortex. Sometimes these procedures work for a while, 
but often the pain returns.
Melzak (1992) suggested that the phantom limb 
sensation is inherent in the organization of the parietal 
cortex. As we saw in the discussion of unilateral neglect 
in Chapter 1, the parietal cortex is involved in our aware-
ness of our own bodies. Indeed, people with lesions of 
the parietal lobe (especially in the right hemisphere) 
have been known to push their own leg out of bed, be-
lieving that it belongs to someone else. Melzak reports 
that some people who were born with missing limbs 
nevertheless experience phantom limb sensations, 
which would suggest that our brains are genetically pro-
grammed to provide sensations for all four limbs.
Endogenous Modification  
of Pain Sensitivity
For many years, investigators have known that percep-
tion of pain can be modified by environmental stimuli. 
Recent work, beginning in the 1970s, has revealed the 
existence of neural circuits whose activity can produce 
analgesia. A variety of environmental stimuli can acti-
vate these analgesia-producing circuits. Most of these 
stimuli cause the release of the endogenous opioids, 
which were described in Chapter 4.
Electrical stimulation of particular locations within 
the brain can cause analgesia, which can even be pro-
found enough to serve as an anesthetic for surgery in 
rats (Reynolds, 1969). The most effective locations appear 
to be within the periaqueductal gray matter and in the 
rostroventral medulla. For example, Mayer and Liebes-
kind (1974) reported that electrical stimulation of the 
periaqueductal gray matter produced analgesia in rats 
equivalent to that produced by at least 10 milligrams 
(mg) of morphine per kilogram of body weight, which is 
a large dose. The technique has even found an applica-
tion in reducing severe, chronic pain in humans: Fine 
A particularly interesting form of pain sensation oc-
curs after a limb has been amputated. After the limb is 
gone, up to 70 percent of amputees report that they feel as 
though the missing limb still exists and that it often hurts. 
This phenomenon is referred to as the phantom limb 
(Melzak, 1992; Ramachandran and Hirstein, 1998). Peo-
ple with phantom limbs report that the limb feels very real, 
and they often say that if they try to reach out with it, it feels 
as though it were responding. Sometimes, they perceive it 
as sticking out, and they may feel compelled to avoid 
knocking it against the side of a doorframe or sleeping in 
a position that would make it come between them and the 
mattress. People have reported all sorts of sensations in 
figure 7.30  Sensory and Emotional Components  
of Pain
The PET scans show brain regions that respond to pain. 
Top: Dorsal views of the brain. Activation of the primary 
somatosensory cortex (circled in red) by a painful stimulus 
was not affected by a hypnotically suggested reduction in 
unpleasantness of a painful stimulus, indicating that this 
region responded to the sensory component of pain. 
Bottom: Midsagittal views of the brain. The anterior 
cingulate cortex (circled in red) showed much less 
activation when the unpleasantness of the painful 
stimulus was reduced by hypnotic suggestion.
(From Rainville, P., Duncan, G. H., Price, D. D., Carrier, Benoit, and Bushnell, 
M. C. Science, 1997, 277, 968–971. Copyright © American Association for the 
Advancement of Science. Reprinted with permission.)
x phantom limb  Sensations that appear to originate in a limb 
that has been amputated.

240	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
some people take a medication that they believe will re-
duce pain, it triggers the release of endogenous opioids 
and actually does so. This effect is eliminated if the peo-
ple are given an injection of naloxone, a drug that blocks 
opiate receptors (Eippert et al., 2009). Thus, for some 
people a placebo is not pharmacologically inert—it has a 
physiological effect. The placebo effect may be mediated 
through connections of the frontal cortex with the peri-
aqueductal gray matter. A functional-imaging study by 
Zubieta et al. (2005) found that placebo-induced analge-
sia did indeed cause the release of endogenous opiates. 
They used a PET scanner to detect the presence of 
μ-opioid neurotransmission in the brains of people who 
responded to the effects of a placebo. As Figure 7.32 
shows, several regions of the brain, including the anterior 
cingulate cortex and insular cortex, showed evidence of 
increased endogenous opioid activity. (See Figure 7.32.)
An interesting study by Waber et al. (2008) found 
that the efficacy of a placebo was directly related to its 
perceived value. Volunteers were given a placebo pill 
that was alleged to reduce pain. Some people were told 
that the pills normally cost $2.50 each, and others were 
told that the price had been discounted to 10 cents 
each. Before and after taking the pill, the subjects  
received electric shocks to their wrists and rated the  
intensity of the pain that the shocks produced. As Figure 
7.33 shows, subjects who believed that they had received 
an expensive pill showed a stronger reduction in pain 
perception than those who believed they had received 
an inexpensive one. (See Figure 7.33.)
A functional-imaging study by Wager et al. (2004) 
supports the suggestion that the prefrontal cortex 
wires are surgically implanted in parts of the central 
nervous system and attached to a radio-controlled device 
that permits the patient to administer electrical stimula-
tion when necessary (Kumar, Wyant, and Nath, 1990).
Analgesic brain stimulation apparently triggers the 
neural mechanisms that reduce pain, primarily by caus-
ing endogenous opioids to be released. Basbaum and 
Fields (1978, 1984), who summarized their work and 
that of others, proposed a neural circuit that mediates 
opiate-induced analgesia. Basically, they proposed the 
following: Endogenous opioids (released by environ-
mental stimuli or administered as a drug) stimulate opi-
ate receptors on neurons in the periaqueductal gray 
matter. Because the effect of opiates appears to be  
inhibitory (Nicoll, Alger, and Jahr, 1980), Basbaum and 
Fields proposed that the neurons that contain opiate 
receptors are themselves inhibitory interneurons. Thus, 
the administration of opiates activates the neurons on 
which these interneurons synapse. (See Figure 7.31.)
Neurons in the periaqueductal gray matter send 
axons to the nucleus raphe magnus, located in the me-
dulla. The neurons in this nucleus send axons to the 
dorsal horn of the spinal cord gray matter; destruction 
of these axons eliminates analgesia induced by an injec-
tion of morphine. The inhibitory effects of these neu-
rons apparently involve one or two interneurons in the 
spinal cord. (Look again at Figure 7.31.)
Pain sensitivity can be regulated by direct neural 
connections, as well as by secretion of the endogenous 
opioids. The periaqueductal gray matter receives inputs 
from the frontal cortex, amygdala, and hypothalamus 
(Beitz, 1982; Mantyh, 1983). These inputs permit learn-
ing and emotional reactions to affect an animal’s respon-
siveness to pain even without the secretion of opioids.
Pain can be reduced, at least in some people, by  
administering a pharmacologically inert placebo. When 
figure 7.31  Opiate-Induced Analgesia
The schematic shows the neural circuit that mediates opiate-induced analgesia,  
as hypothesized by Basbaum and Fields (1978).
Opiates inhibit
activity of inhibitory
neuron, thus removing
inhibition on neuron
that communicates
with nucleus raphe magnus
To
brain
Axon contains
opiate receptors
Pain
pathway
Cell body in
dorsal root ganglion
Pain
receptor
Interneurons inhibit
neurons that transmit
pain messages to brain
Dorsal horn
of spinal cord
gray matter
Nucleus
raphe
magnus
in medulla
Periaqueductal
gray matter
in midbrain
x nucleus raphe magnus  A nucleus of the raphe that contains 
serotonin-secreting neurons that project to the dorsal gray matter 
of the spinal cord and is involved in analgesia produced by opiates.

	
Somatosenses	
241
activity in the prefrontal cortex and the periaqueductal 
gray matter of the midbrain. Presumably, the expectation 
of decreased sensitivity to pain caused the increased 
activity of the prefrontal cortex, and connections  
of this region with the periaqueductal gray matter  
activated endogenous mechanisms of analgesia. (See 
Figure 7.34.)
It appears that a considerable amount of neural 
circuitry is devoted to reducing the intensity of pain. 
What functions do these circuits perform? When an ani-
mal encounters a noxious stimulus, the animal usually 
stops what it is doing and engages in withdrawal or  
escape behaviors. Obviously, these responses are quite 
appropriate. However, they are sometimes counterpro-
ductive. For example, males fighting for access to  
females during mating season will fail to pass on their 
genes if pain elicits withdrawal responses that interfere 
with fighting. In fact, fighting and sexual activity both 
stimulate brain mechanisms of analgesia.
Komisaruk and Larsson (1971) found that gentle 
probing of a rat’s vagina with a glass rod produced anal-
gesia. Such probing also increases the activity of neu-
rons in the periaqueductal gray matter and decreases 
the responsiveness of neurons in the ventrobasal thala-
mus to painful stimulation (Komisaruk and Steinman, 
1987). The phenomenon also occurs in humans; Whip-
ple and Komisaruk (1988) found that self-administered 
vaginal stimulation reduces sensitivity to painful stimuli 
but not to neutral tactile stimuli. Presumably, copula-
tion triggers analgesic mechanisms. The adaptive sig-
nificance of this phenomenon is clear: Painful stimuli 
encountered during the course of copulation are less 
likely to cause the behavior to be interrupted; thus, the 
chances of pregnancy are increased.
plays a role in placebo analgesia. They administered 
painful stimuli (heat or electrical shocks) to the skin 
with or without the application of an “analgesic” skin 
cream that was actually an unmedicated placebo. 
They observed a placebo effect—reports of less in-
tense pain and decreased activity in the primary pain-
reactive regions of the brain, including the thalamus, 
ACC, and insular cortex. They also observed increased 
figure 7.32  Effects of a Placebo on μ-Opioid 
Neurotransmission
The figure shows the brains of people who responded to 
the effects of analgesic placebo. ACC = anterior 
cingulate cortex, DLPFC = dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, 
NAC = nucleus accumbens.
(From Zubieta, J.-K., Bueller, J. A., Jackson, L. R., Scott, D .J., Xu, Y., Koeppe, 
R. A., Nichols, T. E., and Stohler, C. S. Journal of Neuroscience, 2005, 25, 7754–
7762. Reprinted with permission.)
DLPFC
ACC
Insula
Insula
Low
High
-opioid activity
NAC
µ
figure 7.33  Effect of Perceived Price of a Drug 
on Placebo Analgesia
The graph shows that subjects reported less pain 
reduction from a placebo when they thought it was 
priced at a discount.
40
20
15
30
35
25
10
5
0
–5
30
20
10
50
60
70
80
Shock intensity (volts)
Strength of placebo pain reduction
Regular
price
Low price
figure 7.34  The Placebo Effect
Functional MRI scans show increased activity in the 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and the periaqueductal gray 
matter of the midbrain of subjects who showed decrease 
sensitivity to pain in response to administration of a placebo.
(From Wager, T. D., Rilling, J. K., Smith, E. E., Sokolik, A., Casey, K. L., Davidson, 
R. J., Kosslyn, S. M., Rose, R. M., and Cohen, J. D. Science, 2004, 303, 1162–1166. 
Copyright © American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted 
with permission.)
Midbrain
Dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex

242	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
Section Summary
Somatosenses
Cutaneous sensory information is provided by special-
ized receptors in the skin. Glabrous skin is the hairless 
skin on the palms and soles of the feet. Cutaneous 
receptors in this skin are involved with touching and 
exploring items in the environment and in and manip-
ulating objects. Merkel’s disks provide information 
about form and roughness, especially to the finger-
tips. Ruffini corpuscles provide information about 
static forces to the skin and about stretching of the 
skin, which contributes to kinesthetic feedback. 
Meissner’s corpuscles provide information about 
edge contours and to Braille-like stimuli, especially to 
the fingertips. Pacinian corpuscles provide informa-
tion about vibration, especially that detected by con-
tact by the ends of elongated objects such as tools 
with other objects. Painful stimuli and changes in  
temperature are detected by free nerve endings.
When the dendrites of mechanoreceptors bend, 
ion channels open, producing a receptor potential. 
Although most tactile information is transmitted to 
the CNS via fast-conducting myelinated axons, gentle 
stroking produces a pleasant sensation mediated by 
small, unmyelinated axons. This information is 
received by the insular cortex, a region associated 
with emotional responses.
Unless the skin is moving, tactile sensation pro-
vides little information about the nature of objects we 
touch. Movement and manipulation provide informa-
tion about the shape, mass, texture, and other physi-
cal characteristics of objects we feel. Tactile experi-
ence, such as that gained by musicians, increases the 
portion of the somatosensory cortex devoted to the 
fingers involved in this experience.
Temperature receptors adapt to the ambient  
temperature; moderate changes in skin temperature 
are soon perceived as neutral, and deviations above 
or below this temperature are perceived as warmth or 
coolness. Transduction of different ranges of tempera-
tures is accomplished by six members of the TRP  
(transient receptor potential) family of receptors. One 
of the coolness receptors, TRPM8, also responds to 
menthol and is involved in responsiveness to environ-
mental cold. There are at least three different types of 
pain receptors: high-threshold mechanoreceptors; fibers 
with capsaicin receptors (TRPV1 receptors), which 
detect extremes of heat, acids, and the presence of 
capsaicin; and fibers with TRPA1 receptors, which are 
sensitive to chemical irritants and inflammation. Itch is 
an unpleasant sensation conveyed by two different 
types of unknown receptors. Pain and itch are mutually 
inhibitory.
Precise, well-localized somatosensory information 
is conveyed by a pathway through the dorsal columns 
and their nuclei and the medial lemniscus, connecting 
the dorsal column nuclei with the ventral posterior 
nuclei of the thalamus. Information about pain and 
temperature ascends the spinal cord through the  
spinothalamic system. Organic sensibility reaches the 
central nervous system by means of axons that travel 
through nerves of the autonomic nervous systems.
The neurons in the primary somatosensory cortex 
are topographically arranged, according to the part of 
the body from which they receive sensory information 
(somatotopic representation). Columns within the 
somatosensory cortex respond to a particular type of 
stimulus from a particular region of the body. 
Different types of somatosensory receptors send their 
information to separate areas of the somatosensory 
cortex. Damage to the somatosensory association 
cortex can cause tactile agnosia, inability to recognize 
common objects by means of touch. Tactile apraxia 
refers to difficulty exploring objects with the fingers.
A particular voltage-dependent sodium channel, 
Nax1.7, plays an essential role in pain sensation. 
Mutations of the gene for this protein produce total 
insensitivity to pain. Pain perception is not a simple 
function of stimulation of pain receptors; it is a com-
plex phenomenon with sensory and emotional com-
ponents that can be modified by experience and the 
immediate environment. The sensory component is 
mediated by the primary and secondary somatosen-
sory cortex, the immediate emotional component 
appears to be mediated by the anterior cingulate  
cortex and the insular cortex, and the long-term  
emotional component appears to be mediated by  
the prefrontal cortex. Functional-imaging studies 
using hypnotic suggestion found that a decrease in 
the sensory component of pain reduced activation of 
the somatosensory cortex and that reduction of the 
unpleasantness of pain reduced the activation of the 
anterior cingulate cortex. The phantom limb phenom-
enon, which often is accompanied by phantom pain, 

	
Gustation	
243
family; lions, tigers, leopards, and house cats do not  
detect sweetness—but then, none of the food they nor-
mally eat is sweet.) Clearly, sweetness receptors are food 
detectors. Most sweet-tasting foods, such as fruits and 
some vegetables, are safe to eat (Ramirez, 1990). Salti-
ness receptors detect the presence of sodium chloride. 
In some environments, inadequate amounts of this min-
eral are obtained from the usual source of food, so  
sodium chloride detectors help the animal to detect its 
presence. Injuries that cause bleeding deplete an organ-
ism of its supply of sodium rapidly, so the ability to find 
it quickly can be critical. In recent years, researchers 
have recognized the existence of a fifth taste quality: 
umami. Umami, a Japanese word that means “good 
taste,” refers to the taste of monosodium glutamate 
(MSG), a substance that is often used as a flavor  
enhancer in Asian cuisine (Kurihara, 1987; Scott and 
Plata-Salaman, 1991). The umami receptor detects the 
presence of glutamate, an amino acid found in proteins. 
Presumably, the umami receptor provides the ability to 
taste proteins, an important nutrient.
Most species of animals will readily ingest substances 
that taste sweet or somewhat salty. Similarly, they are  
attracted to foods that are rich in amino acids, which 
explains the use of MSG as a flavor enhancer. However, 
Gustation
The stimuli that we have encountered so far produce 
receptor potentials by imparting physical energy: ther-
mal, photic (involving light), or kinetic. However, the 
stimuli received by the last two senses to be studied— 
gustation and olfaction—interact with their receptors 
chemically. This section discusses the first of them:  
gustation.
The Stimuli
Gustation is clearly related to eating; this sense modality 
helps us to determine the nature of things we put in our 
mouths. For a substance to be tasted, molecules of it 
must dissolve in the saliva and stimulate the taste recep-
tors on the tongue. Tastes of different substances vary, 
though much less than we generally realize. There are 
only six qualities of taste: bitterness, sourness, sweetness, 
saltiness, umami, and fat. You are familiar with the first 
four qualities, and I will describe the fifth and sixth 
later. Flavor, as opposed to taste, is a composite of olfac-
tion and gustation. Much of the flavor of food depends 
on its odor; anosmic people (who lack the sense of smell) 
or people whose nostrils are stopped up have difficulty 
distinguishing between different foods by taste alone.
Most vertebrates possess gustatory systems that re-
spond to all six taste qualities. (An exception is the cat 
appears to be inherent in the organization of the  
parietal lobe.
Just as we have mechanisms to perceive pain, we 
have mechanisms to reduce it—to produce analgesia. 
In the appropriate circumstances, neurons in the peri-
aqueductal gray matter are stimulated through synap-
tic connections with the frontal cortex, amygdala, and 
hypothalamus. In addition, some neurosecretory cells 
in the brain release enkephalins, a class of endogenous 
opioids. Connections from the periaqueductal gray 
matter to the nucleus raphe magnus of the medulla 
activate serotonergic neurons located there. These 
neurons send axons to the dorsal horn of the spinal 
cord gray matter, where they inhibit the transmission of 
pain information to the brain. In humans, chronic pain 
is sometimes treated by implanting electrodes in the 
periaqueductal gray matter or the thalamus and per-
mitting the patients to stimulate the brain through 
these electrodes when the pain becomes severe.
Functional-imaging studies suggest that the  
placebo effect may be caused by increased activity 
of the prefrontal cortex, which activates the periaq-
ueductal gray matter and inhibits the activity of the 
anterior cingulate cortex and insular cortex, inducing 
analgesia. Analgesia occurs when it is important for 
an animal to continue a behavior that would tend  
to be inhibited by pain—for example, mating or 
fighting. The administration of a placebo can also 
produce analgesia. Because this effect is blocked by 
naloxone, it must involve the release of endogenous 
opioids.
 Thought Question
Our fingertips and our lips are the most sensitive 
parts of our bodies; relatively large amounts of the 
primary somatosensory cortex are devoted to analyz-
ing information from these parts of the body. It is 
easy to understand why fingertips are so sensitive: 
We use them to explore object by touch. But why are 
our lips so sensitive? Does it have something to do 
with eating?
x umami (oo mah mee)  The taste sensation produced by  
glutamate.

244	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
into the saliva that coats the tongue. Tight junctions 
between adjacent taste cells prevent substances in the 
saliva from diffusing freely into the taste bud itself.  
Figure 7.35 shows the appearance of a circumvallate 
papilla; a cross section through the surrounding trench 
contains a taste bud. (See Figure 7.35.)
Taste receptor cells form synapses with dendrites of 
bipolar neurons whose axons convey gustatory informa-
tion to the brain through the seventh, ninth, and tenth 
cranial nerves. The neurotransmitter released by the 
receptor cells is adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the mol-
ecule produced by mitochondria that stores energy 
within cells (Finger et al., 2005). The receptor cells have 
a life span of only ten days. They quickly wear out, being 
directly exposed to a rather hostile environment. As 
they degenerate, they are replaced by newly developed 
cells; the dendrite of the bipolar neuron is passed on to 
the new cell (Beidler, 1970).
Perception of Gustatory Information
Transduction of taste is similar to the chemical transmis-
sion that takes place at synapses: The tasted molecule 
binds with the receptor and produces changes in mem-
brane permeability that cause receptor potentials. Dif-
ferent substances bind with different types of receptors, 
producing different taste sensations. In this section I will 
describe what we know about the nature of the mole-
cules with particular tastes and the receptors that detect 
their presence.
To taste salty, a substance must ionize. Although the 
best stimulus for saltiness receptors is sodium chloride 
(NaCl), a variety of salts containing metallic cations 
(such as Na+, K+, and Li+) with a small anion (such as 
Cl–, Br–, SO4
2–, or NO3
–) taste salty. The receptor for 
saltiness seems to be a simple sodium channel. When 
present in the saliva, sodium enters the taste cell and 
depolarizes it, triggering action potentials that cause the 
they will tend to avoid substances that taste sour or bitter. 
Because of bacterial activity, many foods become acidic 
when they spoil. In addition, most unripe fruits are 
acidic. Acidity tastes sour and causes an avoidance reac-
tion. (Of course, we have learned to make highly pre-
ferred mixtures of sweet and sour, such as lemonade.) 
Bitterness is almost universally avoided and cannot eas-
ily be improved by adding some sweetness. Many plants 
produce poisonous alkaloids, which protect them from 
being eaten by animals. Alkaloids taste bitter; thus, the 
bitterness receptor undoubtedly serves to warn animals 
away from these chemicals.
For many years, researchers have known that many 
species of animals (including our own) show a distinct 
preference for high-fat foods. Because there is not a 
distinct taste that is associated with the presence of fat, 
most investigators concluded that we detected fat by its 
odor and texture (“mouth feel”). However, Fukuwatari 
et al. (2003) found that rats whose olfactory sense was 
destroyed continued to show a preference for a liquid 
diet containing a long-chain fatty acid, one of the break-
down products of fat. When fats reach the tongue, some 
of these molecules are broken down into fatty acids by 
an enzyme called lingual lipase, which is found in the  
vicinity of taste buds. The activity of lingual lipase ensures 
that fatty acid detectors are stimulated when food con-
taining fat enters the mouth. Cartoni et al. (2010) iden-
tified two G protein-coupled receptors that appear to be 
responsible for detecting the presence of fatty acids in 
the mouth. The investigators found that mice with a 
targeted mutation against the genes responsible for the 
production of these receptors showed a decreased pref-
erence for fatty acids, and that responses of the taste 
nerves to fatty acids were also diminished.
Anatomy of the Taste Buds  
and Gustatory Cells
The tongue, palate, pharynx, and larynx contain  
approximately 10,000 taste buds. Most of these receptive 
organs are arranged around papillae, small protuber-
ances of the tongue. Fungiform papillae, located on the 
anterior two-thirds of the tongue, contain up to eight 
taste buds, along with receptors for pressure, touch, and 
temperature. Foliate papillae consist of up to eight paral-
lel folds along each edge of the back of the tongue.  
Approximately 1300 taste buds are located in these 
folds. Circumvallate papillae, arranged in an inverted V 
on the posterior third of the tongue, contain approxi-
mately 250 taste buds. They are shaped like little pla-
teaus surrounded by moatlike trenches. Taste buds con-
sist of groups of twenty to fifty receptor cells, specialized 
neurons arranged somewhat like the segments of an 
orange. Cilia are located at the end of each cell and 
project through the opening of the taste bud (the pore) 
figure 7.35  The Tongue
(a) Papillae on the surface of the tongue. (b) Taste buds.
Papilla
Surface of tongue
Taste
buds
Taste
receptors
Afferent
axons
(b)
(a)

	
Gustation	
245
researchers that bitterness and sweetness receptors may 
be similar. For example, the Seville orange rind con-
tains a glycoside (complex sugar) that tastes extremely 
bitter; the addition of a hydrogen ion to the molecule 
makes it taste intensely sweet (Horowitz and Gentili, 
1974). Some amino acids taste sweet. Indeed, the com-
mercial sweetener aspartame consists of just two amino 
acids: aspartate and phenylalanine.
Receptors sensitive to bitterness and sweetness are 
linked to a G protein known as gustducin, which is very 
similar in structure to transducin, the G protein involved 
in transduction of photic information in the retina.  
Receptors sensitive to umami are linked to both gustducin 
and transducin (McLaughlin et al., 1993; Wong, Gannon, 
and Margolskee, 1996; He et al., 2004). When a bitter 
molecule binds with the receptor, the G protein activates 
an enzyme that begins a cycle of chemical reactions that 
causes the release of ATP, the neurotransmitter of taste 
receptor cells.
Recent evidence has discovered two families of  
receptors responsible for detecting sweet, bitter, and 
umami tastes (see Scott, 2004, for a review). The first 
family, T1R, has three members: T1R1, T1R2, and T1R3, 
produced by three different genes. The sweet receptor 
consists of two components: T1R2 + T1R3. The umami 
receptors consists of T1R1 + T1R3. A given gustatory re-
ceptor cell can be sensitive to sweet or umami but not 
both. Bitter compounds are detected by the second fam-
ily of receptors, T2R, of which there are 30 members 
(Matsunami, Montmayeur, and Buck, 2000). A given gus-
tatory receptor cell sensitive to bitterness contains one of 
the many different varieties of T2R, which indicates that 
each cell can detect the presence of many different bitter- 
tasting molecules. As we saw, many compounds found  
cell to release a neurotransmitter (Avenet and Lindemann,  
1989; Kinnamon and Cummings, 1992). The best evi-
dence that sodium channels are involved is the fact that 
amiloride, a drug that is known to block sodium chan-
nels, prevents sodium chloride from activating taste cells 
and decreases sensations of saltiness. However, the drug 
does not completely block these sensations in humans, 
so most investigators believe that more than one type of 
receptor is involved (Schiffman, Lockhead, and Maes, 
1983; Ossebaard, Polet, and Smith, 1997).
Sourness receptors appear to respond to the hydro-
gen ions present in acidic solutions. However, because 
the sourness of a particular acid is not simply a function 
of the concentration of hydrogen ions, the anions must 
have an effect as well. The reason for this anion effect is 
not yet known. Huang et al. (2006) reported the discov-
ery of the sourness receptor: a transient receptor poten-
tial ion channel known as PKD2L1. (The unfortunate 
name for this channel is polycystic-kidney-disease-like ion 
channel.) Figure 7.36 shows activity recorded from nerves 
that serve the gustatory receptors of the tongues of nor-
mal mice and mice with a knockout of the gene for the 
PKD2L1 ion channel. As you can see, afferent taste fi-
bers of normal mice showed responses to five categories 
of taste stimuli, but PKD2L1 knockout mice showed no 
response to the acids. However, the responses of these 
mice to the other four categories of tastes were normal. 
(See Figure 7.36.)
The stimulus for sourness—the presence of acids—
is clear. However, bitter and sweet substances are more 
difficult to characterize. The typical stimulus for bitter-
ness is a plant alkaloid such as quinine; for sweetness it 
is a sugar such as glucose or fructose. The fact that some 
molecules elicit both sensations suggested to early  
figure 7.36  The Sourness Receptor
Responses were recorded from nerves that serve the gustatory receptors of the 
tongues of normal mice and mice with a knockout (KO) of the PKD2L1 transient 
receptor potential ion channel. Only sensitivity to sour-tasting substances is affected by 
the mutation.
(Adapted from Huang, A. L., Chen, X., Hoon, M.A., Chandrashekar, J., Guo, W., Tränker, D., Ryba, N. J. P., and Zuker, C. S. 
Nature, 2006, 442, 934–938.)
Sour
Sweet
Umami
Bitter
Salty
Normal
KO
Citric acid
Acetic acid
HCl
Saccharin
AceK
Glutamate
Quinine
NaCl

246	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
I mentioned earlier that cats are insensitive to sweet 
tastes. Li et al. (2005) discovered the reason for the  
absence of sweet sensitivity: The DNA of members of the 
cat family (the investigators tested domestic cats, tigers, 
and cheetahs) lacks functional genes that produce T1R2 
proteins, one of the components of sweet receptors. 
(Look again at Figure 7.37.) The investigators suggested 
that this mutation was probably an important event in the 
evolution of cats’ carnivorous behavior. Margolskee et al. 
(2007) found that T1R3 sweet receptors in the gut of mice 
detect the presence of sugar and artificial sweeteners and 
are involved in control of glucose absorption. Mice with a 
targeted mutation against the T1R3 gene were insensitive 
to the presence of sweet substances in the gut.
The Gustatory Pathway
Gustatory information is transmitted through cranial 
nerves 7, 9, and 10. Information from the anterior part 
of the tongue travels through the chorda tympani, a 
branch of the seventh cranial nerve (facial nerve). Taste 
receptors in the posterior part of the tongue send infor-
mation through the lingual (tongue) branch of the ninth 
cranial nerve (glossopharyngeal nerve); the tenth cranial 
nerve (vagus nerve) carries information from receptors 
of the palate and epiglottis. The chorda tympani gets its 
name because it passes through the middle ear just  
beneath the tympanic membrane. Because of its conve-
nient location, it is accessible to a recording or stimulating 
electrode. Investigators have even recorded from this 
nerve during the course of human ear operations.
The first relay station for taste is the nucleus of the 
solitary tract, located in the medulla. In primates the 
taste-sensitive neurons of this nucleus send their axons 
to the ventral posteromedial thalamic nucleus, a  
nucleus that also receives somatosensory information 
received from the trigeminal nerve (Beckstead, Morse, 
and Norgren, 1980). Thalamic taste-sensitive neurons 
send their axons to the primary gustatory cortex, which 
is located in the base of the frontal cortex and in the 
insular cortex (Pritchard et al., 1986). Neurons in this 
region project to the secondary gustatory cortex,  
located in the caudolateral orbitofrontal cortex (Rolls, 
Yaxley, and Sienkiewicz, 1990). Unlike most other sense 
modalities, taste is ipsilaterally represented in the brain; 
that is, the right side of the tongue projects to the right 
side of the brain, and the left side projects to the left. 
(See Figure 7.38.)
in nature that taste bitter to us are poisonous. Rather 
than entrusting detection of these compounds to a single 
receptor, the process of evolution has given us the ability 
to detect a wide variety of compounds with different  
molecular shapes. (See Figure 7.37.)
The T2R bitter receptor is also present in the mu-
cous membrane of the nose, where it detects irritants 
and bacteria (Tizzano et al., 2010). When they are stim-
ulated, these receptors trigger protective responses such 
as sneezing. Jeon et al. (2008) found that T2R bitter  
receptors in the gut may play a role in decreasing the 
absorption of toxic substances that have already been  
ingested.
figure 7.37  Structure of Taste Receptors
This schematic drawing of the structure of receptors 
responsible for detection of sweet, bitter, and umami tastes.
G protein
G protein
T1R2
G protein
T2R
T1R3
Sweet
T1R3
T1R1
Umami
Bitter
Sweet molecule
binds here
Bitter molecule
binds here
Glutamate
binds here
x chorda tympani  A branch of the facial nerve that passes beneath 
the eardrum; conveys taste information from the anterior part of the 
tongue and controls the secretion of some salivary glands.
x nucleus of the solitary tract  A nucleus of the medulla that 
receives information from visceral organs and from the gustatory 
system.

	
Gustation	
247
Besides receiving information from taste recep-
tors, the gustatory cortex also receives thermal,  
mechanical, visceral, and nociceptive (painful) stim-
uli, which undoubtedly play a role in determining the 
palatability of food (Carleton, Accola, and Simon, 
2010). Gustatory information also reaches the amyg-
dala and the hypothalamus and adjacent basal fore-
brain (Nauta, 1964; Russchen, Amaral, and Price, 
1986). Many investigators believe that the hypotha-
lamic pathway plays a role in mediating the reinforc-
ing effects of sweet, umami, and slightly salty tastes. In 
fact, some neurons in the hypothalamus respond to 
sweet stimuli only when the animal is hungry (Rolls et 
al., 1986).
In a functional-imaging study, Schoenfeld et al. 
(2004) had people sip water that was flavored with 
sweet, sour, bitter, and umami tastes. The investigators 
found that tasting each flavor activated different regions 
in the primary gustatory area of the insular cortex.  
Although the locations of the taste-responsive regions 
differed from subject to subject, the same pattern was 
seen when a given subject was tested on different occa-
sions. Thus, the representation of tastes in the gustatory 
cortex is idiosyncratic but stable. (See Figure 7.39.)
figure 7.38  Neural Pathways of the Gustatory 
System
Amygdala
Chorda tympani
(branch of VIIth
nerve)
IXth nerve
Xth nerve
Caudal
medulla
Nucleus of the
solitary tract
Lateral
hypothalamus
Primary gustatory cortex
Ventral posteromedial
nucleus of thalamus
figure 7.39  Activation of the Primary Gustatory 
Cortex by Taste Stimuli
Functional MRI images of the brains of six subjects 
revealed that the responsive regions varied between 
subjects but were stable for each subject.
(From Schoenfeld, M. A., Neuer, G., Tempelmann, C., Schüssler, K., Noesselt, T., 
Hopf, J.-M., and Heinze, H.-J. Neuroscience, 2004, 127, 347–353 with permission 
from Elsevier.)
Sour
Bitter
Salty
Sweet
MSG
(umami)
Section Summary
Gustation
Taste receptors detect only six sensory qualities: bit-
terness, sourness, sweetness, saltiness, umami, and 
fat. Bitter foods often contain plant alkaloids, many of 
which are poisonous. Sour foods have usually under-
gone bacterial fermentation, which can produce toxins. 
On the other hand, sweet foods (such as fruits) are 
usually nutritious and safe to eat, and salty foods con-
tain an essential cation: sodium. The fact that people 
in affluent cultures today tend to ingest excessive 
(continued on next page)

248	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
prepared a scent trail—a string moistened with essen-
tial oil of chocolate and laid down in a grassy field. The 
subjects were blindfolded and wore earmuffs, knee-
pads, and gloves, which prevented them from using 
anything other than their noses to follow the scent trail. 
They did quite well, and they adopted the same zigzag 
strategy used by dogs. (See Figure 7.40.) As the authors 
wrote, these findings “suggest that the poor reputation 
of human olfaction may reflect, in part, behavioral de-
mands rather than ultimate abilities” (Porter et al., 
2007, p. 27).
The Stimulus
The stimulus for odor (known formally as odorants) con-
sists of volatile substances having a molecular weight in 
the range of approximately 15–300. Almost all odorous 
compounds are lipid soluble and of organic origin. 
However, many substances that meet these criteria have 
no odor at all, so we still have much to learn about the 
nature of odorants.
Anatomy of the Olfactory Apparatus
Our 6 million olfactory receptor cells reside within two 
patches of mucous membrane (the olfactory epithelium), 
Olfaction
Olfaction, the second chemical sense, helps us to iden-
tify food and avoid food that has spoiled and is unfit to 
eat. It helps the members of many species to track prey 
or detect predators and to identify friends, foes, and 
receptive mates. Although many other mammals, such 
as dogs, have more sensitive olfactory systems than hu-
mans do, we should not underrate our own. The olfac-
tory system is second only to the visual system in the 
number of sensory receptor cells, with an estimated 10 
million cells. We can smell some substances at lower 
concentrations than the most sensitive laboratory instru-
ments can detect.
For years I have told my students that one reason 
for the difference in sensitivity between our olfactory 
system and those of other mammals is that other mam-
mals put their noses where odors are the strongest—
just above the ground. For example, a dog following an 
odor trail sniffs along the ground, where the odors of a 
passing animal may have clung. Even a bloodhound’s 
nose would not be very useful if it were located five or 
six feet above the ground, as ours is. I was gratified to 
learn that a scientific study established the fact that 
when people sniff the ground as dogs do, their olfac-
tory system works much better. Porter et al. (2007) 
amounts of sweet and salty foods suggests that these 
taste qualities are naturally reinforcing. Umami, the 
taste of glutamate, identifies proteins.
Saltiness receptors appear to be simple sodium 
channels. Sourness receptors appear to detect the 
presence of hydrogen ions, which activate a transient 
receptor potential ion channel known as PKD2L1. 
Bitter, sweet, and umami tastes are detected by two 
families of receptors: sweetness by a receptor consisting 
of T1R2 + T1R3, umami by one consisting of T1R1 + 
T1R3, and bitterness by thirty different members of 
the T2R family. Two G protein-coupled receptors 
detect molecules of fatty acids produced when an 
enzyme, lingual lipase, breaks down some molecules 
of fat in the mouth.
Gustatory information from the anterior part of 
the tongue travels through the chorda tympani, a 
branch of the facial nerve that passes beneath the 
eardrum on its way to the brain. The posterior part of 
the tongue sends gustatory information through the 
glossopharyngeal nerve, and the palate and epiglottis 
send gustatory information through the vagus nerve. 
Gustatory information is received by the nucleus of 
the solitary tract (located in the medulla) and is 
relayed by the ventral posteromedial thalamus to the 
primary gustatory cortex in the basal frontal and insu-
lar areas. Different tastes activate different regions  
of the primary gustatory cortex. The caudolateral 
orbitofrontal cortex contains the secondary gustatory 
cortex. Gustatory information is also sent to the 
amygdala, hypothalamus, and basal forebrain.
 Thought Question
Bees and birds can taste sweet substances, but cats 
and alligators cannot. Obviously, the ability to taste 
particular substances is related to the range of foods 
a species eats. If, through the process of evolution, a 
species develops a greater range of foods, what do 
you think comes first: the food or the receptor? 
Would a species start eating something new (say, 
something with a sweet taste) and later develop the 
appropriate taste receptors, or would the taste recep-
tors evolve first and then lead the animal to a new 
taste?

	
Olfaction	
249
receptor cell sends a single axon into an olfactory bulb, 
where it forms synapses with dendrites of mitral cells 
(named for their resemblance to a bishop’s miter, or 
ceremonial headgear). These synapses take place in the 
complex axonal and dendritic arborizations called  
olfactory glomeruli (from glomus, “ball”). There are ap-
proximately 10,000 glomeruli, each of which receives 
input from a bundle of approximately 2000 axons. The 
axons of the mitral cells travel to the rest of the brain 
through the olfactory tracts. Some of these axons termi-
nate in other regions of the ipsilateral forebrain; others 
cross the brain and terminate in the contralateral olfac-
tory bulb.
Olfactory tract axons project directly to the 
amygdala and to two regions of the limbic cortex: the 
piriform cortex (the primary olfactory cortex) and 
the entorhinal cortex. (Look again at Figure 7.41.) 
The amygdala sends olfactory information to the  
hypothalamus, the entorhinal cortex sends it to the 
hippocampus, and the piriform cortex sends it to  
the hypothalamus and to the orbitofrontal cortex via 
the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus (Buck, 
1996; Shipley and Ennis, 1996). As you may recall, 
the orbitofrontal cortex also receives gustatory infor-
mation; thus, it may be involved in the combining of 
taste and olfaction into flavor. The hypothalamus 
also receives a considerable amount of olfactory  
information, which is probably important for the  
acceptance or rejection of food and for the olfactory 
control of reproductive processes seen in many species 
of mammals.
Most mammals have another organ that responds 
to chemicals in the environment: the vomeronasal  
organ. Because it plays an important role in animals’ 
responses to pheromones, chemicals produced by 
other animals that affect reproductive physiology and 
behavior, its structure and function are described in 
Chapter 10.
Efferent fibers from several locations in the brain 
enter the olfactory bulbs. These include acetylcholinergic, 
noradrenergic, dopaminergic, and serotonergic inputs 
(Shipley and Ennis, 1996).
each having an area of about 1 square inch. The olfac-
tory epithelium is located at the top of the nasal cavity, 
as shown in Figure 7.41. Less than 10 percent of the air 
that enters the nostrils reaches the olfactory epithe-
lium; a sniff is needed to sweep air upward into the 
nasal cavity so that it reaches the olfactory receptors.
The inset in Figure 7.41 illustrates a group of olfac-
tory receptor cells, along with their supporting cells. 
(See Inset, Figure 7.41.) Olfactory receptor cells are bipo-
lar neurons whose cell bodies lie within the olfactory 
mucosa that lines the cribriform plate, a bone at the base 
of the rostral part of the brain. There is a constant pro-
duction of new olfactory receptor cells, but their life is 
considerably longer than those of gustatory receptor 
cells. Supporting cells contain enzymes that destroy 
odorant molecules and thus help to prevent them from 
damaging the olfactory receptor cells.
Olfactory receptor cells send a process toward the 
surface of the mucosa, which divides into ten to twenty 
cilia that penetrate the layer of mucus. Odorous mole-
cules must dissolve in the mucus and stimulate receptor 
molecules on the olfactory cilia. Approximately thirty-
five bundles of axons, ensheathed by glial cells, enter 
the skull through small holes in the cribriform (“perfo-
rated”) plate. The olfactory mucosa also contains free 
nerve endings of trigeminal nerve axons; these nerve 
endings presumably mediate sensations of pain that can 
be produced by sniffing some irritating chemicals, such 
as ammonia.
The olfactory bulbs lie at the base of the brain on 
the ends of the stalklike olfactory tracts. Each olfactory 
figure 7.40  Scent-Tracking Behavior
The path followed by a dog and a human during the 
scent tracking is shown in red.
(From Porter, J., Craven, B., Khan, R. M., Chang, S.-J., Kang, I Judkewitz, B., 
Volpe, J., Settles, G., and Sobel, N. Nature Neuroscience, 2007, 10, 27–29.)
x olfactory epithelium  The epithelial tissue of the nasal sinus 
that covers the cribriform plate; contains the cilia of the olfactory 
receptors.
x olfactory bulb  The protrusion at the end of the olfactory tract; 
receives input from the olfactory receptors.
x mitral cell  A neuron located in the olfactory bulb that receives 
information from olfactory receptors; axons of mitral cells bring 
information to the rest of the brain.
x olfactory glomerulus (glow mare you luss)  A bundle of 
dendrites of mitral cells and the associated terminal buttons of the 
axons of olfactory receptors.

250	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
won a Nobel Prize for doing so). So far, olfactory recep-
tor genes have been isolated in more than twelve species 
of vertebrates, including mammals, birds, and amphibi-
ans (Mombaerts, 1999). Humans have 339 different ol-
factory receptor genes, and mice have 913 (Godfrey, 
Malnic, and Buck, 2004; Malnic, Godfrey, and Buck, 
2004). Molecules of odorant bind with olfactory recep-
tors, and the G proteins coupled to these receptors open 
sodium channels and produce depolarizing receptor  
potentials.
Perception of Specific Odors
For many years, recognition of specific odors has been 
an enigma. Humans can recognize up to 10,000 differ-
ent odorants, and other animals can probably recog-
nize even more (Shepherd, 1994). Even with 339 differ-
ent olfactory receptors, that leaves many odors 
unaccounted for. And every year, chemists synthesize 
new chemicals, many with odors unlike those that any-
one has previously detected. How can we use a rela-
tively small number of receptors to detect so many dif-
ferent odorants?
Transduction of Olfactory  
Information
For many years, researchers have recognized that olfac-
tory cilia contain receptors that are stimulated by mole-
cules of odorants, but the nature of the receptors was 
unknown. Jones and Reed (1989) identified a particular 
G protein, which they called Golf. This protein is able to 
activate an enzyme that catalyzes the synthesis of cyclic 
AMP, which, in turn, can open sodium channels and 
depolarize the membrane of the olfactory cell (Nakamura 
and Gold, 1987; Firestein, Zufall, and Shepherd, 1991; 
Menco et al., 1992).
As we saw in Chapter 2, G proteins serve as the link 
between metabotropic receptors and ion channels: 
When a ligand binds with a metabotropic receptor, the 
G protein either opens ion channels directly or does so 
indirectly, by triggering the production of a second mes-
senger. The discovery of Golf suggested that olfactory cilia 
contained odorant receptors linked to this G protein. 
Indeed, Buck and Axel (1991) used molecular genetics 
techniques and discovered a family of genes that code 
for a family of olfactory receptor proteins (and in 2004 
figure 7.41  The Olfactory System
To thalamus
orbitofrontal
cortex
To hypothalamus
Olfactory
bulb
Olfactory
mucosa
Turbinate
bones
Tongue
Cilia of olfactory
receptor cells
Supporting
cell
Olfactory
receptor
cell
Axons
To olfactory
bulb
Myelin
sheath
To amygdala
Pyriform and
entorhinal cortex
(primary olfactory
cortex)

	
Olfaction	
251
genes. Thus, two different types of olfactory receptor 
cells expressed barley lectin. This protein is transmitted 
from one neuron to others, with which it forms syn-
apses. Thus, it was carried to glomeruli and from there 
to a third set of neurons in the olfactory cortex. The 
investigators found that, just as retinotopic information 
is maintained in the visual system and tonotopic infor-
mation is maintained in the auditory system, “olfacto-
topic” information is maintained in the olfactory sys-
tem. That is, the particular glomeruli that receive 
information from particular olfactory receptors send 
this information to specific regions of olfactory cortex. 
These regions appeared to occur in identical locations 
in different mice.
Now let’s get back to the question I just posed: How 
can we use a relatively small number of receptors to de-
tect so many different odorants? The answer is that a 
particular odorant binds to more than one receptor. 
Thus, because a given glomerulus receives information 
from only one type of receptor, different odorants pro-
duce different patterns of activity in different glomeruli. 
Recognizing a particular odor, then, is a matter of rec-
ognizing a particular pattern of activity in the glomeruli. 
The task of chemical recognition is transformed into a 
task of spatial recognition.
Figure 7.43 illustrates this process (Malnic et al., 
1999). The left side of the figure shows the shapes of 
eight hypothetical odorants. The right side shows four 
hypothetical odorant receptor molecules. If a portion 
of the odorant molecule fits the binding site of the 
receptor molecule, it will activate it and stimulate the 
olfactory neuron. As you can see, each odorant mole-
cule fits the binding site of at least one of the receptors 
and in most cases fits more than one of them. Notice 
also that the pattern of receptors activated by each of 
the eight odorants is different, which means that if we 
know which pattern of receptors is activated, we know 
which odorant is present. Of course, even though a 
particular odorant might bind with several different 
types of receptor molecules, it might not bind equally 
well with each of them. For example, it might bind very 
well with one receptor molecule, moderately well with 
another, weakly with another, and so on. (See Figure 
7.43.) As we just saw, the spatial pattern of “olfacto-
topic” information is maintained in the olfactory cor-
tex. Presumably, the olfactory cortex recognizes par-
ticular odors by recognizing different patterns of 
activation there.
Evidence that supports this model was obtained by 
Johnson, Leon, and their colleagues (Johnson and 
Leon, 2007). The investigators presented a variety of 
odorants to rats and recorded the regions of activation 
on the surface of an exposed olfactory bulb. They 
found that different categories of molecules activated 
different regions of the olfactory bulb. Figure 7.44 
Before I answer this question, we should look more 
closely at the relationship between receptors, olfactory 
neurons, and the glomeruli to which the axons of these 
neurons project. First, the cilia of each olfactory neu-
ron contain only one type of receptor (Nef et al., 1992; 
Vassar, Ngai, and Axel, 1993). As we saw, each glomeru-
lus receives information from approximately two thou-
sand olfactory receptor cells. Ressler, Sullivan, and Buck 
(1994) discovered that each of these 2000 cells contains 
the same type of receptor molecule. Thus, there are as 
many types of glomeruli as there are types of receptor 
molecules. Furthermore, the location of particular 
types of glomeruli (defined by the type of receptor that 
sends information to them) appears to be the same in 
each of the olfactory bulbs in a given animal and may 
even be the same from one animal to another. (See 
Figure 7.42.)
An ingenious study by Zou et al. (2001) investi-
gated the specificity of olfactory information in the 
pathway from olfactory receptors to olfactory glomeruli 
to the olfactory cortex. To accomplish this feat, they 
inserted a gene for a transneuronal tracer protein (bar-
ley lectin) into the DNA of mice adjacent to two differ-
ent olfactory receptor genes. Because of the location of 
this gene, it was turned on only in olfactory receptor 
cells that produced one of the two selected receptor 
figure 7.42  Connections of Olfactory Receptor 
Cells with Glomeruli
Each glomerulus of the olfactory bulb receives 
information from only one type of receptor cell. Olfactory 
receptor cells of different colors contain different types of 
receptor molecules.
Olfactory bulb
Mitral cell
Axons of mitral cells
Glomerulus
Cribriform
plate
Olfactory
receptor
Cilia

252	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
shows the patterns of activity. Thus, particular charac-
teristics of odorant molecules are represented by par-
ticular patterns of activity in the olfactory bulbs. (See 
Figure 7.44.)
Although odorants are categorized according to 
their molecular characteristics within the olfactory 
bulb, the coding scheme changes at the level of the 
piriform cortex (the primary olfactory cortex). A func-
tional-imaging study with humans by Gottfried, Win-
ston, and Dolan (2006) found that groups of neurons 
in the anterior region represent the chemical struc-
tures of odorants, just as neurons in the olfactory bulb 
do, but groups of neurons in the posterior region rep-
resent the qualities of odorants. Another functional im-
aging study (Howard et al., 2009) found that odorants 
normally associated with particular objects (in this case, 
odorants that people perceive as minty, woody, or cit-
rusy) produced particular patterns of activity in the 
posterior piriform cortex, regardless of the chemical 
structure of the odorants. The investigators presented 
the subjects with three different minty odorants, three 
different woody odorants, and three different citrusy 
odorants. Each of the three odorants in each of these 
categories had very different chemical structures.  
figure 7.44  Clusters and Zones in the  
Olfactory Bulb
Specific regions of the olfactory bulb respond to specific 
features or properties of odorant molecules.
(Adapted from Johnson, B. A., and Leon, M. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 
2007, 503, 1–34.)
Lateral
Ventral
Medial
Dorsal
Dorsal
Rostral
Caudal
Carboxylic acids,
methyl and ethyl esters
Primary alcohols,
aldehydes, phenols
Aliphatic hydrocarbon
chain
Aliphatic esters
Aromatic hydrocarbons
Methyl-substituted
bicyclic compounds
Highly water-soluble
compounds
Aromatic with O groups,
high concentrations
of ketones
figure 7.45  Minty-Smelling Molecules
The molecular structures of these molecules are different, 
but they have similar odors and smelling them produces 
similar patterns of activity on the posterior piriform 
cortex.
(Adapted from Howard, J. D., Plailly, J., Grueschow, M., et al. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2009, 12, 932–938.)
H
(–)-R-carvone
(–)-menthol
Methyl salicylate
OH
OH
O
O
O
figure 7.43  Coding of Olfactory Information
A hypothetical explanation of the coding suggests that 
different odorant molecules attach to different 
combinations of receptor molecules. (Activated receptor 
molecules are shown in blue.) Unique patterns of 
activation represent particular odorants.
(Adapted from Malnic, B., Hirono, J., Sato, T., and Buck, L. B. Cell, 1999, 96, 
713–723.)
Odorant
molecules
Receptors
Nevertheless, the patterns of activity on the posterior pir-
iform cortex were correlated with the odor category, 
not the molecular structure. Figure 7.45 shows the mo-
lecular structure of the three minty odorants. As you 
can see, they show little resemblance to each other. 
(See Figure 7.45.)
We do not yet know how maps of chemical structure 
in the olfactory bulb are combined to form maps of 
perceptual quality in the posterior piriform cortex. Pre-
sumably, learning plays some role in this process.

	
Olfaction	
253
Section Summary
Olfaction
The olfactory receptors consist of bipolar neurons 
located in the olfactory epithelium that lines the roof 
of the nasal sinuses, on the bone that underlies the 
frontal lobes. The receptors send processes toward 
the surface of the mucosa, which divide into cilia. The 
membranes of these cilia contain receptors that 
detect aromatic molecules dissolved in the air that 
sweeps past the olfactory mucosa. The axons of the 
olfactory receptors pass through the perforations of 
the cribriform plate into the olfactory bulbs, where 
they form synapses in the glomeruli with the den-
drites of the mitral cells. These neurons send axons 
through the olfactory tracts to the brain, principally to 
the amygdala, the piriform cortex, and the entorhinal 
cortex. The hippocampus, hypothalamus, and orbito-
frontal cortex receive olfactory information indirectly.
Aromatic molecules produce membrane poten-
tials by interacting with a newly discovered family of 
receptor molecules, which appears to contain 339 
members. These receptor molecules are coupled to a 
special G protein, Golf. When an odorant molecule 
bind with and stimulates one of these receptors, Golf 
catalyzes the synthesis of cyclic AMP, which opens 
sodium channels and depolarizes the membrane. 
Each glomerulus receives information from only one 
type of olfactory receptor, and “olfactotopic” coding 
is maintained all the way to the olfactory cortex. This 
means that the task of detecting different odors is a 
spatial one; the brain recognizes odors by means of 
the patterns of activity created in the olfactory cortex. 
The olfactory bulb encodes information according to 
the structure of the odorant molecules, and the pos-
terior piriform cortex codes the information it receives 
from the anterior region according to the odorants’ 
perceptual categories—for example, minty, woody, 
and citrusy.
 Thought Question
Have you ever encountered an odor that you knew 
was somehow familiar, but you couldn’t say exactly 
why? Can you think of any explanations? Might this 
phenomenon have something to do with the fact that 
the sense of olfaction developed very early in our 
evolutionary history?
Several studies have found that interactions can 
take place between glomeruli within the olfactory 
bulb. For example, some odors have the ability to 
mask others. (The existence of the deodorant and air-
freshener industries depends on this fact.) Cooks in 
various cultures have long known that as long as it is 
not too strong, the unpleasant, rancid off-flavor of 
spoiled food can be masked by the spices fennel and 
clove. Takahashi, Nagayama, and Mori (2004) found 
that evidence for this masking can be seen in the re-
sponses of olfactory glomeruli. The investigators used 
a dental drill to thin the skull of anesthetized rats 
above an olfactory bulb and moistened it with mineral 
oil so that it became transparent. Examination of the 
olfactory bulbs with a microscope showed local areas 
of increased blood flow when different odorants were 
presented, which indicated regions of increased neu-
ral activity. Takahashi and his colleagues mapped the 
regions of the olfactory bulb that responded to bad-
smelling odorants (alkylamines and aliphatic alde-
hydes) and to the odors of fennel and clove. They 
found that responses to the bad odors was suppressed 
by the presence of the spice odors, indicating that the 
masking took place in the olfactory bulbs. Presum-
ably, the glomeruli that responded to the spice odors 
inhibited those that responded to the rancid ones.

254	
Chapter 7  Audition, the Body Senses, and the Chemical Senses
6.  Describe the somatosensory pathways and the  
perception of pain.
7.  Describe the five taste qualities, the anatomy of the 
taste buds and how they detect taste, and the gusta-
tory pathway and neural coding of taste.
8.  Describe the major structures of the olfactory system, 
explain how odors may be detected, and describe 
the patterns of neural activity produced by these 
stimuli.
1.  Describe the parts of the ear and the auditory  
pathway.
2.  Describe the detection of pitch, loudness, and timbre.
3.  Discuss the perception of spatial location, the  
perception of complex sounds, and the perception 
of music.
4.  Describe the structures and functions of the vestibular 
system.
5.  Describe the cutaneous receptors and their response 
to touch, temperature, and pain.
Review Questions
Study and Review on MyPsychLab
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Mechanisms of Perception
Each sensory system has its own receptors and neural circuitry. Sensations are 
only perceived after sensory information reaches the cortex. Association cortex 
receives sensory information from more than one sense. The Mechanisms of 
Perception module shows the brain regions involved in the perception of 
­sensory stimuli as well as the brain regions involved in linking sensory stimuli 
for different senses.

Control of Movement
Outline
8
 Skeletal Muscle
Anatomy
The Physical Basis of Muscular 
Contraction
Sensory Feedback from Muscles
Section Summary
 Reflexive Control of Movement
The Monosynaptic Stretch Reflex
The Gamma Motor System
Polysynaptic Reflexes
Section Summary
 Control of Movement  
by the Brain
Organization of the Motor Cortex
Cortical Control of Movement: 
The Descending Pathways
Planning and Initiating 
Movements: Role of the Motor 
Association Cortex
Imitating and Comprehending 
Movements: Role of the Mirror 
Neuron System
Control of Reaching and Grasping
Deficits of Skilled Movements: 
The Apraxias
The Basal Ganglia
The Cerebellum
The Reticular Formation
Section Summary
chapter

S
o far, I have described the nature of neural com­
munication, the basic structure of the nervous 
system, and the physiology of perception. Now it 
is time to consider the ultimate function of the ner­
vous system: control of behavior. The brain is the  
organ that moves the muscles. It does many other 
things, but all of them are secondary to making our 
bodies (or parts of them) move. This chapter describes 
the principles of muscular contraction, some reflex 
circuitry within the spinal cord, and the means by 
which the brain initiates behaviors. The rest of the 
book describes the physiology of particular categories 
of behaviors and the ways in which our behaviors can 
be modified by experience.
Skeletal Muscle
Skeletal muscles are the ones that move us (our skel­
etons) around and thus are responsible for our acti­
ons. Most of them are attached to bones at each end 
and move the bones when they contract. (Exceptions 
include eye muscles and some abdominal muscles, 
which are attached to bone at one end only.) Muscles 
are fastened to bones via tendons, strong bands of con­
nective tissue. Several different classes of movement 
Although Mr. J., a 48-year-old photographer, had just had a 
severe stroke that damaged much of his left parietal lobe, 
he was still a pleasant, cheerful, and likable man. His 
neurologist, Dr. R., introduced Mr. J. to us, and he sat down 
in a chair in front of the room.
“Mr. J., will you please show us how to wave hello?” 
asked Dr. R. The patient made a clumsy movement with 
his right hand and smiled apologetically. “Hold up your 
index finger, like this,” said Dr. R., pointing toward the 
ceiling. Mr. J. held up his hand, pursed his lips together, 
and, with a determined look on his face, clenched and 
unclenched his fist. Clearly, he was trying as hard as he 
could to point with his index finger, but he just could not 
move it without also moving his other fingers. “Can you 
hold your hand like this?” asked Dr. R., who held his hand 
in front of himself, palm down. Mr. J. watched him and, 
with obvious effort, copied the movement. “That’s good! 
Now turn your hand over.” Mr. J. grunted and began 
slapping his hand against his thigh. It looked to us as if 
he were trying to make the requested movement, but the 
wrong one was coming in its place. Dr. R. took hold of 
Mr. J.’s hand and, with great effort (Mr. J. was a strong 
man), managed to turn it over. “Good, now turn it over 
again.” Mr. J. began slapping his thigh with the back of 
his hand. Several times, Dr. R. helped him turn his hand 
over; but despite his efforts, Mr. J. was unable to do so 
by himself. He appeared to have very poor control of his 
movements.
Dr. R. addressed the rest of us. “You can see that  
Mr. J.’s apraxia is severe. But now watch this.” He turned to  
Mr. J. “Will you please take off your glasses?” Mr. J. reached 
up to his glasses, took hold of the earpieces, and smoothly 
removed them. “Fine. Now put them back on.” He did so. 
Dr. R. then asked, “Do you know what a hammer is?” 
“Sure,” answered Mr. J. “Okay, will you show us how you 
would use a hammer?” Mr. J. looked at his hand and then 
began slapping it against his thigh, as he had done before. 
“Okay, you can stop.” Mr. J. continued slapping his thigh, 
harder and harder. “Stop! That’s enough.” With great effort 
Mr. J. finally ceased making the movements. “Now let’s try 
this,” said Dr. R., who placed a block of wood on the table 
in front of Mr. J. and handed him a hammer and a nail. 
“Can you pound the nail into the wood?” Mr. J. held the 
nail upright with the fingers of his left hand, grasped the 
hammer with his right hand, and skillfully drove the nail 
into the wood.
After Mr. J. had left, Dr. R. said, “Mr. J.’s problem is 
not that he cannot make skilled movements, but that he 
cannot make these movements when we ask him to. He 
can manipulate his glasses and he can use a hammer, but 
he can’t make even the simplest voluntary movements out 
of context. Did you notice that he waved to you when  
I introduced him, even though he couldn’t do so when  
I asked him to show us how to wave ‘hello’?” We sheepishly 
admitted that we hadn’t been that observant. “The 
movement was an automatic one that he had learned to 
make long ago, and it was triggered by the fact that he 
was meeting other people. The left parietal lobe is 
involved in the control of movements—especially  
sequences of movements—that are not dictated by the 
context. Thus, he finds it almost impossible to follow verbal 
requests to make arbitrary movements.”
x skeletal muscle  One of the striated muscles attached to bones.

	
Skeletal Muscle	
257
can be accomplished by the skeletal muscles, but I will 
refer principally to two of them: flexion and exten­
sion. Contraction of a flexor muscle produces flexion, 
the drawing in of a limb. Extension, which is the op­
posite movement, is produced by contraction of ex­
tensor muscles. These are the so-called antigravity 
muscles—the ones we use to stand up. When a four-
legged animal lifts a paw, the movement is one of 
flexion. Putting it back down is one of extension. 
Sometimes, people say that they “flex” their muscles. 
This is an incorrect use of the term. Muscles contract; 
limbs flex. Bodybuilders show off their arm muscles by 
simultaneously contracting the flexor and extensor 
muscles of that limb.
Anatomy
The detailed structure of a skeletal muscle is shown in 
Figure 8.1. As you can see, it consists of two types of 
muscle fibers. The extrafusal muscle fibers are served 
by axons of the alpha motor neurons. Contraction of 
these fibers provides the muscle’s motive force. The 
intrafusal muscle fibers are specialized sensory organs 
that are served by two axons, one sensory and one mo­
tor. These organs are also called muscle spindles because 
of their shape. In fact, the Latin word fusus means 
“spindle”; hence, intrafusal muscle fibers are found 
within the spindles, and extrafusal muscle fibers are 
found outside them.
x flexion  A movement of a limb that tends to bend its joints; the 
opposite of extension.
x extension  A movement of a limb that tends to straighten its 
joints; the opposite of flexion.
x extrafusal muscle fiber  One of the muscle fibers that are 
responsible for the force exerted by contraction of a skeletal 
muscle.
x alpha motor neuron  A neuron whose axon forms synapses 
with extrafusal muscle fibers of a skeletal muscle; activation 
contracts the muscle fibers.
x intrafusal muscle fiber  A muscle fiber that functions as a 
stretch receptor, arranged parallel to the extrafusal muscle fibers, 
thus detecting changes in muscle length.
figure 8.1  Anatomy of Skeletal Muscle
Golgi tendon
organ
Ending of
alpha motor
neuron
Pacinian
corpuscle
Muscle
spindle
Intrafusal
muscle
fiber
Sensory
ending
Gamma motor
axon
Free nerve
ending
Motor ending
Extrafusal
muscle
fiber
Actin filament
Myosin filament
Myofibril
Extrafusal muscle fiber
Bundle of extrafusal
muscle fibers

258	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
that is present in the cytoplasm. The myosin cross 
bridges alternately attach to the actin strands, bend in 
one direction, detach themselves, bend back, reattach 
to the actin at a point farther down the strand, and so 
on. Thus, the cross bridges “row” along the actin fila­
ments. Figure 8.2 illustrates this rowing sequence and 
shows how this sequence results in shortening the mus­
cle fiber. (See Figure 8.2.)
A single impulse of a motor neuron produces a 
single twitch of a muscle fiber. The physical effects of 
the twitch last considerably longer than will the action 
potential, because of the elasticity of the muscle and the 
time required to rid the cell of calcium. (Like sodium, 
calcium is actively extruded by a pump situated in the 
membrane.) Figure 8.3 shows how the physical effects of 
a series of action potentials can overlap, causing a sus­
tained contraction by the muscle fiber. A single motor 
unit in a leg muscle of a cat can raise a 100-gram weight, 
which attests to the remarkable strength of the contrac­
tile mechanism. (See Figure 8.3.)
As you know from your own experience, muscular 
contraction is not an all-or-nothing phenomenon, as are 
the twitches of the constituent muscle fibers. Obviously, 
the strength of a muscular contraction is determined  
by the average rate of firing of the various motor units. 
If, at a given moment, many units are firing, the contrac­
tion will be forceful. If few are firing, the contraction 
will be weak.
Sensory Feedback from Muscles
As we saw, the intrafusal muscle fibers contain sensory 
endings that are sensitive to stretch. The intrafusal mus­
cle fibers are arranged in parallel with the extrafusal 
muscle fibers. Therefore, they are stretched when the 
The central region (capsule) of the intrafusal mus­
cle fiber contains sensory endings that are sensitive to 
stretch applied to the muscle fiber. Actually, there are 
two types of intrafusal muscle fibers, but for simplici­
ty’s sake, only one kind is shown here. The efferent 
axon of the gamma motor neuron causes the intra­
fusal muscle fiber to contract; however, this contrac­
tion contributes an insubstantial amount of force. As 
we will see, the function of this contraction is to mod­
ify the sensitivity of the fiber’s afferent ending to 
stretch.
A single myelinated axon of an alpha motor neu­
ron serves several extrafusal muscle fibers. In primates 
the number of muscle fibers served by a single axon 
varies considerably, depending on the precision with 
which the muscle can be controlled. In muscles that 
move the fingers or eyes, the ratio can be less than one 
to ten; in muscles that move the leg, it can be one to 
several hundred. An alpha motor neuron, its axon, 
and associated extrafusal muscle fibers constitute a 
motor unit.
A single muscle fiber consists of a bundle of myofi-
brils, each of which consists of overlapping strands of 
actin and myosin. Note the small protrusions on the 
myosin filaments; these structures (myosin cross bridges) 
are the motile elements that interact with the actin fila­
ments and produce muscular contractions. (Look again 
at Figure 8.1.) The regions in which the actin and myo­
sin filaments overlap produce dark stripes, or striations; 
hence, skeletal muscle is often referred to as striated 
muscle.
The Physical Basis of Muscular  
Contraction
The synapse between the terminal button of an effer­
ent neuron and the membrane of a muscle fiber is 
called a neuromuscular junction. The terminal but­
tons of the neurons synapse on motor endplates,  
located in grooves along the surface of the muscle  
fibers. When an axon fires, acetylcholine is liberated by 
the terminal buttons and produces a depolarization of 
the postsynaptic membrane—an endplate potential. 
The endplate potential is much larger than an excit­
atory postsynaptic potential in synapses between neu­
rons; an endplate potential always causes the muscle 
fiber to fire, propagating the potential along its length. 
This action potential induces a contraction, or twitch, 
of the muscle fiber.
The depolarization of a muscle fiber opens the 
gates of voltage-dependent calcium channels, permit­
ting calcium ions to enter the cytoplasm. This event 
triggers the contraction. Calcium acts as a cofactor that 
permits the myofibrils to extract energy from the ATP 
x gamma motor neuron  A neuron whose axons form synapses 
with intrafusal muscle fibers.
x motor unit  A motor neuron and its associated muscle fibers.
x myofibril  An element of muscle fibers that consists of 
overlapping strands of actin and myosin; responsible for muscular 
contractions.
x actin  One of the proteins (with myosin) that provide the 
physical basis for muscular contraction.
x myosin  One of the proteins (with actin) that provide the 
physical basis for muscular contraction.
x striated muscle  Skeletal muscle; muscle that contains striations.
x neuromuscular junction  The synapse between the terminal 
buttons of an axon and a muscle fiber.
x motor endplate  The postsynaptic membrane of a  
neuromuscular junction.
x endplate potential  The postsynaptic potential that occurs in 
the motor endplate in response to release of acetylcholine by the 
terminal button.

	
Skeletal Muscle	
259
types of movements. Figure 8.4(a) shows the effects of 
passive lengthening of muscles, the kind of movement 
that would be seen if your forearm, held in a com­
pletely relaxed fashion, were slowly lowered by some­
one who was supporting it. The rate of firing of one 
type of muscle spindle afferent neuron (MS1) increases, 
while the activity of the afferent of the Golgi tendon 
organ remains unchanged. (See Figure 8.4a.) Figure 
8.4(b) shows the results when the arm is dropped 
quickly; note that this time the second type of muscle 
spindle afferent neuron (MS2) fires a rapid burst of 
impulses. This fiber, then, signals rapid changes in 
muscle length. (See Figure 8.4b.) Figure 8.4(c) shows 
what would happen if a weight were suddenly dropped 
into your hand while your forearm was held parallel  
figure 8.2  Mechanism of Muscular Contraction
(a) Cross section through a myosin filament and the 
surrounding actin filaments. (b) The myosin cross 
bridges performing “rowing” movements, which cause 
the actin and myosin filaments to move relative to each 
other. For the sake of clarity, only two actin filaments 
are shown.
Myosin
filament
Myosin
cross
bridges
Myosin
cross
bridge
Actin
filaments
Actin
filament
Movement of
actin filament
Movement of
myosin
filament
(a)
(b)
figure 8.3  Action Potentials and Contractions  
of a Muscle Fiber
A rapid succession of action potentials can cause a 
muscle fiber to produce a sustained contraction. Each dot 
represents an individual action potential.
(Adapted from Devanandan, M. S., Eccles, R. M., and Westerman, R. A. Journal of 
Physiology [London], 1965, 178, 359–367.)
100
100
50
50
50
50
0
0
0
0
0
5
Time (sec)
Motor unit
Muscle tension (g)
100
100
x Golgi tendon organ  The receptor organ at the junction of the 
tendon and muscle that is sensitive to stretch.
muscle lengthens and are relaxed when it shortens. 
Thus, even though these afferent neurons are stretch  
receptors, they serve as muscle length detectors. This distinc­
tion is important. Stretch receptors are also located 
within the tendons, in the Golgi tendon organ. These 
receptors detect the total amount of stretch exerted by 
the muscle, through its tendons, on the bones to which 
the muscle is attached. The stretch receptors of the Golgi 
tendon organ encode the degree of stretch by the rate of 
firing. They respond not to a muscle’s length but to how 
hard it is pulling. In contrast, the receptors on intrafusal 
muscle fibers detect muscle length, not tension.
Figure 8.4 shows the response of afferent axons of 
the muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organ to various 

260	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
to the ground. Neurons MS1 and MS2 (especially MS2, 
which responds to rapid changes in muscle length) 
briefly fire, because your arm lowers briefly and then 
comes back to the original position. The Golgi tendon 
figure 8.4  Responses of Muscle and Tendon Receptors
The figure shows effects of arm movements on the firing of muscle and tendon afferent 
axons: (a) slow, passive extension of the arm; (b) rapid extension of the arm; (c) addition 
of a weight to an arm held in a horizontal position. MS1 and MS2 are two types of 
muscle spindles; GTO is an afferent fiber from the Golgi tendon organ.
(a)
(b)
(c)
MS1
MS2
GTO
MS1
MS2
GTO
MS1
MS2
GTO
Movement starts
Movement starts
Weight
added
Arm back
in position
Slow, passive lowering of arm
Arm is abruptly dropped
Weight is dropped into hand
organ, monitoring the strength of contraction, fires in 
proportion to the stress on the muscle, so it increases 
its rate of firing as soon as the weight is added. (See 
Figure 8.4c.)
Section Summary
Skeletal Muscle
Skeletal muscles contain extrafusal muscle fibers, 
which provide the force of contraction. The alpha 
motor neurons form synapses with the extrafusal 
muscle fibers and control their contraction. Skeletal 
muscles also contain intrafusal muscle fibers, which 
detect changes in muscle length. The length of the 
intrafusal muscle fiber, and hence its sensitivity to 
increases in muscle length, is controlled by the 
gamma motor neuron. Besides the intrafusal muscle 
fibers, the muscles contain stretch receptors in the 
Golgi tendon organs, located at the ends of the 
muscles.
The force of muscular contraction is provided  
by long protein molecules called actin and myosin, 
arranged in overlapping parallel arrays. When an 
action potential, initiated by the synapse at the motor 
endplate, causes calcium ions to enter the muscle 
fiber, the myofibrils extract energy from ATP and cause 
a twitch of the muscle fiber, producing a ratchetlike 
“rowing” movement of the myosin cross bridges.

	
Reflexive Control of Movement 	
261
then stimulate the alpha motor neurons, increasing 
their rate of firing. Consequently, the strength of the 
muscular contraction increases, and the arm pulls the 
weight up. (See Figure 8.5b.)
Another important role played by the monosynaptic 
stretch reflex is control of posture. To stand, we must 
keep our center of gravity above our feet, or we will fall. 
As we stand, we tend to oscillate forward and back and 
from side to side. Our vestibular sacs and our visual sys­
tem play important roles in the maintenance of posture. 
However, these systems are aided by the activity of the 
monosynaptic stretch reflex. For example, consider 
what happens when a person begins to lean forward. 
The large calf muscle (gastrocnemius) is stretched, and 
this stretching elicits compensatory muscular contrac­
tion that pushes the toes downward, thus restoring up­
right posture. (See Figure 8.6.)
The Gamma Motor System
Muscle spindles are very sensitive to changes in muscle 
length; they will increase their rate of firing when the 
muscle is lengthened by a very small amount. The inter­
esting thing is that this detection mechanism is adjust­
able. Remember that the ends of the intrafusal muscle 
fibers can be contracted by activity of the associated ef­
ferent axons of the gamma motor neurons; their rate of 
firing determines the degree of contraction. When the 
muscle spindles are relaxed, they are relatively insensi­
tive to stretch. However, when the gamma motor neu­
rons are active, they become shorter and hence become 
much more sensitive to changes in muscle length. This 
property of adjustable sensitivity simplifies the role of 
the brain in controlling movement. The more control 
that can occur in the spinal cord, the fewer messages 
must be sent to and from the brain.
We have already seen that the afferent axons of the 
muscle spindle help to maintain limb position even 
when the load carried by the limb is altered. Efferent 
control of the muscle spindles permits these muscle 
length detectors to assist in changes in limb position as 
well. Consider a single muscle spindle. When its efferent 
axon is completely silent, the spindle is completely  
relaxed and extended. As the firing rate of the efferent 
axon increases, the spindle gets shorter and shorter. If, 
simultaneously, the rest of the entire muscle also gets 
shorter, there will be no stretch on the central region 
that contains the sensory endings, and the afferent axon 
will not respond. However, if the muscle spindle contracts 
faster than does the muscle as a whole, there will be a 
considerable amount of afferent activity.
Reflexive Control  
of Movement
Although behaviors are controlled by the brain, the spi­
nal cord possesses a certain degree of autonomy. Par­
ticular kinds of somatosensory stimuli can elicit rapid 
responses through neural connections located within 
the spinal cord. These reflexes constitute the simplest 
level of motor integration.
The Monosynaptic Stretch Reflex
The activity of the simplest functional neural pathway in 
the body is easy to demonstrate. Sit on a surface high 
enough to allow your legs to dangle freely and have 
someone lightly tap your patellar tendon, just below the 
kneecap. This stimulus briefly stretches your quadriceps 
muscle, on the top of your thigh. The stretch causes the 
muscle to contract, which makes your leg kick forward. 
(I am sure few of you will bother with this demonstra­
tion, because you are already familiar with it; physical 
examinations often include a test of this reflex.) The 
time interval between the tendon tap and the start of 
the leg extension is about 50 milliseconds. That interval 
is too short for the involvement of the brain; it would 
take considerably longer for sensory information to be 
relayed to the brain and for motor information to be 
relayed back. For example, suppose a person is asked to 
move his or her leg as quickly as possible after being 
touched on the knee. This response would not be reflex­
ive but would involve sensory and motor mechanisms of 
the brain. In this case the interval between the stimulus 
and the start of the response would be several times 
greater than the time required for the patellar reflex.
Obviously, the patellar reflex as such has no utility; 
no selective advantage is bestowed on animals that kick a 
limb when a tendon is tapped. However, if a more natural 
stimulus is applied, the utility of this mechanism becomes 
apparent. Figure 8.5 shows the effects of placing a weight 
in a person’s hand. This time I have included a piece of 
the spinal cord, with its roots, to show the neural circuit 
that composes the monosynaptic stretch reflex. First, fol­
low the circuit: Starting at the muscle spindle, afferent 
impulses are conducted to terminal buttons in the gray 
matter of the spinal cord. These terminal buttons synapse 
on an alpha motor neuron that innervates the extrafusal 
muscle fibers of the same muscle. Only one synapse is 
encountered along the route from receptor to effector—
hence the term monosynaptic. (See Figure 8.5a.)
Now consider a useful function this reflex performs. 
If the weight the person is holding is increased, the fore­
arm begins to move downward. This movement length­
ens the muscle and increases the firing rate of the mus­
cle spindle afferent neurons, whose terminal buttons 
x monosynaptic stretch reflex  A reflex in which a muscle contracts 
in response to its being quickly stretched; involves a sensory neuron 
and a motor neuron, with one synapse between them.

262	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
figure 8.5  The Monosynaptic Stretch Reflex
(a) Neural circuit. (b) A useful function.
Muscle
spindle
Dorsal root
ganglion
Dorsal root
Gray matter
Ventral root
Alpha motor
neuron
Spinal Cord
(a)
(b)
Extrafusal
muscle fibers
figure 8.6  The Role of the Monosynaptic Stretch Reflex in Postural Control
Gastrocnemius
muscle
Muscle lengthens,
muscle spindles fire,
alpha motor neurons
are stimulated
reflexively, muscle
contracts
Force exerted
at front of foot
Standing Upright
Leaning Forward
Upright Posture
Restored

	
Reflexive Control of Movement 	
263
isolation; they are normally controlled by the brain. For 
example, Chapter 2 described how inhibition from the 
brain can prevent a person from dropping a hot casse­
role dish, even though the painful stimuli received by 
the fingers cause reflexive extension of the fingers. This 
section will describe some general principles by which 
polysynaptic spinal reflexes operate.
Before I begin the discussion, I should mention 
that the simple circuit diagrams used here (including 
the one you just looked at in Figure 8.6) are much too 
simple. Reflex circuits are typically shown as a single 
chain of neurons, but in reality most reflexes involve 
thousands of neur­ons. Each axon usually synapses on 
many neurons, and each neuron receives synapses from 
many different axons.
As we saw previously, the afferent axons from the 
Golgi tendon organ serve as detectors of muscle stretch. 
There are two populations of afferent axons from the 
Golgi tendon organ, with different sensitivities to 
stretch. The more sensitive afferent axons tell the brain 
how hard the muscle is pulling. The less sensitive ones 
have an additional function. Their terminal buttons 
synapse on spinal cord interneurons—neurons that re­
side entirely within the gray matter of the spinal cord 
and serve to interconnect other spinal neurons. These 
interneurons synapse on the alpha motor neurons serv­
ing the same muscle. The terminal buttons liberate 
The motor system makes use of this phenomenon 
in the following way: When commands from the brain 
are issued to move a limb, both the alpha motor neu­
rons and the gamma motor neurons are activated. The 
alpha motor neurons start the muscle contracting. If 
there is little resistance, both the extrafusal and intra­
fusal muscle fibers will contract at approximately the 
same rate, and little activity will be seen from the affer­
ent axons of the muscle spindle. However, if the limb 
meets with resistance, the intrafusal muscle fibers will 
shorten more than the extrafusal muscle fibers, and 
hence sensory axons will begin to fire and cause the 
monosynaptic stretch reflex to strengthen the contrac­
tion. Thus, the brain makes use of the gamma motor 
system in moving the limbs. By establishing a rate of 
firing in the gamma motor system, the brain controls the 
length of the muscle spindles and, indirectly, the length 
of the entire muscle.
Polysynaptic Reflexes
The monosynaptic stretch reflex is the only spinal re­
flex we know of that involves only one synapse. All oth­
ers are polysynaptic. Examples include relatively simple 
ones, such as limb withdrawal in response to noxious 
stimulation, and relatively complex ones, such as the 
ejaculation of semen. Spinal reflexes do not exist in 
figure 8.7  Polysynaptic Inhibitory Reflex
Input from the Golgi tendon organ can cause inhibitory postsynaptic 
potentials to occur on the alpha motor neuron.
Extrafusal
muscle
fibers
Golgi tendon organ
Muscle
spindle
Dorsal root
Gray matter
Dorsal root
ganglion
Inhibitory
interneuron
Ventral root
Alpha motor
neuron
Muscle
Spinal Cord

264	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
lar formation, a region of the brain stem, which greatly 
facilitates all stretch reflexes, especially of extensor 
muscles, by increasing the activity of the gamma motor 
system. Rostral to the brain stem transection is an in­
hibitory region of the reticular formation that nor­
mally counterbalances the excitatory one. The transec­
tion removes the inhibitory influence, leaving only the 
excitatory one. If you attempt to flex the outstretched 
leg of a decerebrate cat, you will meet with increasing 
resistance, which will suddenly melt away, allowing the 
limb to flex. It almost feels as though you were closing 
the blade of a pocketknife—hence the term clasp-
knife reflex. The sudden release is, of course, medi­
ated by activation of the Golgi tendon organ reflex.
glycine and hence produce inhibitory postsynaptic po­
tentials on the motor neurons. (See Figure 8.7.) The 
function of this reflex pathway is to decrease the 
strength of muscular contraction when there is danger 
of damage to the tendons or bones to which the mus­
cles are attached.
The discovery of the inhibitory Golgi tendon organ 
reflex provided the first real evidence of neural inhibi­
tion, long before the synaptic mechanisms were un­
derstood. A decerebrate cat, whose brain stem has 
been cut through, exhibits a phenomenon known as 
decerebrate rigidity. The animal’s back is arched, and 
its legs are extended stiffly from its body. This rigidity 
results from excitation originating in the caudal reticu-
x decerebrate  Describes an animal whose brain stem has been 
transected.
x decerebrate rigidity  Simultaneous contraction of agonistic 
and antagonistic muscles; caused by decerebration or damage to 
the reticular formation.
x clasp-knife reflex  A reflex that occurs when force is applied to 
flex or extend the limb of an animal showing decerebrate rigidity; 
resistance is replaced by sudden relaxation.
Section Summary
Reflexive Control of Movement
Reflexes are simple circuits of sensory neurons, 
interneurons (usually), and efferent neurons that  
control simple responses to particular stimuli. In the 
monosynaptic stretch reflex the terminal buttons of 
axons that receive sensory information from the 
intrafusal muscle fibers synapse with alpha motor 
neurons that innervate the same muscle. Thus, a 
sudden lengthening of the muscle causes the mus-
cle to contract. By setting the length of the intra-
fusal muscle fibers, and hence their sensitivity to 
increases in muscle length, the motor system of  
the brain can control limb position. Changes in a 
weight being held that cause the limb to move will 
be quickly compensated for by means of the mono-
synaptic stretch reflex.
Polysynaptic reflexes contain at least one inter-
neuron between the sensory neuron and the motor 
neuron. For example, when a strong muscular con-
traction threatens to damage muscles or limbs, the 
increased rate of firing of the afferent axons of Golgi 
tendon organs stimulates inhibitory interneurons, 
which inhibit the alpha motor neurons of those  
muscles.
 Thought Question
Weight lifters can lift heavier weights if their Golgi 
tendon organs are deactivated with injections of a 
local anesthetic. Considering the normal function 
of these organs, why would these injections be 
unwise?
Control of Movement  
by the Brain
Movements can be initiated by several means. For ex­
ample, rapid stretch of a muscle triggers the monosyn­
aptic stretch reflex, a stumble triggers righting reflexes, 
and the rapid approach of an object toward the face 
causes a startle response, a complex reflex consisting of 
movements of several muscle groups. Other stimuli ini­
tiate sequences of movements that we have previously 
learned. For example, the presence of food causes eat­
ing, and the sight of a loved one evokes a hug and a 
kiss. Because there is no single cause of behavior, we 
cannot find a single starting point in our search for the 
neural mechanisms that control movement.
The brain and spinal cord include several different 
motor systems, each of which can simultaneously control 

	
Control of Movement by the Brain 	
265
cortex shows somatotopic organization (from soma, 
“body,” and topos, “place”). Figure 8.8 shows a motor ho-
munculus based on the observations of Penfield and 
Rasmussen (1950). Note that a disproportionate amount 
of cortical area is devoted to movements of the fingers 
and the muscles used for speech. (See Figure 8.8.)
Figure 8.9 shows the results of a combined fMRI and 
DTI study by Wahl et al. (2007), which shows an image of 
regions of the primary motor cortex and the axons of the 
corpus callosum that unite regions of the left and right 
primary motor cortex. The cortical regions that control 
movements in the lips, hand, and foot are shown in light 
particular kinds of movements. For example, a person 
can walk and talk with a friend simultaneously. While 
doing so, the person can gesture with the hands to em­
phasize a point, scratch an itch, brush away a fly, wipe 
sweat off his or her forehead, and so on. Walking, pos­
tural adjustments, talking, movement of the arms, and 
movements of the fingers all involve different special­
ized motor systems.
Organization of the Motor Cortex
The primary motor cortex lies on the precentral gyrus, 
just rostral to the central sulcus. Stimulation studies 
(including those in awake humans) have shown that the 
activation of neurons located in particular parts of the 
primary motor cortex causes movements of particular 
parts of the body. In other words, the primary motor 
x somatotopic organization  A topographically organized 
mapping of parts of the body that are represented in a particular 
region of the brain.
figure 8.8  Motor Cortex and the Motor Homunculus
Stimulation of various regions of the primary motor cortex causes movement in muscles 
of various parts of the body.
Supplementary
motor area
Premotor
cortex
Primary
motor
cortex
Genitals
Buttocks
Toes
Leg
Abdomen
Shoulder
Arm
Forearm
Palm
Fingers
Thumb
Eyelids
Face
Lips
Neck
Tongue
Jaw
Swallowing
Pre-supplementary
motor area

266	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
The principal cortical input to the primary motor 
cortex is the frontal association cortex, located rostral to 
it. Two regions immediately adjacent to the primary mo­
tor cortex—the supplementary motor area and the premotor 
cortex—are especially important in the control of move­
ment. Both regions receive sensory information from 
the parietal and temporal lobes, and both send efferent 
axons to the primary motor cortex. The supplementary 
motor area (SMA) is located on the medial surface of the 
brain, just rostral to the primary motor cortex. The pre-
motor cortex is located primarily on the lateral surface, 
also just rostral to the primary motor cortex. The roles 
that these regions play in the control of movement is 
discussed later in this chapter. (Refer back to Figure 8.8.)
Cortical Control of Movement:  
The Descending Pathways
Neurons in the primary motor cortex control move­
ments by two groups of descending tracts, the lateral 
red, light green, and light yellow, respectively. The axons 
of the corpus callosum that unite these regions are shown 
in darker versions of the same colors. (See Figure 8.9.)
It is important to recognize that the primary motor 
cortex is organized in terms of particular movements of 
particular parts of the body. Each movement may be 
accomplished by the contraction of several muscles. For 
example, when the arm is extended in a particular  
direction, many muscles in the shoulder, upper arm, and 
forearm must contract. This fact means that complex 
neural circuitry is located between individual neurons 
in the primary motor cortex and the motor neurons in 
the spinal cord that cause motor units to contract. As 
we will see, the commands for movement initiated in 
the motor cortex are assisted and modified—most  
notably, by the basal ganglia and the cerebellum.
A study by Graziano and Aflalo (2007) found that 
although brief stimulation of particular regions of the 
primary motor cortex of monkeys caused brief move­
ments of various parts of the body, prolonged stimula­
tion produced much more complex movements. For 
example, stimulation of one region caused the hand to 
close and then approach the mouth and the mouth 
then to open. Stimulation of another region caused the 
face to squint, the head to turn quickly to one side, and 
the arms to fling up, as if to protect the face from some­
thing that was going to hit it. Stimulation of different 
zones of the motor cortex caused different categories of 
actions. The map of these categories was consistent from 
animal to animal. (See Figure 8.10.)
figure 8.9  Regions of the Primary Motor Cortex 
and Associated Axons of the Corpus Callosum
The figures show images of regions of the primary motor 
cortex of the right and left hemispheres that control 
movements of the lips (light red), hand (light green) and 
foot (light yellow). The axons of the corpus callosum that 
unite these regions are shown in darker versions of the 
same colors. (a) Horizontal view. (b) Cross-sectional view.
(From Wahl, M., Lauterbach-Soon, B., Hattinger, E., et al. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2007, 27, 12132–12138. Reprinted with permission.)
(a)
(b)
figure 8.10  Stimulation of the Motor Cortex
Categories of movements elicited by prolonged 
stimulation of specific regions of the motor cortex  
of monkeys.
(Adapted from Graziano, M. S. A., and Aflalo, T. N. Neuron, 2007, 56, 239–251.)
Hand in
lower space
Manipulate in
central space
Chewing/licking
Hand to mouth
Defense
Reach to grasp
Climbing/leaping
x supplementary motor area (SMA)  A region of motor 
association cortex of the dorsal and dorsomedial frontal lobe, 
rostral to the primary motor cortex.
x premotor cortex  A region of motor association cortex of the 
lateral frontal lobe, rostral to the primary motor cortex.

	
Control of Movement by the Brain 	
267
lateral group consists of the corticospinal tract, the corti-
cobulbar tract, and the rubrospinal tract. This system is 
primarily involved in control of independent limb move­
ments, particularly movements of the hands and fingers. 
Independent limb movements mean that the right and 
left limbs make different movements or one limb moves 
while the other remains still. These movements contrast 
with coordinated limb movements, such as those  
involved in locomotion. The ventromedial group consists 
of the vestibulospinal tract, the tectospinal tract, the reticulo-
spinal tract, and the ventral corticospinal tract. These tracts 
control more automatic movements: gross movements 
of the muscles of the trunk and coordinated trunk and 
limb movements involved in posture and locomotion.
Let’s first consider the lateral group of descending 
tracts. The corticospinal tract consists of axons of corti­
cal neurons that terminate in the gray matter of the 
spinal cord. The largest concentration of cell bodies  
responsible for these axons is located in the primary  
motor cortex, but neurons in the parietal and temporal  
lobes also send axons through the corticospinal path­
way. The axons leave the cortex and travel through sub­
cortical white matter to the ventral midbrain, where 
they enter the cerebral peduncles. They leave the  
peduncles in the medulla and form the pyramidal tracts, 
so called because of their shape. At the level of the cau­
dal medulla, most of the fibers decussate (cross over) 
and descend through the contralateral spinal cord, 
forming the lateral corticospinal tract. The rest of the 
fibers descend through the ipsilateral spinal cord, form­
ing the ventral corticospinal tract. Because of its loca­
tion and function, the ventral corticospinal tract is actu­
ally part of the ventromedial group. (See the light and 
dark blue lines in Figure 8.11.)
Most of the axons in the lateral corticospinal tract 
originate in the regions of the primary motor cortex 
and supplementary motor area that control the distal 
parts of the limbs: the arms, hands, and fingers and the 
x lateral group  The corticospinal tract, the corticobulbar tract, 
and the rubrospinal tract.
x ventromedial group  The vestibulospinal tract, the tectospinal 
tract, the reticulospinal tract, and the ventral corticospinal tract.
x corticospinal tract  The system of axons that originates in the 
motor cortex and terminates in the ventral gray matter of the 
spinal cord.
x pyramidal tract  The portion of the corticospinal tract on the 
ventral border of the medulla.
x lateral corticospinal tract  The system of axons that originates 
in the motor cortex and terminates in the contralateral ventral gray 
matter of the spinal cord; controls movements of the distal limbs.
x ventral corticospinal tract  The system of axons that originates 
in the motor cortex and terminates in the ipsilateral ventral gray 
matter of the spinal cord; controls movements of the upper legs 
and trunk.
figure 8.11  Lateral Group of Descending  
Motor Tracts
The figure shows the lateral corticospinal tract (light blue 
lines), corticobulbar tract (green lines), and rubrospinal 
tract (red lines). The ventral corticospinal tract (dark blue 
lines) is part of the ventromedial group.
Upper leg and trunk
Lower leg
and foot
Corticorubral tract
Cerebral peduncle
Hand and fingers
Face
and
tongue
Red nucleus
Corticobulbar
tract
Motor nucleus of
trigeminal nerve
(jaw movement)
Motor nucleus
of facial nerve
To motor nucleus of
hypoglossal nerve
(tongue movement)
Rubrospinal
tract
To muscles of
fingers and
hands
Lateral
corticospinal
tract
To muscles 
of arms
Ventral corticospinal
tract
To muscles of
lower leg and
foot
To muscles of trunk
and upper legs
Lumbar
Spinal Cord
Cervical
Spinal Cord
Pons
Midbrain
group and the ventromedial group, named for their  
locations in the white matter of the spinal cord. The 

268	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
nuclei. As you might expect, this system plays a role in 
the control of posture. The cell bodies of neurons in 
the tectospinal tracts are located in the superior collicu­
lus and are involved in coordinating head and trunk 
movements with eye movements. The cell bodies of 
neurons of the reticulospinal tracts are located in many 
nuclei in the brain stem and midbrain reticular forma­
tion. These neurons control several automatic func­
tions, such as muscle tonus, respiration, coughing, and 
sneezing; but they are also involved in behaviors that 
are under direct neocortical control, such as walking. 
(See Figure 8.12.)
Table 8.1 summarizes the names of these pathways, 
their locations, and the muscle groups they control. 
(See Table 8.1.)
Planning and Initiating Movements: 
Role of the Motor Association  
Cortex
The supplementary motor area and the premotor cor­
tex are involved in the planning of movements, and 
they execute these plans through their connections 
with the primary motor cortex. Functional-imaging 
studies show that when people execute sequences of 
movements—or even imagine them—these regions 
become activated (Roth et al., 1996). More recent evi­
dence indicates that the motor association cortex is also 
involved in imitating the actions of other people (an 
ability that makes it possible to learn new behaviors 
from them) and even in understanding the functions of 
other people’s behavior.
The supplementary motor area and the premotor 
cortex receive information from association areas of 
the parietal and temporal cortex. As we saw in Chapter 6, 
lower legs, feet, and toes. They form synapses, directly 
or via interneurons, with motor neurons in the gray mat­
ter of the spinal cord—in the lateral part of the ventral 
horn. These motor neurons control muscles of the dis­
tal limbs, including those that move the arms, hands, 
and fingers. (See the light blue lines in Figure 8.11.)
The axons in the ventral corticospinal tract origi­
nate in the upper leg and trunk regions of the primary 
motor cortex. They descend to the appropriate region 
of the spinal cord and divide, sending terminal buttons 
into both sides of the gray matter. They control motor 
neurons that move the muscles of the upper legs and 
trunk. (See the dark blue lines in Figure 8.11.)
The corticospinal pathway controls hand and finger 
movements and is indispensable for moving the fingers 
independently when reaching and manipulating. Pos­
tural adjustments of the trunk and use of the limbs for 
reaching and locomotion are controlled by other systems.
The second of the lateral group of descending path­
ways, the corticobulbar tract, projects to the medulla 
(sometimes called the bulb). This pathway is similar to 
the corticospinal pathway, except that it terminates in 
the motor nuclei of the fifth, seventh, ninth, tenth, elev­
enth, and twelfth cranial nerves (the trigeminal, facial, 
glossopharyngeal, vagus, spinal accessory, and hypoglos­
sal nerves). These nerves control movements of the face, 
neck, and tongue and parts of the extraocular eye mus­
cles. (See the green lines in Figure 8.11.)
The third member of the lateral group is the rubro-
spinal tract. This tract originates in the red nucleus 
(nucleus ruber) of the midbrain. The red nucleus receives 
its most important inputs from the motor cortex via  
the corticorubral tract and (as we shall see later) from 
the cerebellum. Axons of the rubrospinal tracts termi­
nate on motor neurons in the spinal cord that control 
independent movements of the forearms and hands—
that is, movements that are independent of trunk move­
ments. (They do not control the muscles that move the 
fingers.) (See the red lines in Figure 8.11.)
Now let’s consider the second set of pathways origi­
nating in the brain stem: the ventromedial group. This 
group includes the vestibulospinal tracts, the tectospi-
nal tracts, and the reticulospinal tracts, as well as the 
ventral corticospinal tract (already described). These 
tracts control motor neurons in the ventromedial part 
of the spinal cord gray matter. Neurons of all these 
tracts receive input from the portions of the primary 
motor cortex that control movements of the trunk and 
proximal muscles (that is, the muscles located on the 
parts of the limbs close to the body). In addition, the 
reticular formation receives a considerable amount of 
input from the premotor cortex and from several sub­
cortical regions, including the amygdala, hypothala­
mus, and basal ganglia. The cell bodies of neurons of 
the vestibulospinal tracts are located in the vestibular 
x corticobulbar tract  A bundle of axons from the motor cortex 
to the fifth, seventh, ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth cranial 
nerves; controls movements of the face, neck, tongue, and parts 
of the extraocular eye muscles.
x rubrospinal tract  The system of axons that travels from the red 
nucleus to the spinal cord; controls independent limb movements.
x corticorubral tract  The system of axons that travels from the 
motor cortex to the red nucleus.
x vestibulospinal tract  A bundle of axons that travels from the 
vestibular nuclei to the gray matter of the spinal cord; controls 
postural movements in response to information from the vestibular 
system.
x tectospinal tract  A bundle of axons that travels from the 
tectum to the spinal cord; coordinates head and trunk movements 
with eye movements.
x reticulospinal tract  A bundle of axons that travels from the 
reticular formation to the gray matter of the spinal cord; controls 
the muscles responsible for postural movements.

	
Control of Movement by the Brain 	
269
perception. Besides receiving information about space 
from the visual system, the parietal lobe receives infor­
mation about spatial location from the somatosensory, 
vestibular, and auditory systems and integrates this in­
formation with visual information. Thus, the regions of 
the frontal cortex that are involved in planning move­
ments receive the information they need about what is 
happening and where it is happening from the tempo­
ral and parietal lobes. Because the parietal lobes con­
tain spatial information, the pathway from them to the 
frontal lobes is especially important in controlling both 
locomotion and arm and hand movements. After all, 
meaningful locomotion requires us to know where we 
are, and meaningful movements of our arms and hands 
require us to know where objects are located in space. 
(See Figure 8.13.)
Let’s look at the functions of the supplementary 
motor area and the premotor cortex in more detail. In 
general, the supplementary motor cortex is involved in 
learning and performing behaviors that consist of sequ­
ences of movements. The premotor cortex is involved in 
learning and executing responses that are signaled by 
the presence of arbitrary stimuli. As a component of the 
mirror neurons system, it is also imitating responses of 
other people and in understanding and predicting 
these actions.
The Supplementary Motor Area
The supplementary motor area plays a critical role in beha­
vioral sequences. Damage to this region disrupts the ability 
to execute well-learned sequences of responses in which 
the performance of one response serves as the signal that 
the next response must be made. Chen et al. (1995) found 
that lesions of the supplementary motor area severely  
impaired monkeys’ ability to perform a simple sequence  
of two responses: pushing a lever in and then turning it  
to the left, receiving a peanut after each response. (See 
Figure 8.14.)
A single-unit recording study came to similar conclu­
sions. Mushiake, Inase, and Tanji (1991) trained mon­
keys to perform a memorized series of responses, press­
ing each of three buttons in a specific sequence. While 
the monkeys were performing this task, more than half 
of the neurons in the supplementary motor area be­
came activated. However, when the sequence was cued 
by visual stimuli—the monkeys simply had to press the 
button that was illuminated—these neurons showed little 
activity.
Shima and Tanji (2000) taught monkeys six sequences 
of three motor responses. For example, one of the se­
quences was push, then pull, then turn. They recorded 
from neurons in the supplementary motor area and 
found neurons whose activity appeared to encode ele­
ments of these sequences. For example, some neurons 
figure 8.12  Ventromedial Group of Descending 
Motor Tracts
The figure shows the tectospinal tract (blue lines), lateral 
reticulospinal tract (purple lines), medial reticulospinal 
tract (orange lines), and vestibulospinal tract (green lines).
Superior
colliculus
Vestibular
nucleus
Pontine
reticular
formation
Medullary
reticular
formation
Lateral
reticulospinal tract
Tectospinal
tract
Vestibulospinal
tract
To muscles of
neck and trunk
To flexor
muscles
of leg
To extensor
muscles
of leg
Medial reticulospinal
tract
Cervical
Spinal Cord
Lumbar
Spinal Cord
Medulla
Midbrain
Pons
the visual association cortex is organized in two streams: 
dorsal and ventral. The ventral stream, which termi­
nates in the inferior temporal cortex, is involved in 
perceiving and recognizing particular objects—the 
“what” of visual perception. The dorsal stream, which 
terminates in the posterior parietal lobe, is involved in 
perception of location—the “where” of visual percep­
tion. In addition, the parietal lobes are involved in  
organizing visually guided movements that interact 
with objects in the environment—the “how” of visual 

270	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
responded just before a particular sequence of three 
movements occurred; some neurons responded between 
two particular responses; and some neurons responded 
as the monkey was preparing the make the last response 
of the sequence. Presumably, these neurons were mem­
bers of circuits that encoded the information necessary 
to perform the six sequences. Figure 8.15 shows the re­
sponse of a neuron that responded during a pulling 
movement, but only if it was to be followed by a pushing 
movement. (See Figure 8.15.)
Shima and Tanji (1998) temporarily inactivated the 
supplementary motor area in monkeys with injections 
of muscimol, a drug that stimulates GABA receptors 
and thus inhibits neural activity. They found that after 
inactivation of this region, monkeys could still reach for 
objects or make particular movements in response to 
visual cues but could no longer make a sequence of 
three movements they had previously learned.
Studies with human subjects have obtained results 
similar to those obtained with monkeys. For example, a 
functional-imaging study by Hikosaka et al. (1996) ob­
served increased activity in the posterior SMA during 
figure 8.13  Cortical Control of Movement
The posterior association cortex is involved with 
perceptions and memories, and the frontal association 
cortex is involved with plans for movement.
Primary motor
cortex
Supplementary
motor area
Premotor
cortex
Plans for
movements
Prefrontal
cortex
Temporal lobe
Occipital lobe
Visual perceptions
and memories
Auditory perceptions
and memories
Perception of
space and
location of limbs
Parietal lobe
Movement of Muscles
Pre-supplementary
motor area
table 8.1  Major Motor Pathways
Origin
Termination
Muscle Group
Function
Lateral Group
Lateral cortico-
spinal tract
Finger, hand, and arm 
region of motor cortex
Spinal cord 
Fingers, hands, and arms 
Grasping and manipu-
lating objects
Rubrospinal tract 
 
Red nucleus 
 
Spinal cord 
 
Hands (not fingers), lower 
arms, feet, and lower legs 
Movement of forearms 
and hands independent 
from that of the trunk
Corticobulbar tract 
 
Face region of motor 
cortex 
Cranial nerve 
nuclei: 5, 7, 9, 
10, 11, and 12
Face and tongue 
 
Face and tongue  
movements 
Ventromedial Group
Vestibulospinal 
tract
Vestibular nuclei 
Spinal cord 
Trunk and legs 
Posture 
Tectospinal tract 
 
Superior colliculi 
 
Spinal cord 
 
Neck and trunk 
 
Coordination of eye 
movements with those 
of trunk and head
Lateral reticulo-
spinal tract
Medullary reticular  
formation
Spinal cord 
Flexor muscles of legs 
Walking 
Medial reticulo-
spinal tract
Pontine reticular  
formation
Spinal cord 
Extensor muscles of legs 
Walking 
Ventral cortico-
spinal tract
Trunk and upper leg 
region of motor cortex
Spinal cord 
Hands (not fingers), lower 
arms, feet, and lower legs
Locomotion  
and posture

	
Control of Movement by the Brain 	
271
finger movements using four fingers of the right 
hand. While they were learning the task, the experi­
menters supplied transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(TMS) to the subjects’ left SMA with a sequence of 
pulses that temporarily disrupted the activity of this 
region. If the disrupting stimulation occurred just  
before each response was to be made, the subjects 
learned the task with their right hand but performed 
poorly when they were later tested with their left 
hand. If the stimulation occurred during each finger 
movement, transfer to the left hand was normal. Perez 
and her colleagues noted that the left and right SMA 
have strong interconnections and suggest that during 
the learning of the sequence, information about the 
previous response was transmitted from the left SMA 
to the right SMA. The disrupting TMS interfered with 
this transfer.
A region just anterior to the supplementary motor 
area, the pre-SMA, appears to be involved in control of 
performance of a learned sequence of button presses. 
Gerloff et al. (1997) taught people to make a sequence 
of sixteen finger presses on an electronic piano. When 
the experimenters disrupted the activity of the SMA 
with transcranial magnetic stimulation, the performance 
of the sequence was disrupted. However, the disruption 
was not immediate: The subjects continued the se­
quence for approximately one second and then stopped, 
saying that they “did not know anymore which series of 
keys to press next.” Apparently, the SMA is involved in 
planning the elements yet to come in sequences of move­
ments. The actual execution of the movements appears 
to be controlled elsewhere—presumably by the primary 
motor cortex.
Once we have learned a sequence of movements 
using one hand, we can easily perform the sequence 
with the other hand. Presumably, the learning has 
taken place in the hemisphere that controls the hand 
that first performed the sequence. Perez et al. (2008) 
trained people to perform a twelve-item sequence of 
figure 8.14  Role of the SMA in Execution  
of Behavioral Sequences
The monkey was required to (1) push the handle in and 
then (2) turn it to the left, receiving a piece of food in the 
door above the lever after each component of the 
sequence.
(Adapted from Chen, Y.-C., Thaler, D., Nixon, P. D., et al. Experimental Brain 
Research, 1995, 102, 461–473.)
2
1
After correct response,
monkey pushes panel
to receive food
figure 8.15  Firing Patterns of a Supplementary 
Motor Area Neuron
The figure shows the firing patterns of a single neuron in 
the supplementary motor area of a monkey. The animal 
performed three sequences of movements. The neuron 
responded only during a pulling response that was to be 
followed by a pushing response. Black hash marks 
indicate action potentials during each trial, and blue 
histograms indicate the total number of action potentials 
summed across all trials.
(From Shima, K., and Tanji, J. Journal of Neurophysiology, 2000, 84, 2148–2160. 
Reprinted with permission of the American Physiological Society.)
Carlson/ POB,9e/C9B08F14.ai
20.0 x 12.5
Push
Push
Push
Push
Push
Push
Pull
Pull
Pull
Pull
Pull
Pull
Turn
Turn
Turn
Turn
Turn
Turn
1 sec

272	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
the frontopolar cortex, located at the rostral tip of the ce­
rebral hemispheres—may play a critical role in decid­
ing to make a motor response. The investigators had 
subjects perform a task similar to the one used by Lau 
et al. (2004). The subjects were told to watch a screen 
that displayed a stream of letters and to press one of two 
buttons whenever they felt like it. The choice of button 
and the timing of the response was up to them. After 
each response, the subjects reported the letter they had 
seen on the screen at the time they decided to press 
one of the buttons, which indicated the time between 
the awareness of this decision and their movement—
which averaged about one second. Examination of the 
pattern of brain activation on each trial enabled the 
investigators to predict the decision to press the right 
or left button. Approximately 10 sec before the re­
sponse, the decision about which button should be 
pressed could accurately be predicted by particular pat­
terns of activity in the frontopolar cortex. The decision 
could be predicted shortly thereafter by the pattern of 
activity in the posterior parietal cortex, and then by the 
activity in the SMA. Finally, the primary motor cortex 
became activated, causing the finger to move. These 
results suggest that the prefrontal cortex plays a critical 
role in decision making of the kind the investigators 
studied. The posterior parietal cortex appears to be in­
volved in storing the information about the decision 
and transmitting it to the SMA, where the process of 
executing the response begins.
The Premotor Cortex
The premotor cortex is involved in learning and exe­
cuting complex movements that are guided by sensory 
information. The results of several studies suggest that 
the premotor cortex is involved in using arbitrary stim­
uli to indicate what movement should be made. For 
example, reaching for an object that we see in a par­
ticular location involves nonarbitrary spatial informa­
tion; that is, the visual information provided by the  
location of the object specifies just where we should 
target our reaching movement. But we also have the 
ability to learn to make movements based on arbitrary 
information—information that is not directly related to 
the movement that it signals. For example, a person can 
point to a particular object when someone says its 
name, or a dancer can make a particular movement 
when asked to do so by a choreographer. Different lan­
guages use different sounds to indicate the names of 
objects, and different choreographers could invent dif­
ferent names for movements used in their dances. Or a 
person could be told to “wave your left hand when you 
hear the buzz and touch your nose when you hear the 
bell.” The associations between these stimuli and the 
movements they designate are arbitrary and must be 
learned.
spontaneous movements—or at least in the perception 
of control. It has long been known that although elec­
trical stimulation of the motor cortex causes move­
ments, it does not produce the desire to move. The 
movement is perceived as automatic and involuntary. In 
contrast, electrical stimulation of the medial surface of 
the frontal lobes (including the SMA and pre-SMA) 
often provokes the urge to make a movement or at least 
the anticipation that a movement is about to occur 
(Fried et al., 1991).
A functional-imaging study by Lau et al. (2004) 
found that the pre-SMA appears to play a role in volun­
tary behavior. They found that this region became  
active just before people performed spontaneous move­
ments. The experimenters asked the subjects to make a 
finger movement from time to time, whenever they felt 
like doing so. The subjects watched a red light that 
moved around a clock face at about 2.5 sec per revolu­
tion. They were asked to pay attention to the instant 
when they decided to make the movement and report 
the position of the red dot at that time. The decision 
appeared to occur approximately 0.2 sec before the 
movement began. However, fMRI showed that the activity 
of the pre-SMA actually began to increase approxi­
mately 2–3 sec earlier than that, which suggests that the 
neural activity responsible for the decision to move be­
gins before a person is even aware of making that deci­
sion. The results suggest that although we feel that we 
consciously decide when to make a response, the deci­
sion is actually made by brain processes of which we are 
unaware. We do not actually become aware of the decision 
until later.
Evidence suggests that the decision to move is not 
made by neurons in the SMA. Sirigu et al. (2004) used a 
task similar to the one in the study by Lau et al. to inves­
tigate decision making in people with lesions of the 
posterior parietal cortex. They found that people with 
these lesions could accurately report when they started 
the movement, but they were not aware of an intention 
to move prior to making the movement. The investiga­
tors suggest that neural activity in the posterior parietal 
cortex “generates a predictive internal model of the 
upcoming movement.”
What neural circuits are actually responsible for 
making a decision to move? Sirigu and her colleagues 
(2004) note that lesions of the prefrontal cortex (even 
more anterior than the pre-SMA) disrupt people’s plans 
for voluntary action. People with prefrontal lesions will 
react to events but show deficits in initiating behavior, so 
perhaps the prefrontal cortex is an important source of 
these decisions. The posterior parietal cortex may be 
involved in monitoring one’s own plans and intentions 
rather than directly forming these intentions.
A functional imaging study by Soon et al. (2008) 
found evidence that a region of the prefrontal cortex—

	
Control of Movement by the Brain 	
273
of the rostral part of the ventral premotor cortex in the 
monkey brain (area F5) became active when monkeys saw 
people or other monkeys perform various grasping, hold­
ing, or manipulating movements with objects or when 
they performed these movements themselves. Thus, the 
neurons responded to either the sight or the execution of 
particular movements. The investigators named these 
cells mirror neurons. These neurons, located in the ven­
tral premotor cortex, are reciprocally connected with 
neurons in the posterior parietal cortex, and further  
investigation found that this region also contains mirror 
neurons. Given the characteristics of mirror neurons, we 
might expect that they play a role in a monkey’s ability to 
imitate the movements of other monkeys—and Rizzolatti 
and his colleagues found that this inference was correct.
Figure 8.16 shows the anatomy of the major regions of 
the parietal lobe of the human brain that I will discuss in the 
next several subsections of this chapter. (See Figure 8.16.)
Several functional-imaging studies have shown that 
the human brain also contains a circuit of mirror neu­
rons in the rostral part of the inferior parietal lobule (a 
region of the posterior parietal cortex) and the ventral 
premotor area. For example, in a functional imaging 
study, Buccino et al. (2004) had nonmusicians watch 
and then imitate video clips of an expert guitarist placing 
Kurata and Hoffman (1994) trained monkeys to 
move their hand toward the right or left in response to 
either a spatial or a nonspatial signal. The spatial signal 
required the animals to move in the direction indicated 
by signal lights located to the right and left of its hand. 
The nonspatial signal consisted of a pair of lights, one red 
and one green, located in the middle of the display. The 
red light signaled a movement to the left, and the green 
light signaled a movement to the right. The investigators 
temporarily inactivated the premotor cortex with injec­
tions of muscimol. When this region was inactivated, the 
monkeys could still move their hand toward a signal light 
located to the left or right (a nonarbitrary signal), but 
they could no longer make the appropriate movements 
when the red or green signal lights were illuminated.
Similar results are seen in people with damage to the 
premotor cortex. Halsband and Freund (1990) found 
that patients with these lesions could learn to make six 
different movements in response to spatial cues but not 
to arbitrary visual cues. That is, they could learn to point 
to one of six locations in which they had just seen a visual 
stimulus, but they could not learn to use a set of visual, 
auditory, and tactile cues to make particular movements.
Nowak et al. (2009) found further evidence that the 
premotor cortex plays a role in learning to control move­
ments in response to arbitrary stimuli. The investigators 
trained subjects to grasp and lift an object positioned 
between the thumb and forefinger of their right (domi­
nant) hand. The subjects watched a computer screen; 
when a blue dot appeared, they immediately gripped the 
object and lifted it. Sometimes the dot was pale blue, and 
sometimes it was dark blue. The light blue dot indicated 
that the object would weigh 350 gm, and the dark blue 
dot indicated that it would weigh 550 gm. Thus, the 
force needed to grip and lift the object was indicated by 
an arbitrary signal. The subjects learned to grip the  
object more forcefully when the dark blue dot (heavy 
signal) appeared, indicating that the object would be 
heavy. Next, 20 sec of repetitive TMS was applied to the 
subjects’ left dorsal premotor cortex, which inhibits this 
brain region for approximately 30 min. When the sub­
jects were again tested on the task, they did not adjust 
the force of their grip; instead, they used a more forceful 
grip regardless of the brightness of the blue dot.
Imitating and Comprehending 
Movements: Role of the Mirror  
Neuron System
Rizzolatti and his colleagues (Gallese et al., 1996; Rizzolatti 
et al., 2001; Rizzolatti and Sinigaglia, 2010) made some 
interesting observations that have changed the way we 
think about imitating and comprehending the behavior 
of others. The investigators found that neurons in an area 
x mirror neurons  Neurons located in the ventral premotor 
cortex and inferior parietal lobule that respond when the individual 
makes a particular movement or sees another individual making 
that movement.
figure 8.16  Important Motor Regions  
of the Human Brain
In the human brain, the inferior parietal lobule and the 
ventral premotor cortex constitute the primary mirror neuron 
circuit. The parietal reach region plays a role in reaching, 
and the anterior intraparietal sulcus plays a role in grasping.
Premotor
cortex
Supplementary
motor area
Parietal reach
region
Anterior intraparietal
sulcus (aIPS)
Pre-supplementary
motor area
Inferior
parietal
lobule

274	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
his fingers on the neck of a guitar to play a chord. Both 
watching and imitating the guitarist’s movements acti­
vated the mirror neuron circuit.
Several studies have found that the mirror neuron 
system is activated most strongly when one watches a 
behavior in which one is already competent. For exam­
ple, Calvo-Merino et al. (2006) had professional ballet 
dancers watch videos of men or women perform ballet 
moves. Some moves are performed only by men, some 
only by women, and some by both men and women, but 
all of the moves have been seen many times by both male 
and female ballet dancers. The investigators found that 
when women watched women’s moves or when men 
watched men’s moves, the mirror neuron system was 
strongly activated. However, when women watched 
men’s moves or when men watched women’s moves, 
much less activity was seen in this circuit. Thus, the mir­
ror neuron circuit develops sensitivity to the sight of 
movements that the person actually performs, not sim­
ply actions that the person has seen performed. Once 
this sensitivity develops, the circuit is activated by watch­
ing another person perform those movements.
Mirror neurons are activated not only by the perfor­
mance of an action or the sight of someone else perform­
ing that action, but also by sounds that indicate the occur­
rence of a familiar action. For example, Kohler et al. 
(2002) found that mirror neurons in the ventral prefrontal 
cortex of monkeys became active when the animals heard 
sounds they recognized, such as a peanut breaking, a piece 
of paper being ripped, or a stick being dropped. Individual 
neurons—the researchers called them audiovisual neurons—
responded to the sounds of particular actions and to the 
sight of those actions being performed. Presumably, activa­
tion of these neurons by these familiar sounds reminds the 
animals of the actions the sounds represent.
Haslinger et al. (2005) found that the interaction 
between audition and vision worked in the other direc­
tion as well. The investigators showed professional pia­
nists silent videos of a hand playing the piano or making 
meaningless finger movements above a piano keyboard. 
(See Figure 8.17.) Functional imaging showed that when 
the subjects watched actual piano playing, the mirror 
neuron system and visual cortex were activated, as would 
be expected, but the auditory cortex was activated as 
well. Presumably, the musicians imagined what it was 
like to make the meaningful hand and finger move­
ments, activating the mirror neuron system, but also 
imagined what the piano would sound like when the 
keys were pressed, activating the auditory cortex.
Rizzolatti, Fogassi, and Gallese (2001) suggest that 
the mirror neuron circuit helps us to understand the 
actions of others:
[A]n action is understood when its observation 
causes the motor system of the observer to “res­
onate.” So, when we observe a hand grasping an 
figure 8.17  Mirror Neurons in Musicians
Videos of piano playing, but not meaningless finger 
movements, activated the mirror neuron system and also 
the auditory cortex of professional pianists.
(From Haslinger, B., Erhard, P., Altenmüller, E., et al. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 2005, 17, 282–293. Reprinted with permission.)
B
(a)
(b)
apple, the same population of neurons that 
control the execution of grasping movements 
becomes active in the observer’s motor areas. . . . 
In other words, we understand an action be­
cause the motor representation of that action is 
activated in our brain. (p. 661)
By “resonation,” Rizzolatti and his colleagues mean 
that the neural circuits responsible for performing a 
particular action are activated when we see someone 
else beginning to perform that action or even when we 
hear the characteristic sounds produced by that action. 
Feedback from the activation of these circuits gives rise 
to the recognition of the action.
The next time you intently watch someone execut­
ing a skilled action—say, pitching a baseball, swinging a 

	
Control of Movement by the Brain 	
275
manipulating it. Researchers investigating these inter­
actions classify them into two major categories: reach­
ing and grasping. It turns out that different brain 
mechanisms are involved in these two activities.
Most reaching behavior is controlled by vision. As 
we saw in Chapter 6, the dorsal stream of the visual 
system is involved in determining the location of  
objects and, if they are moving, the direction and speed 
of their movement. You will not be surprised to learn 
that connections between the parietal lobe (the end­
point of the dorsal stream of the visual association cor­
tex) and the frontal lobe play a critical role in reaching. 
As we saw in Chapter 6, several regions of the visual  
association cortex are named for particular types of  
objects that we perceive, for example, fusiform face 
area, extrastriate body area, and parahippocampal 
place area. One region of the medial posterior parietal 
cortex has been named the parietal reach region. Con­
nolly, Andersen, and Goodale (2003) found that when 
people were about to make a pointing or reaching 
movement to a particular location this region became 
active. Presumably, the parietal cortex determines the 
location of the target and supplies information about 
this location to motor mechanisms in the frontal cortex. 
(See Figure 8.19 and refer again to Figure 8.16.)
Another region of the posterior parietal cortex, the 
anterior part of the intraparietal sulcus (aIPS), is involved 
in controlling hand and finger movements involved in 
grasping the target object. A functional-imaging study by 
bat, kicking a football, or jumping a hurdle—see 
whether you don’t find yourself tensing the muscles that 
you would use if you were performing the action. Pre­
sumably, the activation of the mirror neuron circuit is 
responsible for this effect. As we will see in Chapter 11, 
we also tend to copy facial expressions of emotion that 
other people make, and feedback from doing so tends 
to evoke a similar emotional state in us.
A functional-imaging study by Iacoboni et al. (2005) 
suggests that the mirror neuron system helps us to un­
derstand other people’s intentions. The researchers 
showed subjects video clips of an arm and hand reach­
ing for and grasping a drinking mug. The actions were 
shown in isolation or in the context of objects set out for 
a snack (mug, teapot, milk pitcher, sugar bowl, sealed 
jam jar, plate of cookies, and the like) or the same  
objects after the snack had been eaten (mug, milk pitcher 
overturned, cookies missing from the plate, open jam 
jar, and the like). The first context suggests that the  
intent of the action is that of drinking, and the second 
suggests that the intent is that of cleaning up. The inves­
tigators found that watching the reaching action acti­
vated the mirror neuron system of the ventral premotor 
cortex, but there were differences in the activation when 
the action occurred in the two different contexts. (There 
were no differences in the activation caused by simply 
looking at the contexts.) The authors concluded that 
the mirror neuron system encodes not only an action 
but the intent of that action. (See Figure 8.18.)
Control of Reaching and Grasping
Much of our behavior involves interacting with objects 
in our environment. Many of these interactions involve 
reaching for something and then doing something 
with it, such as picking it up, moving it, or otherwise 
figure 8.18  Understanding Intentions
The photographs show the actions and contexts presented 
to the subjects in the experiment by Iacoboni et al. (2005).
(From Iacoboni, M., Molnar-Szakacs, I., Gallese, V., et al. PLoS Biology, 2005, 3, e79.)
Context
After tea
Cleaning up
Action
Intention
Drinking
Before tea
x parietal reach region  A region in the medial posterior parietal 
cortex that plays a critical role in control of pointing or reaching 
with the hands.
figure 8.19  The Parietal Reach Region
An inflated left cerebral hemisphere shows fMRI 
activation of the parietal reach region (PRR) just as people 
were about to make a pointing or reaching movement. 
POS = parieto-occipital sulcus.
(From Connolly, J.D., Andersen, R. A., and Goodale, M.A. Experimental Brain 
Research, 2003, 153, 140–145. Reprinted with permission.)
Medial
surface
PRR
POS
Intraparietal
sulcus

276	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
to one side of the brain, and visual information about a 
hand shaped to grasp the object was transmitted to the 
other side of the brain. Analysis of the brain activation 
showed that information about the nature of the object 
activated the ventral stream (“what”) of the visual system 
and information about the shape of the hand activated 
the aIPS, which is part of the dorsal stream (“where”). 
The results suggest that the aIPS is involved in recogni­
tion of grasping movements as well as their execution.
Deficits of Skilled Movements:  
The Apraxias
Damage to the frontal or parietal cortex on the left side 
of the brain can produce a category of deficits called 
apraxia. Literally, the term means “without action,” but 
apraxia differs from paralysis or weakness that occurs 
when motor structures such as the precentral gyrus, 
basal ganglia, brain stem, or spinal cord are damaged. 
Apraxia refers to the inability to imitate movements or 
produce them in response to verbal instructions or  
inability to demonstrate the movements that would be 
made in using a familiar tool or utensil (Leiguarda and 
Marsden, 2000). Neuropsychological studies of the 
apraxias have provided information about the way 
skilled behaviors are organized and initiated.
There are four major types of apraxia, two of which 
I will discuss in this chapter. Limb apraxia refers to prob­
lems with movements of the arms, hands, and fingers. 
Oral apraxia refers to problems with movements of the 
muscles used in speech. Apraxic agraphia refers to a par­
ticular type of writing deficit. Constructional apraxia refers 
to difficulty in drawing or constructing objects. Because 
of their relation to language, I will describe oral apraxia 
and the various forms of agraphia in Chapter 14.
Limb Apraxia
Limb apraxia is characterized by movement of the wrong 
part of the limb, incorrect movement of the correct part, 
or correct movements but in the incorrect sequence. It 
is assessed by asking patients to perform movements—
for example, imitating hand gestures made by the exam­
iner. The most difficult movements involve pantomim­
ing particular acts without the presence of the objects 
that are normally acted upon. For example, the exam­
iner might say to the patient, “Pretend you have a key in 
your hand and open a door with it.” In response, a pa­
tient with limb apraxia might wave his wrist back and 
forth rather than rotating it or might rotate his wrist first 
and then pretend to insert the key. Or if asked to pre­
tend that she is brushing her teeth, a patient might use 
Frey et al. (2004) had people reach for objects of different 
shapes, which required them to make a variety of hand 
and finger movements to hold onto the objects. The 
brain activity directly related to grasping movements was 
determined by subtracting the activity produced by reach­
ing for and simply touching the objects from the activity 
produced by reaching for and grasping the objects. The 
grasping activity activated the aIPS. (See Figure 8.20 and 
refer again to Figures 8.16 and 8.19.)
An experiment by Tunik, Frey, and Grafton (2005) 
confirmed the importance of the aIPS to grasping. The 
investigators had subjects reach for and grasp a rectan­
gular object that was oriented with its long side in a 
vertical or horizontal position. On some trials (“per­
turbed trials”) the object suddenly rotated during the 
subjects’ reaching movements, which required the sub­
jects to adjust the position of their hand or fingers be­
fore they reached the object. On some of these per­
turbed trials the investigators applied transcranial 
magnetic stimulation that disrupted the activity of the 
aIPS. When the disruptive stimulation occurred shortly 
after the rotation of the object, the subjects’ ability to 
accurately change grip posture was disrupted. Stimula­
tion of the hand area of the primary motor cortex or 
other parts of the parietal lobe had no effect.
The visual input to the aIPS is, of course, from  
the dorsal stream of the visual system. In a functional- 
imaging study by Shmuelof and Zohary (2005), subjects 
watched brief videos of a hand reaching out to grasp a 
variety of objects. Sometimes the hand appeared in the 
left visual field and the object appeared in the right  
visual field; sometimes the locations for the hand and 
the object were reversed. (The subjects focused their 
gaze on a fixation point located between the hand and 
the object.) This procedure means that, for a particular 
trial, visual information about an object was transmitted 
figure 8.20  Activation of the Anterior 
Intraparietal Sulcus
The activation is produced by grasping movements made 
while reaching for objects with different shapes. Activity 
made by reaching for and simply touching the objects was 
subtracted from activity made by reaching and grasping, 
leaving only the grasping component of fMRI activation.
(From Frey, S. H., Vinton, D., Norlund, R., and Grafton, S. T. Cognitive Brain 
Research, 2005, 23, 397–405. Reprinted with permission.)
x apraxia  Difficulty in carrying out purposeful movements, in the 
absence of paralysis or muscular weakness.

	
Control of Movement by the Brain 	
277
types of skilled movements with their arms and hands. 
They have no trouble using objects properly, imitating 
their use, or pretending to use them. However, they have 
trouble drawing pictures or assembling objects from ele­
ments such as toy building blocks.
The primary deficit in constructional apraxia  
appears to involve the ability to perceive and imagine 
geometrical relations. Because of this deficit, a person 
cannot draw a picture, say, of a cube, because he or she 
cannot imagine what the lines and angles of a cube look 
like, not because of difficulty controlling the movements 
of his or her arm and hand. (See Figure 8.22.) Besides 
being unable to draw accurately, a person with construc­
tional apraxia invariably has trouble with other tasks  
involving spatial perception, such as following a map.
The Basal Ganglia
Anatomy And Function
The basal ganglia constitute an important component 
of the motor system. We know that they are important 
because their destruction by disease or injury causes  
severe motor deficits. The motor nuclei of the basal gan­
glia include the caudate nucleus, putamen, and globus  
pallidus. The basal ganglia receive most of their input 
from all regions of the cerebral cortex (but especially 
the primary motor cortex and primary somatosensory 
cortex) and the substantia nigra. They have two primary 
outputs: the primary motor cortex, supplementary motor 
her finger as though it were a toothbrush rather than 
pretending to hold a toothbrush in her hand.
To perform behaviors on verbal command without 
having a real object to manipulate, a person must com­
prehend the command and be able to imagine the miss­
ing article as well as to make the proper movements; 
therefore, these requests are the most difficult to carry 
out. Somewhat easier are tasks that involve imitating 
behaviors performed by the experimenter. Sometimes, 
a patient who cannot mime the use of a key can copy the 
examiner’s hand movements. The easiest tasks involve 
the actual use of objects. For example, the examiner 
might give the patient a door key and ask him or her to 
demonstrate its use. If the brain lesion makes it impos­
sible for the patient to understand speech, then the  
examiner cannot assess the ability to perform behaviors 
on verbal command. In this case the examiner can only 
measure the patient’s ability to imitate movements or 
use actual objects. (See Heilman, Rothi, and Kertesz, 
1983, for a review.)
Why does damage to the left parietal hemisphere, 
but usually not the right, cause an apraxia of both 
hands? The answer seems to be that the right hemisph­
ere is involved with extrapersonal space and the left 
hemisphere is involved with one’s own body. A functional-
imaging study by Chaminade, Meltzoff, and Decety 
(2005) supports this explanation. The investigators asked 
subjects to watch another person perform hand and 
arm gestures and then either imitate the gestures or make 
different ones with the same arm or the other arm. On 
the basis of the activity seen by fMRI scans, the authors 
concluded that posterior regions of the right hemi­
sphere tracked the movements of the model in space, 
while the left parietal lobe organized the movements 
that would be made in response.
Although the frontal and parietal lobes are both 
involved in the imitating hand gestures made by other 
people, the frontal cortex appears to play a more impor­
tant role in recognizing the meaning of these gestures. 
Pazzaglia et al. (2008) tested patients with limb apraxia 
caused by damage to the left frontal or parietal lobes. 
They tested the patients’ recognition of hand gestures 
by having them watch video clips in which a person per­
formed the gestures correctly or incorrectly. For exam­
ple, incorrect gestures included playing a broom as if it 
were a guitar or pretending to hitchhike by extending 
the little finger instead of the thumb. Apraxic patients 
with damage to the inferior frontal gyrus, but not to the 
parietal cortex, showed deficits in comprehension of the 
gestures. (See figure 8.21.)
Constructional Apraxia
Constructional apraxia is caused by lesions of the right 
hemisphere, particularly the right parietal lobe. People 
with this disorder do not have difficulty making most 
figure 8.21  Lesions Causing Limb Apraxia
Left hemisphere lesions in the frontal and parietal lobes 
cause limb apraxia. Lesions in red regions interfere with 
the ability of patients to comprehend the gestures made 
by other people.
(From Pazzaglia, M., Smania, N., Corato, E., and Aglioti, S. M. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2008, 28, 3030–3041. Reprinted with permission.)
Rostral
Caudal
x constructional apraxia  Difficulty in drawing pictures or diagrams 
or in making geometrical constructions of elements such as building 
blocks or sticks; caused by damage to the right parietal lobe.

278	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
basal ganglia can monitor somatosensory information 
and are informed of movements being planned and 
executed by the motor cortex. Using this information 
(and other information they receive from other parts of 
the brain), they can then influence the movements con­
trolled by the motor cortex. Throughout this circuit, 
information is represented somatotopically. That is, pro­
jections from neurons in the motor cortex that cause 
movements in particular parts of the body project to 
particular parts of the putamen, and this segregation is 
maintained all the way back to the motor cortex. (See 
Figure 8.23b.) Another important input to the basal gan­
glia comes from the substantia nigra of the midbrain. 
We saw in Chapter 4 that degeneration of the nigrostriatal 
bundle, the dopaminergic pathway from the substantia 
nigra to the caudate nucleus and putamen (the neostria-
tum), causes Parkinson’s disease. (I will say more about 
the neural circuits involved in this disorder in the next 
subsection.) (Look again at Figure 8.23b.)
Now let’s consider some of the complexities of the 
cortical–basal ganglia loop. The links in the loop are 
made by both excitatory (glutamate-secreting) neurons 
and inhibitory (GABA-secreting) neurons. The caudate 
nucleus and putamen receive excitatory input from the 
cerebral cortex. They send inhibitory axons to the exter­
nal and internal divisions of the globus pallidus (the GPi 
and the GPe, respectively). The subthalamic nucleus 
also receives excitatory input from the cerebral cortex, 
and it sends excitatory input to the GPi. The pathway 
shown in solid lines that includes the GPi is known as the 
direct pathway. Neurons in GPi send inhibitory axons to 
the ventral anterior and ventrolateral thalamus (VA/VL 
thalamus), which send excitatory projections to the  
motor cortex. The net effect of the loop is excitatory 
area, and premotor cortex (via the thalamus) and mo­
tor nuclei of the brain stem that contribute to the ven­
tromedial pathways. Through these connections the 
basal ganglia influence movements under the control of 
the primary motor cortex and exert some direct control 
over the ventromedial system.
Figure 8.23(a) illustrates the components of the 
basal ganglia: the caudate nucleus, the putamen, and 
the globus pallidus. It also shows some nuclei associated 
with the basal ganglia: the ventral anterior nucleus and 
ventrolateral nucleus of the thalamus, the subthalamic 
nucleus, and the substantia nigra of the ventral mid­
brain. (See Figure 8.23a.)
Figure 8.23(b) shows some of the more important 
connections of the basal ganglia and helps to explain 
the role these structures play in the control of move­
ment. For the sake of clarity this figure leaves out many 
connections, including inputs to the substantia nigra 
from the basal ganglia and other structures. First, let’s 
take a quick look at the loop formed between the cortex 
and the basal ganglia. The frontal, parietal, and tempo­
ral cortex send axons to the caudate nucleus and the 
putamen, which then connect with the globus pallidus. 
The globus pallidus sends information back to the  
motor cortex via the ventral anterior and ventrolateral 
nuclei of the thalamus, completing the loop. Thus, the 
figure 8.22  Constructional Apraxia
An attempt to copy a cube by a patient with constructional 
apraxia caused by a lesion of the right parietal lobe.
(From Fundamentals of Human Neuropsychology, by B. Kolb and I. Q. Whishaw. 
W. H. Freeman and Company. Copyright © 1980. Reprinted with permission.)
Model
Patient's copy
x caudate nucleus  A telencephalic nucleus, one of the input 
nuclei of basal ganglia; involved with control of voluntary movement.
x putamen  A telencephalic nucleus; one of the input nuclei of 
the basal ganglia; involved with control of voluntary movement.
x globus pallidus  A telencephalic nucleus; the primary output 
nucleus of the basal ganglia; involved with control of voluntary 
movement.
x ventral anterior nucleus (of thalamus)  A thalamic nucleus 
that receives projections from the basal ganglia and sends 
projections to the motor cortex.
x ventrolateral nucleus (of thalamus)  A thalamic nucleus that 
receives projections from the basal ganglia and sends projections 
to the motor cortex.
x subthalamic nucleus  A nucleus located ventral to the 
thalamus, an important part of the subcortical motor system that 
includes the basal ganglia; a target of deep-brain stimulation for 
treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
x direct pathway (in basal ganglia)  The pathway that includes 
the caudate nucleus and putamen, the internal division of the 
globus pallidus, and the ventral anterior/ventrolateral thalamic 
nuclei; has an excitatory effect on movement.

	
Control of Movement by the Brain 	
279
GPe send inhibitory input to the subthalamic nucleus, 
which sends excitatory input to the GPi. From there on, 
the circuit is identical to the one we just examined— 
except that the ultimate effect of this loop on the thalamus 
and frontal cortex is inhibitory. The globus pallidus also 
because it contains two inhibitory links. Each inhibitory 
link (red arrow) reverses the sign of the input to that 
link. Thus, excitatory input to the caudate nucleus and 
putamen causes these structures to inhibit neurons in 
the GPi. This inhibition removes the inhibitory effect of 
the connections between the GPi on the VA/VL thala­
mus; in other words, neurons in the VA/VL thalamus 
become more excited. This excitation is passed on to 
the motor cortex, where it facilitates movements. (Look 
again at Figure 8.23b.)
The pathway shown in broken lines, which includes 
the GPe, is known as the indirect pathway. Neurons in 
figure 8.23  Basal Ganglia
(a) The locations of the components of the basal ganglia and associated structures.  
(b) The major connections of the basal ganglia and associated structures. Excitatory 
connections are shown as black lines; inhibitory connections are shown as red lines. 
The direct pathway is indicated by arrows with solid lines. The indirect pathway is 
indicated by arrows with broken lines. The hyperdirect pathway is indicated by arrows 
with dotted lines. Many connections, such as the inputs to the substantia nigra, are 
omitted for clarity.
 
 
 
Substantia
nigra
Subthalamus
VA/VL thalamus
Subthalamic nucleus
To motor nuclei
in the brain stem
(ventromedial
system)
Substantia nigra
Excitatory effect
on D1 receptors
Globus pallidus,
external
Globus pallidus,
internal
Caudate nucleus
and putamen
Dopaminergic
axons
Excited by direct pathway;
inhibited by indirect pathway
Premotor
cortex
External division
Internal division
Putamen
Ventral anterior nucleus
Ventrolateral nucleus
Caudate
nucleus
Supplementary
motor area
Primary motor
cortex
Primary somatosensory
cortex
Globus Pallidus
Thalamus
Forebrain
Midbrain
(a)
(b)
Direct
pathway
Inhibitory effect
on D2 receptors
Pre-supplementary
motor area
Hyperdirect
pathway
Indirect
pathway
Indirect
pathway
x indirect pathway (in basal ganglia)  The pathway that includes 
the caudate nucleus and putamen, the external division of the 
globus pallidus, the subthalamic nucleus, the internal division of 
the globus pallidus, and the ventral anterior/ventrolateral thalamic 
nuclei; has an inhibitory effect on movement.

280	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
quickly move to restore balance—for example, by taking 
a step in the direction of the impending fall or by reach­
ing out with the arms to grasp a piece of furniture. How­
ever, a person with Parkinson’s disease fails to do so and 
simply falls. A person with this disorder is even unlikely 
to put out his or her arms to break the fall.
Many of the symptoms I have just described can  
be explained as a deficiency of automatic, habitual  
responses (Redgrave et al., 2010). As we will see in Chap­
ter 13, the basal ganglia play an essential role in the 
learning and execution of automatic actions, as opposed 
to deliberate actions. For example, learning a complex 
skilled behavior such as driving a car requires thought­
ful, deliberate actions. Someone who is driving a car for 
the first time will have to concentrate on what he or she 
is doing and will find that the demands of the task make 
it very difficult to carry on a conversation. However, the 
actions of an experienced driver are much more auto­
matic, freeing up some brain resources to devote to a 
conversation or thoughts about the plans for that day. 
Disruption of the normal functions of the basal ganglia 
means that people with Parkinson’s disease have diffi­
culty performing tasks automatically. As the disease pro­
gresses, they must “think through” actions that were 
previously automatic, which means that the actions  
become slower and demand more brain resources for 
their accomplishment.
Parkinson’s disease also produces a resting tremor—
vibratory movements of the arms and hands that dimin­
ish somewhat when the individual makes purposeful 
movements. The tremor is accompanied by rigidity; the 
joints appear stiff. However, the tremor and rigidity are 
not the cause of the slow movements. In fact, some  
patients with Parkinson’s disease show extreme slowness 
of movements but little or no tremor.
Let’s look at Figure 8.23(b) again to see why damage 
to the nigrostriatal bundle causes slowness of movements 
and disrupts postural adjustments. Normal movements 
require an appropriate balance between the direct (ex­
citatory) and indirect (inhibitory) pathways. The caudate 
nucleus and putamen consist of two different zones, both 
of which receive input from dopaminergic neurons of 
the substantia nigra. One of these zones contains D1 do­
pamine receptors, which produce excitatory effects. Neu­
rons in this zone send their axons to the GPi. Neurons in 
the other zone contain D2 receptors, which produce in­
hibitory effects. These neurons send their axons to the 
GPe. (Look again at Figure 8.23b.) The first of these cir­
cuits, beginning with the black arrow from the substantia 
sends axons to various motor nuclei in the brain stem 
that contribute to the ventromedial system. The effect 
of this pathway is to inhibit the motor cortex. (Look 
once again at Figure 8.23b.)
A third pathway is known as the hyperdirect pathway. 
Neurons in the pre-SMA send excitatory input to the 
subthalamic nucleus, which sends excitatory input to 
the GPi. As we just saw, the GPi has an inhibitory effect 
on the motor cortex, so the hyperdirect pathway inhibits 
movements. The general functions of the direct and 
indirect pathways have long been understood. However, 
the hyperdirect pathway was recognized much more  
recently (Nambu, Tokuno, and Takada, 2000; Gerfen, 
2000). This pathway bypasses the caudate nucleus and 
putamen and is thus able to inhibit movement with a 
much shorter delay than the indirect pathway. Most  
investigators believe that this pathway plays a role in 
preventing or quickly stopping movements that are  
being initiated by the direct pathway (Nachev, Kennard, 
and Husain, 2008; Nambu, 2008). For example, suppose 
that you are jogging down a city street. As you approach 
a cross street, you see that the stoplight is red, so you 
stop running. The indirect pathway plays a role in the 
inhibition of your jogging. (Perhaps not completely—
perhaps you jog in place while you wait for the light to 
change.) The light turns green, and this go signal is  
reflected by increased activity of your direct pathway. 
You lean forward and raise a foot to begin jogging again. 
Suddenly, you hear the roar of a speeding car immedi­
ately to your left. You quickly stop, and before you can 
turn you head to look for the source of the noise, a car 
that has just run through the red light passes in front of 
you. Activity in your hyperdirect pathway has just saved 
your life.
Parkinson’s Disease
Now that you understand the roles played by the three 
cortical–basal ganglia loops, you can understand the 
symptoms and treatment of two important neurological 
disorders: Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s dis­
ease. The primary symptoms of Parkinson’s disease are 
muscular rigidity, slowness of movement, a resting 
tremor, and postural instability. For example, once a 
person with Parkinson’s disease is seated, he or she finds 
it difficult to arise. Once the person begins walking, he 
or she has difficulty stopping. Thus, a person with Par­
kinson’s disease cannot easily pace back and forth across 
a room. Reaching for an object can be accurate, but the 
movement usually begins only after a considerable  
delay, and the individual components of the movement 
(a series of trunk, arm, hand, and finger movements) 
are poorly coordinated (Poizner et al., 2000). Writing is 
slow and labored, and as it progresses, the letters get 
smaller and smaller. Postural movements are impaired. 
A normal person who is bumped while standing will 
x hyperdirect pathway  An excitatory pathway from the 
pre-SMA to the subthalamic nucleus that increases the activity of 
the GPi and appears to play a role in preventing or quickly stopping 
movements that are being initiated by the direct pathway.

	
Control of Movement by the Brain 	
281
In recent years, clinicians have worked developing 
new ways to treat Parkinson’s disease, including stereo­
taxic surgery and implantation of stimulating electrodes 
in various regions of the basal ganglia. In addition, 
much research has been done on discovering the causes 
of the disease. I will describe these efforts in Chapter 15.
Huntington’s Disease
Another basal ganglia disease, Huntington’s disease, is 
caused by degeneration of the caudate nucleus and puta­
men, especially of GABAergic and acetylcholinergic 
neurons. (See Figure 8.24.) Whereas Parkinson’s disease 
causes a poverty of movements, Huntington’s disease, for­
merly called Huntington’s chorea, causes uncontrollable 
ones, especially jerky limb movements. (The term chorea 
derives from the Greek khoros, meaning “dance.”) The 
movements of Huntington’s disease look like fragments 
of purposeful movements but occur involuntarily. This 
disease is progressive and eventually causes death.
The symptoms of Huntington’s disease usually be­
gin in the patient’s thirties or forties but can sometimes 
begin in the early twenties. The first signs of neural  
nigra, goes through two inhibitory synapses (red arrows) 
before it reaches the VA/VL thalamus; thus, this circuit 
has an excitatory effect on behavior. The second of these 
circuits begins with an inhibitory input to the caudate 
nucleus and putamen, but it goes through four inhibitory 
synapses in the following pathway: substantia nigra → 
caudate/putamen → GPe → subthalamic nucleus → 
GPi → VA/VL thalamus. Thus, the effect of this path­
way, too, is excitatory; thus, dopaminergic input to the 
caudate nucleus and putamen facilitate movements. Note 
that the GPi also sends axons to the ventromedial system. 
A decrease in this inhibitory output is probably responsi­
ble for the muscular rigidity and poor control of posture 
seen in Parkinson’s disease. (Refer again to Figure 8.23b.)
As we saw in Chapter 4, the standard treatment for 
Parkinson’s disease is l-DOPA, the precursor of dopa­
mine. When an increased amount of l-DOPA is present, 
the remaining nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons in a 
patient with Parkinson’s disease will produce and  
release more dopamine. But this compensation often 
produces dyskinesias and dystonias—involuntary move­
ments and postures that are presumably caused by too 
much stimulation of dopamine receptors in the basal 
ganglia. In addition, l-DOPA does not work indefinitely; 
eventually, the number of nigrostriatal dopaminergic 
neurons declines to such a low level that the symptoms 
become worse. Some patients—especially those whose 
symptoms began when they were relatively young—
eventually become bedridden, scarcely able to move.
x Huntington’s disease  A fatal inherited disorder that causes 
degeneration of the caudate nucleus and putamen; characterized 
by uncontrollable jerking movements, writhing movements, and 
dementia.
figure 8.24  Huntington’s Disease
(a) A slice through a normal human brain, showing the normal appearance of the caudate 
nuclei and putamen (arrowheads) and lateral ventricles. (b) A slice through the brain of a 
person who had Huntington’s disease. The arrowheads indicate the location of the 
caudate nuclei and putamen, which are severely degenerated. As a consequence of the 
degeneration, the lateral ventricles (open spaces in the middle of the slice) have enlarged.
(Courtesy of Harvard Medical School/Betty G. Martindale and Anthony D’Agostino, Good Samaritan Hospital,  
Portland, Oregon.)
(a) Normal
(b) Huntington’s disease

282	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
vestibulospinal and reticulospinal tracts, two of the 
three ventromedial pathways. (See the blue lines in 
Figure 8.25.)
The rest of the cerebellar cortex receives most of its 
input from the cerebral cortex, including the primary 
motor cortex and association cortex. This input is relayed 
to the cerebellar cortex through the pontine tegmental 
reticular nucleus. The intermediate zone of the cerebel­
lar cortex projects to the interposed nuclei, which in 
turn project to the red nucleus. Thus, the intermediate 
zone influences the control of the rubrospinal system 
over movements of the arms and legs. The interposed 
nuclei also send outputs to the ventrolateral thalamic 
nucleus, which projects to the motor cortex. (See the 
red lines in Figure 8.25.)
The lateral zone of the cerebellum is involved in the 
control of independent limb movements, especially 
rapid, skilled movements. Such movements are initiated 
by neurons in the frontal association cortex, which con­
trol neurons in the primary motor cortex. But although 
the frontal cortex can plan and initiate movements, it 
does not contain the neural circuitry needed to calculate 
the complex, closely timed sequences of muscular con­
tractions that are needed for rapid, skilled movements. 
That task falls to the lateral zone of the cerebellum.
Both the frontal association cortex and the primary 
motor cortex send information about intended move­
ments to the lateral zone of the cerebellum via the pontine 
 nucleus. The lateral zone also receives information from 
the somatosensory system, which informs it about the 
current position and rate of movement of the limbs— 
information that is necessary for computing the details of 
a movement. When the cerebellum receives information 
that the motor cortex has begun to initiate a movement, 
it computes the contribution that various muscles will 
have to make to perform that movement. The results  
of this computation are sent to the dentate nucleus,  
another of the deep cerebellar nuclei. Neurons in the den­
tate nucleus pass the information on to the ventrolateral 
degeneration occur in the caudate nucleus and the  
putamen—specifically, in the medium-sized spiny inhib­
itory neurons whose axons travel to the external division 
of the globus pallidus. The loss of inhibition provided by 
these GABA-secreting neurons increases the activity of 
the GPe, which then inhibits the subthalamic nucleus.  
As a consequence, the activity level of the GPi decreases, 
and excessive movements occur. (Refer again to Figure 
8.23b.) As the disease progresses, the caudate nucleus 
and putamen degenerate until almost all of their neu­
rons disappear. The patient dies from complications of 
immobility. Unfortunately, there is at present no effective 
treatment for this disorder.
Huntington’s disease is a hereditary disorder, caused 
by a dominant gene on chromosome 4. In fact, the gene 
has been located, and its defect has been identified as a 
repeated sequence of bases that code for the amino acid 
glutamine (Collaborative Research Group, 1993). This 
repeated sequence causes the gene product—a protein 
called huntingtin—to contain an elongated stretch of 
glutamine. Longer stretches of glutamine are associated 
with patients whose symptoms began at a younger age, 
which strongly suggests that this abnormal portion  
of the huntingtin molecule is responsible for the dis­
ease. Research on the role that abnormal huntingtin 
plays in death of basal ganglia neurons is described in 
Chapter 15.
The Cerebellum
The cerebellum is an important part of the motor sys­
tem. It contains about 50 billion neurons, compared to 
the approximately 22 billion neurons in the cerebral 
cortex. Its outputs project to every major motor struc­
ture of the brain. When it is damaged, people’s move­
ments become jerky, erratic, and uncoordinated. The 
cerebellum consists of two hemispheres that contain 
several deep nuclei situated beneath the wrinkled and 
folded cerebellar cortex. Thus, the cerebellum resem­
bles the cerebrum in miniature. The medial part of the 
cerebellum is phylogenetically older than the lateral 
part, and it participates in control of the ventromedial 
system. The flocculonodular lobe, located at the caudal 
end of the cerebellum, receives input from the vestibu­
lar system and projects axons to the vestibular nucleus. 
You will not be surprised to learn that this system is  
involved in postural reflexes. (See the green lines in  
Figure 8.25.) The vermis (“worm”), located on the mid­
line, receives auditory and visual information from the 
tectum and cutaneous and kinesthetic information 
from the spinal cord. It sends its outputs to the fastigial 
nucleus (one of the set of deep cerebellar nuclei). Neu­
rons in the fastigial nucleus send axons to the vestibular 
nucleus and to motor nuclei in the reticular formation. 
Thus, these neurons influence behavior through the 
x flocculonodular lobe  A region of the cerebellum; involved in 
control of postural reflexes.
x vermis  The portion of the cerebellum located at the midline; 
receives somatosensory information and helps to control the 
vestibulospinal and reticulospinal tracts through its connections 
with the fastigial nucleus.
x fastigial nucleus  A deep cerebellar nucleus; involved in the 
control of movement by the reticulospinal and vestibulospinal tracts.
x interposed nuclei  A set of deep cerebellar nuclei; involved in 
the control of the rubrospinal system.
x pontine nucleus  A large nucleus in the pons that serves as an 
important source of input to the cerebellum.
x dentate nucleus  A deep cerebellar nucleus; involved in the 
control of rapid, skilled movements by the corticospinal and 
rubrospinal systems.

	
Control of Movement by the Brain 	
283
cortex. The lateral zone of the cerebellum also sends  
efferents to the red nucleus (again, via the dentate  
nucleus); thus, it helps to control independent limb move­
ments through this system as well. (See Figure 8.26.)
thalamus, which projects to the primary motor cortex. 
The projection from the ventrolateral thalamus to the 
primary motor cortex enables the cerebellum to modify 
the ongoing movement that was initiated by the frontal 
figure 8.25  Inputs and Outputs of the Cerebellum
The figure shows the inputs and outputs of three systems: flocculonodular lobe (green 
lines), the vermis (blue lines), and the intermediate zone of the cerebellar cortex (red lines).
Pontine
tegmental
reticular
nucleus
Spinocerebellar
tract
Spinal
cord
Caudal
medulla
From vestibular
system
Cutaneous and
kinesthetic input
Flocculonodular
lobe
Flocculonodular
lobe
Dorsal view of cerebellar
cortex unrolled and
laid out flat
Lateral
zone
Vestibulospinal
tract
Vestibular
nucleus
Rostral
medulla
Intermediate
zone
Vermis
Fastigial
nucleus
Interposed
nuclei
Reticulospinal
tract
Intermediate
lobe
Cerebellum
Vermis
Tectum
From cerebral cortex
To ventrolateral
thalamic nucleus
Red
nucleus
Rubrospinal
tract
Potine
reticular
formation

284	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
Lesions of the lateral zone of the cerebellar cortex 
also appear to impair the timing of rapid ballistic move­
ments. Ballistic (literally, “throwing”) movements occur 
too fast to be modified by feedback. The sequence of 
muscular movements must then be programmed in ad­
vance, and the individual muscles must be activated at 
the proper times. You might like to try this common 
neurological test: Have a friend place his or her finger in 
front of your face, about three-quarters of an arm’s 
length away. While your friend slowly moves his or her 
finger around to serve as a moving target, alternately 
touch your nose and your friend’s finger as rapidly as you 
can. If your cerebellum is normal, you can successfully 
hit your nose and your friend’s finger without too much 
trouble. People with lateral cerebellar damage have great 
difficulty; they tend to miss the examiner’s hand and 
poke themselves in the eye. (I have often wondered why 
neurologists do not adopt a less dangerous test.)
When making rapid, aimed movements, we cannot 
rely on feedback to stop the movement when we reach 
the target. By the time we perceive that our finger has 
reached the proper place, it is too late to stop the move­
ment, and we will overshoot the target if we try to stop it 
then. Instead of relying on feedback, the movement  
appears to be timed. We estimate the distance between our  
hand and the target, and our cerebellum calculates the 
amount of time that the muscles will have to be turned 
on. After the proper amount of time, the cerebellum 
briefly turns on antagonistic muscles to stop the move­
ment. In fact, Kornhuber (1974) suggested that one of 
the primary functions of the cerebellum is timing the 
duration of rapid movements. Obviously, learning must 
play a role in controlling such movements.
Timmann, Watts, and Hore (1999) reported an  
interesting example of the role the cerebellum plays in 
timing sequences of muscular contractions. When toss­
ing a ball at a target using an overarm throw, a person 
raises his or her hand above the shoulder, rotates the 
arm forward, and then releases the ball by extending  
the fingers—moving them apart. The timing of the  
release is critical: too soon and the ball goes too high, 
too late and it goes too low. The researchers found that 
normal subjects released the ball within an 11-msec win­
dow 95 percent of the time. Patients with cerebellar le­
sions did five times worse: Their window was 55 msec wide.
The cerebellum also appears to integrate successive 
sequences of movements that must be performed one  
after the other. For example, Holmes (1939) reported 
that one of his patients said, “The movements of my left 
arm are done subconsciously, but I have to think out 
each movement of the right [affected] arm. I come to a 
dead stop in turning and have to think before I start 
again.” Thach (1978) obtained experimental evidence 
that corroborates this role. He found that many neurons 
in the dentate nuclei (which receive inputs from the 
In humans, lesions of different regions of the cer­
ebellum produce different symptoms. Damage to the 
flocculonodular lobe or the vermis causes disturbances 
in posture and balance. Damage to the intermediate 
zone produces deficits in movements controlled by 
the rubrospinal system; the principal symptom of this 
damage is limb rigidity. Damage to the lateral zone 
causes weakness and decomposition of movement. For  
example, a person with this kind of damage who is  
attempting to bring the hand to the mouth will make 
separate movements of the joints of the shoulder,  
elbow, and wrist instead of performing simultaneous 
smooth movements.
figure 8.26  Inputs and Outputs of the Lateral 
Zone of the Cerebellar Cortex
The lateral zone receives information about impending 
movements from the frontal lobes and helps to smooth 
and integrate the movements through its connections to 
the primary motor cortex and red nucleus through the 
dentate nucleus and ventral thalamus.
Primary motor
cortex
Red
nucleus
Ventral
anterior
nucleus
To spinal cord,
muscles
Dentate
nucleus
Cerebellum
Pontine
nucleus

	
Control of Movement by the Brain 	
285
The Reticular Formation
The reticular formation consists of a large number of 
nuclei located in the core of the medulla, pons, and 
midbrain. The reticular formation controls the activity 
of the gamma motor system and hence regulates mus­
cle tonus. In addition, the pons and medulla contain 
several nuclei with specific motor functions. For  
example, different locations in the medulla control 
automatic or semiautomatic responses such as respira­
tion, sneezing, coughing, and vomiting. As we saw, the 
ventromedial pathways originate in the superior col­
liculi, vestibular nuclei, and reticular formation. Thus, 
the reticular formation plays a role in the control of 
posture.
The reticular formation also plays a role in loco­
motion. Stimulation of the mesencephalic locomotor 
region, located ventral to the inferior colliculus, causes 
a cat to make pacing movements (Shik and Orlovsky, 
1976). The mesencephalic locomotor region does not 
send fibers directly to the spinal cord but apparently 
controls the activity of reticulospinal tract neurons.
The reticular formation also appears to exert con­
trol over some very specific behaviors. For example, 
Siegel and McGinty (1977) recorded from thirty-five 
single neurons in the reticular formation of unanesthe­
tized, freely moving cats. Thirty-two of these neurons 
responded during specific movements of the head, 
tongue, facial muscles, ears, forepaw, or shoulder. The 
specific nature of the relationships suggests that the 
neurons play some role in controlling the movements. 
For example, one neuron responded when the tongue 
moved out and to the left. The functions of these neu­
rons and the range of movements they control are not 
yet known.
lateral zone of the cerebellar cortex) showed response 
patterns that predicted the next movement in a sequence 
rather than the one that was currently taking place. Pre­
sumably, the cerebellum was planning these movements.
Dr. S., a professor of neurology at the medical school, 
stood on the stage of the auditorium as he presented  
a case to a group of physicians and students. He dis-
cussed the symptoms and possible causes of cerebellar–
brain stem degeneration. “Now I’d like to present  
Mr. P.,” he said, as a set of MRI scans appeared on the 
screen. “As you can see, Mr. P.’s cerebellum shows sub-
stantial degeneration, but we can’t see evidence of any 
damage to the brain stem.”
Dr. S. left the stage and returned, pushing Mr. P. 
onstage in a wheelchair.
“Mr. P., how are you feeling today?”
“I’m fine,” he replied. “Of course, I’d feel better if  
I could have walked out here myself.”
“Of course.”
Dr. S. chatted with Mr. P. for a few minutes, getting 
him to talk enough so that we could see that his mental 
condition was lucid and that he had no obvious speech 
or memory problems.
“Okay, Mr. P., I’d like you to make some move-
ments.” He faced Mr. P. and said, “Please stretch your 
hands out and hold them like this.” Dr. S. suddenly 
raised his arms from his sides and held them out straight 
in front of him, palms down, fingers pointing forward.
Mr. P. did not respond immediately. He looked as if 
he were considering what to do. Suddenly, his arms 
straightened out and lifted from the armrests of the 
wheelchair. Instead of stopping when they were pointed 
straight ahead of him, they continued upward. Mr. P. 
grunted, and his arms began flailing around—up, down, 
left, and right—until he finally managed to hold them 
outstretched in front of him. He was panting with the 
effort to hold them there.
“Thank you, Mr. P. Please put your arms down again. 
Now try this.” Dr. S. very slowly raised his arms from his 
side until they were straight out in front of them. Mr. P. 
did the same, and this time there was no overshoot.
After a few more demonstrations, Dr. S. thanked 
Mr. P. and wheeled him offstage. When he returned, he 
reviewed what we had seen.
“When Mr. P. tried to quickly raise his arms in front 
of him, his primary motor cortex sent messages to the 
appropriate muscles, and his arms straightened out and 
began to rise. Normally, the cerebellum is informed 
about the movement and, through its connections back 
to the motor cortex, begins to contract the antagonistic 
muscles at the appropriate time, bringing the arms to 
rest in the intended position. Mr. P. could get the 
movement started just fine, but the damage to his cer-
ebellum eliminated the help this structure gives to rapid 
movements, and he couldn’t stop his arms in time. 
When he tried to move slowly, he could use visual and 
kinesthetic feedback from the position of his arms to 
control the movement.”
x mesencephalic locomotor region  A region of the reticular 
formation of the midbrain whose stimulation causes alternating 
movements of the limbs normally seen during locomotion.

286	
Chapter 8  Control of Movement
Section Summary
Control of Movement by the Brain
The motor systems of the brain are complex. (Having 
read this section, you do not need me to tell you 
that.) A good way to review the systems is through an 
example. Suppose you see, out of the corner of your 
eye, that something is moving. You quickly turn your 
head and eyes toward the source of the movement 
and discover that a vase of flowers on a table some-
one has just bumped is ready to fall. You quickly 
reach forward, grab it, and restore it to a stable, 
upright position. (For simplicity’s sake I will assume 
that you are right-handed.)
The rapid movement of your head and eyes is 
controlled by mechanisms that involve the superior 
colliculi and nearby nuclei. The head movement and 
corresponding movement of the trunk are mediated 
by the tectospinal tract. You perceive the tipping vase 
because of the activity of neurons in your visual asso-
ciation cortex. The dorsal stream of your visual asso-
ciation cortex also contributes spatial information to 
the parietal reaching region in your left hemisphere, 
which calculates the reaching movement you must 
make and transmits this information to the motor 
association cortex in your left frontal lobe. During 
your reaching movement the cortex located in your 
anterior intraparietal sulcus sends information to your 
motor association cortex that moves your hand and 
fingers so that you will be ready to grasp the falling 
vase. Because the movement will have to be very 
rapid, your cerebellum controls its timing on the basis 
of information it receives from the association cortex 
of the frontal and parietal lobes. Your hand stops just 
as it touches the vase, and connections between the 
somatosensory cortex and the primary motor cortex 
initiate a reflex that closes your hand around the vase.
The muscles of your arm and hand are controlled 
through a cooperation between the corticospinal, 
rubrospinal, and ventromedial pathways. Even before 
your hand moves, the ventral corticospinal tract and 
the ventromedial pathways (vestibulospinal and retic-
ulospinal system, largely under the influence of the 
basal ganglia) begin adjusting your posture so that 
you will not fall forward when you suddenly reach in 
front of you. Depending on how far forward you will 
have to reach, the reticulospinal tract may even cause 
one leg to step forward to take your weight. The 
rubrospinal tract controls the muscles of your upper 
arm, and the lateral corticospinal tract controls your 
finger and hand movements. Perhaps you say, trium-
phantly, “I got it!” The corticobulbar pathway, under 
the control of speech mechanisms in the left hemi-
sphere, causes the muscles of your vocal apparatus to 
say these words.
The supplementary motor area (SMA) and the 
premotor cortex receive information from the parietal 
lobe and help to initiate movements through their 
connections with the primary motor cortex. The SMA 
is involved in well-learned behavioral sequences. 
Neurons there fire at particular points in behavioral 
sequences, and disruption or damage impairs the  
ability to perform these sequences. The pre-SMA is 
involved in awareness of our decisions to make spon-
taneous movements. The premotor cortex is involved 
in learning and executing complex movements that 
are guided by arbitrary sensory information, such as 
verbal instructions. This region and the inferior parietal 
lobule constitute a mirror neuron system that plays an 
important role in imitation and understanding the 
actions and intentions of others.
A person with apraxia will have difficulty making 
controlled movements of the limb in response to a 
verbal request or an attempt to imitate another per-
son’s action. Most cases of apraxia are produced by 
lesions of the left frontal or parietal cortex. The left 
parietal cortex directly controls movement of the right 
limb by activating neurons in the left primary motor 
cortex and indirectly controls movement of the left 
limb by sending information to the right frontal  
association cortex.
The basal ganglia are part of a circuit that 
includes the cerebral cortex, the subthalamic nucleus, 
thalamic motor nuclei, and the substantia nigra. The 
direct pathway is involved in excitation of cortical 
mechanisms of motor control, and the indirect and 
hyperdirect pathways are involved in the inhibition of 
these mechanisms. Parkinson’s disease is caused by 
degeneration of dopamine-secreting neurons of the 
substantia nigra that send axons to the basal ganglia. 
An important symptom of this disorder is disruption 
of automatic behaviors. Huntington’s disease, a fatal 
disease caused by a mutation that caused production 

	
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab	
287
of abnormal huntingtin protein, causes degeneration 
of the caudate nucleus and putamen. Although iden-
tification of the faulty protein provides hope for 
understanding the causes of the neural degeneration, 
there is still no treatment for this disorder.
 Thought Question
Think about the kinds of automatic and deliberate 
actions you take in the course of a day. Which of 
these actions do you think would be impaired if you 
had Parkinson’s disease? Explain why.
4.  Describe the four principal motor tracts and the 
movements they control.
5.  Describe the symptoms and causes of limb apraxia 
and constructional apraxia.
6.  Discuss the anatomy and function of the basal  
ganglia and its role in Parkinson’s disease and 
Huntington’s disease.
7.  Discuss the role of the cerebellum and the reticular 
formation in the control of movement.
1.  Describe the three types of muscles found in the 
bodies of mammals and explain the physical basis of 
muscular contraction.
2.  Explain the monosynaptic stretch reflex, the gamma 
motor system, and the contribution of the Golgi  
tendon organ.
3.  Describe the organization of motor cortex and the 
role of the motor cortex in initiating, imitating, and 
comprehending movements.
Review Questions
Study and Review on MyPsychLab
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Control of Movement by the Brain
Although we often take movement for granted, the neural regulation of move-
ment involves many brain regions. The Control of Movement by the Brain 
module of the virtual brain shows the brain regions and circuits involved in  
planning, executing, sensing, and coordinating movement.

288	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
Sleep and Biological 
Rhythms
Outline
9
 A Physiological and Behavioral 
Description of Sleep
Stages of Sleep
Mental Activity  
During Sleep
Section Summary
 Disorders of Sleep
Insomnia
Narcolepsy
REM Sleep Behavior Disorder
Problems Associated with  
Slow-Wave Sleep
Section Summary
 Why Do We Sleep?
Functions of Slow-Wave Sleep
Functions of REM Sleep
Sleep and Learning
Section Summary
 Physiological Mechanisms of 
Sleep and Waking
Chemical Control of Sleep
Neural Control of Arousal
Neural Control of Slow-Wave 
Sleep
Neural Control of REM Sleep
Section Summary
 Biological Clocks
Circadian Rhythms  
and Zeitgebers
The Suprachiasmatic Nucleus
Control of Seasonal Rhythms: The 
Pineal Gland and Melatonin
Changes in Circadian Rhythms: 
Shift Work and Jet Lag
Section Summary
chapter

W
hy do we sleep? Why do we spend at least 
one-third of our lives doing something that 
provides most of us with only a few fleeting 
memories? I will attempt to answer this question in sev-
eral ways. In the first two parts of this chapter I will de-
scribe what is known about the phenomenon of sleep 
and its disorders, including insomnia, narcolepsy, 
sleepwalking, and other sleep-related disorders. In the 
third part I will discuss research on the functions per-
formed by sleep. In the fourth part I will describe the 
search for the chemicals and the neural circuits that 
control sleep and wakefulness. In the final part of the 
chapter I will discuss the brain’s biological clock—the 
mechanism that controls daily rhythms of sleep and 
wakefulness.
A Physiological and Behavioral 
Description of Sleep
Sleep is a behavior. That statement might seem peculiar, 
because we usually think of behaviors as activities that 
involve movements, such as walking or talking. Except 
for the rapid eye movements that accompany a particu-
lar stage, sleep is not distinguished by movement. What 
Lately, Michael felt almost afraid of going to bed because 
of the unpleasant experiences he had been having. His 
dreams seemed to have become more intense in a rather 
disturbing way. Several times in the past few months, he felt 
as if he were paralyzed as he lay in bed, waiting for sleep to 
come. It was a strange feeling; was he really paralyzed, or 
was he just not trying hard enough to move? He always fell 
asleep before he was able to decide. A couple of times he 
woke up just before it was time for his alarm to go off and 
felt unable to move. Then the alarm would ring, and he 
would quickly shut it off. That meant that he really wasn’t 
paralyzed, didn’t it? Was he going crazy?
One night brought the worst experience of all. As 
Michael was falling asleep, he felt again as if he were 
paralyzed. Then he saw his former roommate enter his 
bedroom. But that wasn’t possible! Since the time he 
graduated from college, he had lived alone, and he always 
locked the door. He tried to say something, but he 
couldn’t. His roommate was holding a hammer. He walked 
up to the bed, stood over Michael, and suddenly raised 
the hammer, as if to smash in his forehead. When Michael 
awoke in the morning, he shuddered with the remem-
brance. It had seemed so real! It must have been a dream, 
but he didn’t think he was asleep. He was in bed. Can a 
person really dream that he is lying in bed, not yet asleep?
That day at the office, he had trouble concentrating 
on his work. He forced himself to review his notes, 
because he had to present the details of the new project 
to the board of directors. This was his big chance; if the 
project were accepted, he would certainly be chosen to 
lead it, and that would mean a promotion and a substan-
tial raise. Naturally, with so much at stake, he felt nervous 
when he entered the boardroom. His boss introduced 
Michael and asked him to begin. Michael glanced at his 
notes and opened his mouth to talk. Suddenly, he felt his 
knees buckle. All his strength seemed to slip away. He fell 
heavily to the floor. He could hear people running over 
and asking what had happened. He couldn’t move 
anything except his eyes. His boss got down on his knees, 
looked into Michael’s face, and asked, “Michael, are you 
all right?” Michael looked at his boss and tried to answer, 
but he couldn’t say a thing. A few seconds later, he felt his 
strength coming back. He opened his mouth and said, 
“I’m okay.” He struggled to his knees and then sat in a 
chair, feeling weak and frightened.
“You undoubtedly have a condition known as narco-
lepsy,” said the doctor whom Michael visited. “It’s a 
problem that concerns the way your brain controls sleep. 
I’ll have you spend a night in the sleep clinic and get some 
recordings done to confirm my diagnosis, but I’m sure that 
I’ll be proved correct. You told me that lately you’ve been 
taking short naps during the day. What were these naps 
like? Were you suddenly struck by an urge to sleep?” 
Michael nodded. “I just had to put my head on the desk, 
even though I was afraid that my boss might see me. But I 
don’t think I slept more than five minutes or so.” “Did you 
still feel sleepy when you woke?” “No,” he replied, “I felt 
fine again.” The doctor nodded. “All the symptoms you 
have reported—the sleep attacks, the paralysis you 
experienced before sleeping and after waking up, the spell 
you had today—they all fit together. Fortunately, we can 
usually control narcolepsy with medication. In fact, we have 
a new one that does an excellent job. I’m sure we’ll have 
you back to normal, and there is no reason why you can’t 
continue with your job. If you’d like, I can talk with your 
boss and reassure him, too.”

290	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
During wakefulness the EEG of a normal person 
shows two basic patterns of activity: alpha activity and beta 
activity. Alpha activity consists of regular, medium- 
frequency waves of 8–12 Hz. The brain produces this 
activity when a person is resting quietly, not particularly 
aroused or excited and not engaged in strenuous mental 
activity (such as problem solving). Although alpha waves 
sometimes occur when a person’s eyes are open, they are 
much more prevalent when they are closed. The other 
type of waking EEG pattern, beta activity, consists of ir-
regular, mostly low-amplitude waves of 13–30 Hz. Beta 
activity shows desynchrony; it reflects the fact that many 
different neural circuits in the brain are actively process-
ing information. Desynchronized activity occurs when a 
person is alert and attentive to events in the environ-
ment or is thinking actively. (See Figure 9.2.)
Let’s look at a typical night’s sleep of a female col-
lege student in a sleep laboratory. (Of course, we would 
obtain similar results from a male, with one exception, 
which is noted later.) The experimenter attaches the 
electrodes, turns the lights off, and closes the door. Our 
subject becomes drowsy and soon enters stage 1 sleep, 
marked by the presence of some theta activity (3.5–7.5 Hz),  
which indicates that the firing of neurons in the neocor-
tex is becoming more synchronized. This stage is actu-
ally a transition between sleep and wakefulness; if we 
watch our volunteer’s eyelids, we will see that from time 
to time they slowly open and close and that her eyes roll 
upward and downward. (Look again at Figure 9.2.) About 
10 minutes later she enters stage 2 sleep. The EEG dur-
ing this stage is generally irregular but contains periods 
of theta activity, sleep spindles, and K complexes. Sleep spin-
dles are short bursts of waves of 12–14 Hz that occur 
between two and five times a minute during stages 1–4 
of sleep. They appear to play a role in consolidation of 
memories, and increased numbers of sleep spindles are 
correlated with increased scores on test of intelligence 
(Fogel and Smith, 2011). (The role of sleep in memory 
is discussed later in this chapter.) K complexes are sud-
den, sharp waveforms, which, unlike sleep spindles, are 
usually found only during stage 2 sleep. They spontane-
ously occur at the rate of approximately one per minute 
characterizes sleep is that the insistent urge of sleepiness 
forces us to seek out a quiet, warm, comfortable place; 
lie down; and remain there for several hours. Because 
we remember very little about what happens while we 
sleep, we tend to think of sleep more as a state of con-
sciousness than as a behavior. The change in conscious-
ness is undeniable, but it should not prevent us from 
noticing the behavioral changes.
Stages of Sleep
The best research on human sleep is conducted in a 
sleep laboratory. A sleep laboratory, usually located at a 
university or medical center, consists of one or several 
small bedrooms adjacent to an observation room, where 
the experimenter spends the night (trying to stay 
awake). The experimenter prepares the sleeper for elec-
trophysiological measurements by attaching electrodes 
to the scalp to monitor the electroencephalogram (EEG) 
and to the chin to monitor muscle activity, recorded  
as the electromyogram (EMG). Electrodes attached 
around the eyes monitor eye movements, recorded as 
the electro-oculogram (EOG). In addition, other elec-
trodes and transducing devices can be used to monitor 
autonomic measures such as heart rate, respiration, and 
changes in the ability of the skin to conduct electricity. 
(See Figure 9.1.)
figure 9.1  A Subject Prepared for a Night’s Sleep 
in a Sleep Laboratory
(Philippe Platilly/Science Photo Library/Photo Researchers Inc.)
x electromyogram (EMG) (my oh gram)  An electrical potential 
recorded from an electrode placed on or in a muscle.
x electro-oculogram (EOG) (ah kew loh gram)  An electrical 
potential from the eyes, recorded by means of electrodes placed 
on the skin around them; detects eye movements.
x alpha activity  Smooth electrical activity of 8–12 Hz recorded 
from the brain; generally associated with a state of relaxation.
x beta activity  Irregular electrical activity of 13–30 Hz recorded 
from the brain; generally associated with a state of arousal.
x theta activity  EEG activity of 3.5–7.5 Hz that occurs intermit-
tently during early stages of slow-wave sleep and REM sleep.

	
A Physiological and Behavioral Description of Sleep	
291
stages 3 and 4, these stages are collectively referred to as 
slow-wave sleep. (Refer again to Figure 9.2.)
In recent years, researchers have begun studying 
the details of the EEG activity that occurs during slow-
wave sleep and the brain mechanisms responsible for 
this activity (Steriade, 2003, 2006). It turns out that the 
most important feature of slow-wave activity during 
sleep are slow oscillations of less than 1 Hz. Each oscil-
lation consists of a single high-amplitude biphasic 
(down and up) wave of slightly less than 1 Hz. The first 
part of the wave indicates a down state—a period of 
inhibition during which neurons in the neocortex are 
absolutely silent. Presumably, it is during this down 
state that neocortical neurons are able to rest. The 
second part indicates an up state—a period of excita-
tion during which these neurons briefly fire at a high 
rate. Figure 9.3 shows the EEG recording and multi-
unit recordings from six microelectrodes in the cere-
bral cortex of a sleeping rat. Several slow oscillations 
are shown at the top of the figure. Each oscillation 
consists of an inhibitory hyperpolarizing silent phase 
(down state, indicated in red) followed by an excit-
atory depolarizing phase during which the neuron 
fires at a high rate (up state, indicated in green). (See 
Figure 9.3.)
About 90 minutes after the beginning of sleep (and 
about 45 minutes after the onset of stage 4 sleep), we 
notice an abrupt change in a number of physiological 
measures recorded from our subject. The EEG suddenly 
becomes mostly desynchronized, with a sprinkling of 
theta waves, very similar to the record obtained during 
stage 1 sleep. (Refer back to Figure 9.2.) We also note that 
her eyes are rapidly darting back and forth beneath her 
closed eyelids. We can see this activity in the EOG, re-
corded from electrodes attached to the skin around her 
eyes, or we can observe the eye movements directly—the 
cornea produces a bulge in the closed eyelids that can be 
seen to move about. We also see that the EMG becomes 
silent; there is a profound loss of muscle tone. In fact, 
physiological studies have shown that, aside from occa-
sional twitching, a person actually becomes paralyzed 
during REM sleep. This peculiar stage of sleep is quite 
distinct from the quiet sleep we saw earlier. It is usually 
but often can be triggered by noises—especially unex-
pected noises. Cash et al. (2009) recorded the activity of 
single neurons in the human cerebral cortex during 
sleep and found that K complexes consisted of isolated 
periods of neural inhibition. (The recordings were made 
from the brains of patients who were being evaluated for 
neurosurgery.) K complexes appear to be the forerun-
ner of delta waves, which appear in the deepest levels of 
sleep. (Refer again to Figure 9.2.)
The subject is sleeping soundly now; but if awak-
ened, she might report that she has not been asleep. 
This phenomenon often is reported by nurses who 
awaken loudly snoring hospital patients early in the 
night (perhaps to give them a sleeping pill) and find 
that the patients insist that they were lying there awake 
all the time. About 15 minutes later the subject enters 
stage 3 sleep, signaled by the occurrence of high-ampli-
tude delta activity (less than 3.5 Hz). (Look again at 
Figure 9.2.) The distinction between stage 3 and stage 4 
is not clear-cut; stage 3 contains 20–50 percent delta 
activity, and stage 4 contains more than 50 percent. Be-
cause slow-wave EEG activity predominates during sleep 
figure 9.2  An EEG Recording of the Stages of Sleep
(From Horne, J. A. Why We Sleep: The Functions of Sleep in Humans and Other 
Mammals. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 1988.)
0
1
2
3
4
5
Beta activity
Awake
Stage 1 sleep
Stage 2 sleep
Stage 3 sleep
Stage 4 sleep
REM sleep
Theta activity
Theta activity
Delta activity
Beta activity
Alpha activity
Sleep
spindle
K complex
Seconds
Delta activity
x delta activity  Regular, synchronous electrical activity of less 
than 4 Hz recorded from the brain; occurs during the deepest 
stages of slow-wave sleep.
x slow-wave sleep  Non-REM sleep, characterized by synchro-
nized EEG activity during its deeper stages.
x down state  A period of inhibition during a slow oscillation 
during slow-wave sleep; neurons in the neocortex are silent and 
resting.
x up state  A period of excitation during a slow oscillation during 
slow-wave sleep; neurons in the neocortex briefly fire at a high rate.

292	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
shows a graph of a typical night’s sleep. The vertical axis 
indicates the EEG activity that is being recorded; thus, 
REM sleep and stage 1 sleep are placed on the same line 
because similar patterns of EEG activity occur at these 
times. Note that most slow-wave sleep (stages 3 and 4) 
occurs during the first half of night. Subsequent bouts of 
non-REM sleep contain more and more stage 2 sleep, 
and bouts of REM sleep (indicated by the horizontal 
bars) become more prolonged. (See Figure 9.4.)
As we saw, during REM sleep we become paralyzed; 
most of our spinal and cranial motor neurons are strongly 
inhibited. (Obviously, the ones that control respiration 
and eye movements are spared.) At the same time the 
brain is very active. Cerebral blood flow and oxygen con-
sumption are accelerated. In addition, during most peri-
ods of REM sleep a male’s penis and a female’s clitoris 
will become at least partially erect, and a female’s vaginal 
secretions will increase (Schmidt and Schmidt, 2004). 
However, Fisher, Gross, and Zuch (1965) found that, in 
males, genital changes do not signify that the person is 
experiencing a dream with sexual content. (Of course, 
people can have dreams with frank sexual content. In 
males some dreams culminate in ejaculation—the so-
called nocturnal emissions, or “wet dreams.” Females, 
too, sometimes experience orgasm during sleep.)
The fact that penile erections occur during REM 
sleep, independent of sexual arousal, has been used clin-
ically to assess the causes of impotence (Karacan, Salis, 
and Williams, 1978; Singer and Weiner, 1996). A subject 
sleeps in the laboratory with a device attached to his penis 
that measures its circumference. If penile enlargement 
occurs during REM sleep, then his failure to obtain an 
referred to as REM sleep (for the rapid eye movements 
that characterize it).
By most criteria, stage 4 is the deepest stage of sleep; 
only loud noises will cause a person to awaken, and when 
awakened, the person acts groggy and confused. During 
REM sleep a person might not react to noises, but he or 
she is easily aroused by meaningful stimuli, such as the 
sound of his or her name. Also, when awakened from 
REM sleep, a person appears alert and attentive.
If we arouse our volunteer during REM sleep and 
ask her what was going on, she will almost certainly re-
port that she had been dreaming. The dreams of REM 
sleep tend to be narrative in form, with a storylike pro-
gression of events. On the other hand, if we wake her 
during slow-wave sleep and ask, “Were you dreaming?” 
she will most likely say, “No.” However, if we question 
her more carefully, she might report the presence of a 
thought, an image, or some emotion.
During the rest of the night our subject’s sleep alter-
nates between periods of REM and non-REM sleep. Each 
cycle is approximately 90 minutes long, containing a 20- 
to 30-minute bout of REM sleep. Thus, an 8-hour sleep 
will contain four or five periods of REM sleep. Figure 9.4 
figure 9.3  EEG and Single-Cell Activity
These recordings show cortical EEG and multiunit cell 
activity during slow-wave sleep of a rat. The top of the 
figure shows several slow oscillations. During the 
descending phase of the slow oscillation (down state, 
indicated in red), the neurons are hyperpolarized and do 
not fire. During the ascending phase (up state, indicated 
in green), the neurons fire.
(From Vyazovskiy, V. V., Olcese, U., Lazimy, Y. M., et al. Neuron, 2009, 63,  
865–878. Reprinted with permission.)
Off
On
1
2
3
4
5
6
Multiunit electrodes
in cortex
Cortical EEG
x REM sleep  A period of desynchronized EEG activity during 
sleep, at which time dreaming, rapid eye movements, and 
muscular paralysis occur; also called paradoxical sleep.
x non-REM sleep  All stages of sleep except REM sleep.
figure 9.4  A Typical Pattern of Sleep Stages 
During a Single Night
The dark blue shading in this figure indicates REM sleep.
W
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
REM sleep
Awake
Hours
EEG stage

	
A Physiological and Behavioral Description of Sleep	
293
long-term goals but rather is carried along by the flow of 
time by circumstances that crop up in an unpredictable 
way.” This quote could just as well be describing the daily 
life of a person whose prefrontal cortex has been damaged.
Several investigators have suggested that the eye 
movements made during REM sleep are related to the 
visual imagery that occurs while we dream. Roffwarg et al. 
(1962) recorded the eye movements of subjects during 
REM sleep and then awakened the subjects and asked 
them to describe what had been happening in their 
dreams. They found that the eye movements were similar 
to what would have been expected if the subjects had ac-
tually been watching these events. In addition, evidence 
indicates that the particular brain mechanisms that be-
come active during a dream are those that would become 
active if the events in the dream were actually occurring. 
For example, cortical and subcortical motor mechanisms 
become active during a dream that contains movement, 
as if the person were actually moving (McCarley and  
Hobson, 1979). In addition, if a dream involves talking 
and listening, regions of the dreamer’s brain that are in-
volved in speaking and listening become especially active 
(Hong et al., 1996). (Brain mechanisms of verbal com-
munication are discussed in Chapter 14.)
Although narrative, storylike dreaming most often 
occurs during REM sleep, mental activity can also accom-
pany slow-wave sleep. Some of the most terrifying night-
mares occur during slow-wave sleep, especially stage 4 
sleep (Fisher et al., 1970). In French the word for night-
mare is cauchemar, or “pressing devil.” Figure 9.5 shows a 
victim of a nightmare (undoubtedly in the throes of 
stage 4 slow-wave sleep) being squashed by an incubus 
(from the Latin incubare, “to lie upon”). (See Figure 9.5.)
erection during attempts at intercourse is not caused by 
physiological problems such as nerve damage or a circu-
latory disorder. (A neurologist told me that there is a less 
expensive way to gather the same data: The patient ob-
tains a strip of postage stamps and applies them around 
his penis before going to bed. In the morning he checks 
to see whether the perforations are broken.)
The important differences between REM sleep and 
slow-wave sleep are listed in Table 9.1.
Mental Activity During Sleep
Although sleep is a period during which we do not  
respond very much to the environment, it is incorrect to  
refer to sleep as a state of unconsciousness. Consciousness 
during sleep certainly differs from waking consciousness, 
but we are conscious then. In the morning we usually for-
get what we experienced while asleep, so in retrospect we 
conclude that we were unconscious. However, when ex-
perimenters wake sleeping subjects, the reports that the 
subjects give make it clear that they were conscious.
Researchers have found that the rate of cerebral 
blood flow in the human brain during REM sleep is high 
in the visual association cortex but low in the primary 
visual cortex and the prefrontal cortex (Madsen et al., 
1991; Braun et al., 1998). The lack of activity in the pri-
mary visual cortex reflects the fact that the eyes are not 
receiving visual input; the high level of activity in the vi-
sual association cortex undoubtedly reflects the visual 
hallucinations that occur during dreams. As we shall see 
in Chapter 13, the prefrontal cortex is involved in mak-
ing plans, keeping track of the organization of events in 
time, and distinguishing illusion from reality. As Madsen 
and his colleagues noted, dreams are characterized by 
good visual images but are poorly organized with respect 
to time; for example, past, present, and future are often 
interchanged (Hobson, 1988). And as Melges (1982)  
put it, “The dreamer often has no feeling of striving for 
table 9.1  Principal Characteristics of REM  
and Slow-Wave Sleep
REM Sleep
Slow-Wave Sleep
EEG desynchrony 
(rapid, irregular waves)
EEG synchrony  
(slow waves)
Lack of muscle tonus
Moderate muscle tonus
Rapid eye movements 
Slow or absent eye  
movements
Penile erection or  
vaginal secretion
Lack of genital activity 
Dreams
 
figure 9.5  The Nightmare, 1781, by Henry Fuseli, 
Swiss, 1741–1825
(Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Bert L. Smokler and Mr. and Mrs. Lawrence A. Fleischman, 
Acc. No. 55.5. Courtesy of The Detroit Institute of Arts.)

294	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
night, and the drug is prescribed on the basis of this 
testimony. Very few patients are observed during a 
night’s sleep in a sleep laboratory; thus, insomnia is one 
of the few medical problems that physicians treat with-
out having direct clinical evidence for its existence. But 
studies on the sleep of people who complain of insom-
nia show that most of them underestimate the amount 
of time they actually sleep. In fact, Rosa and Bonnet 
(2000) evaluated in a sleep laboratory the sleep of peo-
ple who complained of insomnia and people who did 
not and found no differences between the two groups in 
time spent sleeping. They did, however, find personality 
differences, which could account for the complaints.
For many years the goal of sleeping medication was 
to help people fall asleep, and when drug companies 
evaluated potential medications, they concentrated on 
that property. However, if we think about the ultimate 
goal of sleeping medication, it is to make the person feel 
more refreshed the next day. If a medication puts people 
Disorders of Sleep
Because we spend about one-third of our lives sleeping, 
sleep disorders can have a significant impact on our 
quality of life. They can also affect the way we feel while 
we are awake.
Insomnia
Insomnia is a problem that is said to affect approxi-
mately 25 percent of the population occasionally and 9 
percent regularly (Ancoli-Israel and Roth, 1999). Insom-
nia is characterized as difficulty falling asleep after going 
to bed or after awakening during the night. But a sig-
nificant problem in identifying insomnia is the unreli-
ability of self-reports. Most patients who receive a pre-
scription for a sleeping medication are given one on the 
basis of their own description of their symptoms. That is, 
they tell their physician that they sleep very little at 
Section Summary
A Physiological and Behavioral Description of Sleep
Sleep is generally regarded as a state, but it is never-
theless a behavior. The stages of non-REM sleep, 
stages 1–4, are defined by EEG activity. Slow-wave 
sleep (stages 3 and 4) includes the two deepest 
stages. Alertness consists of desynchronized beta 
activity (13–30 Hz); relaxation and drowsiness consist 
of alpha activity (8–12 Hz); stage 1 sleep consists of 
alternating periods of alpha activity, irregular fast 
activity, and theta activity (3.5–7.5 Hz); the EEG of 
stage 2 sleep lacks alpha activity but contains sleep 
spindles (short periods of 12–14 Hz activity) and occa-
sional K complexes; stage 3 sleep consists of 20–50 
percent delta activity (less than 3.5 Hz); and stage 4 
sleep consists of more than 50 percent delta activity. 
Waves of delta activity are organized around the slow 
waves of less than 1 Hz that begin with a silent down 
state followed by a brief, active up state. About  
90 minutes after the beginning of sleep, people  
enter REM sleep. Cycles of REM and slow-wave sleep 
alternate in periods of approximately 90 minutes.
REM sleep consists of rapid eye movements, a 
desynchronized EEG, sensitivity to external stimula-
tion, muscular paralysis, genital activity, and dreaming. 
Mental activity can accompany slow-wave sleep too, 
but most narrative dreams occur during REM sleep.
 Thought Questions
1.	 Have you ever been resting quietly and suddenly 
heard someone tell you that you had obviously 
been sleeping because you were snoring? Did you 
believe them, or were you certain that you were 
really awake? Do you think it was likely that you 
had actually entered stage 1 sleep?
2.	 What is accomplished by dreaming? Some 
researchers believe that the subject matter of a 
dream does not matter; it is the REM sleep itself 
that is important. Others believe that the subject 
matter does count. Some researchers believe that if 
we remember a dream, then the dream failed to 
accomplish all of its functions; others say that 
remembering dreams is useful because it can give 
us some insights into our problems. What do you 
think of these controversies?
3.	Some people report that they are “in control” of 
some of their dreams—that they feel as if they 
determine what comes next and are not simply 
swept along passively. Have you ever had this 
experience? Have you ever had a “lucid dream,” 
in which you were aware of the fact that you were 
dreaming?

	
Disorders of Sleep	
295
varying amounts of muscle weakness. In some cases the 
person will become completely paralyzed and slump 
down to the floor. The person will lie there, fully con-
scious, for a few seconds to several minutes. What appar-
ently happens is that one of the phenomena of REM 
sleep—muscular paralysis—occurs at an inappropriate 
time. As we saw, this loss of tonus is caused by massive 
inhibition of motor neurons in the spinal cord. When 
this happens during waking, the victim of a cataplectic 
attack loses control of his or her muscles. As in REM 
sleep, the person continues to breathe and is able to 
control eye movements. (The brain abnormality respon-
sible for narcolepsy is described later in this chapter.)
Cataplexy is quite different from a narcoleptic sleep 
attack; cataplexy is usually precipitated by strong emo-
tional reactions or by sudden physical effort, especially 
if the patient is caught unawares. Laughter, anger, or an 
effort to catch a suddenly thrown object can trigger a 
cataplectic attack. In fact, as Guilleminault, Wilson, and 
Dement (1974) noted, even people who do not have 
cataplexy sometimes lose muscle strength after a bout of 
intense laughter. (Perhaps that is why we say a person 
can become “weak from laughter.”) Common situations 
that bring on cataplexy are attempting to discipline 
one’s children and making love (an unfortunate time to 
become paralyzed!). Michael, the man described in the 
opener to this chapter, had his first cataplectic attack 
when he was addressing the board of directors of the 
company he worked for. Wise (2004) notes that patients 
with narcolepsy often try to avoid thoughts and situa-
tions that are likely to evoke strong emotions because 
they know that these emotions are likely to trigger cata-
plectic attacks.
REM sleep paralysis sometimes intrudes into waking 
at a time that does not present any physical danger—just 
before or just after normal sleep, when a person is al-
ready lying down. This symptom of narcolepsy is re-
ferred to as sleep paralysis, an inability to move just be-
fore the onset of sleep or on waking in the morning. A 
person can be snapped out of sleep paralysis by being 
touched or by hearing someone call his or her name. 
Sometimes, the mental components of REM sleep in-
trude into sleep paralysis; that is, the person dreams 
to sleep right away but produces a hangover of groggi-
ness and difficulty concentrating the next day, it is worse 
than useless. In fact, many drugs that are traditionally 
used to treat insomnia have just this effect. Researchers 
now recognize that the true evaluation of a sleeping 
medication must be made during wakefulness the fol-
lowing day, and “hangover-free” drugs are finally being 
developed (Hajak et al., 1995; Ramakrishnan and Scheid, 
2007).
Many people spend much of their time in a sleep-
deprived state not because they suffer from insomnia 
but because the demands of their daily schedules lead 
them to stay up late or get up early (or both), thus re-
ceiving less than the optimal amount of sleep. Chronic 
sleep deprivation can lead to serious health problems, 
including increased risk of obesity, diabetes, and cardio-
vascular disease (Orzel-Gryglewska, 2010).
A particular form of insomnia is caused by an in-
ability to sleep and breathe at the same time. Patients 
with this disorder, called sleep apnea, fall asleep and 
then cease to breathe. (Apnos is Greek for “without 
breathing.”) Nearly all people, especially people who 
snore, have occasional episodes of sleep apnea, but not 
to the extent that it interferes with sleep. During a  
period of sleep apnea the level of carbon dioxide in the 
blood stimulates chemoreceptors (neurons that detect 
the presence of certain chemicals), and the person 
wakes up, gasping for air. The oxygen level of the blood 
returns to normal, the person falls asleep, and the whole 
cycle begins again. Because sleep is disrupted, people 
with this disorder typically feel sleepy and groggy during 
the day. Fortunately, many cases of sleep apnea are 
caused by an obstruction of the airway that can be cor-
rected surgically or relieved by a device that attaches to 
the sleeper’s face and provides pressurized air that keeps 
the airway open (Sher, 1990; Piccirillo, Duntley, and 
Schotland, 2000).
Narcolepsy
Narcolepsy (narke means “numbness,” and lepsis means 
“seizure”) is a neurological disorder characterized by 
sleep (or some of its components) at inappropriate 
times (Nishino, 2007). The symptoms can be described 
in terms of what we know about the phenomena of 
sleep. The primary symptom of narcolepsy is the sleep 
attack. The narcoleptic sleep attack is an overwhelming 
urge to sleep that can happen at any time but occurs 
most often under monotonous, boring conditions. 
Sleep (which appears to be entirely normal) generally 
lasts for 2–5 minutes. The person usually wakes up feel-
ing refreshed.
Another symptom of narcolepsy—in fact, the most 
striking one—is cataplexy (from kata, “down,” and plexis, 
“stroke”). During a cataplectic attack, a person will sustain 
x sleep apnea (app nee a)  Cessation of breathing while sleeping.
x narcolepsy (nahr ko lep see)  A sleep disorder characterized 
by periods of irresistible sleep, attacks of cataplexy, sleep 
paralysis, and hypnagogic hallucinations.
x sleep attack  A symptom of narcolepsy; an irresistible urge to 
sleep during the day, after which the person awakens feeling 
refreshed.
x cataplexy (kat a plex ee)  A symptom of narcolepsy; complete 
paralysis that occurs during waking.
x sleep paralysis  A symptom of narcolepsy; paralysis occurring 
just before a person falls asleep.

296	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
animals showed symptoms of narcolepsy. Like human 
patients with narcolepsy, they went directly into REM 
sleep from waking and showed periods of cataplexy while 
they were awake. (
Simulate narcolepsy on MyPsychLab 
to see videos of narcoleptic dogs, mice, and people.) 
Gerashchenko et al. (2001, 2003) prepared a toxin that 
attacked only orexinergic neurons and administered it to 
rats. The destruction of the orexin system produced the 
symptoms of narcolepsy.
Loss of orexinergic neurons is the cause of most 
cases of narcolepsy in humans as well. Nishino et al. 
(2000) performed an analysis of the cerebrospinal 
fluid of normal subjects and patients with narcolepsy. 
They found a complete absence of orexin in seven of 
the nine narcoleptic patients. They hypothesized that 
the cause of narcolepsy in these seven patients was a 
hereditary disorder that caused the immune system to 
attack and destroy orexin-secreting neurons. Most pa-
tients with narcolepsy are born with orexinergic neu-
rons, but during adolescence the immune system at-
tacks these neurons, and the symptoms of narcolepsy 
begin (Fontana et al., 2010). The narcolepsy seen in 
the two patients with high levels of orexin may have 
been caused by a mutation of a gene responsible for 
production of the orexin B receptor—the same muta-
tion that causes canine narcolepsy. Peyron et al.(2002) 
reported the case of one patient with early onset nar-
colepsy (before age 2) with a different genetic defect: 
while lying awake, paralyzed. These episodes, called  
hypnagogic hallucinations, are often alarming or even 
terrifying. (The term hypnagogic comes from the Greek 
words hupnos, “sleep,” and agogos, “leading.”) During a 
hypnagogic hallucination, Michael thought that his for-
mer roommate was trying to attack him with a hammer.
Fortunately, human narcolepsy is relatively rare, 
with an incidence of approximately one in 2000 people. 
This hereditary disorder appears to involve a gene 
found on chromosome 6, but it is strongly influenced 
by unknown environmental factors (Mignot, 1998; Ma-
howald and Schenck, 2005; Nishino, 2007). Years ago, 
researchers began a program to maintain breeds of 
dogs that are afflicted with narcolepsy, with the hopes 
that discovery of the causes of canine narcolepsy would 
further our understanding of the causes of human nar-
colepsy. (See Figure 9.6.) Eventually, this research paid 
off. Lin et al. (1999) discovered that a mutation of a 
specific gene is responsible for canine narcolepsy. The 
product of this gene is a receptor for a peptide neu-
rotransmitter called hypocretin by some researchers and 
orexin by others. The name “hypocretin” comes from 
the fact that the lateral hypothalamus contains the cell 
bodies of all of the neurons that secrete this peptide. 
The name “orexin” comes from the role this peptide 
plays in the control of eating and metabolism, discussed 
in more detail in Chapter 12. (Orexis means “appetite” 
in Greek.) Orexin also plays a crucial role in the physi-
ological and behavioral effects of addictive drugs, dis-
cussed in Chapter 18. Two laboratories independently 
discovered the peptide; hence it has two names. There 
are two orexin receptors, A and B. Lin and his col-
leagues discovered that the mutation responsible for 
canine narcolepsy involves the orexin B receptor.
Chemelli et al. (1999) prepared a targeted mutation 
in mice against the orexin gene and found that the  
x hypnagogic hallucination (hip na gah jik)  A symptom of 
narcolepsy; vivid dreams that occur just before a person falls 
asleep; accompanied by sleep paralysis.
x orexin  A peptide, also known as hypocretin, produced by  
neurons whose cell bodies are located in the hypothalamus; their 
destruction causes narcolepsy.
figure 9.6  A Dog Undergoing a Cataplectic Attack
The attack was triggered by the dog’s excitement at finding some food on the floor.  
(a) Sniffing the food. (b) Muscles beginning to relax. (c) The dog is temporarily 
paralyzed, as it would be during REM sleep.
(Photos courtesy of the Sleep Disorders Foundation, Stanford University.)
(a)
(b)
(c)

	
Disorders of Sleep	
297
dresser and I had [gotten up out of bed and 
run and] knocked lamps, mirrors and every-
thing off the dresser, hit my head against the 
wall and my knee against the dresser. (Schenck 
et al., 1986, p. 294)
Like narcolepsy, REM sleep behavior disorder ap-
pears to be a neurodegenerative disorder with at least 
some genetic component (Schenck, Hurwitz, and Ma-
howald, 1993). It is often associated with better-known 
neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson’s dis-
ease (Boeve et al., 2007). These disorders are called 
-synucleinopathies because they involve the inclusion of 
-synuclein protein in degenerating neurons. In addi-
tion, REM sleep behavior disorder can be caused by 
brain damage—in some cases to the neural circuits in 
the brain stem that control the phenomena of REM 
sleep, which will be discussed later in this chapter (Cul-
ebras and Moore, 1989). The symptoms of REM sleep 
behavior disorder are the opposite of those of cata-
plexy; that is, rather than exhibiting paralysis outside 
REM sleep, patients with REM sleep behavior disorder 
fail to exhibit paralysis during REM sleep. As you might 
expect, the drugs that are used to treat the symptoms of 
cataplexy will aggravate the symptoms of REM sleep 
behavior disorder (Schenck and Mahowald, 1992). 
REM sleep behavior disorder is usually treated by clon-
azepam, a benzodiazepine tranquilizer (Aurora et al., 
2010; Frenette, 2010).
Problems Associated  
with Slow-Wave Sleep
Some maladaptive behaviors occur during slow-wave 
sleep, especially during its deepest phase, stage 4. These 
behaviors include bedwetting (nocturnal enuresis), sleep-
walking (somnambulism), and night terrors (pavor noctur-
nus). All three events occur most frequently in children. 
Often bedwetting can be cured by training methods, 
such as having a special electronic circuit ring a bell 
when the first few drops of urine are detected in the bed 
sheet (a few drops usually precede the ensuing flood). 
Night terrors consist of anguished screams, trembling, a 
rapid pulse, and usually no memory of what caused the 
terror. Night terrors and somnambulism usually cure 
themselves as the child gets older. Neither of these phe-
nomena is related to REM sleep; a sleepwalking person 
is not acting out a dream. Especially when it occurs in 
adulthood, sleepwalking appears to have a genetic com-
ponent (Hublin et al., 1997).
mutation of the gene responsible for the production 
of orexin.
The symptoms of narcolepsy can be treated with 
drugs. Sleep attacks can be diminished by stimulants 
such a methylphenidate (Ritalin), a catecholamine ago-
nist (Vgontzas and Kales, 1999). The REM sleep phe-
nomena (cataplexy, sleep paralysis, and hypnagogic hal-
lucinations) can be alleviated by antidepressant drugs, 
which facilitate both serotonergic and noradrenergic 
activity (Mitler, 1994; Hublin, 1996). As we will see in 
Chapter 16, abnormalities in patterns of REM sleep are 
seen in people suffering from depression. The fact that 
drugs that reduce depression also suppress the phenom-
ena of REM sleep is probably not coincidental.
At the present time, modafinil, a stimulant drug 
whose precise site of action is still unknown, is widely 
used to treat narcolepsy (Fry, 1998; Nishino, 2007). 
(Michael, the man discussed in the opener to this chap-
ter, takes this drug.) Scammell et al. (2000) found that 
administration of modafinil increased the expression of 
Fos protein in orexinergic neurons, which indicates that 
the neurons had been activated. However, the drug 
must act on other targets, because the drug treats the 
symptoms of people with narcolepsy, whose brains lack 
these neurons.
The connections of orexinergic neurons with other 
regions of the brain involved in sleep and wakefulness 
are discussed later in this chapter.
REM Sleep Behavior Disorder
As you now know, REM sleep is accompanied by paral­
ysis. Although neurons in the motor cortex and sub-
cortical motor systems are extremely active during 
REM sleep (McCarley and Hobson, 1979), people are 
unable to move at this time. (The occasional twitches 
that are seen during REM sleep are apparently signs of 
intense activity of motor neurons that are not com-
pletely suppressed.) The fact that people are paralyzed 
while they dream suggests the possibility that, but for 
the paralysis, they would act out their dreams. Indeed, 
they would. Schenck et al. (1986) reported the exis-
tence of an interesting disorder: REM sleep behavior 
disorder. The behavior of people with this disorder 
corresponds with the contents of their dreams. Consider 
the following case:
I was a halfback playing football, and after the 
quarterback received the ball from the center 
he lateraled it sideways to me and I’m supposed 
to go around end and cut back over tackle 
and—this is very vivid—as I cut back over tackle 
there is this big 280-pound tackle waiting, so I, 
according to football rules, was to give him my 
shoulder and bounce him out of the way . . . 
when I came to I was standing in front of our 
x REM sleep behavior disorder  A neurological disorder in 
which the person does not become paralyzed during REM sleep 
and thus acts out dreams.

298	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
they were asleep, which they labeled sleep-related eating 
disorder. Almost half of the patients had become over-
weight from night eating. Once patients realize that 
they are eating in their sleep, they often employ strata-
gems such as keeping their food under lock and key or 
setting alarms that will awaken them when they try to 
open their refrigerator.
Sleep-related eating disorder usually responds well 
to dopaminergic agonists or topiramate, an antiseizure 
medication, and may be provoked by zolpidem, a benzo-
diazepine agonist that has been used to treat insomnia 
(Howell and Schenck, 2009). An increased incidence  
of nocturnal eating in family members of people with 
this disorder suggests that heredity may play a role (De  
Ocampo et al., 2002).
Sometimes, people can engage in complex behav-
iors while sleepwalking. Consider the following cases:
One evening Ed Weber got up from a nap on 
the sofa, polished off a half-gallon of chocolate 
chip ice cream, then dozed off again. He woke 
up an hour later and went looking for the ice 
cream, summoning his wife to the kitchen and 
insisting, to her astonishment, that someone 
else must have eaten it.
[T]elevision talk show host Montel Wil-
liams . . . told viewers he had removed raw foods 
from his refrigerator because “I wake up in the 
morning and there’s a pack of chicken and 
there’s a bite missing out of it. . . . I can take a 
whole pound of ham or bologna . . . and then 
wake up in the morning and not realize that I 
had [eaten] it and ask, ‘Who ate my lunch 
meat?’ ” (Boodman, 2004, p. HE01)
Schenck et al. (1991) reported nineteen cases of 
people with histories of eating during the night while 
x sleep-related eating disorder  A disorder in which the person 
leaves his or her bed and seeks out and eats food while sleep­
walking, usually without a memory for the episode the next day.
Section Summary
Disorders of Sleep
Although many people believe that they have  
insomnia—that they do not obtain as much sleep as 
they would like—insomnia is not a disease. Insomnia 
can be caused by depression, pain, illness, or even 
excited anticipation of a pleasurable event. Only 
recently have sleeping medications been developed 
that do not cause a hangover of grogginess and dif-
ficulty concentrating the next day. Sometimes, insom-
nia is caused by sleep apnea, which can often be cor-
rected surgically or treated by wearing a mask that 
delivers pressurized air.
Narcolepsy is characterized by four symptoms. 
Sleep attacks consist of overwhelming urges to sleep 
for a few minutes. Cataplexy is sudden paralysis, dur-
ing which the person remains conscious. Sleep paraly-
sis is similar to cataplexy, but it occurs just before 
sleep or on waking. Hypnagogic hallucinations are 
dreams that occur during periods of sleep paralysis, 
just before a night’s sleep. Sleep attacks are treated 
with stimulants such as amphetamine, and the other 
symptoms are treated with serotonin agonists or, more 
commonly, with modafinil. Studies with narcoleptic 
dogs and humans indicate that this disorder is caused 
by pathologies in a system of neurons that secrete a 
neuropeptide known as orexin (also known as hypo-
cretin). REM sleep behavior disorder is caused by a 
neurodegenerative disease that damages brain mech-
anisms that produce paralysis during REM sleep. As a 
result, the patient acts out his or her dreams.
During slow-wave sleep, especially during stage 
4, some people are afflicted by bedwetting (nocturnal 
enuresis), sleepwalking (somnambulism), or night ter-
rors (pavor nocturnus). These problems are most com-
mon in children, who usually outgrow them. People 
with sleep-related eating disorder seek and consume 
food while sleepwalking.
 Thought Question
Suppose you were spending the night at a friend’s 
house and, hearing a strange noise during the night, 
got out of bed and found your friend walking 
around, still asleep. How would you tell whether your 
friend was sleepwalking or had REM sleep behavior 
disorder?

	
Why Do We Sleep?	
299
Effects of Sleep Deprivation
When we are forced to miss a night’s sleep, we become 
very sleepy. The fact that sleepiness is so motivating sug-
gests that sleep is a necessity of life. If so, it should be 
possible to deprive people or laboratory animals of sleep 
and see what functions are disrupted. We should then 
be able to infer the role that sleep plays. However, the 
results of sleep deprivation studies have not revealed as 
much as investigators had originally hoped.
Studies with Humans.  Sleep deprivation studies with 
human subjects have not obtained persuasive evidence 
that sleep is needed to keep the body functioning nor-
mally. Horne (1978) reviewed over fifty experiments in 
which people had been deprived of sleep. He reported 
that most of them found that sleep deprivation did not 
interfere with people’s ability to perform physical exer-
cise. In addition, the studies found no evidence of a 
physiological stress response to sleep deprivation. Thus, 
the primary role of sleep does not seem to be rest and 
recuperation of the body. However, people’s cognitive 
abilities were affected; some people reported percep-
tual distortions or even hallucinations and had trouble 
concentrating on mental tasks. Perhaps sleep provides 
the opportunity for the brain to rest.
What happens to sleep-deprived subjects after they 
are permitted to sleep again? Most of them sleep longer 
the next night or two, but they never regain all of the 
sleep they lost. In one remarkable case a 17-year-old boy 
stayed awake for 264 hours so that he could obtain a 
place in the Guinness Book of World Records (Gulevich, 
Dement, and Johnson, 1966). After his ordeal the boy 
slept for a little less than 15 hours and awoke feeling 
fine. He slept slightly more than 10 hours the second 
night and just under 9 hours the third. Almost 67 hours 
were never made up. However, percentages of recovery 
Why Do We Sleep?
We all know how insistent the urge to sleep can be and 
how uncomfortable we feel when we have to resist it 
and stay awake. With the exception of the effects of 
severe pain and the need to breathe, sleepiness is 
probably the most insistent drive that we can experi-
ence. People can commit suicide by refusing to eat or 
drink, but even the most stoical person cannot indefi-
nitely defy the urge to sleep. Sleep will come, sooner 
or later, no matter how hard a person tries to stay 
awake. Although the issue is not yet settled, most  
researchers believe that the primary function of slow-
wave sleep is to permit the brain to rest. In addition, 
slow-wave sleep and REM sleep promote different 
types of learning, and REM sleep appears to promote 
brain development.
Functions of Slow-Wave Sleep
Sleep is a universal phenomenon among vertebrates. As 
far as we know, all mammals and birds sleep (Durie, 
1981). Reptiles also sleep, and fish, amphibians, and 
even insects enter periods of quiescence that resemble 
sleep. However, only warm-blooded vertebrates (mam-
mals and birds) exhibit unequivocal REM sleep, with 
muscular paralysis, EEG signs of desynchrony, and rapid 
eye movements. Obviously, birds such as flamingos, 
which sleep while perched on one leg, do not lose tone 
in the muscles they use to remain standing. Also, ani-
mals such as moles, which move their eyes very little 
while awake, show few signs of eye movement while 
asleep. The functions of REM sleep will be discussed 
separately, in a later section.
Sleep appears to be essential to survival. Evidence 
for this assertion comes from the fact that sleep is 
found in some species of mammals that would seem to 
be better off without it. For example, some species of 
marine mammals have developed an extraordinary pat-
tern of sleep: The cerebral hemispheres take turns 
sleeping, presumably because that strategy always per-
mits at least one hemisphere to be alert and keep the 
animal from sinking and drowning. In addition, the 
eye contralateral to the active hemisphere remains 
open. Some birds (for example, mallard ducks) can 
also sleep with only one hemisphere, keeping the op-
posite eye open to watch for predators (Rattenborg, 
Lima, and Amlaner, 1999). The bottlenose dolphin 
(Tursiops truncatus) and the porpoise (Phocoena pho-
coena) both sleep with one hemisphere at a time 
(Mukhametov, 1984). Figure 9.7 shows the EEG re-
cordings from the two hemispheres; note that slow-
wave sleep occurs independently in the left and right 
hemispheres. (See Figure 9.7.)
figure 9.7  Sleep in a Dolphin
The two hemispheres sleep independently, presumably 
so that the animal remains behaviorally alert.
(Adapted from Mukhametov, L. M., in Sleep Mechanisms, edited by A. A. Borbély 
and J. L. Valatx. Munich: Springer-Verlag, 1984.)
Waking
Waking
Waking
Waking
Waking
Intermediate
sleep
Slow-wave
sleep
Slow-wave
sleep
Right Hemisphere
Left Hemisphere

300	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
system and the endocrine system; increased body tem-
perature; and insomnia. The first signs of sleep distur-
bances are reductions in sleep spindles and K com-
plexes. As the disease progresses, slow-wave sleep 
completely disappears, and only brief episodes of REM 
sleep (without the accompanying paralysis) remain. As 
the name indicates, the disease is fatal. Whether the in-
somnia, caused by the brain damage, contributes to the 
other symptoms and to the patient’s death is not known. 
However, as we shall see in the next subsection, when 
rats are kept awake indefinitely, they too will die.
Schenkein and Montagna (2006a, 2006b) describe 
the case of a man diagnosed with a form of fatal familial 
insomnia that usually causes death within 12 months. 
Because several relatives had died of this disorder, the 
man knew what to expect, and he enlisted the aid of 
several physicians to administer drugs and treatments 
designed to help him sleep. For several months the 
treatments did help him to sleep, and the man survived 
about a year longer than would have been expected. 
Further studies will be needed to determine whether his 
increased survival time was a direct result of the in-
creased sleep. In any event, his quality of life during 
most of the period of his illness was much improved.
Studies with Laboratory Animals.  Rechtschaffen 
and his colleagues (Rechtschaffen et al., 1983, 1989; Rech­
tschaffen and Bergmann, 1995, 2002) devised a proc­
edure to keep rats from sleeping without forcing them 
to exercise continuously. (A group of control animals 
exercised just as much as the experimental subjects but 
were able to engage in normal amounts of sleep.)
Sleep deprivation had serious effects. The control 
animals remained in perfect health. However, the ex-
perimental animals looked sick and stopped grooming 
their fur. They became weak and uncoordinated and lost 
their ability to regulate their body temperature. Although 
they began eating much more food than normal, their 
metabolic rates became so high that they continued to 
lose weight. Eventually, the rats died. The cause of death 
is still not understood. The rats’ brains appeared to be 
normal, and there were no obvious signs of inflamma-
tion or damage to other internal organs. The animals’ 
levels of stress hormones were not unusually high, so the 
deaths could not be attributed to simple stress. If they 
were given a high-calorie diet to compensate for their 
increased metabolic rate, the rats lived longer, but even-
tually they succumbed (Everson and Wehr, 1993). As we 
will see later in this chapter, damage to parts of the basal 
forebrain causes insomnia, and if the animals do not re-
cover from their sleeplessness, they die.
were not equal for all stages of sleep. Only 7 percent of 
stages 1 and 2 were made up, but 68 percent of stage 4 
slow-wave sleep and 53 percent of REM sleep were made 
up. Other studies (for example, Kales et al., 1970) have 
found similar results, suggesting that stage 4 sleep and 
REM sleep are more important than the other stages.
What do we know about the possible functions of 
slow-wave sleep? What happens then that is so impor-
tant? Although the human brain contains only 2 percent 
of the total body weight, it expends 20 percent of the 
body’s energy during quiet wakefulness. Both cerebral 
metabolic rate and cerebral blood flow decline during 
slow-wave sleep, falling to about 75 percent of the waking 
level during stage 4 sleep (Sakai et al., 1979; Buchsbaum 
et al., 1989; Maquet, 1995). In particular, the regions 
that have the highest levels of activity during waking 
show the highest levels of delta waves—and the lowest 
levels of metabolic activity—during slow-wave sleep. 
Thus, the presence of slow-wave activity in a particular 
region of the brain appears to indicate that that region 
is resting. As we know from behavioral observation, peo-
ple are unreactive to all but intense stimuli during slow-
wave sleep and, if awakened, act groggy and confused, as 
if their cerebral cortex has been shut down and has not 
yet resumed its functioning. In addition, several studies 
have shown that missing a single night’s sleep impairs 
people’s cognitive abilities; presumably, the brain needs 
sleep to function at peak efficiency (Harrison and 
Horne, 1998, 1999). These observations suggest that 
during stage 4 sleep the brain is indeed resting.
The available evidence does indeed suggest that the 
brain needs to rest periodically to recuperate from ad-
verse side effects of its waking activity. But what is the 
nature of these adverse effects? Siegel (2005) suggests 
that among the waste products produced by the high 
metabolic rate associated with waking activity of the 
brain are free radicals, chemicals that contain at least 
one unpaired electron. Free radicals are highly reactive 
oxidizing agents; they can bind with electrons from 
other molecules and damage the cells in which they are 
found, a process known as oxidative stress. During slow-
wave sleep the lowered rate of metabolism permits re-
storative mechanisms in the cells to destroy the free 
radicals and prevent their damaging effects. Indeed, 
Ramanathan et al. (2002) found evidence that pro-
longed sleep deprivation caused an increase in free 
radicals in the brains of rats and caused oxidative stress.
An inherited neurological disorder called fatal 
familial insomnia results in damage to portions of the  
thalamus (Sforza et al., 1995; Gallassi et al., 1996; Mon-
tagna et al., 2003). The symptoms of this disease, which 
is related to Creuzfeldt-Jacob disease and bovine spongi-
form encephalopathy (“mad cow disease”), include def-
icits in attention and memory, followed by a dreamlike, 
confused state; loss of control of the autonomic nervous 
x fatal familial insomnia  A fatal inherited disorder characterized 
by progressive insomnia.

	
Why Do We Sleep?	
301
the people showed less slow-wave activity in the regions 
of the neocortex that received somatosensory informa-
tion from that arm and controlled its movements.
In an ingenious study, Horne and Minard (1985) 
found a way to increase mental activity without affecting 
physical activity and without causing stress. The investi-
gators told subjects to show up for an experiment in 
which they were supposed to take some tests designed to 
measure reading skills. When the subjects turned up, 
however, they were told that the plans had been 
changed. They were invited for a day out, at the expense 
of the experimenters. (Not surprisingly, the subjects 
willingly accepted.) They spent the day visiting an art 
exhibition, a shopping center, a museum, an amuse-
ment park, a zoo, and an interesting mansion. After a 
scenic drive through the countryside they watched a 
movie in a local theater. They were driven from place to 
place and certainly did not become overheated by exer-
cise. After the movie they returned to the sleep labora-
tory. They said they were tired, and they readily fell 
asleep. Their sleep duration was normal, and they awoke 
feeling refreshed. However, their slow-wave sleep— 
particularly stage 4 sleep—was increased. After all that 
mental exercise, the brain appears to have needed more 
rest than usual.
Functions of REM Sleep
Clearly, REM sleep is a time of intense physiological ac-
tivity. The eyes dart about rapidly, the heart rate shows 
sudden accelerations and decelerations, breathing be-
comes irregular, and the brain becomes more active. It 
would be unreasonable to expect that REM sleep has the 
same functions as slow-wave sleep. An early report on the 
effects of REM sleep deprivation (Dement, 1960) ob-
served that as the deprivation progressed, subjects had 
to be awakened from REM sleep more frequently; the 
“pressure” to enter REM sleep built up. Furthermore, 
after several days of REM sleep deprivation, subjects 
would show a rebound phenomenon when permitted to 
sleep normally; they spent a much greater-than-normal 
percentage of the recovery night in REM sleep. This re-
bound suggests that there is a need for a certain amount 
of REM sleep—that REM sleep is controlled by a regula-
tory mechanism. If selective deprivation causes a defi-
ciency in REM sleep, the deficiency is made up later, 
when uninterrupted sleep is permitted.
Researchers have long been struck by the fact that 
the highest proportion of REM sleep is seen during the 
As we just saw, the symptoms of the neurodegenera-
tive disorder called fatal familial insomnia resembles the 
effects of forced sleep deprivation in rats. Budka et al. 
(1998) reported another similarity. The investigators 
studied five people with fatal familial insomnia who, 
along with insomnia, memory loss, and autonomic dys-
function, exhibited prominent weight loss.
Effects of Exercise on Slow-Wave Sleep
Sleep deprivation studies with humans suggest that the 
brain may need slow-wave sleep to recover from the 
day’s activities. Another way to determine whether sleep 
is needed for restoration of physiological functioning is 
to look at the effects of daytime activity on nighttime 
sleep. If the function of sleep is to repair the effects on 
the body of physical activity during waking hours, then 
we should expect that sleep and exercise are related. 
That is, we should sleep more after a day of vigorous 
exercise than after a day spent quietly at an office desk.
However, the relationship between sleep and exer-
cise is not very compelling. For example, Ryback and 
Lewis (1971) found no changes in slow-wave or REM 
sleep of healthy subjects who spent six weeks resting in 
bed. If sleep repairs wear and tear, we would expect 
these people to sleep less. Adey, Bors, and Porter (1968) 
studied the sleep of almost completely immobile quad-
riplegics and paraplegics and found only a small de-
crease in slow-wave sleep as compared with uninjured 
people. Thus, although sleep certainly provides the 
body with rest, its primary function appears to be some-
thing else.
Effects of Brain Activity  
on Slow-Wave Sleep
If the primary function of slow-wave sleep is to permit 
the brain to rest and recover from its daily activity, then 
we might expect that a person would spend more time 
in slow-wave sleep after a day of intense cerebral activity. 
Tasks that demand alertness and mental activity do in-
crease glucose metabolism in the brain (Roland, 1984). 
The most significant increases are seen in the frontal 
lobes, where slow-wave activity is most intense during 
non-REM sleep. In an experiment that supports this in-
terpretation, Huber et al. (2004) had people perform a 
motor learning task just before going to sleep. The task 
required subjects to make hand movements whose di-
rections were indicated by a visual display. During sleep 
the subjects showed increased slow-wave activity in the 
region of the neocortex that became active while they 
were performing the task. Presumably, the increased 
activity of these cortical neurons called for more rest 
during the following night’s sleep. A follow-up study by 
Huber et al. (2006) found that immobilizing one arm 
for 12 hours produced the opposite result: During sleep 
x rebound phenomenon  The increased frequency or intensity of  
a phenomenon after it has been temporarily suppressed; for 
example, the increase in REM sleep seen after a period of REM 
sleep deprivation.

302	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
looked at the effects of a nap on memory consolidation. 
Mednick, Nakayama, and Stickgold (2003) had subjects 
learn a nondeclarative visual discrimination task at 9:00 
a.m. The subjects’ ability to perform the task was tested 
10 hours later, at 7:00 p.m. Some, but not all, of the sub-
jects took a 90-minute nap during the day between train-
ing and testing. The investigators recorded the EEGs of 
the sleeping subjects to determine which of them en-
gaged in REM sleep and which of them did not. (Obvi-
ously, all of them engaged in slow-wave sleep, because 
this stage of sleep always comes first in healthy people.) 
The investigators found that the performance of sub-
jects who did not take a nap was worse when they were 
tested at 7:00 p.m. than it had been at the end of train-
ing. The subjects who engaged only in slow-wave sleep 
did about the same during testing as they had done at 
the end of training. However, the subjects who engaged 
in REM sleep performed significantly better. Thus, REM 
sleep strongly facilitated the consolidation of a nonde-
clarative memory. (See Figure 9.8.)
In the second study, Tucker et al. (2006) trained 
subjects on two tasks: a declarative task (learning a list of 
paired words) and a nondeclarative task (learning to 
trace a pencil-and-paper design while looking at the 
paper in a mirror). Afterward, some of subjects were 
permitted to take a nap lasting for about 1 hour. Their 
EEGs were recorded, and they were awakened before 
they could engage in REM sleep. The subjects’ perfor-
mance on the two tasks was then tested 6 hours after the 
original training. The investigators found that, com-
pared with subjects who stayed awake, a nap consisting 
of just slow-wave sleep increased the subjects’ performance 
most active phase of brain development. Perhaps, then, 
REM sleep plays a role in this process (Siegel, 2005). 
Infants born with immature brains, such as ferrets or 
humans, spend much more time in REM sleep than  
infants born with well-developed brains, such as guinea 
pigs or cattle (Roffwarg, Muzio, and Dement, 1966; Jouvet- 
Mounier, Astic, and Lacote, 1970). But if the function of 
REM sleep is to promote brain development, why do 
adults have REM sleep? One possibility is that REM 
sleep facilitates the massive changes in the brain that 
occur during development but also some of the more 
modest changes responsible for learning that occur 
later in life. As we will see in the next subsection, evi-
dence does suggest that REM sleep facilitates learning—
but so does slow-wave sleep.
Sleep and Learning
Research with both humans and laboratory animals in-
dicates that sleep does more than allow the brain to rest: 
It also aids in the consolidation of long-term memories 
(Marshall and Born, 2007). In fact, slow-wave sleep and 
REM sleep play different roles in memory consolidation.
As we will see in Chapter 13, there are two major 
categories of long-term memory: declarative memory (also 
called explicit memory) and nondeclarative memory (also 
called implicit memory). Declarative memories include 
those that people can talk about, such as memories of 
past episodes in their lives. They also include memories 
of the relationships between stimuli or events, such as 
the spatial relationships between landmarks that permit 
us to navigate around our environment. Nondeclarative 
memories include those gained through experience 
and practice that do not necessarily involve an attempt 
to “memorize” information, such as learning to drive a 
car, throw and catch a ball, or recognize a person’s face. 
Research has found that slow-wave sleep and REM sleep 
play different roles in the consolidation of declarative 
and nondeclarative memories.
Before I tell you about the results of this research, 
let’s review the consciousness of a person engaged in 
each of these stages of sleep. During REM sleep, people 
normally have a high level of consciousness. If we 
awaken people during REM sleep, they will be alert and 
clearheaded and will usually be able to describe the  
details of a dream that they were having. However, if we 
awaken people during slow-wave sleep, they will tend to 
be groggy and confused and will usually tell us that very 
little was happening. So which stages of sleep do you 
think aid in the consolidation of declarative and nonde-
clarative memories?
I would have thought that REM sleep would be as-
sociated with declarative memories and slow-wave sleep 
with nondeclarative memories. However, just the oppo-
site is true. Let’s look at evidence from two studies that 
figure 9.8  REM Sleep and Learning
Only after a 90-minute nap that included both slow-wave 
sleep and REM sleep was an improvement seen in the 
subjects’ performance on a nondeclarative visual 
discrimination task.
(Based on data from Mednick, Nakayama, and Strickgold, 2003.)
5
10
–5
–10
–15
No nap
SWS only SWS + REM
Discrimination improvement
0

	
Why Do We Sleep?	
303
Using a similar virtual reality navigation task, Wams-
ley et al. (2010) awakened their subjects from slow-wave 
sleep during an afternoon nap that followed training 
and asked them to report everything that was going 
through their mind. They found that subjects whose 
thoughts were related to the task performed much better 
during a subsequent session on the navigation task than 
those who did not report such thoughts. Thus, although 
people who are awakened during slow-wave sleep seldom 
report narrative dreams, the sleeping brain rehearses 
information that was acquired during the previous period 
of wakefulness. (See Figure 9.10.)
Many studies with laboratory animals have directly 
recorded the activity of individual neurons in the ani-
mals’ brains. These studies, too, indicate that the brain 
appears to rehearse newly learned information during 
slow-wave sleep (O’Neill et al., 2010). Chapter 13 re-
views this evidence and describes research on the rele-
vant brain mechanisms.
on the declarative task but had no effect on perfor-
mance of the nondeclarative task. (See Figure 9.9.) So 
these two experiments (and many others I have not de-
scribed) indicate that REM sleep facilitates consolida-
tion of nondeclarative memories and that slow-wave 
sleep facilitates consolidation of declarative memories.
Peigneux et al. (2004) had human subjects learn 
their way around a computerized virtual-reality town. 
This task is very similar to what people do when they 
learn their way around a real town. They must learn the 
relative locations of landmarks and streets that connect 
them so that they can find particular locations when the 
experimenter “placed” them at various starting points. 
As we will see in Chapter 13, the hippocampus plays an 
essential role in learning of this kind. Peigneux and his 
colleagues used functional brain imaging to measure 
regional brain activity and found that the same regions 
of the hippocampus were activated during route learn-
ing and during slow-wave sleep the following night. 
These patterns were not seen during REM sleep.
figure 9.9  Slow-Wave Sleep and Learning
Subjects learned a declarative learning task (list of paired 
words) and a nondeclarative learning task (mirror tracing). 
After a nap that included just slow-wave sleep, only 
subjects who learned the declarative learning task 
showed improved performance, compared with subjects 
who stayed awake.
(Based on data from Mednick, Nakayama, and Stickgold, 2003.)
50
40
30
20
10
0
Percent improvement
Improvement (sec)
–20
–40
–60
0
Declarative Learning Task
Nondeclarative Learning Task
Wake 
Nap
Wake 
Nap
figure 9.10  Thinking about Past Experiences 
While Asleep
The graph shows superior performance of subjects who, 
when awakened, reported having thoughts about a virtual 
reality navigation task they had been learning the 
previous day.
(Based on data from Wamsley et al., 2010.)
No
Yes
Thoughts related to
task when awakened?
100
200
300
400
0
Improvement from last training trial (sec)
Section Summary
Why Do We Sleep?
The two principal explanations for sleep are that 
sleep serves as an adaptive response or that it pro-
vides a period of restoration. The fact that all verte-
brates sleep, including some that would seem to be 
better off without it, suggests that sleep is more than 
an adaptive response.
In humans the effects of several days of sleep depri-
vation include perceptual distortions and (sometimes) 
(continued on next page)

304	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
The simplest explanation would be that the body 
produces a sleep-promoting substance that accumulates 
during wakefulness and is destroyed during sleep. The 
longer someone is awake, the longer he or she has to 
sleep to deactivate this substance. And because REM 
sleep deprivation produces an independent REM sleep 
debt, there might have to be two substances, one for 
each stage of sleep.
Where might such substances be produced? They 
do not appear to be found in the general circulation of 
the body. As we saw earlier, the cerebral hemispheres of 
the bottlenose dolphin sleep at different times (Mukha-
metov, 1984). If sleep were controlled by chemicals in 
the blood, the hemispheres should sleep at the same 
time. This observation suggests that if sleep is controlled 
by chemicals, these chemicals are produced within the 
brain and act there. In support of this suggestion Olek-
senko et al. (1992) obtained evidence that indicates that 
each hemisphere of the brain incurs its own sleep debt. 
The researchers deprived a bottlenose dolphin of sleep 
in only one hemisphere. When they allowed the animal 
to sleep normally, they saw a rebound of slow-wave sleep 
only in the deprived hemisphere.
Physiological Mechanisms  
of Sleep and Waking
So far, I have discussed the nature of sleep, problems as-
sociated with it, and its functions. Now it is time to exam-
ine what researchers have discovered about the physio-
logical mechanisms that are responsible for the behavior 
of sleep and for its counterpart, alert wakefulness.
Chemical Control of Sleep
As we have seen, sleep is regulated; that is, an organism 
deprived of slow-wave sleep or REM sleep will make up 
at least part of the missed sleep when permitted to do so. 
In addition, the amount of slow-wave sleep that a person 
obtains during a daytime nap is deducted from the 
amount of slow-wave sleep he or she obtains the next 
night (Karacan et al., 1970). These facts suggest that 
some physiological mechanism monitors the amount of 
sleep that an organism needs—in other words, keeps 
track of the sleep debt we incur during hours of wakeful-
ness. What might this mechanism be?
mild hallucinations and difficulty performing tasks that 
require prolonged concentration. These effects suggest 
that sleep deprivation impairs cerebral functioning. 
Deep slow-wave sleep appears to be the most impor-
tant stage, and perhaps its function is to permit the 
brain to rest and recuperate. Fatal familial insomnia is an 
inherited disease that results in degeneration of parts of 
the thalamus, deficits in attention and memory, a 
dreamlike state, loss of control of the autonomic ner-
vous system and the endocrine system, insomnia, and 
death. Rats that are sleep deprived eventually die. Their 
symptoms include increased body temperature and 
metabolic rate, voracious eating, and weight loss, but 
no obvious signs of a stress response.
The primary function of sleep does not seem to be 
to provide an opportunity for the body to repair the 
wear and tear that occurs during waking hours. 
Changes in a person’s level of exercise do not signifi-
cantly alter the amount of sleep the person needs the 
following night. Instead, the most important function of 
slow-wave sleep seems to be to lower the brain’s 
metabolism and permit it to rest. In support of this 
hypothesis, research has shown that slow-wave sleep 
does indeed reduce the brain’s metabolic rate and that 
increased mental activity (the surprise treat experiment) 
can cause an increase in slow-wave sleep the next night.
The functions of REM sleep are even less under-
stood than those of slow-wave sleep. REM sleep may 
promote brain development. Both REM sleep and 
slow-wave sleep promote learning: REM sleep facili-
tates nondeclarative learning, and slow-wave sleep 
facilitates declarative learning.
 Thought Question
The evidence presented in this section suggests that 
the primary function of sleep is to permit the brain to 
rest. But could sleep also have some other functions? 
For example, could sleep serve as an adaptive 
response, keeping animals out of harm’s way as well 
as providing some cerebral repose? Sleep researcher 
William Dement pointed out that one of the functions 
of the lungs is communication. Obviously, the primary 
function of our lungs is to provide oxygen and rid the 
body of carbon dioxide, and this function explains the 
evolution of the respiratory system. But we can also 
use our lungs to vibrate our vocal cords and provide 
sounds used to talk, so they play a role in communi-
cation, too. Other functions of our lungs are to warm 
our cold hands (by breathing on them), to kindle fires 
by blowing on hot coals, or to blow out candles. With 
this perspective in mind, can you think of some other 
useful functions of sleep?

	
Physiological Mechanisms of Sleep and Waking 	
305
our alertness can vary. For example, when we observe 
something very interesting (or frightening or simply 
surprising), we become more alert and aware of our 
surroundings.
Circuits of neurons that secrete at least five different 
neurotransmitters play a role in some aspect of an ani-
mal’s level of alertness and wakefulness—what is com-
monly called arousal: acetylcholine, norepinephrine, 
serotonin, histamine, and orexin.
Acetylcholine
One of the most important neurotransmitters involved 
in arousal—especially of the cerebral cortex—is acetyl-
choline. Two groups of acetylcholinergic neurons, one 
in the pons and one located in the basal forebrain, pro-
duce activation and cortical desynchrony when they are 
stimulated (Jones, 1990; Steriade, 1996). A third group 
of acetylcholinergic neurons, located in the medial sep-
tum, controls the activity of the hippocampus.
Researchers have long known that acetylcholinergic 
agonists increase EEG signs of cortical arousal and that 
acetylcholinergic antagonists decrease them (Vander-
wolf, 1992). Marrosu et al. (1995) used microdialysis 
probes to measure the release of acetylcholine in the 
hippocampus and neocortex, two regions whose activity 
is closely related to an animal’s alertness and behavioral 
arousal. They found that the levels of ACh in these re-
gions were high during both waking and REM sleep—
periods during which the EEG displayed desynchro-
nized activity—but low during slow-wave sleep. (See 
Figure 9.11.)
Benington, Kodali, and Heller (1995) suggested 
that adenosine, a nucleoside neuromodulator, might 
play a primary role in the control of sleep, and subse-
quent studies have supported this suggestion. As we saw 
in Chapter 2, astrocytes maintain a small stock of nutri-
ents in the form of glycogen, an insoluble carbohydrate 
that is also stocked by the liver and the muscles. In times 
of increased brain activity this glycogen is converted into 
fuel for neurons; thus, prolonged wakefulness causes a 
decrease in the level of glycogen in the brain (Kong et al., 
2002). A fall in the level of glycogen causes an increase 
in the level of extracellular adenosine, which has an in-
hibitory effect on neural activity. This accumulation of 
adenosine serves as a sleep-promoting substance. Dur-
ing slow-wave sleep, neurons in the brain rest, and the 
astrocytes renew their stock of glycogen (Basheer et al., 
2004; Wigren et al., 2007). If wakefulness is prolonged, 
even more adenosine accumulates, which inhibits neu-
ral activity and produces the cognitive and emotional 
effects that are seen during sleep deprivation. (As we 
saw in Chapter 4, caffeine blocks adenosine receptors. I 
don’t need to tell you the effect that caffeine has on 
sleepiness.) Halassa et al. (2009) prepared a targeted 
mutation in the brains of mice that interfered with the 
release of adenosine by astrocytes. As a result, the ani-
mals spent less time than normal in slow-wave sleep.
As we all know, people differ in their sleep need. 
Evidence suggests that genetic factors affect the typical 
duration of a person’s slow-wave sleep. Rétey et al. 
(2005) discovered one of these factors—variability in 
the gene that encodes for an enzyme, adenosine deami-
nase, which is involved in the breakdown of adenosine. 
The investigators found that people with the G/A allele 
for this gene, which encodes for a form of the enzyme 
that breaks down adenosine more slowly, spent approxi-
mately 30 minutes more time in slow-wave sleep than 
did people with the more common G/G allele. Levels of 
adenosine in people with the G/A allele decreased more 
slowly during slow-wave sleep, and as a consequence the 
slow-wave sleep of these people was prolonged.
The role of adenosine as a sleep-promoting factor is 
discussed in more detail later in this chapter, in a sec-
tion devoted to the neural control of sleep.
Neural Control of Arousal
As we have seen, sleep is not a unitary condition but 
consists of several different stages with very different 
characteristics. The waking state, too, is nonuniform; 
sometimes we are alert and attentive, and sometimes we 
fail to notice much about what is happening around us. 
Of course, sleepiness has an effect on wakefulness; if we 
are fighting to stay awake, the struggle might impair 
our ability to concentrate on other things. But everyday 
observations suggest that even when we are not sleepy, 
x adenosine  A neuromodulator that is released by neurons 
engaging in high levels of metabolic activity; may play a primary 
role in the initiation of sleep.
figure 9.11  Release of Acetylcholine During  
the Sleep–Waking Cycle
Acetylcholine is released from the cortex and 
hippocampus. SWS = slow-wave sleep.
(Based on data from Marrosu et al., 1995.)
100
100
200
300
400
200
300
0
0
ACh (pyol//10µl)
SWS QW
AW
REM
SWS QW
AW
REM
Cortex
Hippocampus

306	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
a particular stimulus that would appear on a video dis-
play. The investigators observed that the monkeys per-
formed best when the rate of firing of the LC neurons 
was high. After the monkeys worked for a long time at 
the task, the neurons’ rate of firing fell, and so did the 
monkeys’ performance. These results support the con-
clusion that the activation of LC neurons (and their re-
lease of norepinephrine) increases vigilance.
Serotonin
A third neurotransmitter, serotonin (5-HT) also appears 
to play a role in activating behavior. Almost all of the 
brain’s serotonergic neurons are found in the raphe 
nuclei, which are located in the medullary and pontine 
regions of the reticular formation. The axons of these 
neurons project to many parts of the brain, including 
the thalamus, hypothalamus, basal ganglia, hippocam-
pus, and neocortex. Stimulation of the raphe nuclei 
causes locomotion and cortical arousal (as measured by 
the EEG), whereas PCPA, a drug that prevents the syn-
thesis of serotonin, reduces cortical arousal (Peck and 
Vanderwolf, 1991).
Jacobs and Fornal (1999) suggested that one spe-
cific contribution of serotonergic neurons to activation 
is facilitation of continuous, automatic movements, such 
Rasmusson, Clow, and Szerb (1994) electrically 
stimulated a region of the dorsal pons and found that 
the stimulation activated the cerebral cortex and in­
creased the release of acetylcholine there by 350 per-
cent (as measured by microdialysis probes). A group of 
acetylcholinergic neurons located in the basal forebrain 
forms an essential part of the pathway that is responsible 
for this effect. If these neurons were deactivated by  
infusing a local anesthetic or drugs that blocked synaptic 
transmission, the activating effects of the pontine stimu-
lation were abolished. In contrast, Cape and Jones 
(2000) found that drugs that activated these neurons 
caused wakefulness. Lee et al. (2004) found that most 
neurons in the basal forebrain showed a high rate of 
firing during both waking and REM sleep and a low rate 
of firing during slow-wave sleep.
Norepinephrine
Investigators have long known that catecholamine ago-
nists such as amphetamine produce arousal and sleep-
lessness. These effects appear to be mediated primarily 
by the noradrenergic system of the locus coeruleus 
(LC), located in the dorsal pons. Neurons of the locus 
coeruleus give rise to axons that branch widely, releas-
ing norepinephrine (from axonal varicosities) through-
out the neocortex, hippocampus, thalamus, cerebellar 
cortex, pons, and medulla; thus, they potentially affect 
widespread and important regions of the brain.
Aston-Jones and Bloom (1981) recorded the activity 
of noradrenergic neurons of the LC across the sleep-
waking cycle in unrestrained rats. They found that this 
activity was closely related to behavioral arousal: The 
firing rate of these neurons was high during wakeful-
ness, low during slow-wave sleep, and almost zero during 
REM sleep. Within a few seconds of awakening, the rate 
of firing increased dramatically. (See Figure 9.12.)
Carter, Yizhar, and Chikahisa (2010) used a viral 
vector to insert genes for two photosensitive proteins, 
ChR2 and NpHR, into noradrenergic cells of the locus 
coeruleus. As we saw in Chapter 5, exposure of ChR2 to 
blue light activates the neurons, and exposure of NpHR 
to yellow light inhibits them. Previous experiments, 
which used electrical or chemical stimulation, activated 
many neurons in and around the locus coeruleus and 
thus produced effects that were not specific to norad-
renergic neurons. Carter and his colleagues found that 
stimulation of the neurons caused immediate waking, 
and that inhibition decreased wakefulness and increased 
slow-wave sleep.
Most investigators believe that activity of noradren-
ergic LC neurons increases an animal’s vigilance—its 
ability to pay attention to stimuli in the environment. 
For example, Aston-Jones et al. (1994) recorded the 
electrical activity of noradrenergic LC neurons in mon-
keys performing a task that required them to watch for 
figure 9.12  Norepinephrine and the Sleep–
Waking Cycle
This graph shows the activity of noradrenergic neurons in 
the locus coeruleus of freely moving rats during various 
stages of sleep and waking.
(From Aston-Jones, G., and Bloom, F. E. The Journal of Neuroscience, 1981, 1, 
876–886. Copyright 1981, The Society for Neuroscience.)
0
0
0
0
0
4
8
50
40
30
20
10
40
40
40
80
80
80
% Stage
% Stage
% Stage
Sec
Waking
Waking
REM
sleep
Slow-wave
sleep
Mean firing rate (spikes/sec)
x locus coeruleus (LC) (sa roo lee us)  A dark-colored group of 
noradrenergic cell bodies located in the pons near the rostral end 
of the floor of the fourth ventricle; involved in arousal and vigilance.
x raphe nuclei (ruh fay)  A group of nuclei located in the 
reticular formation of the medulla, pons, and midbrain, situated 
along the midline; contain serotonergic neurons.

	
Physiological Mechanisms of Sleep and Waking 	
307
directly increase cortical activation and arousal, and 
projections to acetylcholinergic neurons of the basal 
forebrain and dorsal pons do so indirectly, by increasing 
the release of acetylcholine in the cerebral cortex 
(Khateb et al., 1995; Brown, Stevens, and Haas, 2001). 
The activity of histaminergic neurons is high during 
waking but low during slow-wave sleep and REM sleep 
(Steininger et al., 1996). In addition, injections of drugs 
that prevent the synthesis of histamine or block hista-
mine H1 receptors decrease waking and increase sleep 
(Lin, Sakai, and Jouvet, 1998). Also, infusion of hista-
mine into the basal forebrain region of rats causes an 
increase in waking and a decrease in non-REM sleep 
(Ramesh et al., 2004).
Although histamine clearly plays an important role 
in wakefulness and arousal, evidence suggests that con-
trol of wakefulness is shared with the other neurotrans-
mitters discussed in this section. For example, Parmen-
tier et al. (2002) found that mice with a targeted 
mutation that blocks the synthesis of histamine showed 
normal amounts of spontaneous wakefulness. However, 
the animals showed less arousal in response to environ-
mental stimuli. For example, normal mice placed in a 
novel environment remain awake for 2–3 hours, but the 
histamine-deprived mice fell asleep within a few min-
utes. Similarly, Takahashi, Lin, and Sakai (2006) found 
that histaminergic neurons did not respond to environ-
mental stimuli unless the stimuli elicited a state of overt 
attention. Gerashchenko et al. (2004) suggest that the 
brain’s arousal systems promote wakefulness at different 
times or in different situations and that no one of these 
systems plays a critical role under all conditions.
Orexin
As we saw in the section on sleep disorders, the cause of 
narcolepsy is degeneration of orexinergic neurons in 
humans and a hereditary absence of orexin-B receptors 
in dogs. The cell bodies of neurons that secrete orexin 
(also called hypocretin, as we saw) are located in the 
lateral hypothalamus. Although there are only about 
7000 orexinergic neurons in the human brain, the axons 
of these neurons project to almost every part of the 
brain, including the cerebral cortex and all of the regions 
involved in arousal and wakefulness, including the locus 
coeruleus, raphe nuclei, tuberomammillary nucleus, 
and acetylcholinergic neurons in the dorsal pons and 
as pacing, chewing, and grooming. On the other hand, 
when animals engage in orienting responses to novel 
stimuli, the activity of serotonergic neurons decreases. 
Perhaps serotonergic neurons are involved in facilitat-
ing ongoing activities and suppressing the processing of 
sensory information, preventing reactions that might 
disrupt the ongoing activities.
Figure 9.13 shows the activity of serotonergic neu-
rons, recorded by Trulson and Jacobs (1979). As you 
can see, these neurons, like the noradrenergic neurons 
studied by Aston-Jones and Bloom (1981), were most 
active during waking. Their firing rate declined during 
slow-wave sleep and became virtually zero during REM 
sleep. However, once the period of REM sleep ended, 
the neurons temporarily became very active again. (See 
Figure 9.13.)
Histamine
The fourth neurotransmitter implicated in the control 
of wakefulness and arousal is histamine, a compound 
synthesized from histidine, an amino acid. You are un-
doubtedly aware that antihistamines, which are used to 
treat allergies, can cause drowsiness. They do so by 
blocking histamine H2 receptors in the brain. More 
modern antihistamines cannot cross the blood–brain 
barrier, so they do not cause drowsiness.
The cell bodies of histaminergic neurons are lo-
cated in the tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN) of the 
hypothalamus, located at the base of the brain just ros-
tral to the mammillary bodies. The axons of these neu-
rons project primarily to the cerebral cortex, thalamus, 
basal ganglia, basal forebrain, and other regions of the 
hypothalamus. The projections to the cerebral cortex 
figure 9.13  Serotonin and the Sleep–Waking Cycle
This graph shows the activity of serotonergic 
(5-HT-secreting) neurons in the dorsal raphe nuclei of freely 
moving cats during various stages of sleep and waking.
(Adapted from Trulson, M. E., and Jacobs, B. L. Brain Research, 1979, 163,  
135–150. Redrawn with permission.)
5
3
4
2
1
Mean firing rate (spikes/sec)
Active waking
Quiet waking
Drowsy
Stage 1 sleep
Stage 2 sleep
Stage 3 sleep
Pre-
REM
sleep
REM
sleep
Time
First second after
REM sleep
x histamine  A neurotransmitter synthesized from the amino acid 
histidine; plays an important role in maintenance of wakefulness 
and arousal.
x tuberomammillary nucleus (TMN)  A nucleus in the ventral 
posterior hypothalamus, just rostral to the mammillary bodies; 
contains histaminergic neurons involved in cortical activation and 
behavioral arousal.

308	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
will eventually become sleepy, and once we sleep, we will 
be likely to sleep longer than usual and make up at least 
some of our sleep debt. This control of sleep is homeo-
static in nature, and follows the principles that regulate 
our eating and drinking, which are described in Chap-
ter 12. But under some conditions, it is important for us 
to stay awake—for example, when we are being threat-
ened by a dangerous situation or when we are dehydrated 
and are looking for some water to drink. This control of 
sleep is allostatic in nature, a term that refers to reactions 
to stressful events in the environment (danger, lack of 
water, and so on) that serve to override homeostatic 
control. Finally, circadian factors, or time of day factors, 
tend to restrict our period of sleep to a particular por-
tion of the day/night cycle. (Circadian control of sleep 
cycles is described in the last section of this chapter.)
As we saw earlier in this chapter, the primary ho-
meostatic factor that controls sleep is the presence or 
absence of adenosine, a chemical that accumulates in 
the brain during wakefulness and is destroyed during 
slow-wave sleep. Allostatic control is mediated primarily 
by hormonal and neural responses to stressful situations 
(described in Chapter 11) and by neuropeptides (such 
as orexin) that are involved in hunger and thirst.
This subsection describes the neural circuitry that 
controls slow-wave sleep and the means by which ade-
nosine exerts its homeostatic effect. When we are awake 
and alert, most of the neurons in our brain—especially 
those of the forebrain—are active, which enables us to 
pay attention to sensory information and process this 
information, to think about what we are perceiving, to 
retrieve and think about our memories, and to engage 
in a variety of behaviors that we are called on to perform 
during the day. The level of brain activity is largely con-
trolled by the five sets of arousal neurons described in 
the previous section. A high level of activity of these 
neurons keeps us awake, and a low level puts us to sleep.
But what controls the activity of the arousal neu-
rons? What causes this activity to fall, thus putting us to 
sleep? The first hint at an answer to this question was 
suggested in the early twentieth century by careful ob-
servations of a Viennese neurologist, Constantin von 
Economo, who noticed that patients afflicted by a new 
type of encephalitis that was sweeping through Europe 
and North America showed severe disturbance in sleep 
and waking (Triarhou, 2006). Most patients slept exces-
sively, waking only to eat and drink. (We would now say 
that they were wakened by allostatic factors.) According 
to von Economo, these patients had brain damage at 
the junction of the brain stem and forebrain, at a loca-
tion that would destroy the axons of the arousal neurons 
entering the forebrain. Some patients, however, showed 
just the opposite symptoms: They slept only a few hours 
each day. Although they were tired, they had difficulty 
falling asleep and usually awakened shortly thereafter. 
basal forebrain (Sakurai, 2007). Orexin has an excit-
atory effect in all of these regions.
Mileykovskiy, Kiyashchenko, and Siegel (2005) recor­
ded the activity of single orexinergic neurons in unanes-
thetized rats and found that the neurons fired at a high 
rate during alert or active waking and at a low rate dur-
ing quiet waking, slow-wave sleep, and REM sleep. The 
highest rate of firing was seen when the rats were  
engaged in exploratory activity. (See Figure 9.14.)
Adamantidis and his colleagues used genetic trans-
fer to insert ChR2 protein into orexinergic neurons of 
the lateral hypothalamus of mice (Adamantidis, Carter, 
and de Lecea, 2010). They found that activation of these 
neurons with blue light awakened the animals from  
either REM or non-REM sleep.
As we saw earlier, narcolepsy is most often treated 
with modafinil, a drug that suppresses the drowsiness as-
sociated with this disorder. Ishizuka, Murotani, and Yam-
atodani (2010) found that the alerting effects of modafinil 
are exerted by stimulating the release of orexin in the 
TMN, which activates the histaminergic neurons located 
there.
Neural Control of Slow-Wave Sleep
Sleep is controlled by three factors: homeostatic, allostatic, 
and circadian. If we go without sleep for a long time, we 
figure 9.14  Orexin and the Sleep–Waking Cycle
This graph shows the activity of single orexinergic 
neurons during various stages of sleep and waking.
(From Mileykovskiy, B. Y., Kiyashchenko, L. I., and Siegel, J. M. Neuron, 2005, 46, 
787–798. Reprinted by permission.)
Rate
Unit
Rate
Unit
Rate
Unit
Rate
Unit
Rate
Unit
Active waking
Quiet waking
Slow-wave sleep
REM sleep
Exploration
5 sp/s
5 sp/s
10 sp/s
10 sp/s
10 sp/s

	
Physiological Mechanisms of Sleep and Waking 	
309
The sleep neurons in the preoptic area receive in-
hibitory inputs from some of the same regions they in-
hibit, including the tuberomammillary nucleus, raphe 
nuclei, and locus coeruleus (Chou et al., 2002); thus, 
they are inhibited by histamine, serotonin, and norepi-
nephrine. As Saper and his colleagues (Saper, Chou, 
and Scammell, 2001; Saper et al., 2010) suggest, this 
mutual inhibition may provide the basis for establishing 
periods of sleep and waking. They note that reciprocal 
inhibition also characterizes an electronic circuit known 
as a flip-flop. A flip-flop can assume one of two states, usu-
ally referred to as on or off—or 0 or 1 in computer ap-
plications. Thus, either the sleep neurons are active and 
inhibit the wakefulness neurons, or the wakefulness neu-
rons are active and inhibit the sleep neurons. Because 
these regions are mutually inhibitory, it is impossible for 
neurons in both sets of regions to be active at the same 
time. In fact, sleep neurons in the vlPOA are silent until 
an animal shows a transition from waking to sleep (Taka-
hashi, Lin, and Sakai, 2009). (See Figure 9.15.)
A flip-flop has an important advantage: When it 
switches from one state to another, it does so quickly. 
Clearly, it is most advantageous to be either asleep or 
awake; a state that has some of the characteristics of 
both sleep and wakefulness would be maladaptive. 
However, there is one problem with flip-flops: They 
Von Economo reported that patients who displayed in-
somnia had damage to the region of the anterior hypo-
thalamus. We now know that this region, usually re-
ferred to as the preoptic area, is the one most involved in 
control of sleep. The preoptic area contains neurons 
whose axons form inhibitory synaptic connections with 
the brain’s arousal neurons. When our preoptic neu-
rons (let’s call them sleep neurons) become active, they 
suppress the activity of our arousal neurons, and we fall 
asleep (Saper, Scammell, and Lu, 2005).
Nauta (1946) found that destruction of the preoptic 
area produced total insomnia in rats. The animals sub-
sequently fell into a coma and died; the average survival 
time was only three days. The effects of effects of electri-
cal stimulation of the preoptic area are just the opposite: 
It causes drowsiness and sleep (Sterman and Clemente, 
1962a, 1962b).
The majority of the sleep neurons are located in the 
ventrolateral preoptic area (vlPOA). In addition, some 
are located in the nearby median preoptic nucleus (MnPN). 
Damage to vlPOA neurons suppresses sleep (Lu et al., 
2000), and the activity of these neurons, measured by 
their levels of Fos protein, increases during sleep. Ex-
periments have shown that the sleep neurons secrete 
the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA and that they 
send their axons to the five brain regions involved in 
arousal described in the previous section (Sherin et al., 
1998; Gvilia et al., 2006; Suntsova et al., 2007). As we 
saw, activity of neurons in these five regions causes corti-
cal activation and behavioral arousal. Inhibition of these 
regions, then, is a necessary condition for sleep.
x ventrolateral preoptic area (vlPOA)  A group of GABAergic 
neurons in the preoptic area whose activity suppresses alertness 
and behavioral arousal and promotes sleep.
figure 9.15  The Sleep/Waking Flip-Flop
According to Saper et al. (2001), the major sleep-promoting region (the vlPOA) and the 
major wakefulness-promoting regions (the basal forebrain and pontine regions that 
contain acetylcholinergic neurons; the locus coeruleus, which contains noradrenergic 
neurons; the raphe nuclei, which contain serotonergic neurons; and the tuberomammillary 
nucleus of the hypothalamus, which contains histaminergic neurons) are reciprocally 
connected by inhibitory GABAergic neurons. (a) When the flip-flop is in the “wake” 
state, the arousal systems are active and the vlPOA is inhibited, and the animal is 
awake. (b) When the flip-flop is in the “sleep” state, the vlPOA is active and the arousal 
systems are inhibited, and the animal is asleep.
(a)
Inhibited
Mutual
inhibition
Activated
Sleep-promoting
region in vlPOA
Brain stem
and forebrain
arousal systems
Flip-flop is “on”
Alert Waking State
ACh  NE  5-HT  Histamine
(b)
Inhibited
Mutual
inhibition
Activated
Sleep-promoting
region in vlPOA
Flip-flop is “off”
ACh  NE  5-HT  Histamine
Slow-Wave Sleep
Brain stem
and forebrain
arousal systems

310	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
As we saw earlier in this chapter, adenosine is re-
leased by astrocytes when neurons are metabolically ac-
tive, and the accumulation of adenosine produces 
drowsiness and sleep. Porkka-Heiskanen, Strecker, and 
McCarley (2000) used microdialysis to measure adenos-
ine levels in several regions of the brain. They found 
that the level of adenosine increased during wakefulness 
and slowly decreased during sleep, especially in the 
basal forebrain. (See Figure 9.17.)
Scammell et al. (2001) found that infusion of an 
adenosine agonist into the vlPOA activated neurons 
there, decreased the activity of histaminergic neurons of 
the tuberomammillary nucleus, and increased slow-wave 
sleep. However, adenosine receptors are found on neu-
rons in many regions of the brain, including the orexin-
ergic neurons of the lateral hypothalamus (Thakkar, 
Winston, and McCarley, 2002). Thus, it is unlikely that 
all of the sleep-promoting effects of adenosine involve 
the neurons of the vlPOA.
Seeing that orexinergic neurons help to hold the 
sleep/waking flip-flop in the waking state, the obvious 
question to ask is, what factors control the activity of or-
exinergic neurons? During the waking part of the day/
night cycle, orexinergic neurons receive an excitatory 
signal from the biological clock that controls rhythms of 
sleep and waking. These neurons also receive signals 
can be unstable. In fact, people with narcolepsy and 
animals with damage to the orexinergic system of neu-
rons exhibit just this characteristic. They have great 
difficulty remaining awake when nothing interesting is 
happening, and they have trouble remaining asleep 
for an extended amount of time. (They also show in-
trusions of the characteristics of REM sleep at inappro-
priate times. I will discuss this phenomenon in the 
next section.)
Saper et al. (2001, 2010) suggest that an important 
function of orexinergic neurons is to help stabilize the 
sleep/waking flip-flop through their excitatory connec-
tions to the wakefulness neurons. Activity of this system 
of neurons tips the activity of the flip-flop toward the 
waking state, thus promoting wakefulness and inhibiting 
sleep. Perhaps your success at staying awake in a boring 
lecture depends on maintaining a high rate of firing of 
your orexinergic neurons, which would keep the flip-
flop in the waking state. (See Figure 9.16.) A mathemati-
cal model of the sleep/waking flip-flop constructed by 
Rempe, Best, and Terman (2010) confirmed the role of 
orexigenic neurons in stabilizing the circuit.
Mochizuki et al. (2004) found that mice with a tar-
geted mutation against the orexin gene showed normal 
amounts of sleep and waking, but their bouts of wakeful-
ness and slow-wave sleep were very brief, showing many 
more transitions between sleep and waking. These results 
provide further support for the hypothesis that orexiner-
gic neurons help stabilize the sleep/waking flip-flop.
figure 9.16  Role of Orexinergic Neurons in Sleep
The schematic diagram shows the effect of activation of 
the orexinergic system of neurons of the lateral 
hypothalamus on the sleep/waking flip-flop. Motivation to 
remain awake or events that disturb sleep activate the 
orexinergic neurons.
Activation holds
flip-flop “on”
Motivation
to remain
awake
Inhibited
Mutual
inhibition
Activated
Sleep-promoting
region in vlPOA
Brain stem
and forebrain
arousal systems
Alert Waking State
ACh  NE  5-HT  Histamine
Orexinergic
neurons in
the lateral
hypothalamus
figure 9.17  Adenosine and Sleep
Extracellular adenosine in the cat basal forebrain region is 
shown during 6 hours of prolonged waking and 3 hours 
of recovery sleep, as measured by microdialysis.
(From Porkka-Heiskanen, T., Strecker, R. E., Thakkar, M., et al. Science, 1997, 276, 
1265–1268. Copyright 1997 by the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science.)
50
100
150
200
250
Adenosine (% of hour 2)
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
Prolonged waking
Recovery
0
Hours

	
Physiological Mechanisms of Sleep and Waking 	
311
and when we sleep; once we fall asleep, the REM flip-flop 
controls our cycles of REM sleep and slow-wave sleep.
Acetylcholinergic neurons play an important role in 
cerebral activation during alert wakefulness. Research-
ers have also found that they are involved in the neocor-
tical activation that accompanies REM sleep. Several 
studies (for example, El Mansari, Sakai, and Jouvet, 
1989; Steriade et al., 1990; Kayama, Ohta, and Jodo, 
1992) have shown that ACh neurons in the dorsal pons 
fire at a high rate during both REM sleep and active 
wakefulness or during REM sleep alone. Figure 9.19 
shows the activity of a so-called REM-ON cell, which fires 
at a high rate only during REM sleep. As you can see, this 
neuron increased its activity approximately 80 seconds 
before the onset of REM sleep. (See Figure 9.19.) Find-
ings such as these suggested that the ACh neurons of 
the dorsal pons served as the trigger mechanism that 
initiated a period of REM sleep. However, more recent 
research suggests that REM sleep is controlled by the 
activity of a flip-flop whose elements do not include ace-
tylcholinergic neurons.
Reviews by Fort, Bassetti, and Luppi (2009) and 
Saper et al. (2010) summarize the evidence for the REM 
flip-flop. A region of the dorsal pons, just ventral to the 
locus coeruleus, contains REM-ON neurons. In rats this 
from brain mechanisms that monitor the animal’s nutri-
tional state: Hunger-related signals activate orexinergic 
neurons, and satiety-related signals inhibit them. Thus, 
orexinergic neurons maintain arousal during the times 
when an animal should search for food. In fact, if nor-
mal mice (but not mice with a targeted mutation against 
orexin receptors) are given less food than they would 
normally eat, they stay awake longer each day (Yamanaka 
et al., 2003; Sakurai, 2007). Finally, orexinergic neurons 
receive inhibitory input from the vlPOA, which means 
that sleep signals that arise from the accumulation of 
adenosine can eventually overcome excitatory input to 
orexinergic neurons, and sleep can occur. Thus, orexin-
ergic neurons are involved in all three factors that con-
trol sleep and wakefulness: homeostatic, allostatic, and 
circadian.(See Figure 9.18.)
Neural Control of REM Sleep
As we saw earlier in this chapter, REM sleep consists of 
desynchronized EEG activity, muscular paralysis, rapid 
eye movements, and increased genital activity. The rate 
of cerebral metabolism during REM sleep is as high as it 
is during waking (Maquet et al., 1990), and were it not 
for the state of paralysis, the level of physical activity 
would also be high.
As we shall see, REM sleep is controlled by a flip-flop 
similar to the one that controls cycles of sleep and wak-
ing. The sleep/waking flip-flop determines when we wake 
figure 9.18  Adenosine, Time of Day, and Hunger
This figure illustrates the role of adenosine, time of day, 
and hunger and satiety signals on the sleep/waking flip-flop.
ACh  NE  5-HT  Histamine
Arousal
system
vlPOA
Biological
clock–time
of day
Hunger
signals
Satiety
signals
SWS-on region
Waking-on region
Prolonged 
wakefulness
and metabolic 
activity of
neuron in brain
Accumulation
of adenosine
LH
orexinergic
neurons
Sleep/Waking Flip-Flop
figure 9.19  Firing Pattern of a REM-ON Cell
The acetylcholinergic REM-ON cell is located in the 
dorsal pons. The figure shows (a) action potentials during 
60-minute intervals during waking, slow-wave sleep, and 
REM sleep, and (b) rate of firing just before and after the 
transition from slow-wave sleep to REM sleep. The 
increase in activity begins approximately 80 seconds 
before the onset of REM sleep.
(Adapted from El Mansari, M., Sakai, K., and Jouvet, M. Experimental Brain 
Research, 1989, 76, 519–529.)
3
2
1
0
1
0
REM sleep
REM sleep
Pre-REM sleep
Slow-wave sleep
Time (min)
(b)
Rate of firing
(spikes/5 sec)
20
10
Slow-wave
sleep
10 sec
(a)
Waking

312	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
We can see now why degeneration of orexinergic 
neurons causes narcolepsy. The daytime sleepiness and 
the fragmented sleep occur because without the influ-
ence of orexin, the sleep/waking flip-flop becomes un-
stable. The release of orexin in the REM-OFF region 
normally keeps the REM flip-flop in the off state. With 
region is known as the sublaterodorsal nucleus (SLD). A 
region of the dorsal midbrain, the ventrolateral periaq-
ueductal gray matter (vlPAG), contains REM-OFF 
neurons. For simplicity I will refer to the REM-ON and 
REM-OFF regions. The REM-ON and REM-OFF regions 
are interconnected by means of inhibitory GABAergic 
neurons. Stimulation of the REM-ON region with in-
fusions of glutamate agonists elicits most of the ele-
ments of REM sleep, whereas inhibition of this region 
with GABA agonists disrupts REM sleep. In contrast, 
stimulation of the REM-OFF region suppresses REM 
sleep, whereas damage to this region or infusions of 
GABA agonists dramatically increases REM sleep. (See 
Figure 9.20.)
The mutual inhibition of these two regions means 
that they function like a flip-flop: Only one region can be 
active at any given time. During waking, the REM-OFF 
region receives excitatory input from the orexinergic neu-
rons of the lateral hypothalamus, and this activation tips 
the REM flip-flop into the off state. (Additional excit-
atory input to the REM-OFF region is received from two 
sets of wakefulness neurons: the noradrenergic neurons 
of the locus coeruleus and the serotonergic neurons of 
the raphe nuclei.) When the sleep/waking flip-flop 
switches into the sleep phase, slow-wave sleep begins. 
The activity of the excitatory orexinergic, noradrenergic, 
and serotonergic inputs to the REM-OFF region begins 
to decrease. Eventually, the REM sleep flip-flop switches 
to the on state, and REM sleep begins. Figure 9.21 shows 
the control of the REM sleep flip-flop by the sleep/waking 
flip flop. (See Figure 9.21.)
Once sleep begins, the activity of orexinergic neu-
rons ceases, which removes one source of the excitatory 
input to the REM-OFF region. As we saw in Figures 9.12 
and 9.13, as sleep progresses, the activity of noradrener-
gic and serotonergic neurons gradually decreases. As a 
consequence, more of the excitatory input to the REM-
OFF region is removed. The REM flip-flop tips to the on 
state, and REM sleep begins.
x sublaterodorsal nucleus (SLD)  A region of the dorsal pons, 
just ventral to the locus coeruleus, that contains REM-ON neurons; 
part of the REM flip-flop.
x ventrolateral periaqueductal gray matter (vlPAG)  A region 
of the dorsal midbrain, that contains REM-OFF neurons; part of 
the REM flip-flop.
figure 9.20  The REM Sleep Flip-Flop
 
 
LH
orexinergic
neurons
Biological
clock–time
of day
Hunger
signals
Satiety
signals
vlPAG
Brain regions that
control components
of REM sleep
SLD
REM Sleep Flip-Flop
REM-OFF 
REM-ON 
figure 9.21  REM Sleep
This figure shows summary of the neural circuitry that is 
thought to be responsible for the components of REM sleep.
ACh  NE  5-HT  Histamine
vlPAG
LH
orexinergic
neurons
Emotional stimuli
Sleep/Waking Flip-Flop
Arousal
system
vlPOA
REM Sleep Flip-Flop
SWS-on region
Waking-on region
Brain regions that
control components
of REM sleep
SLD
Amygdala
REM-OFF 
REM-ON 

	
Physiological Mechanisms of Sleep and Waking 	
313
Jouvet’s lesions destroyed a set of neurons that are 
responsible for the muscular paralysis that occurs dur-
ing REM sleep. These neurons are located just ventral to 
the area we now know to be part of the REM-ON region 
(Lai et al., 2010). Some of the axons that leave this re-
gion travel to the spinal cord, where they excite inhibi-
tory interneurons whose axons form synapses with mo-
tor neurons. This means that when the REM flip-flop 
tips to the on state, motor neurons in the spinal cord 
become inhibited and cannot respond to the signals 
arising from the motor cortex in the course of a dream. 
Damage to the REM-ON region removes this inhibition, 
and the person (or one of Jouvet’s cats) acts out his or 
her dreams. (See Figure 9.23.)
The fact that our brains contain an elaborate mech-
anism whose sole function is to keep us paralyzed while 
we dream—that is, to prevent us from acting out our 
dreams—suggests that the motor components of dreams 
are as important as the sensory components. Perhaps 
the practice our motor system gets during REM sleep 
helps us to improve our performance of behaviors we 
have learned that day. The inhibition of the motor neu-
rons in the spinal cord prevents the movements being 
practiced from actually occurring, with the exception of 
a few harmless twitches of the hands and feet.
Neurons in the REM-ON region also send axons to 
regions of the thalamus that are involved in the control 
the loss of orexinergic neurons, emotional episodes such 
as laughter or anger, which activate the amygdala, tip the 
REM flip-flop into the on state—even during waking—
and the result is an attack of cataplexy. (Look again at 
Figure 9.21.) In fact, a functional-imaging study by 
Schwartz et al. (2008) found that when people with cata-
plexy watched humorous sequences of photographs, the 
hypothalamus was activated less, and the amygdala was 
activated more, than the same structures in control sub-
jects. The investigators suggest that the loss of hypocret-
inergic neurons removed an inhibitory influence of the 
hypothalamus on the amygdala. The increased amygdala 
activity could account at least in part for the increased 
activity of REM-ON neurons that occurs even during 
waking in people with cataplexy. (See Figure 9.22.)
As we saw earlier, REM sleep has several behavioral 
components, including rapid eye movements, genital ac-
tivity, and muscular paralysis. The last of these phenom-
ena, muscular paralysis, is particularly interesting. We 
also saw that patients with REM sleep behavior disorder 
fail to become paralyzed during REM sleep and there-
fore act out their dreams. The same thing happens to 
cats when a lesion is placed in a particular region of the 
midbrain. Jouvet (1972) described this phenomenon:
To a naive observer, the cat, which is standing, 
looks awake since it may attack unknown ene-
mies, play with an absent mouse, or display 
flight behavior. There are orienting movements 
of the head or eyes toward imaginary stimuli, 
although the animal does not respond to visual 
or auditory stimuli. These extraordinary epi-
sodes . . . are a good argument that “dreaming” 
occurs during [REM sleep] in the cat. (Jouvet, 
1972, pp. 236–237)
figure 9.22  Humor and Narcolepsy
The figure shows the activation of the hypothalamus and 
amygdala in normal subjects and patients with narcolepsy 
watching neutral and humorous sequences of photos.
(From Schwartz, S., Ponz, A., Poryazova, R., et al. Brain, 2008, 131, 514–522. 
Reprinted by permission.)
1
1
2
3
4
–1
–2
–3
–4
Controls
Patients
Controls
Patients
fMRI effect size
Hypothalamus
Amygdala
Humor
Neutral
figure 9.23  Control of Components of REM Sleep 
by the REM-ON Region
REM Sleep Flip-Flop
Lateral
preoptic
area
vlPAG
Inhibitory
interneurons
Cortical arousal
ACH neurons
in forebrain
and pons
Movements
REMs
Genital activity
Tectum
Motor
neurons
REM-OFF 
REM-ON 
ACh neurons in
pons
Medial pontine
reticular formation
SLD

314	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
mechanisms responsible for them. A study by Schmidt 
et al. (2000) found that lesions of the lateral preoptic 
area in rats suppressed penile erections during REM 
sleep but had no effect on erections during waking. 
Salas et al. (2007) found that penile erections could 
be triggered by electrical stimulation of acetylcholin-
ergic neurons in the pons that become active during 
REM sleep. The investigators note that evidence sug-
gests that these pontine neurons may be directly con-
nected with neurons in the lateral preoptic area and 
thus may be responsible for the erections. (Look again 
at Figure 9.23.)
of cortical arousal, which may at least partly account for 
the EEG activation that is seen during REM sleep. In 
addition, they send axons to glutamatergic neurons in 
the medial pontine reticular formation, which, in turn, 
send axons to the acetylcholinergic neurons of the basal 
forebrain. Activation of these forebrain neurons pro-
duces arousal and cortical desynchrony. The control of 
rapid eye movements appears to be achieved by projec-
tions from acetylcholinergic neurons in the dorsal pons 
to the tectum (Webster and Jones, 1988).
Little is known about the function of genital activ-
ity that occurs during REM sleep or about the neural 
Section Summary
Physiological Mechanisms of Sleep and Waking
The fact that the amount of sleep is regulated sug-
gests that a sleep-promoting substance is produced 
during wakefulness and destroyed during sleep. The 
sleeping pattern of the dolphin brain suggests that 
such a substance does not accumulate in the blood. 
Instead, evidence indicates that adenosine, released 
when neurons are obliged to utilize the supply of gly-
cogen stored in astrocytes, serves as the link between 
increased brain metabolism and the necessity of 
sleep.
Five systems of neurons appear to be important 
for alert, active wakefulness: the acetylcholinergic 
system of the pons and the basal forebrain, involved 
in cortical activation; the noradrenergic system of 
the locus coeruleus, involved in vigilance; the sero-
tonergic system of the raphe nuclei, involved in acti-
vation of automatic behaviors such as locomotion 
and grooming; the histaminergic neurons of the 
tuberomammillary nucleus, involved in maintaining 
wakefulness; and the orexinergic system of the lat-
eral hypothalamus, also involved in maintaining 
wakefulness.
Slow-wave sleep occurs when neurons in the ven-
trolateral preoptic area (vlPOA) become active. These 
neurons inhibit the systems of neurons that promote 
wakefulness. In turn, the vlPOA is inhibited by these 
same wakefulness-promoting regions, thus forming a 
kind of flip-flop that keeps us either awake or asleep. 
The accumulation of adenosine promotes sleep by 
inhibiting wakefulness-promoting regions and activat-
ing the sleep-promoting neurons of the vlPOA. 
Activity of the orexinergic neurons of the lateral  
hypothalamus keeps the flip-flop that controls sleep 
and waking in the “waking” state.
REM sleep is controlled by another flip-flop. The 
sublaterodorsal nucleus (SLD) serves as the REM-ON 
region, and the ventrolateral periaqueductal gray 
region (vlPAG) serves as the REM-OFF region. This 
flip-flop is controlled by the sleep/waking flip-flop; 
only when the sleep/waking flip-flop is in the “sleep-
ing” state can the REM flip-flop switch to the “REM” 
state. The muscular paralysis that prevents our act-
ing out our dreams is produced by connections 
between neurons in the SLD that excite inhibitory 
interneurons in the spinal cord. Penile erections dur-
ing REM sleep (but not during waking) are abolished 
by lesions of the lateral preoptic area. Rapid eye 
movements are produced by indirect connections 
between the SLD and the tectum, through the 
medial pontine reticular formation and acetylcholin-
ergic neurons in the pons.
 THOUGHT QUESTIONS
Have you ever been lying in bed, almost asleep, 
when you suddenly thought of something impor-
tant you had forgotten to do? Did you then sud-
denly become fully awake and alert? If so, neurons 
in your brain’s arousal systems undoubtedly 
became active, which aroused your cerebral cortex. 
What do you think the source of this activation 
was? What activated the arousal systems? How 
would you go about answering this question? What 
research methods described in Chapter 5 would be 
helpful?

	
Biological Clocks	
315
it synchronizes the endogenous rhythm. Studies with 
many species of animals have shown that if they are 
maintained in constant darkness (or constant dim 
light), a brief period of bright light will reset their in-
ternal clock, advancing or retarding it depending on 
when the light flash occurs (Aschoff, 1979). For ex-
ample, if an animal is exposed to bright light soon af-
ter dusk, the biological clock is set back to an earlier 
time—as if dusk had not yet arrived. On the other 
hand, if the light occurs late at night, the biological 
clock is set ahead to a later time—as if dawn had  
already come.
Like other animals, humans exhibit circadian rhythms. 
Our normal period of inactivity begins several hours after 
Biological Clocks
Much of our behavior follows regular rhythms. For ex-
ample, we saw that the stages of sleep are organized 
around a 90-minute cycle of REM and slow-wave sleep. 
And, of course, our daily pattern of sleep and waking 
follows a 24-hour cycle. Finally, many animals display 
seasonal breeding rhythms in which reproductive be-
haviors and hormone levels show yearly fluctuations. In 
recent years investigators have learned much about the 
neural mechanisms that are responsible for these 
rhythms.
Circadian Rhythms and Zeitgebers
Daily rhythms in behavior and physiological processes 
are found throughout the plant and animal world. 
These cycles are generally called circadian rhythms. 
(Circa means “about,” and dies means “day”; therefore, a 
circadian rhythm is one with a cycle of approximately 24 
hours.) Some of these rhythms are passive responses to 
changes in illumination. However, other rhythms are 
controlled by mechanisms within the organism—by 
“internal clocks.” For example, Figure 9.24 shows the 
activity of a rat during various conditions of illumina-
tion. Each horizontal line represents 24 hours. Black 
lines indicate the time the rat spends in wakefulness. 
Remember, rats are nocturnal animals, active at night. 
Of course, actual records from a rat would show more 
variability and some short periods of waking during the 
day and perhaps some catnaps (ratnaps?) during the 
night. The upper portion of the figure shows the activity 
of the rat during a normal day/night cycle, with alternat-
ing 12-hour periods of light and dark. (See Figure 9.24.)
Next, the dark–light cycle was shifted; the dark cycle 
now came on 4 hours earlier. The animal’s activity cycle 
quickly followed the change. (See the middle portion of 
Figure 9.24.) Finally, dim lights were left on continuously. 
The cyclical pattern in the rat’s activity remained. Be-
cause there were no cycles of light and dark in the rat’s 
environment, the source of rhythmicity must be located 
within the animal; that is, the animal must possess an 
internal, biological clock. You can see that the rat’s clock 
was not set precisely to 24 hours; when the illumination 
was held constant, the clock ran a bit slow. The animal 
began its bout of activity approximately 1 hour later 
each day. (See the bottom portion of Figure 9.24.)
The phenomenon illustrated in Figure 9.24 is typi-
cal of the circadian rhythms shown by many species. A 
free-running clock, with a cycle of approximately 25 
hours, controls some biological functions—in this 
case, sleep and wakefulness. Regular daily variation in 
the level of illumination (that is, sunlight and dark-
ness) normally keeps the clock adjusted to 24 hours. 
Light serves as a zeitgeber (German for “time giver”); 
figure 9.24  Wheel-Running Activity of a Rat
Top: The animal’s activity occurs at “night” (that is, 
during the twelve hours the light is off). Middle: The 
period of waking follows the new dark period when the 
light cycle is changed. Bottom: When the animal is 
maintained in constant dim illumination, it displays a free-
running activity cycle of approximately twenty-five hours, 
which means that its period of waking begins about one 
hour later each day.
Noon
Noon
6 PM
6 AM
Days
x circadian rhythm (sur kay dee un or sur ka dee un)  A daily 
rhythmical change in behavior or physiological process.
x zeitgeber (tsite gay ber)  A stimulus (usually the light of dawn) 
that resets the biological clock that is responsible for circadian 
rhythms.

316	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
mice’s eyes, these effects were disrupted. These results 
suggested that there is a special photoreceptor that pro-
vides information about the ambient level of light that 
synchronizes circadian rhythms. Provencio et al. (2000) 
found the photochemical responsible for this effect, 
which they named melanopsin.
Unlike the other retinal photopigments, which are 
found in rods and cones, melanopsin is present in gan-
glion cells—the neurons whose axons transmit informa-
tion from the eyes to the rest of the brain. Melanopsin-
containing ganglion cells are sensitive to light, and their 
axons terminate in the SCN. They also terminate in the 
region of the midbrain that controls the response of the 
pupils to changes in the level of illumination (Berson, 
Dunn, and Takao, 2002; Hattar et al., 2002; Gooley et 
al., 2003). Apparently, melanopsin-containing ganglion 
cells, and not rods and cones, are involved in the pupil-
lary response to light. (See Figure 9.26.)
Because the synchronizing effects of light on the 
SCN are mediated by specialized ganglion cells and not 
by rods and cones, people who have become blind be-
cause of loss of these photoreceptors can still show nor-
mal circadian rhythms. Although they cannot see, the 
melanopsin-containing ganglion cells in their retinas 
can still detect changes in light levels and synchronize 
the activity of their SCN.
the start of the dark portion of the day/night cycle and 
persists for a variable amount of time into the light por-
tion. Without the benefits of modern civilization we would 
probably go to sleep earlier and get up earlier than we do; 
we use artificial lights to delay our bedtime and window 
shades to extend our time for sleep. Under constant illu-
mination our biological clocks will run free, gaining or 
losing time like a watch that runs too slow or too fast. Dif-
ferent people have different cycle lengths, but most peo-
ple in that situation will begin to live a “day” that is ap-
proximately 25 hours long. This works out quite well, 
because the morning light, acting as a zeitgeber, simply 
resets the clock.
The Suprachiasmatic Nucleus
Role in Circadian Rhythms
Researchers working independently in two laboratories 
(Moore and Eichler, 1972; Stephan and Zucker, 1972) 
discovered that the primary biological clock of the rat is 
located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the 
hypothalamus; they found that lesions disrupted circa-
dian rhythms of wheel running, drinking, and hormonal 
secretion. The SCN also provides the primary control 
over the timing of sleep cycles. Rats are nocturnal ani-
mals; they sleep during the day and forage and feed at 
night. Lesions of the SCN abolish this pattern; sleep oc-
curs in bouts randomly dispersed throughout both day 
and night (Ibuka and Kawamura, 1975; Stephan and 
Nuñez, 1977). However, rats with SCN lesions still ob-
tain the same amount of sleep that normal animals do. 
The lesions disrupt the circadian control of sleep but do 
not affect its homeostatic control.
Figure 9.25 shows the suprachiasmatic nuclei in a 
cross section through the hypothalamus of a mouse; 
they appear as two clusters of dark-staining neurons at 
the base of the brain, just above the optic chiasm. (See 
Figure 9.25.) The suprachiasmatic nuclei of the rat con-
sist of approximately 8,600 small neurons, tightly 
packed into a volume of 0.036 mm3 (Moore, Speh, and 
Leak, 2002).
Because light is the primary zeitgeber for most 
mammals’ activity cycles, we would expect that the SCN 
receives fibers from the visual system. Indeed, anatomi-
cal studies have revealed a direct projection of fibers 
from the retina to the SCN: the retinohypothalamic pathway 
(Hendrickson, Wagoner, and Cowan, 1972; Aronson et 
al., 1993).
The photoreceptors in the retina that provide pho-
tic information to the SCN are neither rods nor cones—
the cells that provide us with the information used for 
visual perception. Freedman et al. (1999) found that 
targeted mutations against genes necessary for produc-
tion of both rods and cones did not disrupt the synchro-
nizing effects of light. However, when they removed the 
figure 9.25  The SCN
The location and appearance of the suprachiasmatic 
nuclei in a rat are shown here. Cresyl violet stain was 
used to color the nuclei in this cross section of a rat brain.
(Courtesy of Geert DeVries, University of Massachusetts.)
x suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) (soo pra ky az mat ik)  A nucleus 
situated atop the optic chiasm. It contains a biological clock that is 
responsible for organizing many of the body’s circadian rhythms.
x melanopsin (mell a nop sin)  A photopigment present in 
ganglion cells in the retina whose axons transmit information to 
the SCN, the thalamus, and the olivary pretectal nuclei.

	
Biological Clocks	
317
the projections to the orexinergic neurons are excit-
atory and thus promote wakefulness (Saper, Scammell, 
and Lu, 2005). Of course, the activity of these connec-
tions varies across the day/night cycle. In diurnal ani-
mals (such as ourselves) the activity of these connec-
tions is high during the day and low during the night. 
(See Figure 9.27.)
Although connections of SCN neurons with the SPZ 
play a critical role in circadian control of sleep and wak-
ing, several experiments suggest that the SCN can also 
control these rhythms by secretion of chemicals that 
diffuse through the brain’s extracellular fluid. Lehman 
et al. (1987) destroyed the SCN and then transplanted 
in its place a new set of suprachiasmatic nuclei obtained 
from donor animals. The grafts succeeded in reestab-
lishing circadian rhythms, even though very few synaptic 
connections were observed between the graft and the 
recipient’s brain.
The most convincing evidence for chemical com-
munication between the SCN and other parts of the 
brain comes from a transplantation study by Silver et al. 
(1996). Silver and her colleagues first destroyed the 
SCN in a group of hamsters, abolishing their circadian 
rhythms. Then, a few weeks later, they removed SCN 
tissue from donor animals and placed it in tiny semiper-
meable capsules, which they then implanted in the ani-
mals’ third ventricles. Nutrients and other chemicals 
could pass through the walls of the capsules, keeping 
the SCN tissue alive, but the neurons inside the cap-
sules were not able to establish synaptic connections 
with the surrounding tissue. Nevertheless, the trans-
plants reestablished circadian rhythms in the recipient 
animals. Evidence suggests that the chemical signal may 
be a prokineticin 2 (PK2), a protein contained in a subset 
of SCN neurons (Zhang, Truong, and Zhou, 2009). 
How does the SCN control cycles of sleep and wak-
ing? Efferent axons of the SCN responsible for organiz-
ing cycles of sleep and waking terminate in the subpara-
ventricular zone (SPZ), a region just dorsal to the SCN 
(Deurveilher and Semba, 2005). Lu et al. (2001) found 
that excitotoxic lesions of the ventral part of the SPZ 
disrupted circadian rhythms of sleep and waking. The 
ventral SPZ projects to the dorsomedial nucleus of the hypo-
thalamus (DMH), which in turn projects to several brain 
regions, including two that play critical roles in the con-
trol of sleep and waking: the vlPOA and the orexinergic 
neurons of the lateral hypothalamus. The projections to 
the vlPOA are inhibitory and thus inhibit sleep, whereas 
figure 9.26  Melanopsin-Containing Ganglion 
Cells in the Retina
The figure shows axons of the ganglion cells form the 
retinohypothalamic tract. These neurons detect the light 
of dawn that resets the biological clock in the SCN.
(From Hattar, S., Liao, H.-W., Takao, M., et al. Science, 2002, 295, 1065–1070.)
figure 9.27  Control of Circadian Rhythms in Sleep and Waking by the SCN
During the day cycle, the DMH inhibits the vlPOA and excites the brain stem and 
forebrain arousal systems, thus stimulating wakefulness.
ACh  NE  5-HT  Histamine
Sleep/Waking Flip-Flop
Arousal
system
vlPOA
SPZ
LH
orexinergic
neurons
DMH
Opposite effects
of DMH activity
SWS-on region
Waking-on region
SCN
biological clock–
time of the day

318	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
could be intrinsic to individual neurons themselves. Evi-
dence suggests the latter—that each neuron contains a 
clock. Several studies have succeeded in keeping indi-
vidual SCN neurons alive in a culture medium. For ex-
ample, Welsh et al. (1995) removed tissue from the rat 
SCN and dissolved the connections between the cells 
with papain, an enzyme that is sometimes used as a meat 
tenderizer. The cells were placed on top of an array of 
microelectrodes so that their electrical activity could be 
measured. Unlike neurons in the intact SCN, whose 
rhythms are synchronized, the cultured neurons dis-
played individual, independent, circadian rhythms in 
activity. Figure 9.29 shows the activity cycles of four neu-
rons. As you can see, all showed circadian rhythms, but 
their periods of peak activity occurred at different times 
of day. (See Figure 9.29.)
Presumably, the chemicals secreted by cells in the SCN 
affect rhythms of sleep and waking by diffusing into the 
SPZ and binding with receptors on neurons located there. 
In fact, Hu et al. (2007) found that mice with a targeted 
mutation against the PK2 gene showed disrupted circa-
dian rhythms.
The Nature of The Clock
All clocks must have a time base. Mechanical clocks use 
flywheels or pendulums; electronic clocks use quartz 
crystals. The SCN, too, must contain a physiological 
mechanism that parses time into units. After years of 
research, investigators are finally beginning to discover 
the nature of the biological clock in the SCN.
Several studies have demonstrated daily activity 
rhythms in the SCN, which indicates that the circadian 
clock is indeed located there. A study by Schwartz and 
Gainer (1977) nicely demonstrated day/night fluctua-
tions in the activity of the SCN. The investigators in-
jected some rats with radioactive 2-DG during the day 
and injected others at night. The animals were then 
killed, and autoradiographs of cross sections through 
the brain were prepared. (2-DG autoradiography was 
described in Chapter 5.) Figure 9.28 shows photographs 
of two of these cross sections. Note the evidence of  
radioactivity (and hence a high metabolic rate) in the 
SCN of the brain that was injected during the day (left). 
(See Figure 9.28.)
The “ticking” of the biological clock within the SCN 
could involve interactions of circuits of neurons, or it 
figure 9.28  Circadian Rhythms in the SCN
Shown are autoradiographs of cross sections of brains of 
rats injected with radioactive 2-DG during the day (left) 
and the night (right). The dark region at the base of the 
brain (arrows) indicates increased metabolic activity of the 
suprachiasmatic nuclei.
(From Schwartz, W. J., and Gainer, H. Science, 1977, 197, 1089–1091. Reprinted 
with permission.)
figure 9.29  Firing Rate of Individual SCN 
Neurons in a Tissue Culture
Color bars have been added to emphasize the daily 
peaks. Note that although each neuron has a period of 
approximately 1 day, the activity cycles of the neurons 
are not synchronized.
(From Welsh, D. K., Logothetis, D. E., Meister, M., and Reppert, S. M. Neuron, 
1995, 14, 697–706.)
Firing rate (action potentials/sec)
Time (h)
0
0
0
0
0
4
4
3
2
24
48
72

	
Biological Clocks	
319
(per2) is responsible for the advanced sleep phase  
syndrome. This syndrome causes a 4-hour advance in 
rhythms of sleep and temperature cycles. People with 
this syndrome fall asleep around 7:30 p.m. and awaken 
around 4:30 a.m. The mutation appears to change the 
relationship between the zeitgeber of morning light and 
the phase of the circadian clock that operates in the 
cells of the SCN. Ebisawa et al. (2001) found evidence 
that the opposite disorder, the delayed sleep phase syn-
drome, may be caused by mutations of the per3 gene, 
found on chromosome 1. This syndrome consists of a 
4-hour delay in sleep/waking rhythms. People with this 
disorder are typically unable to fall asleep before 2:00 
a.m. and have great difficulty waking before midmorn-
ing. Allebrandt et al. (2010) found yet another set of 
gene variants (in the clock gene) that affect people’s 
sleep duration.
Control of Seasonal Rhythms:  
The Pineal Gland and Melatonin
Although the SCN has an intrinsic rhythm of approxi-
mately 24 hours, it plays a role in much longer rhythms. 
(We could say that it is involved in a biological calendar 
What causes intracellular ticking? For many years, 
investigators have believed that circadian rhythms were 
produced by the production of a protein that, when it 
reached a certain level in the cell, inhibited its own pro-
duction. As a result, the levels of the protein would be-
gin to decline, which would remove the inhibition, start-
ing the production cycle again. (See Figure 9.30.)
Just such a mechanism was discovered in Drosophila 
melanogaster, the common fruit fly. Subsequent research 
with mammals discovered a similar system. (See 
Golombek and Rosenstein, 2010, for a review.) The sys-
tem involves at least seven genes and their proteins and 
two interlocking feedback loops. When one of the pro-
teins produced by the first loop reaches a sufficient 
level, it starts the second loop, which eventually inhibits 
the production of proteins in the first loop, and the cy-
cle begins again. Thus, the intracellular ticking is regu-
lated by the time it takes to produce and degrade a set 
of proteins. Yan and Silver (2004) found that if animals 
that are kept in the dark are exposed to a brief period 
of bright light, the levels of these proteins change. Fur-
thermore, pulses of light presented during different 
phases of the animal’s circadian rhythm produce differ-
ent effects on the production of these proteins. As we 
saw earlier, exposure to light at different times of day 
had different effects on the animals’ behavior, setting 
their biological clocks either forward or backward  
(Aschoff, 1979).
Genetic studies have found evidence for similarities 
between the human SCN and that of laboratory animals. 
Toh et al. (2001) found that a mutation on chromo-
some 2 of a gene for one of the proteins involved in the 
feedback loops I mentioned earlier in this subsection 
x advanced sleep phase syndrome  A 4-hour advance in rhythms 
of sleep and temperature cycles, apparently caused by a mutation 
of a gene (per2) involved in the rhythmicity of neurons of the SCN.
x delayed sleep phase syndrome  A 4-hour delay in rhythms of 
sleep and temperature cycles, possibly caused by a mutation of a 
gene (per3) involved in the rhythmicity of neurons of the SCN.
figure 9.30  Circadian Rhythms in the SCN
This schematic shows a simplified explanation of the molecular control of the daily 
“ticking” of neurons of the SCN.
x
The protein enters the nucleus, 
suppressing the gene
responsible for its production. 
No more messenger RNA is made.
The level of the protein
falls, so the gene
becomes active again.
Nucleus
Protein
Gene
Cytoplasm
Protein
mRNA
The gene is active; messenger RNA leaves the
the nucleus and causes the production of the protein.

320	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
acts back on various structures in the brain (including 
the SCN, whose cells contain melatonin receptors) and 
controls hormones, physiological processes, and behav-
iors that show seasonal variations. During long nights a 
large amount of melatonin is secreted, and the animals 
go into the winter phase of their cycle. Lesions of the 
SCN, the PVN, or the pineal gland disrupt seasonal 
rhythms that are controlled by day length—and so do 
knife cuts that interrupt the neural connection between 
the SCN and the PVN, which indicates that this is one 
function of the SCN that is mediated through its neural 
connections with another structure. Furthermore, al-
though transplants of fetal suprachiasmatic nuclei will 
restore circadian rhythms in animals with SCN lesions, 
they will not restore seasonal rhythms, because the 
transplanted tissue does not establish neural connec-
tions with the PVN (Ralph and Lehman, 1991).
Changes in Circadian Rhythms:  
Shift Work and Jet Lag
When people abruptly change their daily rhythms of 
activity, their internal circadian rhythms, controlled by 
the SCN, become desynchronized with those in the ex-
ternal environment. For example, if a person who nor-
mally works on a day shift begins working on a night shift 
or if someone travels east or west across several time 
zones, his or her SCN will signal the rest of the brain that 
it is time to sleep during the work shift (or the middle of 
the day in the case of jet travel). This disparity between 
internal rhythms and the external environment results 
in sleep disturbances and mood changes and interferes 
with people’s ability to function during waking hours. 
Problems such as ulcers, depression, and accidents re-
lated to sleepiness are more common in people whose 
work schedules shift frequently (Drake et al., 2004).
Jet lag is a temporary phenomenon; after several 
days, people who have crossed several time zones find it 
easier to fall asleep at the appropriate time, and their 
daytime alertness improves. Shift work can present a 
more enduring problem when people are required to 
change shifts often. Obviously, the solution to jet lag 
and to the problems caused by shift work is to get the 
internal clock synchronized with the external environ-
ment as quickly as possible. The most obvious way to 
start is to try to provide strong zeitgebers at the appro-
priate time. If a person is exposed to bright light before 
the low point in the daily rhythm of body temperature 
as well as a biological clock.) For example, male ham-
sters show annual rhythms of testosterone secretion, 
which appear to be based on the amount of light that 
occurs each day. Their breeding season begins as the 
day length increases and ends when it decreases.  
Lesions of the SCN abolish these annual breeding cycles; 
the animals’ testes then secrete testosterone all year 
(Rusak and Morin, 1976). Possibly, the lesions disrupt 
these annual cycles because they destroy the 24-hour 
clock against which the daily light period is measured to 
determine the season. That is, if the light period is con-
siderably shorter than 12 hours, the season is winter; if 
it is considerably longer than 12 hours, the season is 
summer.
The control of seasonal rhythms involves another 
part of the brain: the pineal gland (Bartness et al., 1993). 
This structure sits on top of the midbrain, just in front 
of the cerebellum. (See Figure 9.31.) The pineal gland 
secretes a hormone called melatonin, so named because 
it has the ability in certain animals (primarily fish, rep-
tiles, and amphibians) to turn the skin temporarily dark. 
(The dark color is produced by a chemical known as 
melanin.) In mammals, melatonin controls seasonal 
rhythms. Neurons in the SCN make indirect connec-
tions with neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the 
hypothalamus (the PVN). The axons of these neurons 
travel all the way to the spinal cord, where they form 
synapses with preganglionic neurons of the sympathetic 
nervous system. The postganglionic neurons innervate 
the pineal gland and control the secretion of melatonin.
In response to input from the SCN, the pineal gland 
secretes melatonin during the night. This melatonin 
x pineal gland (py nee ul)  A gland attached to the dorsal 
tectum; produces melatonin and plays a role in circadian and 
seasonal rhythms.
x melatonin (mell a tone in)  A hormone secreted during the night 
by the pineal body; plays a role in circadian and seasonal rhythms.
figure 9.31  Pineal Gland, Located on the Dorsal 
Surface of the Midbrain
(Adapted from Paxinos, G., and Watson, C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic 
Coordinates. Sydney: Academic Press, 1982. Redrawn with permission.)
Cerebral
cortex
Corpus
callosum
Pineal
gland
Superior
colliculus
Cerebellum

	
Biological Clocks	
321
Studies have found that melatonin, acting on recep-
tors in the SCN, can affect the sensitivity of SCN neurons 
to zeitgebers and can itself alter circadian rhythms  
(Gillette and McArthur, 1995; Starkey et al., 1995). Research­
ers do not yet understand exactly what role melatonin 
plays in the control of circadian rhythms, but they have 
already discovered practical applications. Melatonin secre-
tion normally reaches its highest levels early in the night, 
at around bedtime. Investigators have found that the ad-
ministration of melatonin at the appropriate time (in 
most cases, just before going to bed) significantly reduces 
the adverse effects of both jet lag and shifts in work sched-
ules (Arendt et al., 1995; Deacon and Arendt, 1996). 
Blind people who have lost their eyes or sustained retinal 
damage that includes their melanopsin-containing gan-
glion cells as well as their rods and cones will show unsyn-
chronized, free-running circadian rhythms. In such cases, 
bedtime melatonin has been used to synchronize their 
circadian rhythms and has improved their cycles of sleep 
(Skene, Lockley, and Arendt, 1999).
(which occurs an hour or two before the person usually 
awakens), the person’s circadian rhythm is delayed. If 
the exposure to bright light occurs after the low point, 
the circadian rhythm is advanced (Dijk et al., 1995). In 
fact, several studies have shown that exposure to bright 
lights at the appropriate time helps to ease the transi-
tion (Boulos et al., 1995). Similarly, people adapt to 
shift work more rapidly if artificial light is kept at a 
brighter level in the workplace and if their bedroom is 
kept as dark as possible (Horowitz et al., 2001).
As we saw in the previous subsection, the role of 
melatonin in seasonal rhythms is well established. Stud-
ies in recent years suggest that melatonin may also be 
involved in circadian rhythms. As we saw, melatonin is 
secreted during the night, which, for diurnal mammals 
such as ourselves, is the period during which we sleep. 
But although our species lacks strong seasonal rhythms, 
the daily rhythm of melatonin secretion persists. Thus, 
melatonin must have some functions besides regulation 
of seasonal rhythms.
Section Summary
Biological Clocks
Our daily lives are characterized by cycles in physical 
activity, sleep, body temperature, secretion of hor-
mones, and many other physiological changes. 
Circadian rhythms—those with a period of approxi-
mately one day—are controlled by biological clocks 
in the brain. The principal biological clock appears to 
be located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the hypo-
thalamus; lesions of these nuclei disrupt most circa-
dian rhythms, and the activity of neurons located 
there correlates with the day/night cycle. Light, 
detected by special retinal ganglion cells that contain 
a photopigment called melanopsin, serves as a zeit-
geber for most circadian rhythms. The human biologi-
cal clock tends to run a bit slow, with a period of 
approximately 25 hours. The sight of sunlight in the 
morning is conveyed from the retina to the SCN, and 
the daily cycle is resynchronized. Information from the 
SCN is conveyed via the subparaventricular zone and 
the dorsomedial nucleus of the hypothalamus to 
regions of the brain involved in sleep and waking.
Individual neurons, rather than circuits of neurons, 
are responsible for the “ticking.” Each tick, approximately 
24 hours long, consists of the production and breakdown 
of a series of proteins in two interlocking loops that act 
back on the genes responsible for their own production.
The SCN and the pineal gland control annual 
rhythms. During the night the SCN signals the 
pineal gland to secrete melatonin. Prolonged  
melatonin secretion, which occurs during winter, 
causes animals to enter the winter phase of their 
annual cycle. Melatonin also appears to be 
involved in synchronizing circadian rhythms: The 
hormone can help people to adjust to the effects 
of shift work or jet lag and even synchronize the 
daily rhythms of blind people for whom light cannot 
serve as a zeitgeber.
 THOUGHT QUESTION
Until recently (in terms of the evolution of our spe-
cies), our ancestors tended to go to sleep when the 
sun set and wake up when it rose. Once our ancestors 
learned how to control fire, they undoubtedly stayed 
up somewhat later, sitting in front of a fire. But it was 
only with the development of cheap, effective lighting 
that many members of our species adopted the habit 
of staying up late and waking several hours after sun-
rise. Considering that our biological clock and the 
neural mechanisms it controls evolved long ago, do 
you think the changes in our daily rhythms impair any 
of our physical and intellectual abilities?

322	
Chapter 9  Sleep and Biological Rhythms
6.  Discuss the neural control of slow-wave and REM 
sleep.
7.  Describe circadian rhythms and discuss research on 
the role of the suprachiasmatic nucleus in the control 
of these rhythms.
8.  Discuss the time base of the circadian clock, control 
of seasonal rhythms, and changes in circadian 
rhythms caused by work schedules and travel.
1.  Describe the course of a night’s sleep: its stages and 
their characteristics.
2.  Discuss insomnia, sleeping medications, and sleep 
apnea.
3.  Discuss narcolepsy and problems associated with 
REM and slow-wave sleep.
4.  Review the hypothesis that sleep serves as a period 
of restoration by discussing the effects of sleep  
deprivation, exercise, and mental activity and explain 
the functions of REM sleep.
5.  Evaluate evidence that the onset and amount of 
sleep are chemically controlled and describe the  
neural control of arousal.
Review Questions
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Sleep and Dreaming
The neural circuits underlying sleep are composed of nuclei spread throughout 
the subcortical brain. It appears there are circuits to help maintain vigilance and 
arousal. Other circuits inhibit these. There is a circuit to trigger sleep, another to 
trigger REM, and yet another to end REM. The Sleep and Dreaming module of 
the virtual brain will help you visualize these brain circuits.
Study and Review on MyPsychLab

Reproductive Behavior
Outline
10
 Sexual Development
Production of Gametes  
and Fertilization
Development of the Sex Organs
Sexual Maturation
Section Summary
 Hormonal Control of Sexual 
Behavior
Hormonal Control of Female 
Reproductive Cycles
Hormonal Control of Sexual 
Behavior of Laboratory Animals
Organizational Effects of 
Androgens on Behavior: 
Masculinization and 
Defeminization
Effects of Pheromones
Human Sexual Behavior
Sexual Orientation
Section Summary
 Neural Control of Sexual 
Behavior
Males
Females
Formation of Pair Bonds
Section Summary
 Parental Behavior
Maternal Behavior of Rodents
Hormonal Control of Maternal 
Behavior
Neural Control of Maternal 
Behavior
Neural Control of Paternal 
Behavior
Section Summary
chapter

R
eproductive behaviors constitute the most impor-
tant category of social behaviors, because without 
them, most species would not survive. These  
behaviors—which include courting, mating, parental 
behavior, and most forms of aggressive behaviors—are 
the most striking categories of sexually dimorphic  
behaviors, that is, behaviors that differ in males and 
females (di + morphous, “two forms”). As you will see, 
hormones that are present both before and after birth 
play a very special role in the development and control 
of sexually dimorphic behaviors.
This chapter describes male and female sexual  
development and then discusses the neural and hormonal 
control of two sexually dimorphic behaviors that are 
most important to reproduction: sexual behavior and 
parental behavior.
Sexual Development
A person’s chromosomal sex is determined at the time 
of fertilization. However, this event is merely the first in 
a series of steps that culminate in the development of a 
male or female. This section considers the major fea-
tures of sexual development.
Production of Gametes  
and Fertilization
All cells of the human body (other than sperms or ova) 
contain twenty-three pairs of chromosomes. The ge-
netic information that programs the development of a 
human is contained in the DNA that constitutes these 
chromosomes. We pride ourselves on our ability to min-
iaturize computer circuits on silicon chips, but that ac-
complishment looks primitive when we consider that 
the blueprint for a human being is too small to be seen 
by the naked eye.
At first a tragic surgical accident appeared to suggest that 
people’s sexual identity and sexual orientation were not 
under the strong control of biological factors and that these 
characteristics could be shaped by the way a child was 
raised (Money and Ehrhardt, 1972). Identical twin boys were 
raised normally until seven months of age, at which time the 
penis of one of the boys was accidentally removed during 
circumcision. The cautery (a device that cuts tissue by means 
of electric current) was adjusted too high, and instead of 
removing just the foreskin, the current burned off the entire 
penis. After a period of agonized indecision the parents 
decided to raise the child as a girl. John became Joan.
Joan’s parents started dressing her in girl’s clothing 
and treating her like a little girl. Surgeons performed a sex 
change operation, removing the testes and creating a 
vagina. At first, psychologists who studied Joan reported 
that she was a normal, happy girl and concluded that it 
was a child’s upbringing that determined his or her sexual 
identity. Many writers saw this case as a triumph of 
socialization over biology.
Unfortunately, this conclusion was premature  
(Diamond and Sigmundson, 1997). It turned out that 
although Joan did not know she had been born as a boy, 
she was unhappy as a girl. She felt that she really was a 
boy and even tried to stand to urinate. When, as an 
unhappy adolescent, she threatened to commit suicide, 
her family and physicians agreed to a sex change. The 
estrogen treatment she had been receiving was termi-
nated, she started taking androgens, she had a mastec-
tomy, and surgeons began creating a phallus. Joan 
became John again. His father finally told him that he 
was born a boy, a revelation that John received with 
great relief. John later married and adopted his wife’s 
children.
We now know this person’s real names: Bruce became 
Brenda, who then chose the name David after deciding to 
become a boy again. A book has told his story (Colapinto, 
2000), and a 2002 television documentary (NOVA’s “Sex: 
Unknown”) presented interviews with David, his mother,  
Dr. Diamond, and others involved in this unfortunate case. 
Sadly, David subsequently lost his job, he and his wife 
separated, and in May 2004, at the age of 38, he committed 
suicide.
x sexually dimorphic behavior  A behavior that has different 
forms or that occurs with different probabilities or under different 
circumstances in males and females.

	
Sexual Development	
325
The production of gametes (ova and sperms; gamein 
means “to marry”) entails a special form of cell division. 
This process produces cells that contain one member of 
each of the twenty-three pairs of chromosomes. The 
development of a human begins at the time of fertiliza-
tion, when a single sperm and ovum join, sharing their 
twenty-three single chromosomes to reconstitute the 
twenty-three pairs.
A person’s genetic sex is determined at the time of 
fertilization of the ovum by the father’s sperm. Twenty-
two of the twenty-three pairs of chromosomes deter-
mine the organism’s physical development independent 
of its sex. The last pair consists of two sex chromosomes, 
which contain genes that determine whether the off-
spring will be a boy or a girl.
There are two types of sex chromosomes: X chro-
mosomes and Y chromosomes. Females have two X 
chromosomes (XX); thus, all the ova that a woman pro-
duces will contain an X chromosome. Males have an X 
and a Y chromosome (XY). When a man’s sex chromo-
somes divide, half the sperms contain an X chromo-
some, and the other half contain a Y chromosome. A  
Y-bearing sperm produces an XY-fertilized ovum and 
therefore a male. An X-bearing sperm produces an XX-
fertilized ovum and therefore a female. (See Figure 10.1.)
Development of the Sex Organs
Men and women differ in many ways: Their bodies 
are different, parts of their brains are different, and 
their reproductive behaviors are different. Are all 
these differences directly encoded on the tiny Y chro-
mosome, the sole piece of genetic material that dis-
tinguishes males from females? The answer is no. The 
X chromosome and the twenty-two nonsex chromo-
somes found in the cells of both males and females 
contain all the information needed to develop the 
bodies of either sex. Exposure to sex hormones, both 
before and after birth, is responsible for our sexual 
dimorphism. What the Y chromosome does control is 
the development of the glands that produce the male 
sex hormones.
Gonads
There are three general categories of sex organs: the 
gonads, the internal sex organs, and the external 
genitalia. The gonads—testes or ovaries—are the 
first to develop. Gonads (from the Greek gonos, “pro-
creation”) have a dual function: They produce ova or 
sperms, and they secrete hormones. Through the 
sixth week of prenatal development, male and fe-
male fetuses are identical. Both sexes have a pair of 
identical undifferentiated gonads, which have the 
potential of developing into either testes or ovaries. 
The factor that controls their development appears 
to be a single gene on the Y chromosome called Sry 
(sex-determining region Y). This gene produces a 
protein that binds to the DNA of cells in the undif-
ferentiated gonads and causes them to become tes-
tes. (Testes are also known as testicles, Latin for “little 
testes.”) Believe it or not, the words “testis” and “tes-
tify” have the same root, meaning “witness.” Legend 
has it that ancient Romans placed their right hand 
over their genitals while swearing that they would tell 
the truth in court. (Only men were permitted to tes-
tify.) If the Sry gene is not present, the undifferenti-
ated gonads become ovaries. In fact, a few cases of 
XX males have been reported. This anomaly can  
figure 10.1  Determination of Gender
The gender of the offspring depends on whether the 
sperm cell that fertilizes the ovum carries an X or a Y 
chromosome.
X  X
X
X
X
Y
X Y
X   X
X    X
X
Y
X
Y
Ova
Sperms
Females
Males
x gamete (gamm eet)  A mature reproductive cell; a sperm or 
ovum.
x sex chromosome  The X and Y chromosomes, which determine 
an organism’s gender. Normally, XX individuals are female, and XY 
individuals are male.
x gonad (rhymes with moan ad)  An ovary or testis.
x Sry  The gene on the Y chromosome whose product instructs 
the undifferentiated fetal gonads to develop into testes.

326	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
stimulates the development of the Wolffian system. 
(This class of hormone is also aptly named: Andros 
means “man,” and gennan means “to produce.”) An-
drogens have a masculinizing effect.
Two different androgens are responsible for mascu-
linization. The first, testosterone, is secreted by the tes-
tes and gets its name from these glands. An enzyme 
called 5a reductase converts some of the testosterone 
into another androgen, known as dihydrotestosterone.
As you will recall from Chapter 2, hormones exert 
their effects on target cells by stimulating the appropri-
ate hormone receptor. Thus, the precursor of the male 
internal sex organs—the Wolffian system—contains an-
drogen receptors that are coupled to cellular mecha-
nisms that promote growth and division. When mole-
cules of androgens bind with these receptors, the 
epididymis, vas deferens, and seminal vesicles develop 
and grow. In contrast, the cells of the Müllerian system 
contain receptors for anti-Müllerian hormone that pre-
vent growth and division. Thus, the presence of anti-
Müllerian hormone prevents the development of the 
female internal sex organs.
The fact that the internal sex organs of the  
human embryo are bisexual and could potentially 
develop as either male or female is dramatically il-
lustrated by two genetic disorders: androgen insensitiv-
ity syndrome and persistent Müllerian duct syndrome. 
Some people are insensitive to androgens; they have 
occur when the Sry gene becomes translocated from 
the Y chromosome to the X chromosome during pro-
duction of the father’s sperms. Although the Sry 
gene begins the process of gonadal differentiation, 
at least two other genes are also necessary for com-
pletion of this process.
Once the gonads have developed, a series of events 
is set into action that determines the individual’s gen-
der. These events are directed by hormones, which 
affect sexual development in two ways. During prena-
tal development these hormones have organizational 
effects, which influence the development of a per-
son’s sex organs and brain. These effects are perma-
nent; once a particular path is followed in the course 
of development, there is no going back. The second 
role of sex hormones is their activational effect. These 
effects occur later in life, after the sex organs have 
developed. For example, hormones activate the pro-
duction of sperms, make erection and ejaculation pos-
sible, and induce ovulation. Because the bodies of 
adult males and females have been organized differ-
ently, sex hormones will have different activational  
effects in the two sexes.
Internal Sex Organs
Early in embryonic development the internal sex or-
gans are bisexual; that is, all embryos contain the precur-
sors for both female and male sex organs. However, 
during the third month of gestation, only one of these 
precursors develops; the other withers away. The pre-
cursor of the internal female sex organs, which devel-
ops into the fimbriae and Fallopian tubes, the uterus, and 
the inner two-thirds of the vagina, is called the Müllerian 
system. The precursor of the internal male sex organs, 
which develops into the epididymis, vas deferens, and sem-
inal vesicles, is called the Wolffian system. (These sys-
tems were named after their discoverers, Müller and 
Wolff. See Figure 10.2.)
The gender of the internal sex organs of a fetus 
is determined by the presence or absence of hor-
mones secreted by the testes. If these hormones are 
present, the Wolffian system develops. If they are not, 
the Müllerian system develops. The Müllerian (fe-
male) system needs no hormonal stimulus from the 
gonads to develop; it just normally does so. (Turner’s 
syndrome, a disorder of sexual development that I 
will discuss later, provides evidence for this asser-
tion.) In contrast, the cells of the Wolffian (male) 
system do not develop unless they are stimulated to 
do so by a hormone. Thus, testes secrete two types of 
hormones. The first, a peptide hormone called anti-
Müllerian hormone, does exactly what its name says: 
It prevents the Müllerian (female) system from devel-
oping. It therefore has a defeminizing effect. The 
second, a set of steroid hormones called androgens, 
x anti-Müllerian hormone  A peptide secreted by the fetal 
testes that inhibits the development of the Müllerian system, 
which would otherwise become the female internal sex organs.
x defeminizing effect  An effect of a hormone present early in 
development that reduces or prevents the later development of 
anatomical or behavioral characteristics typical of females.
x androgen (an dro jen)  A male sex steroid hormone. Testoster-
one is the principal mammalian androgen.
x masculinizing effect  An effect of a hormone present early in 
development that promotes the later development of anatomical 
or behavioral characteristics typical of males.
x testosterone (tess tahss ter own)  The principal androgen 
found in males.
x dihydrotestosterone (dy hy dro tess tahss ter own)  An 
androgen, produced from testosterone through the action of the 
enzyme 5 reductase.
x activational effect (of hormone)  The effect of a hormone that 
occurs in the fully developed organism; may depend on the 
organism’s prior exposure to the organizational effects of 
hormones.
x Müllerian system  The embryonic precursors of the female 
internal sex organs.
x Wolffian system  The embryonic precursors of the male 
internal sex organs.
x organizational effect (of hormone)  The effect of a hormone  
on tissue differentiation and development.

	
Sexual Development	
327
androgen insensitivity syndrome, one of the more 
aptly named disorders (Money and Ehrhardt, 1972; 
MacLean, Warne, and Zajac, 1995). The cause of an-
drogen insensitivity syndrome is a genetic mutation 
that prevents the formation of functioning androgen 
receptors. (The gene for the androgen receptor is 
located on the X chromosome.) The primitive go-
nads of a genetic male fetus with androgen insensitiv-
ity syndrome become testes and secrete both anti-
Müllerian hormone and androgens. The lack of 
androgen receptors prevents the androgens from 
having a masculinizing effect; thus, the epididymis, 
vas deferens, seminal vesicles, and prostate fail to 
develop. However, the anti-Müllerian hormone still 
has its defeminizing effect, preventing the female 
internal sex organs from developing. The uterus, 
fimbriae, and Fallopian tubes fail to develop, and the 
vagina is shallow. The external genitalia are female, 
and at puberty the person develops a woman’s body. 
Of course, lacking a uterus and ovaries, the person 
cannot have children. A test based on a molecular 
figure 10.2  Development of the Internal Sex Organs
Precursor of female
internal sex organs
(Mullerian system)
Precursor of male
internal sex organs
(Wolffian system)
Immature
gonad
Fallopian
tube
Uterus
Seminal
vesicle
Prostate
Vas deferens
Urethra
Epididymis
Testis
Penis
Scrotum
Labia
Opening of
urethra
Vagina
Ovary
Fimbria
Early in Fetal Development
Adult Female
Adult Male
x androgen insensitivity syndrome  A condition caused by a 
congenital lack of functioning androgen receptors; in a person 
with XY sex chromosomes, causes the development of a female 
with testes but no internal sex organs.
probe for Sry was used to ensure that potential com-
petitors for the women’s Summer Olympic events in 
Atlanta in 1996 had no Sry gene and therefore were 
not men masquerading as women. However, this con-
troversial test would erroneously identify XY women 
with androgen insensitivity syndrome as men. Given 
that androgens cannot stimulate muscle develop-
ment in people whose cells are insensitive to these 
hormones, the presence of the Sry gene does not 
indicate that they are men trying to compete as 
women. Women with androgen insensitivity syn-
drome have women’s bodies, with muscular strength 
typical of women. In any event, science and common 
sense prevailed, and gender testing was eliminated 
by the time of the 2000 Summer Olympics.

328	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
Sexual Maturation
The primary sex characteristics include the gonads, inter-
nal sex organs, and external genitalia. These organs are 
present at birth. The secondary sex characteristics, such as 
enlarged breasts and widened hips or a beard and deep 
voice, do not appear until puberty. Without seeing geni-
tals, we must guess the sex of a prepubescent child from 
his or her haircut and clothing; the bodies of young boys 
and girls are rather similar. However, at puberty the  
gonads are stimulated to produce their hormones, and 
these hormones cause the person to mature sexually. The 
The second genetic disorder, persistent Müllerian 
duct syndrome, has two causes: either a failure to pro-
duce anti-Müllerian hormone or the absence of re-
ceptors for this hormone (Warne and Zajac, 1998). 
When this syndrome occurs in genetic males, andro-
gens have their masculinizing effect, but defeminiza-
tion does not occur. Thus, the person is born with both 
sets of internal sex organs, male and female. The 
presence of the additional female sex organs usually 
interferes with normal functioning of the male sex 
organs.
So far, I have been discussing only male sex hor-
mones. What about prenatal sexual development in 
females? A chromosomal anomaly indicates that the 
hormones produced by female sex organs are not 
needed for development of the Müllerian system. This 
fact has led to the dictum “Nature’s impulse is to cre-
ate a female.” People with Turner’s syndrome have 
only one sex chromosome: an X chromosome. (Thus, 
instead of having XX cells, they have X0 cells—0 
[zero] indicating a missing sex chromosome.) In most 
cases the existing X chromosome comes from the 
mother, which means that the cause of the disorder 
lies with a defective sperm (Knebelmann et al., 1991). 
Because a Y chromosome is not present, testes do not 
develop. In addition, because two X chromosomes are 
needed to produce ovaries, these glands are not pro-
duced either. But even though people with Turner’s 
syndrome have no gonads at all, they develop into fe-
males, with normal female internal sex organs and 
external genitalia—which proves that fetuses do not 
need ovaries or the hormones they produce to develop 
as females. Of course, they must be given estrogen pills 
to induce puberty and sexual maturation. And they 
cannot bear children, because without ovaries they 
cannot produce ova.
External Genitalia
The external genitalia are the visible sex organs, includ-
ing the penis and scrotum in males and the labia, clitoris, 
and outer part of the vagina in females. (See Figure 10.3.) 
As we just saw, the external genitalia do not need to be 
stimulated by female sex hormones to become female; 
they just naturally develop that way. In the presence of 
dihydrotestosterone, the external genitalia will become 
male. Thus, the gender of a person’s external genitalia is 
determined by the presence or absence of an androgen, 
which explains why people with Turner’s syndrome have 
female external genitalia even though they lack ovaries. 
People with androgen insensitivity syndrome have fe-
male external genitalia too, because without androgen 
receptors their cells cannot respond to the androgens 
produced by their testes.
Figure 10.4 summarizes the factors that control the 
development of the gonads, internal sex organs, and 
genitalia. (See Figure 10.4.)
x persistent Müllerian duct syndrome  A condition caused by a 
congenital lack of anti-Müllerian hormone or receptors for this 
hormone; in a male, causes development of both male and female 
internal sex organs.
x Turner’s syndrome  The presence of only one sex chromosome 
(an X chromosome); characterized by lack of ovaries but otherwise 
normal female sex organs and genitalia.
figure 10.3  Development of the External Genitalia
(Adapted from Spaulding, M. H., in Contributions to Embryology, Vol. 13. 
Washington, DC: Carnegie Institute of Washington, 1921.)
Anus
Urethral fold
Urethral slit
Tail (cut off)
Phallus
Genital
swelling
Glans
Urethral fold
Urogenital slit
Labioscrotal
swelling
Perineal raphe
Anus
Urethral
meatus
Glans
penis
Prepuce
Shaft of
penis
Scrotum
Raphe
Labia
minora
Vaginal
orifice
Urethral
meatus
Labia
majora
Clitoris
Seventh to Eighth Week
Twelfth Week
Indifferent Stage

	
Sexual Development	
329
and to secrete testosterone. If male and female pitu-
itary glands are exchanged in rats, the ovaries and tes-
tes respond perfectly to the hormones secreted by the 
new glands (Harris and Jacobsohn, 1951–1952).
The secretion of GnRH, which directs the production 
of the gonadotropic hormones, which in turn stimulate 
puberty and production of the sex hormones secreted by 
the gonads, is under the control of another peptide:  
kisspeptin. (The unusual name of this peptide does not 
refer to a behavior that sometimes serves as the beginning 
of a sexual encounter. Instead, it refers to Hershey, Penn-
sylvania, the location of the laboratory where the gene that 
encodes for the peptide was discovered. This city is also 
the home of the company that makes Hershey’s Kisses, a 
chocolate candy.) Kisspeptin, produced by neurons in the 
arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, is essential for the 
initiation of puberty and the maintenance of male and 
female reproductive ability (Millar et al., 2010).
For over a century the age at which children (par-
ticularly girls) reach puberty has been diminishing in 
developed countries, presumably because of improved 
nutrition (Foster and Nagatani, 1999). Girls who remain 
unusually thin through exercise and diet tend to reach 
puberty later than normal (think of a female Olympic 
gymnast), while obese girls tend to reach puberty sooner 
onset of puberty occurs when cells in the hypothalamus 
secrete gonadotropin-releasing hormones (GnRH), which 
stimulate the production and release of two gonadotropic 
hormones by the anterior pituitary gland. The gonado-
tropic (“gonad-turning”) hormones stimulate the gonads 
to produce their hormones, which are ultimately respon-
sible for sexual maturation. (See Figure 10.5.)
The two gonadotropic hormones are follicle- 
stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone 
(LH), named for the effects they produce in the female 
(production of a follicle and its subsequent luteinization, 
to be described in the next section of this chapter). 
However, the same hormones are produced in the 
male, where they stimulate the testes to produce sperms 
figure 10.4  Hormonal Control of Development of the Internal Sex Organs
Androgens
Anti-Mullerian
hormone
Testis-determining
factor
Male
XY
Primordial
gonads
develop
into testes
Androgens
Mullerian system
withers away
Wolffian system
develops into vas
deferens, seminal
vesicles, prostate
Primordial external
genitalia develop
into penis and scrotum
Primordial
gonads
develop
into ovaries
Female
XX
No hormones
Mullerian system
develops into fimbriae,
fallopian tubes, uterus,
inner vagina
Wolffian system,
without androgens,
withers away
Primordial external 
genitalia develop into
clitoris, labia, outer
vagina
Masculinization
Defeminization
figure 10.5  Sexual Maturation
Puberty is initiated when the hypothalamus secretes 
gonadotropin-releasing hormones, which activate the 
secretion of gonadotropic hormones by the anterior 
pituitary gland.
Male
Female
GnRH
GnRH
Gonadotropic hormones
Ovary
Testis
Testosterone
Estradiol
x gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) (go nad oh trow 
pin)  A hypothalamic hormone that stimulates the anterior 
pituitary gland to secrete gonadotropic hormone.
x gonadotropic hormone  A hormone of the anterior pituitary 
gland that has a stimulating effect on cells of the gonads.
x follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)  The hormone of the 
anterior pituitary gland that causes development of an ovarian 
follicle and the maturation of an ovum.
x luteinizing hormone (LH) (lew tee a nize ing)  A hormone of 
the anterior pituitary gland that causes ovulation and development 
of the ovarian follicle into a corpus luteum.
x kisspeptin  A peptide produced by neurons in the arcuate nucleus 
of the hypothalamus under the control of leptin receptors; essential 
for initiation of puberty and maintenance of reproductive ability.

330	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
growth. This description leaves out two of the female 
secondary characteristics: axillary and pubic hair. These 
characteristics are produced not by estradiol but rather 
by androgens secreted by the cortex of the adrenal 
glands. Even a male who is castrated before puberty 
(whose testes are removed) will grow axillary and pubic 
hair, stimulated by his own adrenal androgens. A list of 
the principal sex hormones and examples of their effects 
are presented in Table 10.1. Note that some of these ef-
fects are discussed later in this chapter. (See Table 10.1.)
The bipotentiality of some of the secondary sex  
characteristics remains throughout life. If a man is treated 
with an estrogen (for example, to control an androgen- 
dependent tumor), he will grow breasts, and his facial 
hair will become finer and softer. However, his voice will 
remain low, because the enlargement of the larynx is per-
manent. Conversely, a woman who receives high levels of 
an androgen (usually from a tumor that secretes andro-
gens) will grow a beard, and her voice will become lower.
(Frisch, 1990). As we will see in Chapter 12, leptin, a pep-
tide hormone secreted by well-nourished fat cells, pro-
vides an important signal to the brain concerning the 
amount of fat tissue in the body. If body fat increases, 
the level of leptin in the blood increases and signals the 
brain to suppress appetite. This hormone also plays a 
role in determining the onset of puberty in females: It 
acts on leptin receptors found on kisspeptin-secreting 
neurons in the arcuate nucleus (Smith et al., 2006).
In response to the gonadotropic hormones (usually 
called gonadotropins) the gonads secrete steroid sex hor-
mones. The ovaries produce estradiol, one of a class of 
hormones known as estrogens. As we saw, the testes pro-
duce testosterone, an androgen. Both types of glands 
also produce a small amount of the hormones of the 
other sex. The gonadal steroids affect many parts of the 
body. Both estradiol and androgens initiate closure of 
the growing portions of the bones and thus halt skeletal 
growth. In females, estradiol also causes breast develop-
ment, growth of the lining of the uterus, changes in the 
deposition of body fat, and maturation of the female 
genitalia. In males, androgens stimulate growth of facial, 
axillary (underarm), and pubic hair; lower the voice; al-
ter the hairline on the head (often causing baldness later 
in life); stimulate muscular development; and cause genital 
x estradiol (ess tra dye ahl)  The principal estrogen of many 
mammals, including humans.
x estrogen (ess trow jen)  A class of sex hormones that cause 
maturation of the female genitalia, growth of breast tissue, and 
development of other physical features characteristic of females.
table 10.1  Classification of Sex Steroid Hormones
 
Class
Principal Hormone in Humans  
(Where Produced)
 
Examples of Effects
Androgens 
 
 
Testosterone (testes) 
 
 
Development of Wolffian system; production of 
sperms; growth of facial, pubic, and axillary hair; 
muscular development; enlargement of larynx; inhibi-
tion of bone growth; sex drive in men (and women?)
  
Dihydrotestosterone (produced from  
testosterone by action of 5 reductase)
Maturation of male external genitalia 
  
Androstenedione (adrenal glands) 
In women, growth of pubic and axillary hair; less impor-
tant than testosterone and dihydrotestosterone in men
Estrogens 
 
Estradiol (ovaries) 
 
Maturation of female genitalia; growth of breasts; 
alterations in fat deposits; growth of uterine lining; 
inhibition of bone growth; sex drive in women (?)
Gestagens
Progesterone (ovaries)
Maintenance of uterine lining
Hypothalamic  
hormones
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone  
(hypothalamus)
Secretion of gonadotropins 
Gonadotropins 
Follicle-stimulating hormone  
(anterior pituitary)
Development of ovarian follicle 
 
Luteinizing hormone (anterior pituitary)
Ovulation; development of corpus luteum
Other hormones
Prolactin (anterior pituitary)
Milk production; male refractory period (?)
  
Oxytocin (posterior pituitary) 
Milk ejection; orgasm; pair bonding (especially 
females); bonding with infants
 
Vasopressin (posterior pituitary)
Pair bonding (especially males)

	
Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior	
331
Hormonal Control of Sexual 
Behavior
We have seen that hormones are responsible for sex-
ual dimorphism in the structure of the body and its 
organs. Hormones have organizational and activational 
effects on the internal sex organs, genitals, and sec-
ondary sex characteristics. Naturally, all of these ef-
fects influence a person’s behavior. Simply having the 
physique and genitals of a man or a woman exerts a 
powerful effect. But hormones do more than give us 
masculine or feminine bodies; they also affect behav-
ior by interacting directly with the nervous system. 
Androgens that are present during prenatal develop-
ment affect the development of the nervous system. In 
Section Summary
Sexual Development
Gender is determined by the sex chromosomes: XX 
produces a female, and XY produces a male. Males 
are produced by the action of the Sry gene on the Y 
chromosome, which contains the code for the pro-
duction of a protein that causes the primitive gonads 
to become testes. The testes secrete two kinds of 
hormones that cause a male to develop. Testosterone 
and dihydrotestosterone (androgens) stimulate the 
development of the Wolffian system (masculinization), 
and anti-Müllerian hormone suppresses the develop-
ment of the Müllerian system (defeminization). 
Androgen insensitivity syndrome results from a hered-
itary defect in androgen receptors, and persistent 
Müllerian duct syndrome results from a hereditary 
defect in production of anti-Müllerian hormone or its 
receptors.
By default the body is female (“Nature’s impulse is 
to create a female”); only by the actions of testicular 
hormones does it become male. Masculinization and 
defeminization are referred to as organizational effects 
of hormones; activational effects occur after develop-
ment is complete. A person with Turner’s syndrome 
(X0) fails to develop gonads but nevertheless develops 
female internal sex organs and external genitalia. The 
external genitalia develop from common precursors. In 
the absence of gonadal hormones the precursors 
develop the female form; in the presence of andro-
gens (primarily dihydrotestosterone, which derives 
from testosterone through the action of 5 reductase) 
they develop the male form (masculinization).
Sexual maturity occurs when neurons in the  
arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus begin secreting 
kisspeptin, which stimulates the secretion of gonado-
tropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), which in turn stimu-
lates the secretion of follicle-stimulating hormone 
(FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) by the anterior 
pituitary gland. These hormones stimulate the gonads 
to secrete their hormones, thus causing the genitals 
to mature and the body to develop the secondary sex 
characteristics (activational effects). Leptin, a hormone 
secreted by well-nourished fat tissue, appears to be 
one of the signals that stimulates the onset of 
puberty, at least in females. Leptin also enables neu-
rons in the arcuate nucleus to secrete kisspeptin.
 Thought Questions
1.	 Suppose that people could determine the sex of 
their child, say, by having one of the would-be par-
ents take a drug before conceiving the baby. What 
would the consequences be?
2.	 With appropriate hormonal treatment the uterus of 
a postmenopausal woman can be made ready for 
the implantation of another woman’s ovum, fertil-
ized in vitro, and she can become a mother. In fact, 
several women in their fifties and sixties have done 
so. What do you think about this procedure? 
Should decisions about using it be left to couples 
and their physicians, or does the rest of society 
(represented by their legislators) have an interest?
addition, both male and female sex hormones have 
activational effects on the adult nervous system that 
influence both physiological processes and behavior. 
This section considers some of these hormonal effects.
Hormonal Control of Female  
Reproductive Cycles
The reproductive cycle of female primates is called a 
menstrual cycle (from mensis, meaning “month”). Females 
x menstrual cycle (men strew al)  The female reproductive cycle 
of most primates, including humans; characterized by growth of 
the lining of the uterus, ovulation, development of a corpus 
luteum, and (if pregnancy does not occur), menstruation.

332	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
of information: experiments with animals and various 
developmental disorders in humans, which serve as na-
ture’s own “experiments.” Let us first consider the evi-
dence gathered from research with laboratory animals.
Males
Male sexual behavior is quite varied, although the es-
sential features of intromission (entry of the penis into 
the female’s vagina), pelvic thrusting (rhythmic move-
ment of the hindquarters, causing genital friction), and 
ejaculation (discharge of semen) are characteristic of all 
male mammals. Humans, of course, have invented all 
kinds of copulatory and noncopulatory sexual behavior. 
For example, the pelvic movements leading to ejacula-
tion may be performed by the woman, and sex play can 
lead to orgasm without intromission.
The sexual behavior of rats has been studied more 
than that of any other laboratory animal (Hull and 
Dominguez, 2007). Male rats reach sexual maturity  
of other species of mammals also have reproductive cy-
cles, called estrous cycles. Estrus means “gadfly”; when a 
female rat is in estrus, her hormonal condition goads 
her to act differently than she does at other times. (For 
that matter, her condition goads male rats to act differ-
ently too.) The primary feature that distinguishes men-
strual cycles from estrous cycles is the monthly growth 
and loss of the lining of the uterus. The other features 
are approximately the same, except that the estrous cy-
cle of rats takes four days. Also, the sexual behavior of 
female mammals with estrous cycles is linked to ovula-
tion, whereas most female primates can mate at any time 
during their menstrual cycle.
Menstrual cycles and estrous cycles consist of a se-
quence of events that are controlled by hormonal secre-
tions of the pituitary gland and ovaries. These glands 
interact, the secretions of one affecting those of the 
other. A cycle begins with the secretion of gonadotro-
pins by the anterior pituitary gland. These hormones 
(especially FSH) stimulate the growth of ovarian folli-
cles, small spheres of epithelial cells surrounding each 
ovum. Women normally produce one ovarian follicle 
each month; if two are produced and fertilized, dizy-
gotic (fraternal) twins will develop. As ovarian follicles 
mature, they secrete estradiol, which causes growth of 
the lining of the uterus in preparation for implantation 
of the ovum, should it be fertilized by a sperm. Feedback 
from the increasing level of estradiol eventually triggers 
the release of a surge of LH by the anterior pituitary 
gland. (See Figure 10.6 and 
Simulate the menstrual 
cycle on MyPsychLab.)
The LH surge causes ovulation: The ovarian follicle 
ruptures, releasing the ovum. Under the continued in-
fluence of LH, the ruptured ovarian follicle becomes a 
corpus luteum (“yellow body”), which produces estra-
diol and progesterone. (Look again at Figure 10.6.) The 
latter hormone promotes pregnancy (gestation). It main-
tains the lining of the uterus, and it inhibits the ovaries 
from producing another follicle. Meanwhile, the ovum 
enters one of the Fallopian tubes and begins its progress 
toward the uterus. If it meets sperm cells during its 
travel down the Fallopian tube and becomes fertilized, 
it begins to divide, and several days later it attaches itself 
to the uterine wall.
If the ovum is not fertilized or if it is fertilized too late 
to develop sufficiently by the time it gets to the uterus, the 
corpus luteum will stop producing estradiol and proges-
terone, and then the lining of the walls of the uterus will 
slough off. At this point, menstruation will commence.
Hormonal Control of Sexual  
Behavior of Laboratory Animals
The interactions between sex hormones and the human 
brain are difficult to study. We must turn to two sources 
x estrous cycle  The female reproductive cycle of mammals 
other than primates.
x ovarian follicle  A cluster of epithelial cells surrounding an 
oocyte, which develops into an ovum.
x corpus luteum (lew tee um)  A cluster of cells that develops 
from the ovarian follicle after ovulation; secretes estradiol and 
progesterone.
x progesterone (pro jess ter own)  A steroid hormone produced 
by the ovary that maintains the endometrial lining of the uterus 
during the later part of the menstrual cycle and during pregnancy; 
along with estradiol it promotes receptivity in female mammals 
with estrous cycles.
figure 10.6  Neuroendocrine Control of the 
Menstrual Cycle
Estradiol
Progesterone
Hypothalamus
Estradiol
Ovary
Ovum
Anterior
pituitary
gland
LH
Corpus
luteum
Luteinization
Ovulation
Growth of Follicle
FSH

	
Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior	
333
Sexual behavior of male rodents depends on testoster-
one, a fact that has long been recognized (Bermant and 
Davidson, 1974). If a male rat is castrated (that is, if his 
testes are removed), his sexual activity eventually ceases. 
However, the behavior can be reinstated by injections of 
testosterone. I will describe the neural basis of this acti-
vational effect later in this chapter.
Other hormones play a role in male sexual behav-
ior. Oxytocin is a hormone produced by the posterior 
pituitary gland that contracts the milk ducts and thus 
causes milk ejection in lactating females. It is also pro-
duced in males, where it obviously plays no role in lacta-
tion. Oxytocin is released at the time of orgasm in both 
males and females and appears to contribute to the 
contractions of the smooth muscle in the male ejacula-
tory system and of the vagina and uterus (Carmichael et 
al., 1987; Carter, 1992). The effects of this hormonal 
release can easily be seen in lactating women, who often 
eject some milk at the time of orgasm. Oxytocin plays a 
role in establishment of pair bonding, a phenomenon 
that will be discussed later in this chapter.
Females
The mammalian female has been described as the pas-
sive participant in copulation. It is true that in some 
species the female’s role during the act of copulation is 
merely to assume a posture that exposes her genitals to 
the male. This behavior is called the lordosis response 
(from the Greek lordos, meaning “bent backward”). The 
female will also move her tail away (if she has one) and 
stand rigidly enough to support the weight of the male. 
However, the behavior of a female rodent in initiating 
copulation is often very active. Certainly, if a male at-
tempts to copulate with a nonestrous rodent, the female 
between 45 and 75 days of age. When an adult male rat 
encounters a receptive female, he will spend some time 
nuzzling her and sniffing her face and genitals, mount 
her, and engage in several rapid, shallow pelvic thrusts. 
If he detects her vagina, he will make a deeper thrust, 
achieve intromission, and then dismount. He will mount 
her several times, achieving intromission on most of the 
mountings. After eight to fifteen intromissions approxi-
mately 1 minute apart (each lasting only about one-
quarter of a second), the male will ejaculate.
After ejaculating, the male refrains from sexual ac-
tivity for a period of time (minutes, in the rat). Most 
mammals will return to copulate several times, finally 
showing a longer pause, called a refractory period. (The 
term comes from the Latin refringere, “to break off.”) An 
interesting phenomenon occurs in some mammals. If a 
male, after finally becoming “exhausted” by repeated 
copulation with the same female, is presented with a new 
female, he begins to respond quickly—often as fast as he 
did in his initial contact with the first female. Successive 
introductions of new females can keep up his perfor-
mance for prolonged periods of time. This phenome-
non is undoubtedly important in species in which a sin-
gle male inseminates all the females in his harem. Species 
with approximately equal numbers of reproductively ac-
tive males and females are less likely to act this way.
In one of the most unusual studies I have read about, 
Beamer, Bermant, and Clegg (1969) tested the ability of 
a ram (male sheep) to recognize ewes with which he 
had mated. A ram that is given a new ewe each time 
will quickly begin copulating and will ejaculate within 2 
minutes. (In one study, a ram kept up this performance 
with twelve ewes. The experimenters finally got tired of 
shuffling sheep around; the ram was still ready to go.) 
Beamer and his colleagues tried to fool rams by putting 
trench coats and Halloween face masks on females with 
which the rams had mated. (No, I’m not making this 
up.) The males were not fooled by the disguise; they 
apparently recognized their former partners by their 
odor and were no longer interested in them.
The rejuvenating effect of a new female, also seen 
in roosters, is usually called the Coolidge effect. The 
following story is reputed to be true, but I cannot vouch 
for that. (If it is not true, it ought to be.) The former U.S. 
president Calvin Coolidge and his wife were touring a 
farm when Mrs. Coolidge asked the farmer whether the 
continuous and vigorous sexual activity among the flock 
of hens was the work of just one rooster. The reply was 
yes. She smiled and said, “You might point that out to 
Mr. Coolidge.” The president looked thoughtfully at the 
birds and then asked the farmer whether a different hen 
was involved each time. The answer, again, was yes. 
“You might point that out to Mrs. Coolidge,” he said.
x refractory period (ree frak to ree)  A period of time after a 
particular action (for example, an ejaculation by a male) during 
which that action cannot occur again.
x Coolidge effect  The restorative effect of introducing a new 
female sex partner to a male that has apparently become 
“exhausted” by sexual activity.
x oxytocin (ox ee tow sin)  A hormone secreted by the posterior 
pituitary gland; causes contraction of the smooth muscle of the 
milk ducts, the uterus, and the male ejaculatory system; also serves 
as a neurotransmitter in the brain.
x lordosis  A spinal sexual reflex seen in many four-legged female 
mammals; arching of the back in response to approach of a male 
or to touching the flanks, which elevates the hindquarters.

334	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
took photos of women’s faces during fertile and nonfer-
tile periods of their menstrual cycle and found that both 
men and women judged the photos taken during the 
fertile period to be more attractive than those taken dur-
ing a nonfertile period. (The women whose pictures were 
taken were not told the object of the study until after-
ward, to prevent them from unknowingly changing their 
facial expressions in a way that might bias the results.)
Organizational Effects of Androgens 
on Behavior: Masculinization  
and Defeminization
The dictum “Nature’s impulse is to create a female” ap-
plies to sexual behavior as well as to sex organs. That is, if 
a rodent’s brain is not exposed to androgens during a 
critical period of development, the animal will engage in 
female sexual behavior as an adult (if the animal is then 
given estradiol and progesterone). Fortunately for experi-
menters this critical time comes shortly after birth for rats 
and for several other species of rodents that are born in a 
rather immature condition. Thus, if a male rat is castrated 
immediately after birth, permitted to grow to adulthood, 
and then given injections of estradiol and progesterone, it 
will respond to the presence of another male by arching its 
back and presenting its hindquarters. In other words, it will 
act as if it were a female (Blaustein and Olster, 1989).
In contrast, if a rodent brain is exposed to andro-
gens during development, two phenomena occur: be-
havioral defeminization and behavioral masculinization. 
Behavioral defeminization refers to the organizational ef-
fect of androgens that prevents the animal from display-
ing female sexual behavior in adulthood. As we shall see 
later, this effect is accomplished by suppressing the de-
velopment of neural circuits controlling female sexual 
behavior. For example, if a female rodent is ovariecto-
mized and given an injection of testosterone immedi-
ately after birth, she will not respond to a male rat when, 
as an adult, she is given injections of estradiol and pro-
gesterone. Behavioral masculinization refers to the organi-
zational effect of androgens that enables animals to en-
gage in male sexual behavior in adulthood. This effect is 
accomplished by stimulating the development of neural 
circuits controlling male sexual behavior. For example, 
if the female rodent in my previous example is given 
testosterone in adulthood rather than estradiol and pro-
gesterone, she will mount and attempt to copulate with 
a receptive female. (See Breedlove, 1992, and Carter, 
1992, for references to specific studies.) (See Figure 10.7.)
Effects of Pheromones
Hormones transmit messages from one part of the body 
(the secreting gland) to another (the target tissue).  
will either actively flee or rebuff him. But when the  
female is in a receptive state, she will often approach the 
male, nuzzle him, sniff his genitals, and show behaviors 
characteristic of her species. For example, a female rat 
will exhibit quick, short, hopping movements and rapid 
ear wiggling, which most male rats find irresistible  
(McClintock and Adler, 1978).
Sexual behavior of female rodents depends on the 
gonadal hormones present during estrus: estradiol and 
progesterone. In rats, estradiol increases about 40 hours 
before the female becomes receptive; just before recep-
tivity occurs, the corpus luteum begins secreting large 
quantities of progesterone (Feder, 1981). Ovariecto-
mized rats (rats whose ovaries have been removed) are 
not sexually receptive. Although sexual receptivity can 
be produced in ovariectomized rodents by administer-
ing large doses of estradiol alone, the most effective 
treatment duplicates the normal sequence of hormones: 
a small amount of estradiol, followed by progesterone. 
Progesterone alone is ineffective; thus, the estradiol 
“primes” its effectiveness. Priming with estradiol takes 
about 16–24 hours, after which an injection of progesterone 
produces receptive behaviors within an hour (Takahashi, 
1990). The neural mechanisms that are responsible for 
these effects will be described later in this chapter.
Studies with targeted mutations confirm the impor-
tance of estradiol and progesterone on sexual behavior 
in female rodents. Rissman et al. (1997) found that fe-
male mice without estrogen receptors were unreceptive 
to males even after treatment with estradiol and proges-
terone, and Lydon et al. (1995) observed similar effects 
in female mice without progesterone receptors.
The sequence of estradiol followed by progesterone 
has three effects on female rats: It increases their recep-
tivity, their proceptivity, and their attractiveness. Recep-
tivity refers to their ability and willingness to copulate—
to accept the advances of a male by holding still and 
displaying lordosis when he attempts to mount her. Pro-
ceptivity refers to a female’s eagerness to copulate, as 
shown by the fact that she seeks out a male and engages 
in behaviors that tend to arouse his sexual interest.  
Attractiveness refers to physiological and behavioral 
changes that affect the male. The male rat (along with 
many other male mammals) is most responsive to fe-
males who are in estrus (“in heat”). Males will ignore a 
female whose ovaries have been removed, but injections 
of estradiol and progesterone will restore her attractive-
ness (and also change her behavior toward the male). 
The stimuli that arouse a male rat’s sexual interest in-
clude her odor and her behavior. In some species, visi-
ble changes, such as the swollen sex skin in the genital 
region of a female monkey, also affect sex appeal.
Even though women do not show obvious physical 
changes during the fertile period of their menstrual cy-
cle, some subtle changes do occur. Roberts et al. (2004) 

	
Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior	
335
is very likely to fail. This effect, too, is caused by a sub-
stance secreted in the urine of intact males—but not of 
males that have been castrated. Thus, a male mouse that 
encounters a pregnant female is able to prevent the 
birth of infants carrying another male’s genes and sub-
sequently impregnate the female himself. This phenom-
enon is advantageous even from the female’s point of 
view. The fact that the new male has managed to take 
over the old male’s territory indicates that he is probably 
healthier and more vigorous; therefore, his genes will 
contribute to the formation of offspring that are more 
likely to survive.
As you learned in Chapter 7, detection of odors is 
accomplished by the olfactory bulbs, which constitute 
the primary olfactory system. However, many of the ef-
fects that pheromones have on reproductive cycles are 
mediated by another sensory organ—the vomeronasal 
organ (VNO)—which consists of a small group of sen-
sory receptors arranged around a pouch connected by  
a duct to the nasal passage. The vomeronasal organ, 
which is present in all orders of mammals except for 
cetaceans (whales and dolphins), projects to the accessory 
olfactory bulb, located immediately behind the olfactory 
bulb (Wysocki, 1979). (See Figure 10.8.) The VNO con-
tains over 200 G-protein-linked receptor molecules that 
detect many of the chemicals that serve as pheromones 
(Dulac and Axel, 1995; Ryba and Tirindelli, 1997;  
Stowers and Marton, 2005). These receptor molecules 
are only distantly related to the ones present in the  
olfactory epithelium.
Removal of the accessory olfactory bulb disrupts the 
Lee-Boot effect, the Whitten effect, the Vandenbergh 
effect, and the Bruce effect; thus, the vomeronasal sys-
tem is essential for these phenomena (Halpern, 1987). 
Another class of chemicals, called pheromones, carries 
messages from one animal to another. Some of these 
chemicals, like hormones, affect reproductive behavior. 
Karlson and Luscher (1959) coined the term, from  
the Greek pherein, “to carry,” and horman, “to excite.” 
Pheromones are released by one animal and directly af-
fect the physiology or behavior of another. In mamma-
lian species most pheromones are detected by means of 
olfaction.
Pheromones can affect reproductive physiology or 
behavior. First, let us consider the effects on reproduc-
tive physiology. When groups of female mice are housed 
together, their estrous cycles slow down and eventually 
stop. This phenomenon is known as the Lee-Boot effect 
(van der Lee and Boot, 1955). If groups of females are 
exposed to the odor of a male (or of his urine), they 
begin cycling again, and their cycles tend to be synchro-
nized. This phenomenon is known as the Whitten effect 
(Whitten, 1959). The Vandenbergh effect (Vanden-
bergh, Whitsett, and Lombardi, 1975) is the acceleration 
of the onset of puberty in a female rodent caused by the 
odor of a male. Both the Whitten effect and the Vanden-
bergh effect are caused by a group of compounds that 
are present only in the urine of intact adult males (Ma, 
Miao, and Novotny, 1999; Novotny et al., 1999); the 
urine of a juvenile or castrated male has no effect. Thus, 
the production of the pheromone by a male requires 
the presence of testosterone.
The Bruce effect (Bruce, 1960a, 1960b) is a particu-
larly interesting phenomenon: When a recently impreg-
nated female mouse encounters a normal male mouse 
other than the one with which she mated, the pregnancy 
figure 10.7  Organizational Effects of Testosterone
Around the time of birth, testosterone masculinizes and 
defeminizes rodents’ sexual behavior.
Immediately
after birth
When rat is
fully grown
None
None
E + P
Testosterone
Testosterone
Testosterone
Testosterone
Activational effect of
estradiol and progesterone
in nonandrogenized animal
Evidence of defeminization:
Estradiol + progesterone fails
to facilitate female
sexual behavior
Evidence of masculinization:
Testosterone facilitates male
sexual behavior
Male: yes
Female: no
Female: no
Female: no
Female: yes
Male: no
Male: no
Male: no
Resulting Sexual Behavior
Hormone Treatment
E + P
x pheromone (fair oh moan)  A chemical released by one animal 
that affects the behavior or physiology of another animal; usually 
smelled or tasted.
x Lee-Boot effect  The slowing and eventual cessation of estrous 
cycles in groups of female animals that are housed together; caused 
by a pheromone in the animals’ urine; first observed in mice.
x Whitten effect  The synchronization of the menstrual or 
estrous cycles of a group of females, which occurs only in the 
presence of a pheromone in a male’s urine.
x Vandenbergh effect  The earlier onset of puberty seen in 
female animals that are housed with males; caused by a phero-
mone in the male’s urine; first observed in mice.
x Bruce effect  Termination of pregnancy caused by the odor of 
a pheromone in the urine of a male other than the one that 
impregnated the female; first identified in mice.
x vomeronasal organ (VNO) (voah mer oh nay zul)  A sensory 
organ that detects the presence of certain chemicals, especially when 
a liquid is actively sniffed; mediates the effects of some pheromones.
x accessory olfactory bulb  A neural structure located in the main 
olfactory bulb that receives information from the vomeronasal organ.

336	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
medium and examined the cells as they exposed the 
tissue to diluted mouse urine. Although many neurons 
were activated by mouse urine, only two or three re-
sponded uniquely to male urine, and approximately 
eight responded uniquely to female urine. It seems, 
then, that a small number of receptors are tuned  
specifically to chemicals secreted by males or females. 
Urine from different individuals produced different 
patterns of activity of large numbers of neurons, un-
doubtedly reflecting the existence of different concen-
trations of large numbers of chemicals in the animals’ 
urine. In fact, as He et al. note, mouse urine contains 
many hundreds—perhaps thousands—of different 
compounds.
The vomeronasal organ is essential for the ability of 
a rodent to identify the sex of another individual. If 
transduction of chemical information in the vomerona-
sal organ is prevented by a knockout of a gene required 
The accessory olfactory bulb sends axons to the medial 
nucleus of the amygdala, which in turn projects to the 
preoptic area and anterior hypothalamus and to the 
ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus. (As you 
learned in Chapter 7, so does the main olfactory bulb.) 
Thus, the neural circuit responsible for the effects of 
these pheromones appears to involve these regions. As 
we shall see, the preoptic area, the medial amygdala, the 
ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus, and the me-
dial preoptic area all play important roles in reproduc-
tive behavior. (See Figure 10.9.)
Although the vomeronasal organ can respond to 
some airborne molecules, it is primarily sensitive to non-
volatile compounds found in urine or other substances 
(Brennan and Keverne, 2004). In fact, stimulation of a 
nerve that serves the nasal region of the hamster causes 
fluid to be pumped into the vomeronasal organ, which 
exposes the receptors to any substances that may be 
present (Meredith and O’Connell, 1979). This pump is 
activated whenever the animal encounters a novel stim-
ulus (Meredith, 1994).
Luo, Fee, and Katz (2003) implanted microelec-
trodes into the accessory olfactory bulb and recorded the 
activity of single neurons in freely moving mice while they 
investigated lightly anesthetized mice introduced into the 
test cage. They found that neurons of the vomeronasal 
system responded only when the mice were actively inves-
tigating the other animal’s face or anogenital region. In 
addition, the neurons showed sharply tuned response 
characteristics, distinguishing between different strains of 
mice and between male and female mice. (
Simulate 
VNO responses on MyPsychLab.)
He et al. (2008) used molecular genetic techniques 
to prepare a strain of mice that expressed a fluorescent 
dye in neurons in their main and accessory olfactory 
systems that would glow when the neurons were stimu-
lated. They then placed slices of the VNO in a culture 
figure 10.8  The Rodent Accessory Olfactory 
System
(Adapted from Wysocki, C. J. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 1979, 3, 
301–341.)
Main olfactory
bulb
Vomeronasal
nerve
Vomeronasal
organ
Brain
Accessory
olfactory bulb
Opening of
vomeronasal
organ
Upper incisor
x medial nucleus of the amygdala (a mig da la)  A nucleus that 
receives olfactory information from the olfactory bulb and 
accessory olfactory bulb; involved in the effects of odors and 
pheromones on reproductive behavior.
figure 10.9  The Amygdala
This schematic of cross section through a rat brain shows 
the location of the amygdala.
(Adapted from Swanson, L. W. Brain Maps: Structure of the Rat Brain. New York: 
Elsevier, 1992.)
Thalamus
Fimbria
Hippocampus
Corpus
callosum
Lateral
ventricle
Basomedial
nucleus of
amygdala
Medial nucleus
of amygdala
Central nucleus
of amygdala
Basolateral
nucleus of
amygdala
Fornix

	
Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior	
337
neurons appear to participate in memory formation. 
Perhaps neurogenesis stimulated by the odor of male 
mice provides the means by which females learn and 
remember the odor of that particular male.
It appears that at least some pheromone-related 
phenomena occur in humans. McClintock (1971) studied 
the menstrual cycles of women attending an all-female 
college. She found that women who spent a large 
amount of time together tended to have synchronized 
cycles: Their menstrual periods began within a day or 
two of one another. In addition, women who regularly 
spent some time in the presence of men tended to have 
shorter cycles than those who rarely spent time with 
(smelled?) men.
Russell, Switz, and Thompson (1980) obtained di-
rect evidence that pheromones can synchronize wom-
en’s menstrual cycles. The investigators collected daily 
samples of a woman’s underarm sweat. They dissolved 
the samples in alcohol and swabbed them on the upper 
lips of a group of women three times each week, in the 
order in which they were originally taken. The cycles of 
the women who received the extract (but not those of 
control subjects whose lips were swabbed with pure alco-
hol) began to synchronize with the cycle of the odor 
donor. These results were confirmed by a similar study 
by Stern and McClintock (1998), who found that com-
pounds from the armpits of women that were taken 
around the time of ovulation lengthened other wom-
en’s menstrual cycles, and compounds taken late in the 
cycle shortened them. Preti et al. (2003) performed a 
similar experiment but exposed women to extracts of 
sweat collected from men. They found that the extract 
(but not a placebo) advanced the onset of the next 
pulse of the women’s LH secretion, reduced tension, 
and increased relaxation.
Several studies have found that compounds present 
in human sweat have different effects in men and 
women. Singh and Bronstad (2001) had men smell  
T-shirts that had been worn by women for several days. 
The men reported that shirts worn by women during 
the fertile phase of their menstrual cycle smelled more 
pleasant and more sexy than those worn during the 
nonfertile phase.
Jacob and McClintock (2000) found that the andro-
genic chemical androstadienone (AND), found in men’s 
sweat, increases alertness and positive mood in women 
but decreases positive mood in men. Wyart et al. (2007) 
found that women who smelled AND showed higher 
levels of cortisol (an adrenal hormone involved in a va-
riety of emotional behaviors) and reported a more posi-
tive mood and an increase in sexual arousal. Saxton  
et al. (2008) applied a solution containing AND or a 
placebo to women’s upper lips and then had them par-
ticipate in a “speed-dating” event organized by a private 
agency at a local bar. During the event, the women met 
for this process (TRPC2), mice can no longer distin-
guish between males and females (Stowers et al., 2002). 
In fact, male mice with this genetic knockout will at-
tempt to mate with both males and females, and they 
will not attack a strange male that invades their territory, 
as a normal mouse will do. But the fact that they can 
successfully engage in sexual behavior with female 
mice—and in fact can impregnate them—indicates that 
input from the vomeronasal system is not essential for 
this behavior. As Wyatt (2010) notes, in mammals, pher-
omones are detected by the vomeronasal system, the 
olfactory system, or both systems.
Normally, when a male mouse smells another 
mouse, he approaches and sniffs the other mouse’s face 
and anogenital region. In mammals, pheromones are 
found in urine, vaginal secretions, saliva, and tears. This 
investigatory behavior permits the animal to detect non-
volatile chemicals secreted by the other animal. If the 
other animal is an estrous female, the male courts and 
mates with it. If it is a strange male, he attacks it. If it is 
a familiar male (say, one of its littermates), he will usu-
ally tolerate its presence. So the main olfactory system 
stimulates investigatory behavior when the presence of 
another mouse is detected, and information provided 
by the vomeronasal system determines the gender, es-
trous condition, and identity of the other animal. With-
out the information from the VNO, the animal indis-
criminately displays sexual behavior. In contrast, if a 
male mouse is made anosmic (incapable of detecting 
odors) by removal of the olfactory bulbs, by a genetic 
knockout that prevents transduction of olfactory infor-
mation in the main olfactory epithelium, or by applica-
tion of a chemical that damages olfactory receptors, he 
will not approach and sniff another mouse and, consequ­
ently, will not attack or attempt to mate with it (Mandiyan, 
Coats, and Shah, 2005; Wang et al., 2006).
The males of some species produce sex-attractant 
pheromones that affect the behavior of females. For 
example, a pheromone present in the saliva of boars 
(male pigs) elicits sexual behavior in sows. This response 
persists even after the sow’s VNO is destroyed, which 
indicates that the main olfactory system can detect the 
pheromone and elicit the behavior (Dorries, Adkins, 
and Halpern, 1997). Other male pheromones that at-
tract females are also detected by the main olfactory 
system. For example, Mak et al. (2007) found that the 
odor of soiled bedding taken from the cage of a male 
mouse activated neurons in the main olfactory system 
and hippocampus of female mice. The odor even stimu-
lated neurogenesis (production of new neurons); Mak 
and her colleagues found new neurons in the olfactory 
bulb and hippocampus. Moreover, bedding from cages 
of dominant males stimulated neurogenesis more effec-
tively than did bedding from subordinate males. As we 
will see in Chapter 13, one function of newly formed 

338	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
pertaining to these issues is discussed later, in a section 
on sexual orientation.
Activational Effects of Sex  
Hormones in Women
As we saw, the sexual behavior of most female mammals 
other than higher primates is controlled by the ovarian 
hormones estradiol and progesterone. (In some species, 
such as cats and rabbits, only estradiol is necessary.) As 
Wallen (1990) points out, the ovarian hormones control 
not only the willingness (or even eagerness) of an estrous 
female to mate but also her ability to mate. That is, a 
male rat cannot copulate with a female rat that is not in 
estrus. Even if he would overpower her and mount her, 
her lordosis response would not occur, and he would be 
unable to achieve intromission. Thus, the evolutionary 
process in rats seems to have selected animals that mate 
only at a time when the female is able to become preg-
nant. (The neural control of the lordosis response and 
the effects of ovarian hormones on it are described later 
in this chapter.)
In higher primates (including our own species) the 
ability to mate is not controlled by ovarian hormones. 
There are no physical barriers to sexual intercourse dur-
ing any part of the menstrual cycle. If a woman or other 
female primate consents to sexual activity at any time 
(or is forced to submit by a male), intercourse can cer-
tainly take place.
Although ovarian hormones do not control women’s 
sexual activity, they may still have an influence on wom-
en’s sexual interest. Early studies reported that fluctua-
tions in the level of ovarian hormones had only a minor 
effect on women’s sexual interest (Adams, Gold, and 
Burt, 1978; Morris et al., 1987). However, as Wallen 
(1990) notes, these studies have almost all involved 
married women who live with their husbands. In stable, 
monogamous relationships in which the partners are 
together on a daily basis, sexual activity can be insti-
gated by either of them. Normally, a husband does not 
force his wife to have intercourse with him, but even if 
she is not interested in engaging in sexual activity at 
that moment, she may find that she wants to do so be-
cause of her affection for him. Thus, changes in sexual 
interest and arousability might not always be reflected 
in changes in sexual behavior. In fact, a study of lesbian 
couples (whose menstrual cycles are likely to be syn-
chronized) found a significant increase in sexual inter-
est and activity during the middle portions of the wom-
en’s cycles (Matteo and Rissman, 1984), which suggests 
that ovarian hormones do influence women’s sexual 
interest.
A study by Van Goozen et al. (1997) supports this 
suggestion. The investigators found that the sexual activ-
ity initiated by men and women showed very different 
relations to the woman’s menstrual cycle (and hence to 
and talked with several men, one at a time, for three 
minutes each. Afterwards, the women were asked to rate 
the men’s attractiveness. Most of the women exposed to 
AND found the men they met to be more attractive.
Men show a brain response to a chemical found in 
women’s urine. A functional-imaging study by Savic et al. 
(2001) found that the estrogenic chemical estratetraene 
(EST) activated the paraventricular nucleus and dorso-
medial hypothalamus in men but not in women.
What sensory organ detects the presence of human 
pheromones? Although humans have a small vomeronasal 
organ located along the nasal septum (bridge of tissue 
between the nostrils) approximately 2 cm from the open-
ing of the nostril (Garcia-Velasco and Mondragon, 1991), 
the human VNO is thought to be a vestigial, nonfunc-
tional, organ. The density of neurons in the VNO is very 
sparse, and investigators have not found any neural con-
nections from this organ to the brain (Doty, 2001). Evi-
dence clearly shows that human reproductive physiology is 
affected by pheromones, but it appears that these chemical 
signals are detected by the “standard” olfactory system—
the receptor cells in the olfactory epithelium—and not by 
cells in the VNO. In support of this conclusion, Savic, He-
dén-Bloomqvist, and Berglund (2009) found that the odor 
EST activated the brains of men with intact olfactory sys-
tems, but not in men whose olfactory epithelium had been 
destroyed by nasal polyps but whose VNOs were intact.
Whether or not pheromones play an important role 
in sexual attraction in humans, the familiar odor of a 
sex partner probably has a positive effect on sexual 
arousal—just like the sight of a sex partner or the sound 
of his or her voice. We are not generally conscious of the 
fact, but we can identify other people on the basis of 
olfactory cues. For example, a study by Russell (1976) 
found that people were able to distinguish by odor be-
tween T-shirts that they had worn and those previously 
worn by other people. They could also tell whether the 
unknown owner of a T-shirt was male or female. Thus, it 
is likely that men and women can learn to be attracted 
by their partners’ characteristic odors, just as they can 
learn to be attracted by the sound of their voice. In an 
instance like this, the odors are serving simply as sensory 
cues, not as pheromones.
Human Sexual Behavior
Human sexual behavior, like that of other mammals, is 
influenced by activational effects of gonadal hormones 
and, almost certainly, by organizational effects as well.
If hormones have organizational effects on human 
sexual behavior, they must exert these effects by altering 
the development of the brain. Although there is good 
evidence that prenatal exposure to androgens affects 
development of the human brain, the consequences of 
this exposure are not yet fully understood. The evidence 

	
Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior	
339
expressed in female chimpanzees (Stumpf and Boesch, 
2005). During their infertile periods, female chimpan-
zees initiate sexual activity with many males in their 
group. However, during their period of peak fertility, 
they become much choosier and tend to mate with the 
same few males—presumably, those that showed the 
most promise of being able to supply good genes for 
their offspring.
Wallen (2001) points out that although ovarian hor-
mones may affect a woman’s sexual interest, her behav-
ior can be influenced by other factors as well. For ex-
ample, if a woman does not want to become pregnant 
and does not have absolute confidence in her method 
of birth control, she may avoid sexual intercourse at 
midcycle, around the time of ovulation—even if her 
potential sexual interest is at a peak. In fact, Harvey 
(1987) found that women were more likely to engage in 
autosexual activity at this time. On the other hand, 
women who want to become pregnant are more likely to 
initiate sexual intercourse during the time when they 
are most likely to conceive.
Several studies suggest that women’s sexual interest 
can be stimulated by androgens. There are two primary 
sources of androgens in the female body: the ovaries 
and the adrenal glands. The primary ovarian sex ste-
roids are, of course, estradiol and progesterone, but 
these glands also produce testosterone. The adrenal 
glands produce another androgen, androstenedione, 
along with other adrenocortical steroids. However, the 
available evidence indicates that androgens by them-
selves (in the absence of estradiol) do not directly stimu-
late women’s sexual interest but appear to amplify the 
effects of estradiol. For example, Shifren et al. (2000) 
studied ovariectomized women aged 31–56 who were 
receiving estrogen-replacement therapy. The women 
were given, in addition to the estrogen, either a placebo 
or testosterone, delivered through transdermal patches. 
Although the estrogen+placebo produced a positive  
effect, the addition of testosterone produced an even 
greater increase in sexual activity and rate of orgasm: 
The percentage of women who had sex fantasies, mas-
turbated, and had intercourse increased two to three 
times over baseline levels, and these women reported 
higher levels of well-being.
Activational Effects of Sex  
Hormones in Men
Although women and mammals with estrous cycles dif-
fer in their behavioral responsiveness to sex hormones, 
men resemble other mammals in their behavioral re-
sponsiveness to testosterone. With normal levels they 
can be potent and fertile; without testosterone, sperm 
production ceases, and sooner or later, so does sexual 
potency. In a double-blind study, Bagatell et al. (1994) 
gave a placebo or a gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
her level of ovarian hormones). Men initiated sexual 
activity at about the same rate throughout the woman’s 
cycle, whereas sexual activity initiated by women showed 
a distinct peak around the time of ovulation, when estra-
diol levels are highest. (See Figure 10.10.) Bullivant et al. 
(2004) found that women were more likely to initiate 
sexual activity and were more likely to engage in sexual 
fantasies just before and during the surge in luteinizing 
hormone that stimulates ovulation.
A review by Gangestad and Thornhill (2008) sug-
gests that women’s sexuality changes across the men-
strual cycle in a particular way: They do not become 
indiscriminately more interested in sexual contact dur-
ing their fertile period, which occurs around the time 
of ovulation. Instead, because they are more likely to 
become pregnant if they engage in unprotected sex at 
that time, they become more choosy. In particular, they 
become more attracted to male characteristics that 
might indicate high genetic quality (or did so in the 
evolution of our species). For example, Gangestad and 
Thornhill note that studies have shown that at midcycle, 
women’s preference increases for the sight of facial and 
bodily masculinity, for masculine behavioral displays, 
for masculine vocal qualities, for androgen-related 
scents, and for body symmetry, which correlates with 
genetic fitness. (Of course, these changes are irrelevant 
for women in monogamous relationships—after all, 
they have already chosen their partners—or for women 
taking birth-control pills, which stabilize levels of circu-
lating hormones.) The tendency is even more strongly 
figure 10.10  Sexual Activity of Heterosexual 
Couples
This graph shows the distribution of sexual activity 
initiated by the man and by the woman during the 
phases of the woman’s menstrual cycle.
(Based on data from Wallen, 2001.)
0
Female initiated
Partner initiated
10
20
30
40
50
Follicular
Ovulatory
Midluteal
Premenstrual
Phase of Woman's Menstrual Cycle
Percentage of sex initiated

340	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
Sexual Orientation
What controls a person’s sexual orientation, that is, the 
gender of the preferred sex partner? Some investigators 
believe that sexual orientation is determined by child-
hood experiences, especially interactions between the 
child and parents. A large-scale study of several hundred 
male and female homosexuals reported by Bell, Weinberg, 
and Hammersmith (1981) attempted to assess the effects 
of these factors. The researchers found no evidence that 
homosexuals had been raised by domineering mothers 
or submissive fathers, as some clinicians had suggested. 
The best predictor of adult homosexuality was a self- 
report of homosexual feelings, which usually preceded 
homosexual activity by three years. The investigators 
concluded that their data did not support social expla-
nations for homosexuality but were consistent with the 
possibility that homosexuality is at least partly biologi-
cally determined.
If homosexuality does have a physiological cause, it 
certainly is not variations in the levels of sex hormones 
during adulthood. Many studies have examined the lev-
els of sex steroids in male homosexuals (Meyer-Bahlburg, 
1984), and the vast majority found these levels to be 
similar to those of heterosexuals. A few studies suggest 
that about 30 percent of female homosexuals have ele-
vated levels of testosterone (but still lower than those 
found in men). Whether these differences are related to 
a biological cause of female homosexuality or whether 
differences in lifestyles may increase the secretion of 
testosterone is not yet known.
A more likely biological cause of homosexuality is a 
subtle difference in brain structure caused by differ-
ences in the amount of prenatal exposure to androgens. 
Perhaps, then, the brains of male homosexuals are nei-
ther masculinized nor defeminized, those of female ho-
mosexuals are masculinized and defeminized, and those 
of bisexuals are masculinized but not defeminized. Of 
course, these are hypotheses, not conclusions. They should 
be regarded as suggestions to guide future research.
Prenatal Androgenization  
of Genetic Females
Evidence suggests that prenatal androgens can affect  
human social behavior and sexual orientation, as well 
as anatomy. In a disorder known as congenital adrenal  
hyperplasia (CAH), the adrenal glands secrete abnor-
mal amounts of androgens. (Hyperplasia means “exces-
sive formation.”) The secretion of androgens begins 
(GnRH) antagonist to young male volunteers to sup-
press secretion of testicular androgens. Within two 
weeks, the subjects who received the GnRH antagonist 
reported a decrease in sexual interest, sexual fantasy, 
and intercourse. Men who received replacement doses 
of testosterone along with the antagonist did not show 
these changes.
The decline of sexual activity after castration is 
quite variable. As reported by Money and Ehrhardt 
(1972), some men lose potency immediately, whereas 
others show a slow, gradual decline over several years. 
Perhaps at least some of the variability is a function of 
prior experience; practice not only may “make perfect” 
but also may forestall a decline in function. Although 
there is no direct evidence with respect to this possibil-
ity in humans, Wallen and his colleagues (Wallen et al., 
1991; Wallen, 2001) injected a GnRH antagonist in 
seven adult male rhesus monkeys that were part of a 
larger group. The injection suppressed testosterone se-
cretion, and sexual behavior declined after one week. 
However, the decline was related to the animal’s social 
rank and sexual experience: More sexually experi-
enced, high-ranking males continued to copulate. In 
fact, the highest-ranking male continued to copulate 
and ejaculate at the same rate as before, even though 
his testosterone secretion was suppressed for almost 
eight weeks. The mounting behavior of the lowest- 
ranking monkey completely ceased and did not resume 
until testosterone secretion recovered from the anti-
GnRH treatment.
Testosterone not only affects sexual activity but also 
is affected by it—or even by thinking about it. A scientist 
stationed on a remote island (Anonymous, 1970) re-
moved his beard with an electric shaver each day and 
weighed the clippings. Just before he left for visits to the 
mainland (and to the company of a female compan-
ion), his beard began growing faster. Because rate of 
beard growth is related to androgen levels, the effect 
indicates that his anticipation of sexual activity stimu-
lated testosterone production.
By the way, women also show similar changes in 
testosterone level. (I mention it here rather than in the 
previous subsection because it makes a good follow-up 
to the study I just described.) Hamilton and Meston 
(2010) studied women in long-distance relationships 
who saw their partners only intermittently. The investigators 
found that the women’s testosterone levels increased 
the day before they rejoined their partners—presumably 
in anticipation of their reunion. (Unlike the study by 
Anonymous, they did not collect beard shavings, but 
measured testosterone levels by collecting samples of 
the women’s saliva.) These findings support the conclu-
sions from the previous subsection that testosterone, as 
well as estradiol, plays a role in women’s sexual interest 
and activity.
x congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) (hy per play zha)  A 
condition characterized by hypersecretion of androgens by the 
adrenal cortex; in females, causes masculinization of the external 
genitalia.

	
Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior	
341
Pasterski et al. (2005) found that girls with CAH 
were more likely to choose male toys than were their 
non-CAH sisters or female cousins. The girls’ parents 
reported that they made a special effort to encourage 
their CAH daughters to play with “girls’ toys” but that 
this encouragement appeared not to succeed. Thus, the 
girls’ tendencies to make male toy choices did not seem 
to be a result of parental pressure.
Because of the masculinizing effects of CAH, some 
clinicians have suggested that parents of strongly an-
drogenized girls with greatly enlarged clitorises raise 
them as boys and not subject them to surgical proce-
dures that feminize their genitalia. The rationale for 
this strategy is that the social behavior and sexual orien-
tation of strongly androgenized girls is likely to be mas-
culine anyway, and the enlarged clitoris could serve for 
sexual intercourse with women. The disadvantages in-
clude the fact that the girls’ ovaries would have to be 
removed, which would eliminate the possibility of natu-
ral parenthood. (Most women with CAH are able to 
conceive and bear children.) A review by Meyer-Bahlberg 
(2001) provides a thoughtful and sensitive discussion of 
these issues.
Failure of Androgenization  
of Genetic Males
As we saw, genetic males with androgen insensitivity 
syndrome develop as females, with female external  
genitalia—but also with testes and without uterus or  
Fallopian tubes. If an individual with this syndrome is 
raised as a girl, all is well. Normally, the testes are removed 
because they often become cancerous; but if they are not 
prenatally; thus, the syndrome causes prenatal mascu-
linization. Boys born with CAH develop normally; the 
extra androgen does not seem to have significant ef-
fects. However, a girl with CAH will be born with an 
enlarged clitoris, and her labia may be partly fused to-
gether. (As Figure 10.3 shows, the scrotum and labia 
develop from the same tissue in the fetus.) If masculin-
ization of the genitals is pronounced, surgery is some-
times performed to correct them. In any event, once 
the syndrome has been identified, the person will be 
given a synthetic hormone that suppresses the abnor-
mal secretion of androgens.
As a group, females with CAH have an increased 
likelihood of becoming sexually attracted to other 
women; approximately one-third describe themselves as 
bisexual or homosexual (Cohen-Bendahan, van de Beek, 
and Berenbaum, 2005). Presumably, prenatal androgen-
ization is responsible for this increased incidence of a 
masculinized sexual orientation.
A plausible explanation for the increased incidence 
of masculine sexual orientation of women with CAH is 
that the androgens affect development of the brain. Of 
course, we must remember that androgens also affect 
the genitals; perhaps the changes in the genitals played 
a role in shaping the development of the girls’ sexual 
orientation. However, Meyer-Bahlberg et al. (2008) 
studied women with a much milder form of the disorder 
called non-classical CAH (NCAH). Girls born with NCAH 
show normal female genitalia at birth and do not show 
signs of increased androgen levels until late childhood 
or adolescence. At that time, the girls receive medical 
treatment to suppress androgen secretion. Meyer-Bahlberg 
and his colleagues found women with NCAH, like those 
with CAH, showed an increased incidence of homosexu-
ality or bisexuality. The investigators suggest that the 
presence of NCAH caused a mild increase in androgen 
secretion during early prenatal development that was 
enough to affect brain development but not enough to 
masculinize the girls’ genitals.
Children typically show sex differences in toy pref-
erences (Alexander, 2003). Boys generally prefer toys 
that can be used actively, especially those that move or 
can be propelled by the child. Girls generally prefer toys 
that provide the opportunity for nurturance. Of course, 
it is an undeniable fact that both caregivers and peers 
often encourage “sex-typical” toy choices. However, evi-
dence suggests that biology may play a role in the nature 
of these choices. For example, even at one day of age, 
baby boys prefer to watch a moving mobile and baby 
girls prefer to look at a female face (Connellan et al., 
2000). Alexander and Hines (2002) found that young 
vervet monkeys showed the same sexually dimorphic 
preferences in choice of toys: Males chose to play with a 
car and a ball, whereas females preferred to play with a 
doll and a pot. (See Figure 10.11.)
figure 10.11  Sex-Typical Toy Choices
Infant vervet monkeys show sex-typical toy choices:  
(a) a female playing with a doll and (b) a male playing 
with a toy car.
(Photograph courtesy of Gerianne M. Alexander, Texas A & M University)
(b)
(a)

342	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
with their gender assignment. Reiner (2005) flatly con-
cludes that “genetic males with male-typical prenatal an-
drogen effects should be reared male” (p. 549).
Sexual Orientation and the Brain
The human brain is a sexually dimorphic organ. This 
fact was long suspected, even before confirmation was 
received from anatomical and functional imaging stud-
ies. For example, neurologists discovered that the two 
hemispheres of a woman’s brain appear to share func-
tions more than those of a man’s brain do. If a man 
sustains a stroke that damages the left side of the brain, 
he is more likely to show impairments in language than 
will a woman with similar damage. Presumably, the 
woman’s right hemisphere shares language functions 
with the left, so damage to one hemisphere is less devas-
tating in women than it is in men. Also, men’s brains 
are, on average, somewhat larger—apparently because 
men’s bodies are generally larger than those of women. 
In addition, the sizes of some specific regions of the 
telencephalon and diencephalon are different in males 
and females, and the shape of the corpus callosum may 
also be sexually dimorphic. (For specific references, see 
Breedlove, 1994; Swaab, Gooren, and Hofman, 1995; 
and Goldstein et al., 2001.)
Most investigators believe that the sexual dimor-
phism of the human brain is a result of differential ex-
posure to androgens prenatally and during early postna-
tal life. Of course, additional changes could occur at the 
time of puberty, when another surge in androgens oc-
curs. Sexual dimorphism in the human brain could 
even be a result of differences in the social environ-
ments of males and females. We cannot manipulate the 
hormone levels of humans before and after birth as we 
can with laboratory animals, so it might be a long time 
before enough evidence is gathered to permit us to 
make definite conclusions.
Several studies have examined the brains of de-
ceased heterosexual and homosexual men and hetero-
sexual women. So far, these studies have found differ-
ences in the size of three different subregions of the 
brain: the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), a sexually 
dimorphic nucleus of the hypothalamus, and the ante-
rior commissure (Swaab and Hofman, 1990; LeVay, 
1991; Allen and Gorski, 1992). You are already familiar, 
from Chapter 9, with the suprachiasmatic nucleus; the 
anterior commissure is a fiber bundle that interconnects 
parts of the left and right temporal lobes. However, from 
what we know about brain functions, there is no reason 
to expect that differences in the SCN or the corpus cal-
losum would play a role in sexual orientation. Also, a 
follow-up study confirmed the existence of a sexually 
dimorphic nucleus in the hypothalamus but failed to 
find a relationship between its size and sexual orienta-
tion in men (Byne et al., 2001). At this point, there is no 
removed, the body will mature into that of a woman at the 
time of puberty through the effects of the small amounts 
of estradiol produced by the testes. (If the testes are re-
moved, the person will be given estradiol to accomplish 
the same result.) At adulthood the individual will func-
tion sexually as a woman, although surgical lengthening 
of the vagina may be necessary. Women with this syn-
drome report average sex drives, including normal fre-
quency of orgasm in intercourse. Most marry and lead 
normal sex lives.
There are no reports of bisexuality or homosexuality 
(sexual orientation toward women) of XY women with 
androgen insensitivity syndrome. Thus, the lack of an-
drogen receptors appears to prevent both the masculin-
izing and defeminizing effects of androgens on a per-
son’s sexual interest. Of course, it is also possible that 
rearing an XY child with androgen insensitivity syndrome 
as a girl plays a role in that person’s sexual orientation.
Effects of Rearing on Sexual Identity 
And Orientation of Prenatally  
Androgenized Genetic Males
The case presented in the opener to this chapter (Bruce/
Brenda/David) suggests that people’s sexual identity 
and sexual orientation are strongly influenced by bio-
logical factors and cannot easily be changed by the way 
a child is raised. Presumably, the exposure of Bruce’s 
brain to androgens prenatally and during the first few 
months of life affected his neural development, favoring 
the emergence of male sexual identity and an orienta-
tion toward women as romantic and sexual partners. 
Fortunately, cases of penile ablation are rare. However, 
a developmental abnormality known as cloacal exstrophy 
results in the birth of a boy with normal testes but uro-
genital abnormalities, often including the lack of a pe-
nis. In the past, many boys born with this condition were 
raised as females, primarily because it is relatively easy to 
surgically construct a vagina that can function in inter-
course but very difficult to construct a functioning penis. 
However, studies have shown that approximately 50 per-
cent of such people later expressed dissatisfaction with 
their gender assignment and began living as men, often 
undergoing sex-change procedures (Meyer-Bahlberg, 
2005; Reiner, 2005; Gooren, 2006). Such people are al-
most always sexually oriented toward females. If we con-
sider the social and parental pressure against someone 
who has been raised as a girl subsequently adopting a 
male sex role, 50 percent is an impressively large num-
ber. Meyer-Bahlberg (2005) reports the case of an ex-
strophy patient raised as a female who underwent a gen-
der change at the age of 52, after both parents had died. 
Presumably, fear of parental disapproval had prevented 
this person from making the change earlier. In contrast, 
there appear to be no reported cases of boys with cloacal 
exstrophy raised as boys who later became dissatisfied 

	
Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior	
343
this nucleus was as large in male homosexuals as in male 
heterosexuals. Thus, its size was related to gender iden-
tity, not to sexual orientation. (Most male homosexuals 
have male sexual identities; although they are romanti-
cally and sexually oriented toward other men, they do 
not regard themselves as women, nor do they wish to 
be.) Kruijver et al. (2000) replicated these results and 
found that the size of this region in female-to-male 
transsexuals was within the range of sizes seen in normal 
males. (See Figure 10.13.)
Garcia-Falgueras and Swaab (2008) found another 
sexually dimorphic region of the human brain: the  
uncinate nucleus of the hypothalamus. They found that 
this nucleus, which is the human version of the medial 
preoptic nucleus in rodents, is approximately twice as large 
in males as in females but that the size of this nucleus in 
male-to-female transsexuals is about the same as that of 
females. The investigators also provide evidence that the 
neurons in the uncinate nucleus send axons to the 
BNST, the size of which was previously shown to be  
related to gender identity. They suggest that these two 
structures are part of a neural circuit that affects a per-
son’s sexual identification.
We cannot necessarily conclude that any of the 
brain regions I mentioned in this section are directly 
involved in people’s sexual orientation (or sexual iden-
tity). The real differences—if indeed sexual orientation 
is determined by prenatal exposure to androgens—may 
lie elsewhere in the brain, in some regions as yet unex-
plored by researchers. However, the observation that 
differences in brain structure are related to sexual ori-
entation and gender identity does suggest that biologi-
cal factors such as exposure to prenatal hormones have 
an effect on the nature of a person’s sexuality.
good evidence for differences in brain structure that 
might account for differences in sexual orientation.
Approximately 8 percent of domestic rams (male 
sheep) show a sexual preference for other males. These 
animals do not show female-typical behavior; they show 
typical male mounting behavior but direct this behavior 
toward other males in preference to females (Price et 
al., 1988). A study by Roselli et al. (2004) discovered a 
sexually dimorphic nucleus in the medial preoptic/ 
anterior hypothalamic area that was significantly larger 
in males than in females. They also found that this nu-
cleus was twice as large in female-oriented (heterosex-
ual) rams as in male-oriented (homosexual) rams. (See 
Figure 10.12.)
As we saw earlier, functional-imaging studies have 
found that the brains of heterosexual men and women 
reacted differently to the odors of AND and EST, two 
chemicals that may serve as human pheromones. Savic, 
Berglund, and Lindström (2005) found that the re-
sponse of brain regions of homosexual men to AND and 
EST was similar to that of the heterosexual women. 
Berglund, Lindström, and Savic (2006) found that the 
response of brain regions of homosexual women to 
these substances was similar to those of heterosexual 
men. These studies suggest that a person’s sexual orien-
tation affects (or is affected by) his or her response pat-
tern to these potential sexual pheromones.
Although this section has been considering sexual 
orientation—the sex of those to whom an individual is 
sexually and romantically attracted—another sexual 
characteristic is related to structural differences in the 
brain. In a study of postmortem brains, Zhou et al. 
(1995) found that the size of a particular region of the 
forebrain, the central subdivision of the bed nucleus of the 
stria terminalis (BNST), is larger in males than in females. 
They also found that in male-to-female transsexuals this 
nucleus is as small as it is in normal females. The size of 
figure 10.12  Sexual Orientation and the SDN
Sexual dimorphism and role of sexual orientation in the 
volume and number of neurons in the sexually dimorphic 
nucleus (SDN) in sheep.
(Based on data from Roselli et al., 2004.)
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
Female-
oriented
rams
Male-
oriented
rams
Ewes
Female-
oriented
rams
Male-
oriented
rams
Ewes
100
200
300
400
0
Neuron count
SDN Volume (mm3)
figure 10.13  The Human BNST
These photomicrographs of slices of the human brain 
contain the central subdivision of the bed nucleus of the 
stria terminalis (BNST).
(From Zhou, J.-N., Hofman, M. A., Gooren, L. J. G., and Swaab, D. F. Nature, 
1995, 378, 68–70. Reprinted with permission.)
Heterosexual
man
Homosexual
man
Heterosexual
woman
Transsexual
male-to-female

344	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
for identical twins and only 22 percent for fraternal 
twins—a difference of 30 percent. Other studies have 
shown differences of up to 60 percent (Gooren, 2006).
Genetic factors also appear to affect female homo-
sexuality. Bailey et al. (1993) found that the concor-
dance of female monozygotic twins for homosexuality 
was 48 percent, while that of dizygotic twins was 16 per-
cent. Another study, by Pattatucci and Hamer (1995), 
found an increased incidence of homosexuality and bi-
sexuality in sisters, daughters, nieces, and female cous-
ins (through a paternal uncle) of homosexual women.
For several years, investigators have been puzzled by 
an apparent paradox. On average, male homosexuals 
have approximately 80 percent fewer children than 
male heterosexuals do (Bell and Weinberg, 1978). This 
reduced fecundity should exert strong selective pressure 
against any genes that predispose men to become ho-
mosexual. Some investigators have suggested that ho-
mosexuals may play a supportive role in their families, 
thus increasing the fecundity of their heterosexual 
brothers and sisters, who share some of their genes  
(Wilson, 1975). However, more recent studies (Bobrow 
and Bailey, 2001; Rahman and Hull, 2005) have found 
that homosexuals do not provide more financial or 
emotional support to their siblings than heterosexuals 
do. A study by Camperio-Ciani, Corna, and Capiluppi 
(2004) suggests a possible explanation. They found that 
the female maternal relatives (for example, maternal 
aunts and grandmothers) of male homosexuals had 
higher fecundity rates did than female maternal rela-
tives of male heterosexuals. No differences were found 
in the female paternal relatives of homosexuals and 
heterosexuals. Because men are likely to share an X 
chromosome with female maternal relatives but not 
with female paternal relatives, the investigators sug-
gested that a gene or genes on the X chromosome that 
increase a male’s likelihood of becoming homosexual 
also increase a female’s fecundity.
To summarize, evidence suggests that two biological 
factors—prenatal hormonal exposure and heredity—
may affect a person’s sexual orientation. These research 
findings certainly contradict the suggestion that a per-
son’s sexual orientation is a moral issue. It appears that 
homosexuals are no more responsible for their sexual 
orientation than heterosexuals are. Morris et al. (2004) 
pointed out the unlikelihood of a person’s sexual orien-
tation being a simple matter of choice. It is difficult to 
imagine someone saying to himself, “Let’s see, I’ll have 
gym at school today, so I’ll wear white socks and tennis 
shoes. Gosh, as long as I’m making decisions I guess I 
better be attracted to girls for the rest of my life, too” 
(Morris et al., 2004, p. 475). Ernulf, Innala, and Whitam 
(1989) found that people who believed that homosexuals 
were “born that way” expressed more positive attitudes 
toward homosexuals than did people who believed that 
Possible Causes of Differences  
in Brain Development
If sexual orientation is, indeed, affected by differences in 
exposure of the developing brain to androgens, what fac-
tors might cause this exposure to vary? Presumably, some-
thing must decrease the prenatal androgen levels to which 
male homosexuals are exposed and increase the levels to 
which female homosexuals are exposed. As we saw, con-
genital adrenal hyperplasia exposes the developing fetus to 
increased levels of androgens, but most homosexual 
women do not have CAH. So far, no other plausible sources 
of high levels of prenatal androgens have been proposed.
Studies by Blanchard and his colleagues (Blanchard, 
2001) and by Bogaert (2006) found that homosexual 
men tend to have more older brothers—but not more 
older sisters or younger brothers or sisters—than hetero-
sexual men. In contrast, the numbers of brothers or sis-
ters (younger or older) of homosexual and heterosexual 
women did not differ, nor did the age of the mother or 
father or the interval between births. The presence of 
older brothers and sisters had no effect on women’s 
sexual orientation. The data obtained by Blanchard and 
his colleagues suggest that the odds of a boy becoming 
homosexual increased by approximately 3.3 percent for 
each older brother. Assuming a 2 percent rate of homo-
sexuality in boys without older brothers, the predicted 
rate would be 3.6 percent for a boy with two older broth-
ers and 6.3 percent for one with four older brothers. 
Thus, the odds are still strongly against the incidence of 
homosexuality even in a family with several boys.
The authors suggest that when mothers are exposed 
to several male fetuses, their immune system may be-
come sensitized to proteins that only males possess. As a 
result, the response of the mother’s immune system may 
affect the prenatal brain development of later male fe-
tuses. Of course, most men who have several older 
brothers are heterosexual, so even if this hypothesis is 
correct, it appears that only some women become sensi-
tized to a protein produced by their male fetuses.
Heredity And Sexual Orientation
Another factor that may play a role in sexual orientation 
is heredity. Twin studies take advantage of the fact that 
identical twins have identical genes, whereas the genetic 
similarity between fraternal twins is, on the average,  
50 percent. Bailey and Pillard (1991) studied pairs of male 
twins in which at least one member identified himself as 
homosexual. If both twins are homosexual, they are said 
to be concordant for this trait. If only one is homosexual, 
the twins are said to be discordant. Thus, if homosexuality 
has a genetic basis, the percentage of monozygotic twins 
who are concordant for homosexuality should be higher 
than that for dizygotic twins. This is exactly what Bailey 
and Pillard found: The concordance rate was 52 percent 

	
Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior	
345
tation. The question “Why does someone become ho-
mosexual?” will probably be answered when we find out 
why someone becomes heterosexual.
they “chose to be” or “learned to be” that way. Thus, we 
can hope that research on the origins of homosexuality 
will reduce prejudice based on a person’s sexual orien-
Section Summary
Hormonal Control of Sexual Behavior
Sexual behaviors are controlled by the organizational 
and activational effects of hormones. The female 
reproductive cycle (menstrual cycle or estrous cycle) 
begins with the maturation of one or more ovarian 
follicles, which occurs in response to the secretion of 
FSH by the anterior pituitary gland. As the ovarian fol-
licle matures, it secretes estradiol, which causes the 
lining of the uterus to develop. When estradiol 
reaches a critical level, it causes the pituitary gland to 
secrete a surge of LH, triggering ovulation. The 
empty ovarian follicle becomes a corpus luteum, 
under the continued influence of LH, and secretes 
estradiol and progesterone. If pregnancy does not 
occur, the corpus luteum dies and stops producing 
hormones, and menstruation begins.
The sexual behavior of males of all mammalian 
species appears to depend on the presence of andro-
gens. Oxytocin has a facilitatory effect on erection 
and ejaculation. The proceptivity, receptivity, and 
attractiveness of female mammals other than primates 
depend primarily on estradiol and progesterone. In 
particular, estradiol has a priming effect on the subse-
quent appearance of progesterone.
In most mammals, female sexual behavior is the 
norm, just as the female body and female sex organs 
are the norm. In other words, unless prenatal andro-
gens masculinize and defeminize the animal’s brain, 
its sexual behavior will be feminine. Behavioral mas-
culinization refers to the androgen-stimulated devel-
opment of neural circuits that respond to testosterone 
in adulthood, producing male sexual behavior. 
Behavioral defeminization refers to the inhibitory 
effects of androgens on the development of neural 
circuits that respond to estradiol and progesterone in 
adulthood, producing female sexual behavior.
Pheromones can affect sexual physiology and 
behavior. Odorants present in the urine of female 
mice affect their estrous cycles, lengthening and even-
tually stopping them (the Lee-Boot effect). Odorants 
present in the urine of male mice abolish these effects 
and cause the females’ cycles to become synchro-
nized (the Whitten effect). (Phenomena similar to the 
Lee-Boot effect and the Whitten effect also occur in 
women.) Odorants can also accelerate the onset of 
puberty in females (the Vandenbergh effect). In addi-
tion, the odor of the urine from a male other than the 
one that impregnated a female mouse will cause her 
to abort (the Bruce effect). Connections between the 
olfactory system and the amygdala appear to be 
important in stimulating male sexual behavior. The 
main olfactory system detects volatile chemicals that 
signal the presence of another animal, and the vom-
eronasal organ determines the other animal’s sex, 
estrous condition, and identity.
Pheromones present in the underarm sweat of 
both men and women affect women’s menstrual 
cycles, and substances present in male sweat improve 
women’s mood. Because the human vomeronasal 
organ does not appear to have sensory functions, 
these effects must be mediated by the main olfactory 
bulb. The search for sex attractant pheromones in 
humans has not produced definitive results, but the 
odors of AND (produced by males) and EST (pro-
duced by females) have effects on brain activity and 
changes in ratings of people’s attractiveness. 
Research also indicates that we might well recognize 
our sex partners by their odors.
Testosterone has an activational effect on the 
sexual behavior of men, just as it does on the behavior 
of other male mammals. Women do not require estra-
diol or progesterone to experience sexual interest or 
to engage in sexual behavior. These hormones may 
affect the quality and intensity of their sex drive, and 
studies comparing the sexual behavior of female 
monkeys housed in small groups with that of females 
housed in large groups in large cages suggest that 
the sexual proceptivity may be related to ovarian hor-
mones, even in higher primates. Studies with women 
suggest that variations in levels of ovarian hormones 
(continued on next page)

346	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
(Coolen et al., 2004; Coolen, 2005) have identified a 
group of neurons in the lumbar region of the rat spinal 
cord that appear to constitute a critical part of the spi-
nal ejaculation generator. These neurons project to ad-
jacent neurons in the spinal cord that control the sym-
pathetic and parasympathetic mechanisms that result in 
emission and ejaculation of semen. They also project to 
a nucleus in a specific part of the posterior intralaminar 
thalamus, so the investigators refer to them as lumbar 
spinothalamic (LSt) cells. This projection presumably pro-
vides input to the brain that constitutes part of the 
pleasurable orgasmic sensation. Ejaculation, but not 
mounts or intromissions without ejaculation, activates 
these neurons. Specific destruction of these neurons 
with a toxin completely abolishes ejaculation but does 
not impair the animal’s ability to produce an erection, 
mount an estrous female, and achieve intromission.
Brain Mechanisms
As we just saw, erection and ejaculation are controlled 
by circuits of neurons that reside in the spinal cord. 
However, brain mechanisms have both excitatory and 
inhibitory control of these circuits. Although tactile 
stimulation of a man’s genitals can stimulate erection 
and ejaculation, these responses can be inhibited by 
the context. For example, the outcomes of tactile stim-
ulation of a man’s penis will have different outcomes 
Neural Control of Sexual  
Behavior
The control of sexual behavior—at least in laboratory 
animals—involves different brain mechanisms in males 
and females. This section describes these mechanisms.
Males
Spinal Mechanisms
Some sexual responses are controlled by neural circuits 
contained within the spinal cord. Men with injuries that 
totally transect the spinal cord have become fathers 
when their wives have been artificially inseminated with 
semen obtained by mechanical stimulation (Hart, 1978). 
Brackett et al. (1998) found that vibratory stimulation of 
the penis successfully elicited ejaculation in most men 
with complete spinal cord transection above the tenth 
thoracic segment, which suggests that the circuits in the 
spinal cord that control the ejaculatory response are lo-
cated below this region. Because the spinal damage pre-
vents sensory information from reaching the brain, 
these men are unable to feel the stimulation and do not 
experience an orgasm.
Ejaculation occurs after sufficient amount of tactile 
stimulation of an erect penis causes activation of the 
spinal ejaculation generator. Coolen and her colleagues 
across the menstrual cycle do affect sexual interest 
but that other factors (such as initiation of sexual 
activity by partners or a desire to avoid or attain preg-
nancy) can also affect sexual behavior. In addition, the 
presence of androgens may facilitate the effect of 
estradiol on women’s sexual interest.
Sexual orientation (that is, heterosexuality or 
homosexuality) may be influenced by prenatal expo-
sure to androgens. Studies of prenatally androgen-
ized girls suggest that organizational effects of 
androgens influence the development of sexual ori-
entation; androgenization appears to enhance inter-
est in activities and toys usually preferred by boys 
and to increase the likelihood of a sexual orientation 
toward women. If androgens cannot act (as they can-
not in cases of androgen insensitivity syndrome), the 
person’s anatomy and behavior are feminine. So far, 
evidence concerning brain structures and sexual ori-
entation is inconclusive. The size of a region of the 
forebrain has been found to be related to sexual 
identity. The case of a twin boy whose penis was 
accidentally destroyed during infancy suggests that 
the behavioral effects of prenatal androgenization are 
not easily reversed by the way a child is reared, and 
studies of genetic males with cloacal exstrophy, who 
are born without a penis, support the conclusion that 
prenatal exposure to androgens promotes a male 
sexual identity and an orientation toward females. 
The fact that male homosexuals tend to have more 
older brothers than male heterosexuals do has led to 
the suggestion that a woman’s immune system may 
become sensitized to a protein that is expressed only 
in male fetuses. Finally, twin studies suggest that 
heredity may play a role in sexual orientation in both 
men and women.
 THOUGHT QUESTION
Whatever the relative roles played by biological and 
environmental factors may be, most investigators 
believe that a person’s sexual orientation is not a 
matter of choice. Why do you think so many people 
consider sexual orientation to be a moral issue?

	
Neural Control of Sexual Behavior 	
347
sexually dimorphic nucleus (SDN) of the preoptic area. 
(As we saw in the previous discussion of brain mecha-
nisms of gender identity, this brain region, which is called 
the uncinate nucleus in humans, is sexually dimorphic in 
our species as well.) The size of this nucleus is controlled 
by the amount of androgens present during fetal devel-
opment. According to Rhees, Shryne, and Gorski (1990a, 
1990b), the critical period for masculinization of the 
SDN appears to start on the eighteenth day of gestation 
and end once the animals are five days old. (Normally, 
rats are born on the twenty-second day of gestation.) De 
Jonge et al. (1989) found that lesions of the SDN de-
crease masculine sexual behavior. (See Figure 10.14.)
Androgens also exert their activational effects on neu-
rons in the MPA and associated brain regions. If a male 
rodent is castrated in adulthood, its sexual behavior will 
cease. However, the behavior can be reinstated by implant-
ing a small amount of testosterone directly into the MPA 
or in two regions whose axons project to the MPA: the 
central tegmental field and the medial amygdala (Sipos 
and Nyby, 1996; Coolen and Wood, 1999). Both of these 
regions contain a high concentration of androgen recep-
tors in the male rat brain (Cottingham and Pfaff, 1986).
when his physician is carrying out physical examina-
tion or when his partner touches him while they are 
lying in bed. In addition, a man’s penis can become 
erect when he sees his partner or has erotic thoughts—
even when his penis is not being touched. Thus, there 
must be brain mechanisms that can activate or sup-
press the spinal mechanisms that control genital  
reflexes.
The medial preoptic area (MPA), located just ros-
tral to the hypothalamus, is the forebrain region most 
critical for male sexual behavior. (As we will see later in 
this chapter, it is also critical for other sexually dimor-
phic behavior, including maternal behavior.) Electrical 
stimulation of this region elicits male copulatory behav-
ior (Malsbury, 1971), and sexual activity increases the 
firing rate of single neurons in the MPA (Shimura,  
Yamamoto, and Shimokochi, 1994; Mas, 1995). In addi-
tion, the act of copulation activates neurons in the MPA 
(Oaknin et al., 1989; Robertson et al., 1991; Wood and 
Newman, 1993). Domingues, Gil, and Hull (2006) 
found that mating increased the release of glutamate in 
the MPA and that infusion of glutamate into the MPA 
increased the frequency of ejaculation. Finally, destruc-
tion of the MPA abolishes male sexual behavior (Heimer 
and Larsson, 1966/1967).
The organizational effects of androgens are respon-
sible for sexual dimorphisms in brain structure. Gorski et 
al. (1978) discovered a nucleus within the MPA of the rat 
that is three to seven times larger in males than in fe-
males. This area is called (appropriately enough) the 
x medial preoptic area (MPA)  An area of cell bodies just rostral 
to the hypothalamus; plays an essential role in male sexual behavior.
x sexually dimorphic nucleus  A nucleus in the preoptic area 
that is much larger in males than in females; first observed in rats; 
plays a role in male sexual behavior.
figure 10.14  Preoptic Area of the Rat Brain
These photomicrographs of sections through the preoptic area of a rat brain show  
(a) normal male, (b) normal female, and (c) androgenized female, given an injection of 
testosterone shortly after birth. SDN-POA = sexually dimorphic nucleus of the preoptic 
area; OC = optic chiasm; V = third ventricle; SCN = suprachiasmatic nucleus;  
AC = anterior commissure.
(From Gorski, R. A., in Neuroendocrine Perspectives, Vol. 2, edited by E. E. Müller and R. M. MacLeod. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier-North Holland, 1983. Reprinted with permission.)
(a) Male
(b) Female
(c) Female + testosterone

348	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
and the diencephalon, which includes the ventral teg-
mental area (probably involved in the pleasurable, rein-
forcing effects of orgasm), other midbrain regions, sev-
eral thalamic nuclei, the lateral putamen (part of the 
basal ganglia), and the cerebellum. Decreased activity was 
seen in the amygdala and the nearby entorhinal cortex. 
As we will see in Chapter 11, the amygdala is involved in 
defensive behavior and in negative emotions such as 
fear and anxiety—and these emotions certainly inter-
fere with erection and ejaculation. Decreased activation 
is also seen in this structure when people who are deeply 
in love see pictures of their loved one (Bartels and Zeki, 
2000, 2004).
Females
Just as the MPA plays an essential role in male sex behav-
ior, another region in the ventral forebrain plays a simi-
lar role in female sexual behavior: the ventromedial 
nucleus of the hypothalamus (VMH). A female rat with 
bilateral lesions of the ventromedial nuclei will not dis-
play lordosis, even if she is treated with estradiol and 
progesterone. Conversely, electrical stimulation of the 
ventromedial nucleus facilitates female sexual behavior 
(Pfaff and Sakuma, 1979).
As we saw in the previous section, the medial amyg-
dala of males receives chemosensory information from 
the vomeronasal system and somatosensory information 
from the genitals, and it sends efferent axons to the 
medial preoptic area. These connections are found in 
females as well. In addition, neurons in the medial 
amygdala also send efferent axons to the VMH. In fact, 
copulation or mechanical stimulation of the genitals or 
flanks of a female rat increases the activation of neurons 
in both the medial amygdala and the VMH (Pfaus et al., 
1993; Tetel, Getzinger, and Blaustein, 1993).
As we saw earlier, sexual behavior of female rats is 
activated by a priming dose of estradiol, followed by 
progesterone. The estrogen sets the stage, so to speak, 
and the progesterone stimulates the sexual behavior. 
Injections of these hormones directly into the VMH will 
stimulate sexual behavior even in females whose ovaries 
have been removed (Rubin and Barfield, 1980; Pleim 
As we saw earlier in this chapter, the primary and 
accessory olfactory systems play important roles in re-
productive behavior. Both of these systems send axons 
to the medial nucleus of the amygdala, which in turn 
sends axons to the MPA. Several studies (for example, 
Lehman and Winans, 1982; Heeb and Yahr, 2000) have 
found that lesions of the medial amygdala abolished the 
sexual behavior of male rodents, presumably because 
the lesions disrupted the activating effects of phero-
mones on the MPA. The medial amygdala, like the me-
dial preoptic area, is sexually dimorphic: One region 
within this structure (which contains an especially high 
concentration of androgen receptors) is 85 percent 
larger in male rats than in female rats (Hines, Allen, and 
Gorski, 1992). The MPA also receives somatosensory  
information from the genitals through connections with 
the central tegmental field of the midbrain and the 
medial amygdala. The act of copulation activates neu-
rons in both of these regions (Gréco et al., 1998).
As we saw in the previous subsection, the lumbar 
region of the spinal cord contains a group of neurons 
that play a critical role in ejaculation (Coolen et al., 
2004). Anatomical tracing studies suggest that the most 
important connections between the MPA and the spinal 
ejaculation generator are accomplished through the 
periaqueductal gray matter (PAG) of the midbrain and 
the nucleus paragigantocellularis (nPGi) of the medulla 
(Marson and McKenna, 1996; Normandin and Murphy, 
2008). The nPGi normally inhibits spinal cord sexual 
reflexes, so one of the tasks of the pathway originating 
in the MPA is to suppress this inhibition. The MPA sup-
presses the nPGi directly through an inhibitory pathway 
and does so indirectly by inhibiting the activity of the 
PAG, which normally excites the nPGi.
The inhibitory connections between neurons of 
the nPGi and those of the spinal ejaculation generator 
are serotonergic. As Marson and McKenna (1992) 
showed, application of serotonin (5-HT) to the spinal 
cord suppresses ejaculation. This connection may ex-
plain a well-known side effect of specific serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Men who take SSRIs as a 
treatment for depression often report that they have no 
trouble attaining an erection but have difficulty achiev-
ing an ejaculation. Presumably, the action of the drug 
as an agonist at the serotonergic synapses in the spinal 
cord increases the inhibitory influence of nPGi on the 
spinal ejaculation generator.
Figure 10.15 summarizes the evidence I have pre-
sented so far in this section. (See Figure 10.15.)
A functional-imaging study by Holstege et al. 
(2003b) examined the pattern of brain activation dur-
ing ejaculation in men that was elicited by the men’s 
female partners by means of manual stimulation. Ejacu-
lation was accompanied by neural activity in many brain 
regions, including the junction between the midbrain 
x periaqueductal gray matter (PAG)  The region of the midbrain 
that surrounds the cerebral aqueduct; plays an essential role in 
various species-typical behaviors, including female sexual behavior.
x nucleus paragigantocellularis (nPGi)  A nucleus of the medulla 
that receives input from the medial preoptic area and contains 
neurons whose axons form synapses with motor neurons in the 
spinal cord that participate in sexual reflexes in males.
x ventromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus (VMH)  A large 
nucleus of the hypothalamus located near the walls of the third 
ventricle; plays an essential role in female sexual behavior.

	
Neural Control of Sexual Behavior 	
349
progesterone receptors. One of the animals had previ-
ously received a priming dose of estradiol; the other 
had not. As this figure shows, the estradiol dramatically 
increased the number of cells containing progesterone 
receptors. (See Figure 10.16.)
The neurons of the ventromedial nucleus send ax-
ons to the periaqueductal gray matter. This region, too, 
has been implicated in female sexual behavior; Sakuma 
and Pfaff (1979a, 1979b) found that electrical stimula-
tion of the PAG facilitates lordosis in female rats and 
that lesions there disrupt it. In addition, Hennessey et al. 
(1990) found that lesions that disconnect the VMH from 
the PAG abolish female sexual behavior. Finally, Sakuma 
and Pfaff (1980a, 1980b) found that estradiol treatment 
or electrical stimulation of the ventromedial nuclei in-
creased the firing rate of neurons in the PAG. (The PAG 
contains both estrogen and progesterone receptors.)
Daniels, Miselis, and Flanagan-Cato (1999) injected 
a transneuronal retrograde tracer, pseudorabies virus, 
in the muscles responsible for the lordosis response in 
female rats. They found that the pathway innervating 
these muscles was as previous studies predicted: VMH → 
PAG → nPGi → motor neurons in the ventral horn of 
the lumbar region of the spinal cord.
As we saw in the previous subsection, the brain regions 
that control male genital reflexes include the MPA, PAG, 
and nPGi. Anatomical tracing studies (Marson, 1995; Mar-
son and Murphy, 2006) injected pseudorabies virus into 
the clitorises and vaginas of female rats and found heavy 
retrograde labeling in these three brain structures (and 
some others as well). Thus, it seems likely that erections of 
and Barfield, 1988). And if a chemical that blocks the 
production of progesterone receptors is injected into 
the VMH, the animal’s sexual behavior is disrupted 
(Ogawa et al., 1994). Thus, estradiol and progesterone 
exert their effects on female sexual behavior by activat-
ing neurons in this nucleus.
Rose (1990) recorded from single neurons in the 
ventromedial hypothalamus of freely moving female 
hamsters and found that injections of progesterone (fol-
lowing estradiol pretreatment) increased the activity 
level of these neurons, particularly when the animals 
were displaying lordosis. Tetel, Celentano, and Blaus-
tein (1994) found that neurons in both the VMH and 
the medial amygdala that showed increased Fos produc-
tion when the animal’s genitals were stimulated also 
contained estrogen receptors. Thus, the stimulating ef-
fects of estradiol and genital stimulation converge on 
the same neurons.
The mechanism by which estradiol primes a fe-
male’s sensitivity to progesterone appears to be simple: 
Estradiol increases the production of progesterone  
receptors, which greatly increases the effectiveness of 
progesterone. Blaustein and Feder (1979) adminis-
tered estradiol to ovariectomized guinea pigs and 
found a 150 percent increase in the number of proges-
terone receptors in the hypothalamus. Presumably, 
the estradiol activates genetic mechanisms in the nu-
cleus that are responsible for the production of pro-
gesterone receptors.
Figure 10.16 shows two slices through the hypo-
thalamus of ovariectomized guinea pigs, stained for 
figure 10.15  Male Sexual Behavior
This schematic shows a possible explanation of the interacting excitatory effects of 
pheromones, genital stimulation, and testosterone on male sexual behavior.
Input from olfactory bulb
and vomeronasal organ
• Mating causes production
  of Fos protein
Central Tegmental Field
Tactile information
from genitals
Medial
preoptic
area
Medial
amygdala
Mating
behavior
• Destruction disrupts
  sexual behavior.
• Mating causes production
  of Fos protein.
• Normally inhibits mating behavior
• Inhibited by the MPA
• Destruction abolishes sexual behavior.
• Prenatal stress reduces size of sexually
  dimorphic nucleus, decreases sexual behavior
• Mating causes production of Fos protein.
• Injection of testosterone enhances
  sexual behavior of castrated rats.
MPA
Medial Amygdala
Nucleus Paragigantocellularis
CTF
PAG
• Normally excites the nPGi
• Inhibited by the MPA
Periaqueductal Gray Matter
nPGi of
medulla

350	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
They also saw activation in the PAG, a critical region for 
copulatory behavior in female laboratory animals.
Formation of Pair Bonds
In approximately 5 percent of mammalian species, het-
erosexual couples form monogamous, long-lasting bonds. 
In humans, such bonds can be formed between members 
of homosexual couples as well. As naturalists and anthro-
pologists have pointed out, monogamy is not always ex-
clusive: In many species of animals, humans included, 
the penis and clitoris are controlled by similar brain mech-
anisms. This finding is not surprising, because these or-
gans derive from the same embryonic tissue.
Figure 10.17 summarizes the evidence I have pre-
sented so far in this section. (See Figure 10.17.)
A functional-imaging study by Holstege et al. (2003a) 
investigated the neural activation that accompanies  
orgasm in women, elicited by manual clitoral stimula-
tion supplied by the women’s male partners. They ob-
served activation in the junction between the midbrain 
and diencephalon, the lateral putamen, and the cerebel-
lum, just as was observed in men (Holstege et al., 2003b). 
figure 10.16  Progesterone Receptors
These photomicrographs of sections through the hypothalamus of ovariectomized 
guinea pigs were stained for progesterone receptors: (a) no priming, and (b) after 
receiving a priming dose of estradiol.
(Courtesy of Joanne Turcotte and Jeffrey Blaustein, University of Massachusetts.)
(a)
(b)
figure 10.17  Female Sexual Behavior
This schematic shows a possible explanation of the interacting excitatory effects of 
pheromones, genital stimulation, and estradiol and progesterone on female sexual 
behavior.
Input from olfactory bulb
and vomeronasal organ
Tactile information
from genitals
Mating
behavior
PAG of
midbrain
Medial
amygdala
VMH
• Destruction abolishes sexual behavior.
• Mating causes production of Fos protein.
• Neurons contain estrogen and
  progesterone receptors.
• Injection of estradiol and progesterone
  enhances sexual behavior of
  ovariectomized rats.
• Mating causes production
  of Fos protein.
• Neurons contain
  estrogen and progesterone
  receptors.
• Destruction abolishes sexual
  behavior.
• Estradiol treatment or stimulation
  of VMH increases neural activity.
• Neurons contain estrogen and
  progesterone receptors.
Periaqueductal Gray Matter
Medial Amygdala
Ventromedial Nucleus of Hypothalamus
nPGi of
medulla

	
Neural Control of Sexual Behavior 	
351
found that male meadow voles with artificially in-
creased levels of V1a receptors spent much more 
time huddling side by side with their mates.
In female voles, oxytocin appears to play a major 
role in pair bonding. Mating stimulates the release of 
oxytocin, and peripheral injection of oxytocin or injec-
tion into the cerebral ventricles facilitates pair bonding 
in female prairie voles (Williams et al., 1994). In con-
trast, a drug that blocks oxytocin receptor disrupts for-
mation of pair bonds (Cho et al., 1999).
Many investigators believe that oxytocin and va-
sopressin may play a role in the formation of pair 
bonding in humans. For example, after intercourse, 
at a time when blood levels of oxytocin are increased, 
people report feelings of calmness and well-being, 
which are certainly compatible with the formation of 
bonds with one’s partner. However, it is difficult to 
envision ways to perform definitive research on this 
topic. Experimenters can study the effects of these 
hormones or their antagonists on pair bonding in 
laboratory animals, but they certainly cannot do so 
with humans. However, Heinrichs et al. (2003) found 
that injections of oxytocin caused relaxation and a 
reduction of anxiety in human subjects. In addition, 
Kosfeld et al. (2005) found that oxytocin increased 
trust. The investigators had subjects play a “trust” 
game, in which they were given money, some or all of 
which they could give to another player (the trustee) 
to invest. If the trustee made money with his invest-
ment (all subjects were male), he could share the 
winnings with the first player—or he could be selfish 
and keep everything for himself. Fifty minutes be-
fore the start of the game, the subjects received a 
nasal spray containing oxytocin or a placebo. The 
oxytocin appeared to increase people’s trust in other 
people: The subjects who received the oxytocin gave 
18 percent more money to the trustees, and they 
were twice as likely to give them all of their money to 
invest. A second study found that oxytocin did not 
simply make they subjects feel more confident. They 
were no more likely to risk their money in an invest-
ment game that did not involve other people.
individuals sometimes cheat on their partners. In addi-
tion, some people display serial monogamy—intense rela-
tionships that last for a period of time, only to be replaced 
with similarly intense relationships with new partners. 
And, of course, some cultures condone (or even encour-
age) polygamy. But there is no doubt that pair bonding 
occurs in some species, including our own.
Several laboratories have investigated pair bonding in 
some closely related species of voles (small rodents that are 
often mistaken for mice). Prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster) 
are monogamous; males and females form pair bonds af-
ter mating, and the fathers help to care for the pups. In the 
wild, most prairie voles whose mates die never take an-
other partner (Getz and Carter, 1996). Meadow voles (Mi-
crotus pennsylvanicus) are promiscuous; after mating, the 
male leaves, and the mother cares for the pups by herself.
Several studies have revealed a relationship bet­
ween monogamy and the levels of two peptides in the 
brain: vasopressin and oxytocin. These compounds 
are both released as hormones by the posterior pitu-
itary gland and as neurotransmitters by neurons in 
the brain. In males, vasopressin appears to play the 
more important role. Monogamous voles have a 
higher level of V1a vasopressin receptors in the ven-
tral forebrain than do polygamous voles (Insel, Wang, 
and Ferris, 1994). This difference appears to be re-
sponsible for the presence or absence of monogamy. 
Lim and Young (2004) found that mating induced 
the production of Fos protein in the ventral forebrain 
of male prairie voles and that an injection into this 
region of a drug that blocks V1a receptors disrupted 
the formation of pair bonds. Lim et al. (2004) per-
formed an even more convincing experiment. They in-
jected a genetically modified virus that contained 
the gene for the V1a receptor into the ventral fore-
brain of normally polygamous male meadow voles. 
This manipulation increased the synthesis of the V1a 
receptor in this brain region and transformed the 
animals from polygamy to monogamy. Unlike prairie 
voles, which spend much time in physical contact 
with their partners after mating, meadow voles normally 
spend little time with them. Lim and her colleagues 
Section Summary
Neural Control of Sexual Behavior
Sexual reflexes such as sexual posturing, erection, 
and ejaculation are organized in the spinal cord. 
Vibratory stimulation of the penis can elicit ejaculation 
in men with complete transection of the spinal cord, 
as long as the damage is located above the tenth 
thoracic segment. LSt cells, a group of neurons in the 
lumbar region of the rat spinal cord play a critical role 
in triggering an ejaculation.
(continued on next page)

352	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
Maternal Behavior of Rodents
The final test of the fitness of an animal’s genes is the 
number of offspring that survive to a reproductive age. 
Just as the process of natural selection favors reproduc-
tively competent animals, it favors those that care ade-
quately for their young, if their young in fact require 
care. Rat and mouse pups certainly do; they cannot 
survive without a mother to attend to their needs.
At birth, rats and mice resemble fetuses. The infants 
are blind (their eyes are still shut), and they can only 
wriggle helplessly. They are poikilothermous (“cold-
blooded”); their brain is not yet developed enough to 
regulate body temperature. They even lack the ability to 
release their own urine and feces spontaneously and must 
be helped to do so by their mother. As we will see shortly, 
this phenomenon actually serves a useful function.
Parental Behavior
In most mammalian species, reproductive behavior takes 
place after the offspring are born as well as at the time 
they are conceived. This section examines the role of 
hormones in the initiation and maintenance of mater-
nal behavior and the role of the neural circuits that are 
responsible for their expression. Most of the research 
has involved rodents; less is known about the neural and 
endocrine bases of maternal behavior in primates.
Although most research on the physiology of paren-
tal behavior has focused on maternal behavior, some 
researchers are now studying paternal behavior shown 
by the males of some species of rodents. It goes without 
saying that parental behavior of human fathers is very 
important for the offspring of our species, but the phys-
iological basis of this behavior has not yet been studied.
In laboratory animals, different brain mechanisms 
control male and female sexual behavior. The medial 
preoptic area is the forebrain region that is most criti-
cal for male sexual behavior. Stimulating this area 
produces copulatory behavior; destroying it perma-
nently abolishes the behavior. The sexually dimorphic 
nucleus, located in the medial preoptic area, devel-
ops only if an animal is exposed to androgens early in 
life. A sexually dimorphic nucleus is found in humans 
as well. Destruction of the SDN (part of the MPA) in 
laboratory animals impairs mating behavior.
Neurons in the MPA contain testosterone recep-
tors. Copulatory activity causes an increase in the 
activity of neurons in this region. Implantation of tes-
tosterone directly into the MPA reinstates copulatory 
behavior that was previously abolished by castration 
in adulthood. Another sexually dimorphic brain 
region, the medial amygdala, sends olfactory informa-
tion to the MPA. Neurons in the MPA are part of a 
circuit that includes the periaqueductal gray matter, 
the nucleus paragigantocellularis of the medulla, and 
motor neurons that control genital reflexes in the spi-
nal cord. Connections of the nPGi with the spinal 
cord are inhibitory. Ejaculation in men is accompa-
nied by increased behavior in the brain’s reinforce-
ment mechanisms, several thalamic nuclei, the lateral 
putamen, and the cerebellum. Activity of the amyg-
dala decreases.
The most important forebrain region for female 
sexual behavior is the ventromedial nucleus of the 
hypothalamus (VMH). Its destruction abolishes  
copulatory behavior, and its stimulation facilitates this 
behavior. Both estradiol and progesterone exert their 
facilitating effects on female sexual behavior in this 
region, and studies have confirmed the existence of 
progesterone and estrogen receptors there. The 
priming effect of estradiol is caused by an increase in 
progesterone receptors in the VMH. The steroid- 
sensitive neurons of the VMH send axons to the peri-
aqueductal gray matter (PAG) of the midbrain; these 
neurons, through their connections with the medul-
lary reticular formation, control the particular 
responses that constitute female sexual behavior. 
Orgasm in women is accompanied by increased activ-
ity in regions similar to those activated during ejacu-
lation in men and, in addition, in the periaqueductal 
gray matter.
Vasopressin and oxytocin, peptides that serve as 
hormones and as neurotransmitters in the brain, 
appear to facilitate pair bonding. In fact, the insertion 
of the gene for vasopressin receptors in the basal 
forebrain of polygamous male voles induces monoga-
mous behavior. Vasopressin plays the most important 
role in males, and oxytocin plays the most important 
role in females. In humans, oxytocin appears to 
increase trust in other people.
 THOUGHT QUESTION
The hormone vasopressin plays an important role in 
the release of milk during nursing, and also in forma-
tion of pair bonding and in trust in other people. Can 
you think of any way in which these roles are related?

	
Parental Behavior	
353
consumes 21 ml of water in the urine of her young, thus 
recycling approximately two-thirds of the water she gives 
to the pups in the form of milk. The water, traded back 
and forth between mother and young, serves as a vehicle 
for the nutrients—fats, protein, and sugar—contained 
in milk. Because each day the milk production of a lac-
tating rat is approximately 14 percent of her body weight 
(for a human weighing 120 pounds, that would be 
around 2 gallons), the recycling is extremely useful, es-
pecially when the availability of water is a problem.
Besides cleaning, nursing, and purging her off-
spring, a female rodent will retrieve pups if they leave or 
are removed from the nest. The mother will even con-
struct another nest in a new location and move her litter 
there, should the conditions at the old site become unfa-
vorable (for example, when an inconsiderate experi-
menter puts a heat lamp over it). The way a female ro-
dent picks up her pup is quite consistent: She gingerly 
grasps the animal, managing not to injure it with her 
very sharp teeth. (I can personally attest to the sharpness 
of a mouse’s teeth and the strength of its jaw muscles.) 
She then carries the pup with a characteristic prancing 
walk, her head held high. (See Figure 10.19.) The pup is 
brought back to the nest and is left there. The female 
then leaves the nest again to search for another pup. She 
continues to retrieve pups until she finds no more; she 
does not count her pups and then stop retrieving when 
she has them all. A mouse or rat will usually accept all the 
pups she is offered, if they are young enough. I once 
observed two lactating female mice with nests in corners 
of the same cage, diagonally opposite each other. I dis-
turbed their nests, which triggered a long bout of retriev-
ing, during which each mother stole youngsters from the 
other’s nest. The mothers kept up their exchange for a 
long time, passing each other in the middle of the cage.
Under normal conditions, one of the stimuli that 
induce a female rat to begin taking care of pups is the 
act of parturition. Female rodents normally begin tak-
ing care of their pups as soon as they are born. Some of 
this effect is caused by prenatal hormones, but the pas-
sage of the pups through the birth canal also stimulates 
maternal behavior: Artificially distending the birth canal 
in nonpregnant females stimulates maternal behavior, 
whereas cutting the sensory nerves that innervate the 
birth canal retards the appearance of maternal behavior 
(Graber and Kristal, 1977; Yeo and Keverne, 1986).
Hormonal Control of Maternal  
Behavior
As we saw earlier in this chapter, most sexually dimor-
phic behaviors are controlled by the organizational and 
During gestation, female rats and mice build nests. 
The form this structure takes depends on the material 
available for its construction. In the laboratory the ani-
mals are usually given strips of paper or lengths of rope 
or twine. A good brood nest, as it is called, is shown in 
Figure 10.18. This nest is made of hemp rope; a piece of 
the rope is shown below the nest. The mouse laboriously 
shredded the rope and then wove an enclosed nest, with 
a small hole for access to the interior. (See Figure 10.18.)
At the time of parturition (delivery of offspring) the 
female begins to groom and lick the area around her va-
gina. As a pup begins to emerge, she assists the uterine 
contractions by pulling the pup out with her teeth. She 
then eats the placenta and umbilical cord and cleans off 
the fetal membranes—a quite delicate operation. (A new-
born pup looks as though it is sealed in very thin plastic 
wrap.) After all the pups have been born and cleaned up, 
the mother will probably nurse them. Milk is usually pres-
ent in the mammary glands very near the time of birth.
Periodically, the mother licks the pups’ anogenital 
region, stimulating reflexive urination and defecation. 
Friedman and Bruno (1976) have shown the utility of 
this mechanism. They noted that a lactating female rat 
produces approximately 48 grams (g) of milk on the 
tenth day of lactation. This milk contains approximately 
35 milliliters (ml) of water. The experimenters injected 
some of the pups with tritiated (radioactive) water and 
later found radioactivity in the mother and in the litter-
mates. They calculated that a lactating rat normally  
x parturition (par tew ri shun)  The act of giving birth.
figure 10.18  A Mouse’s Brood Nest
Beside the nest is a length of the kind of rope the mouse 
used to construct it.

354	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
hormone produced by the anterior pituitary gland that 
is responsible for milk production. (See Figure 10.20.) If 
ovariectomized virgin female rats are given progester-
one, estradiol, and prolactin in a pattern that duplicates 
this sequence, the time it takes to sensitize their maternal 
behavior is drastically reduced (Bridges et al., 1985).
As we saw in the previous section, pair bonding in-
volves vasopressin and oxytocin. In at least some species, 
oxytocin also appears to be involved in formation of a 
bond between mother and offspring. In rats the admin-
istration of oxytocin facilitates the establishment of ma-
ternal behavior (Insel, 1997). Van Leengoed, Kerker, 
and Swanson (1987) injected an oxytocin antagonist 
into the cerebral ventricles of rats as soon as they began 
giving birth. The experimenters removed the pups from 
the cage as soon as they were born. When the pups were 
given back to the mothers 40 minutes later, their moth-
ers ignored them. Control rats that were given a placebo 
began caring for their pups as soon as the pups were 
returned to them.
Neural Control of Maternal  
Behavior
The medial preoptic area, the region of the forebrain 
that plays the most critical role in male sexual behavior, 
appears to play a similar role in maternal behavior.  
Numan (1974) found that lesions of the MPA disrupted 
both nest building and pup care. The mothers simply 
ignored their offspring. However, female sexual behav-
ior was unaffected by these lesions. Del Cerro et al. 
(1995) found that the metabolic activity of the MPA, 
measured by 2-DG autoradiography, increased immedi-
ately after parturition. They also found that virgin fe-
males whose maternal behavior had been sensitized by 
exposure to pups showed increased activity in the MPA. 
Thus, stimuli that facilitate pup care activate the MPA.
Prolactin appears to exert its stimulating effect on 
maternal behavior by acting on receptors in the medial 
preoptic area. Bridges et al. (1997, 2001) found that an 
infusion of prolactin into the MPA of virgin female rats 
that has been primed with estradiol and progesterone 
stimulated maternal behavior, and an infusion of a pro-
lactin antagonist into the MPA delayed the onset of 
maternal behavior.
Olfaction plays an important role in sensitization of 
maternal behavior in the rat. A virgin female rat does 
not normally approach a rat pup; in fact, when she en-
counters one, she retreats from the pup as if she were 
repelled by the pup’s odor. Fleming and Rosenblatt 
(1974) confirmed that the avoidance is, indeed, based 
activational effects of sex hormones. Maternal behavior is 
somewhat different in this respect. First, there is no evi-
dence that organizational effects of hormones play a role; 
as we will see, under the proper conditions, even males will 
take care of infants. (Obviously, they cannot provide the 
infants with milk.) Second, although maternal behavior is 
affected by hormones, it is not controlled by them. Most 
virgin female rats will begin to retrieve and care for young 
pups after having infants placed with them for several days 
(Wiesner and Sheard, 1933). And once the rats are sensi-
tized, they will thereafter take care of pups as soon as they 
encounter them; sensitization lasts for a lifetime.
Although hormones are not essential for the activa-
tion of maternal behavior, many aspects of maternal be-
havior are facilitated by hormones. Nest-building behav-
ior is facilitated by progesterone, the principal hormone 
of pregnancy (Lisk, Pretlow, and Friedman, 1969). After 
parturition, mothers continue to maintain their nests, 
and they construct new nests if necessary, even though 
their blood level of progesterone is very low then.
Although pregnant female rats will not immediately 
care for foster pups that are given to them during preg-
nancy, they will do so as soon as their own pups are born. 
The hormones that influence a female rodent’s respon-
siveness to her offspring are the ones that are present 
shortly before parturition. Figure 10.20 shows the levels 
of the three hormones that have been implicated in ma-
ternal behavior: progesterone, estradiol, and prolactin. 
Note that just before parturition the level of estradiol 
begins rising, then the level of progesterone falls dra-
matically, followed by a sharp increase in prolactin, the 
figure 10.19  A Female Mouse Carrying a Pup
x prolactin  A hormone of the anterior pituitary gland, necessary 
for production of milk; also facilitates maternal behavior.

	
Parental Behavior	
355
(AH), which in turn projects to the periaqueductal gray 
matter (PAG). Because studies have shown that connec-
tions between the AH and the PAG play a role in defen-
sive behavior and avoidance responses, Numan (2007) 
suggests that the role of the MPA in habituation to the 
odor of pups may be to inhibit the activity of the AH → 
PAG circuit. (See Figure 10.21.)
The neural circuitry of the system responsible for 
caring for pups is somewhat more complex. As you 
learned earlier, in the discussion of the neural basis of 
male sexual behavior, the MPA sends axons to the mid-
brain and lower brain stem. Numan and Numan (1997) 
found that neurons of the MPA that were activated by 
the performance of maternal behavior sent their axons 
to the ventral tegmental area (VTA). In turn, dopami-
nergic neurons in the VTA send axons to the nucleus 
accumbens (NAC). As we will see in Chapters 13 and 
18, the VTA → NAC system is critically involved in mo-
tivation and reinforcement. For example, this system is 
activated when a hungry animal receives food, a thirsty 
animal receives water, an animal gets the opportunity 
to engage in sexual activity—or a sensitized or lactating 
female encounters pups. In fact, an fMRI study with 
rats (yes, their tiny little heads really were put in a spe-
cial fMRI scanner) found that regions of the brain that 
are involved in reinforcement are activated when the 
mothers are presented with their pups (Ferris et al., 
2005). The same regions are activated by artificial rein-
forcers such as cocaine. However, cocaine activates 
these regions only in virgin females; lactating females 
actually showed a reduction of activation there when 
they received injections of the drug. To a lactating 
on smell. They rinsed the olfactory mucosa of virgin fe-
male rats with zinc sulfate, which temporarily eliminates 
olfactory sensitivity. The treatment abolished the ani-
mals’ natural aversion to the pups, and they started tak-
ing care of the pups sooner than control rats did. Thus, 
sensitization involves overcoming a natural aversion to 
the odor of pups.
But sensitization of maternal behavior involves more 
than overcoming an aversion to pups—it involves a physi-
ological process in the female that makes pups and their 
odors attractive to her. On the last day of pregnancy a fe-
male rat carrying her first litter spends more time around 
bedding that has been in contact with rat pups (Kinsley 
and Bridges, 1990). Lee, Clancy, and Fleming (2000) also 
found that postpartum female rats, but not pregnant rats, 
would learn to press a lever to receive pups.
Numan (2007) has reviewed research from his labo-
ratory that has traced the neural pathways responsible 
for the two forms of sensitization to pups: inhibition of 
circuits responsible for the aversion to the odor of pups 
and activation of circuits responsible for caring for pups. 
It turns out that the MPA is involved in both forms of 
sensitization. First, let’s consider the aversive response 
that virgin females make toward the odor of pups. As we 
saw earlier in this chapter, the olfactory system provides 
input to the medial amygdala, which plays an important 
role in sexual behavior. Lesions of the medial amygdala 
abolish the aversion of virgin females to pups just as 
treatment with zinc sulfate does, which indicates that 
the medial amygdala plays a role in mediating the aver-
sive effects of pup odors. Some neurons in the medial 
amygdala send axons to the anterior hypothalamus 
figure 10.20  Hormones in Pregnant Rats
The graph shows blood levels of progesterone, estradiol, and prolactin in pregnant rats.
(From Rosenblatt, J. S., Siegel, H. I., and Mayer, A. D. Advances in the Study of Behavior, 1979, 10, 225–310. Reprinted 
with permission.)
0
20
40
60
80
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Progesterone
Estradiol
Prolactin
Insemination
Pregnancy
Parturition
Prolactin Estradiol
Progesterone
(ng/ml)
(ng/ml)
(ng/ml)
100
0.75
0.60
0.45
0.30
0.15

356	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
the brains of these nurturing fathers show some interest-
ing differences compared with those of nonpaternal  
fathers of other species.
You will recall that monogamous male prairie voles 
form pair bonds with their mates and help to care for 
their offspring, while polygamous male meadow voles 
leave the female after mating. As we saw, the release of 
vasopressin, elicited by mating, facilitates this process. 
The size of the MPA, which plays an essential role in 
maternal behavior, shows less sexual dimorphism in 
­monogamous voles than in promiscuous voles (Shapiro 
et al., 1991).
Kirkpatrick, Kim, and Insel (1994) found that when 
male prairie voles were exposed to a pup, neurons in the 
MPA were activated. In addition, lesions of the MPA pro-
duce severe deficits in paternal behavior of male rats and 
another species of monogamous voles (Rosenblatt,  
Hazelwood, and Poole, 1996; Sturgis and Bridges, 1997; 
Lee and Brown, 2007). Thus, the MPA appears to play a 
similar role in parental behavior of both males and females.
Little is known about the brain mechanisms in-
volved in human paternal behavior, but evidence sug-
gests that both prolactin and oxytocin facilitate a fa-
ther’s role in infant care. Fleming et al. (2002) found 
that fathers with higher blood levels of prolactin  
reported stronger feelings of sympathy and activation 
when they heard the cries of infants. Gordon et al. 
(2010) found that higher levels of prolactin were associated 
with more exploratory toy-manipulating play behavior 
with their infants, and that higher levels of oxytocin 
were associated with synchronous, coordinated emotional 
behavior between father and infant.
­female the presence of pups becomes extremely rein-
forcing, and the potency of other stimuli, which might 
distract her from providing maternal care, appears to 
become weaker.
Numan and his colleagues have shown that dopa-
mine is released in the NAC during maternal behavior, 
and that lesions of the NAC or injection of a dopamine 
antagonist into the NAC disrupt maternal behavior  
(Numan, 2007). Finally, axons from the NAC project to 
the ventral pallidum, a region of the basal ganglia in-
volved in control of motivated behaviors, and injection of 
muscimol into the ventral pallidum suppressed maternal 
behavior. (Muscimol, a GABA agonist, inhibits neural 
activity.) (See Figure 10.22.)
An fMRI study—this time with humans—found that 
when mothers looked at pictures of their infants, brain 
regions involved in reinforcement and those that con-
tain receptors for oxytocin and vasopressin showed in-
creased activity. Regions involved with negative emotions, 
such as the amygdala, showed decreased activity (Bartels 
and Zeki, 2004). We already know that mothers (and 
fathers too, for that matter) form intense bonds with 
their infants, so it should not come as a surprise that 
regions involved with reinforcement should be activated 
by the sight of their faces.
Neural Control of Paternal Behavior
Newborn infants of most species of mammals are cared 
for by their mother, and it is, of course, their mother 
that feeds them. However, males of a few species of ro-
dents share the task of infant care with the mothers, and 
figure 10.21  Habituation to the Aversive Effect of the Odor of Pups
According to Numan (2007), the hormonal state of a lactating female or prolonged 
exposure of a virgin female to pups activates the medial preoptic area, which inhibits 
the anterior hypothalamus (AH) and periaqueductal gray matter (PAG).
Input from olfactory bulb
and vomeronasal organ
• Lesions abolish the 
  aversion of virgin
  females to pups
Medial Amygdala
• Activated by hormones
  and stimuli from pups
• Inhibits the AH and PAG
Medial Preoptic Area
PAG
Avoidance 
behavior
Elimination of olfactory
sensitivity with zinc
sulfate abolishes the
aversion of virgin females
to pups
MPA
MA
AH
Anterior 
Hypothalamus

	
Parental Behavior	
357
figure 10.22  Neural Circuits and Maternal Behavior
This schematic shows the neural circuits involved in the maternal behavior of lactating 
females or virgin females sensitized to pups, according to Numan (2007). DA = dopamine.
• Lesions disrupt 
  maternal behavior
Medial Preoptic Area
• Inhibition of neural activity
  disrupts maternal behavior
Ventral Pallidum
• Injection of DA antagonist
  disrupts maternal behavior
• DA neurons activated
  during maternal behavior
Ventral Tegmental Area
• DA released during 
  maternal  behavior 
Nucleus Accumbens
Maternal
behavior
NAC
VP
VTA
MPA
Damage to this
connection disrupts
maternal behavior
Section Summary
Parental Behavior
Many species must care for their offspring. Among 
most rodents this duty falls to the mother, who must 
build a nest, deliver her own pups, clean them, keep 
them warm, nurse them, and retrieve them if they are 
moved out of the nest. The mothers must even 
induce their pups’ urination and defecation, and the 
mother’s ingestion of the urine recycles water, which 
is often a scarce commodity.
Exposure of virgin females to young pups stimu-
lates maternal behavior within a few days. The stimuli 
that normally induce maternal behavior are those 
produced by the hormones present during pregnancy 
and around the time of birth. Injections of progester-
one, estradiol, and prolactin that duplicate the 
sequence that occurs during pregnancy facilitate 
maternal behavior. The hormones appear to act in 
the medial preoptic area (MPA). Connections 
between the MPA and the medial amygdala are 
responsible for the suppression of the aversive effects 
of the odor of pups, and a different circuit starting 
with the MPA is involved in establishing the reinforc-
ing effect of pups and enhancing motivation to care 
for them: MPA → VTA → NAC → ventral pallidum. 
Oxytocin, which facilitates the formation of pair bonds 
in female rodents, is also involved in formation of a 
bond between mother and her pups. An fMRI study 
with rats showed activation of brain mechanisms of 
reinforcement when the mothers were presented with 
their pups. Women who look at pictures of their 
infants show increased activity in similar brain regions.
Paternal behavior is relatively rare in mammalian 
species, but research indicates that sexual dimorphism 
of the MPA is less pronounced in male voles of 
monogamous, but not promiscuous, species. Lesions 
of the MPA abolish paternal behavior of male rats. 
Some aspects of parental care may be related to blood 
levels of prolactin and oxytocin in human fathers.
 Thought Question
As you saw, both male sexual behavior and maternal 
behavior are disrupted by lesions of the medial preop-
tic area; thus, the MPA performs some functions nec-
essary for both behaviors. Do you think that the func-
tions are common to the two categories of behavior, 
or do you think that different functions are involved? If 
you think the former possibility is true, what might 
these functions be? Can you think of any common fea-
tures of male sexual behavior and maternal behavior?

358	
Chapter 10  Reproductive Behavior
1.  Describe mammalian sexual development and 
explain the factors that control it.
2.  Describe the hormonal control of the female  
reproductive cycle and of male and female sexual 
behavior.
3.  Describe the role of pheromones in reproductive and 
sexual behavior.
4.  Discuss the activational effects of gonadal hormones 
on the sexual behavior of women and men.
Review Questions
5.  Discuss the physiological variables that affect sexual 
orientation and gender identity in men and women.
6.  Discuss the neural control of male sexual behavior.
7.  Discuss the neural control of female sexual behavior 
and the formation of pair bonds.
8.  Describe the maternal behavior of rodents, including 
how it is elicited and maintained, and explain the hor-
monal and neural mechanisms that control maternal 
behavior and the neural control of paternal behavior.
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Hormones and Sex
Many brain regions are involved in the regulation and expression of reproductive 
behavior. The Hormones and Sex module in the virtual brain will help you visualize 
a few of the many brain regions involved in the regulation of reproductive behavior.
Study and Review on MyPsychLab

Emotion
Outline
11
 Emotions as Response  
Patterns 
Fear
Anger, Aggression, and Impulse 
Control
Hormonal Control of Aggressive 
Behavior
Section Summary
 Communication of Emotions
Facial Expression of Emotions: 
Innate Responses
Neural Basis of the 
Communication of Emotions: 
Recognition
Neural Basis of the Communication 
of Emotions: Expression
Section Summary
 Feelings of Emotions
The James-Lange Theory
Feedback from Emotional 
Expressions
Section Summary
chapter

T
he word emotion refers to positive or negative reac-
tions to particular situations. There is no such 
thing as a neutral emotion. For example, being 
treated unfairly makes us angry, seeing someone suffer 
makes us sad, and being close to a loved one makes us 
feel happy. Emotions consist of patterns of physiological 
changes and accompanying behaviors—or at least urges 
to perform these behaviors. These responses are accom-
panied by feelings. In fact, most of us use the word emo-
tion to refer to the feelings, not to the behaviors. But it 
is behavior, not private experience, that has conse-
quences for survival and reproduction. Therefore, the 
useful purposes served by emotional behaviors are what 
guided the evolution of our brain.
This chapter is divided into three major sections. 
The first considers the patterns of behavioral and physi-
ological responses that constitute the negative emotions 
of fear and anger. It describes the nature of these re-
sponse patterns, their neural and hormonal control, 
and the role of emotions in moral judgments and social 
behavior. The second section describes the communica-
tion of emotions—their expression and recognition. 
The third section examines the nature of the feelings 
that accompany emotions.
Emotions as Response  
Patterns
An emotional response consists of three types of com-
ponents: behavioral, autonomic, and hormonal. The 
behavioral component consists of muscular movements 
that are appropriate to the situation that elicits them. 
For example, a dog defending its territory against an 
intruder first adopts an aggressive posture, growls, and 
shows its teeth. If the intruder does not leave, the de-
fender runs toward it and attacks. Autonomic responses 
facilitate the behaviors and provide quick mobilization 
of energy for vigorous movement. In this example the 
activity of the sympathetic branch increases while that 
of the parasympathetic branch decreases. As a conse-
quence the dog’s heart rate increases, and changes in 
the size of blood vessels shunt the circulation of blood 
away from the digestive organs toward the muscles.  
Several years ago, while I was on a sabbatical leave, a 
colleague stopped by my office and asked whether I would 
like to see an interesting patient. The patient, a 72-year-old 
man, had suffered a massive stroke in his right hemisphere 
that had paralyzed the left side of his body.
Mr. V. was seated in a wheelchair equipped with a 
large tray on which his right arm was resting; his left arm 
was immobilized in a sling, to keep it out of the way. He 
greeted us politely, almost formally, articulating his words 
carefully with a slight European accent.
Mr. V. seemed intelligent, and this impression was 
confirmed when we gave him some of the subtests of the 
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Test. His verbal intelligence 
appeared to be in the upper 5 percent of the population. 
The fact that English was not his native language made his 
performance even more remarkable.
The most interesting aspect of Mr. V.’s behavior after 
his stroke was his lack of reaction to his symptoms. After 
we had finished with the testing, we asked him to tell us a 
little about himself and his lifestyle. What, for example, was 
his favorite pastime?
“I like to walk,” he said. “I walk at least two hours each 
day around the city, but mostly I like to walk in the woods.  
I have maps of most of the national forests in the state on 
the walls of my study, and I mark all of the trails I’ve taken. 
I figure that in about six months I will have walked all of the 
trails that are short enough to do in a day.”
“You’re going to finish up those trails in the next six 
months?” asked Dr. W.
“Yes, and then I’ll start over again!” he replied.
“Mr. V., are you having any trouble?” asked Dr. W.
“Trouble? What do you mean?”
“I mean physical difficulty.”
“No.” Mr. V. gave him a slightly puzzled look.
“Well, what are you sitting in?”
Mr. V. gave him a look that indicated he thought that 
the question was rather stupid—or perhaps insulting.  
“A wheelchair, of course,” he answered.
“Why are you in a wheelchair?”
Now Mr. V. looked frankly exasperated; he obviously 
did not like to answer foolish questions. “Because my left 
leg is paralyzed!” he snapped.
Mr. V. clearly knew what his problem was, but he failed 
to understand its implications. He could verbally recognize 
his disability, but he was unable to grasp its significance. 
Thus, he blandly accepted the fact that he was confined  
to a wheelchair. The implications of his disability did not 
affect him emotionally or figure into his plans.

	
Emotions as Response Patterns 	
361
research on the role of the amygdala in organizing emo-
tional responses produced by aversive stimuli.
The amygdala (or, more precisely, the amygdaloid 
complex) is located within the temporal lobes. It consists 
of several groups of nuclei, each with different inputs 
and outputs—and with different functions (Amaral et al., 
1992; Pitkänen, Savander, and LeDoux, 1997; Stefanacci 
and Amaral, 2000). The amygdala has been subdivided 
into approximately twelve regions, each containing sev-
eral subregions. However, we need concern ourselves 
with just three major regions: the lateral nucleus, the 
basal nucleus, and the central nucleus.
The lateral nucleus (LA) receives information from 
all regions of the neocortex, including the ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex, the thalamus, and the hippocampal 
formation. The lateral nucleus sends information to the 
basal nucleus (B) and to other parts of the brain, includ-
ing the ventral striatum (a brain region involved in the 
effects of reinforcing stimuli on learning) and the dorso-
medial nucleus of the thalamus, whose projection region 
is the prefrontal cortex. The LA and B nuclei send infor-
mation to the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the 
central nucleus (CE), which projects to regions of the 
hypothalamus, midbrain, pons, and medulla that are re-
sponsible for the expression of the various components 
of emotional responses. As we will see, activation of the 
central nucleus elicits a variety of emotional responses: 
behavioral, autonomic, and hormonal. (See Figure 11.1.)
The central nucleus of the amygdala is the single 
most important part of the brain for the expression of 
emotional responses provoked by aversive stimuli. When 
threatening stimuli are perceived, neurons in the cen-
tral nucleus become activated (Pascoe and Kapp, 1985; 
Campeau et al., 1991). Damage to the central nucleus 
(or to the nuclei that provide it with sensory informa-
tion) reduces or abolishes a wide range of emotional 
behaviors and physiological responses. After the central 
nucleus has been destroyed, animals no longer show 
signs of fear when confronted with stimuli that have 
been paired with aversive events. They also act more 
tamely when handled by humans, their blood levels of 
stress hormones are lower, and they are less likely to 
develop ulcers or other forms of stress-induced illnesses 
Hormonal responses reinforce the autonomic responses. 
The hormones secreted by the adrenal medulla— 
epinephrine and norepinephrine—further increase 
blood flow to the muscles and cause nutrients stored in 
the muscles to be converted into glucose. In addition, 
the adrenal cortex secretes steroid hormones, which 
also help to make glucose available to the muscles.
This section discusses research on the control of 
overt emotional behaviors and the autonomic and hor-
monal responses that accompany them. Special behav-
iors that serve to communicate emotional states to other 
animals, such as the threat gestures that precede an ac-
tual attack and the smiles and frowns used by humans, 
are discussed in the second section of the chapter.  
As you will see, negative emotions receive much more 
attention than positive ones do. Most of the research on 
the physiology of emotions has been confined to fear 
and anger—emotions associated with situations in which 
we must defend ourselves or our loved ones. The physi-
ology of behaviors associated with positive emotions—
such as those associated with lovemaking, caring for 
one’s offspring, or enjoying a good meal or a cool drink 
of water (or an alcoholic beverage)—is described in 
other chapters but not in the specific context of emo-
tions. And Chapter 18 discusses the consequences of 
situations that evoke negative emotions: stress.
Fear
As we saw, emotional responses involve behavioral, auto-
nomic, and hormonal components. These components 
are controlled by separate neural systems. The integra-
tion of the components of fear appears to be controlled 
by the amygdala.
Research With Laboratory Animals
The amygdala plays a special role in physiological and 
behavioral reactions to objects and situations that have 
biological significance, such as those that warn of pain 
or other unpleasant consequences or signify the pres-
ence of food, water, salt, potential mates or rivals, or 
infants in need of care. Researchers in several different 
laboratories have shown that single neurons in various 
nuclei of the amygdala become active when emotionally 
relevant stimuli are presented. For example, these neu-
rons are excited by such stimuli as the sight of a device 
that has been used to squirt either a bad-tasting solution 
or a sweet solution into the animal’s mouth, the sound 
of another animal’s vocalization, the sound of the open-
ing of the laboratory door, the smell of smoke, or the 
sight of another animal’s face (O’Keefe and Bouma, 
1969; Jacobs and McGinty, 1972; Rolls, 1982; Leonard et 
al., 1985). And as we saw in Chapter 10, the amygdala is 
involved in the effects of olfactory stimuli on reproduc-
tive physiology and behavior. This section describes  
x lateral nucleus (LA)  A nucleus of the amygdala that receives 
sensory information from the neocortex, thalamus, and hippocam-
pus and sends projections to the basal, accessory basal, and 
central nucleus of the amygdala.
x central nucleus (CE)  The region of the amygdala that receives 
information from the basal, lateral, and accessory basal nuclei and 
sends projections to a wide variety of regions in the brain; 
involved in emotional responses.
x basal nucleus (B)  A nucleus of the amygdala that receives 
information from the lateral nucleus and sends projections to the 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the central nucleus.

362	
Chapter 11  Emotion
more detail in Chapter 13. Briefly, classical conditioning 
occurs when a neutral stimulus is regularly followed by 
a stimulus that automatically evokes a response. For ex-
ample, if a dog regularly hears a bell ring just before it 
(Coover, Murison, and Jellestad, 1992; Davis, 1992; 
LeDoux, 1992). Normal monkeys show signs of fear 
when they see a snake, but those with amygdala lesions 
do not (Amaral, 2003). In contrast, when the central 
amygdala is stimulated by means of electricity or by an 
injection of an excitatory amino acid, the animal shows 
physiological and behavioral signs of fear and agitation 
(Davis, 1992), and long-term stimulation of the central 
nucleus produces stress-induced illnesses such as gastric 
ulcers (Henke, 1982). These observations suggest that 
the autonomic and endocrine responses controlled by 
the central nucleus are among those responsible for the 
harmful effects of long-term stress, which are discussed 
in Chapter 18. Rather than describing the regions to 
which the amygdala projects and the responses these 
regions control, I will refer you to Figure 11.2, which 
summarizes this information. (See Figure 11.2.)
A few stimuli automatically activate the central nu-
cleus of the amygdala and produce fear reactions— 
for example, loud unexpected noises, the approach of 
large animals, heights, or (for some species) specific 
sounds or odors. Even more important, however, is the 
ability to learn that a particular stimulus or situation is dan-
gerous or threatening. Once the learning has taken place, 
that stimulus or situation will evoke fear: heart rate and 
blood pressure will increase, the muscles will become more 
tense, the adrenal glands will secrete epinephrine, and the 
animal will proceed cautiously, alert and ready to respond.
The most basic form of emotional learning is a  
conditioned emotional response, which is produced by 
a neutral stimulus that has been paired with an emotion-
producing stimulus. The word conditioned refers to the 
process of classical conditioning, which is described in 
figure 11.1  The Amygdala
This figure shows a much-simplified diagram of the major 
divisions and connections of the amygdala that play a 
role in emotions.
Central
nucleus
Hypothalamus
midbrain
pons
medulla
Lateral
nucleus
Basal
nucleus
Ventral striatum
Dorsomedial nucleus
of thalamus (projects
to prefrontal cortex)
All regions of cerebral cortex 
Thalamus
Hippocampal formation
Ventromedial
prefrontal cortex
figure 11.2  Outputs of the Central Nucleus  
of the Amygdala
Shown here are some important brain regions that 
receive input from the central nucleus of the amygdala 
and the emotional responses controlled by these regions.
(Adapted from Davis, M., Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 1992, 13, 35–41.)
Lateral
hypothalamus
Dorsal motor
nucleus of vagus
Parabrachial
nucleus
Ventral
tegmental area
Locus
coeruleus
Dorsal lateral
tegmental nucleus
Nucleus reticularis
pontis caudalis
Periaqueductal
gray matter
Trigeminal, facial
motor nuclei
Paraventricular
nucleus
Nucleus
basalis
Sympathetic activation:
increased heart rate and
blood pressure, paleness
Parasympathetic activation:
ulcers, urination, defecation
Increased respiration
Behavioral arousal
(dopamine)
Increased vigilance
(norepinephrine)
Cortical activation
(acetylcholine)
Augmented startle
response
Behavioral arrest
(freezing)
Facial expressions
of fear
ACTH, glucocorticoid
secretion
Cortical
activation
Brain Regions
Behavioral and
Physiological Responses
x conditioned emotional response  A classically conditioned 
response that occurs when a neutral stimulus is followed by an 
aversive stimulus; usually includes autonomic, behavioral, and 
endocrine components such as changes in heart rate, freezing, 
and secretion of stress-related hormones.

	
Emotions as Response Patterns 	
363
play a role in an animal’s survival but increase the likeli-
hood that an animal can avoid dangerous situations, 
such as places where it encountered aversive events. In 
the laboratory, if the CS (tone) is presented repeatedly 
by itself, the previously established CR (emotional re-
sponse) eventually disappears—it becomes extinguished. 
After all, the value of a conditioned emotional response 
is that it prepares an animal to confront (or, better yet, 
avoid) an aversive stimulus. If the CS occurs repeatedly 
but the aversive stimulus does not follow, then it is bet-
ter for the emotional response—which itself is disrup-
tive and unpleasant—to disappear. And that is exactly 
what happens.
Behavioral studies have shown that extinction is not 
the same as forgetting. Instead, the animal learns that 
the CS is no longer followed by an aversive stimulus, 
and, as a result of this learning, the expression of the CR 
is inhibited; the memory for the association between the 
CS and the aversive stimulus is not erased. This inhibi-
tion is supplied by the ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
(vmPFC). Evidence for this conclusion comes from sev-
eral studies (Amano, Unal, and Paré, 2010; Sotres-Bayon 
and Quirk, 2010). For example, lesions of the vmPFC 
impair extinction, stimulation of this region inhibits 
conditioned emotional responses, and extinction train-
ing activates neurons there. Besides playing an essential 
role in extinction of conditioned emotional responses, 
the vmPFC can modulate the expression of fear in dif-
ferent circumstances. Depending on the situation, one 
subregion of the prefrontal cortex can become active 
and suppress a conditioned fear response, and another 
subregion can become active and enhance the response.
Research With Humans
We humans also acquire conditioned emotional re-
sponses. Let’s examine a specific (if somewhat con-
trived) example. Suppose you are helping a friend pre-
pare a meal. You pick up an electric mixer to mix some 
batter for a cake. Before you can turn the mixer on, the 
device makes a sputtering noise and then gives you a 
painful electrical shock. Your first response would be a 
defensive reflex: You would let go of the mixer, which 
would end the shock. This response is specific; it is aimed 
at terminating the painful stimulus. In addition, the 
painful stimulus would elicit nonspecific responses con-
trolled by your autonomic nervous system: Your eyes 
would dilate, your heart rate and blood pressure would 
increase, you would breathe faster, and so on. The pain-
ful stimulus would also trigger the secretion of some 
stress-related hormones, another nonspecific response.
receives some food that makes it salivate, it will begin 
salivating as soon as it hears the sound of the bell. (You 
probably already know that this phenomenon was dis-
covered by Ivan Pavlov.)
Several laboratories have investigated the role of the 
amygdala in the development of classically conditioned 
emotional responses. For example, these responses can 
be produced in rats by presenting an auditory stimulus 
such as a tone, followed by a brief electrical shock deliv-
ered to the feet through the floor on which the animals 
are standing. (See Figure 11.3.) By itself the shock pro-
duces an unconditional emotional response: The animal 
jumps into the air, its heart rate and blood pressure  
increase, its breathing becomes more rapid, and its  
adrenal glands secrete catecholamines and steroid stress 
hormones. After several pairings of the tone and the 
shock, classical conditioning is normally established.
The next day, if the tone is presented alone—not 
followed by a shock—physiological monitoring will show 
the same physiological responses the animals produced 
when they were shocked during training. In addition, 
they will show behavioral arrest—a species-typical defen-
sive response called freezing. In other words, the animals 
act as if they were expecting to receive a shock. The tone 
becomes a conditional stimulus (CS) that elicits freezing: a 
conditional response (CR).
Research indicates that the physical changes re-
sponsible for the classical conditioning of a conditioned 
emotional response take place in the lateral nucleus of 
the amygdala (Paré, Quirk, and LeDoux, 2004). Neu-
rons in the lateral nucleus communicate with neurons 
in the central nucleus, which in turn communicate with 
regions in the hypothalamus, midbrain, pons, and me-
dulla that are responsible for the behavioral, autonomic, 
and hormonal components of a conditioned emotional 
response. More recent studies indicate that the neural 
circuitry responsible for the process of classical condi-
tioning is actually more complex than that (Ciocchi et al, 
2010; Haubensak et al., 2010; Duvarci, Popa, and Paré, 
2011), but the details of this process will be postponed 
until Chapter 13, which discusses the physiology of 
learning and memory.
The neural mechanisms responsible for classically 
conditioned emotional responses evolved because they 
figure 11.3  The Procedure Used to Produce 
Conditioned Emotional Responses
10 sec
On
Off
0.5 sec
Shock
to feet
Tone
x ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC)  The region of the 
prefrontal cortex at the base of the anterior frontal lobes, adjacent 
to the midline.

364	
Chapter 11  Emotion
prefrontal cortex correlated with extinction of the con-
ditioned response. (See Figure 11.4.)
Damage to the amygdala interferes with the effects 
of emotions on memory. Normally, when people  
encounter events that produce a strong emotional  
response, they are more likely to remember these events. 
Cahill et al. (1995) studied a patient with bilateral de-
generation of the amygdala. The investigators narrated 
a story about a young boy walking with his mother on his 
way to visit his father at work. To accompany the story, 
they showed a series of slides. During one part of the 
story, the boy was injured in a traffic accident, and grue-
some slides illustrated his injuries. When this slide show 
is presented to normal subjects, they remember more 
details from the emotion-laden part of the story. How-
ever, a patient with amygdala damage showed no such 
increase in memory. In another study (Mori et al., 1999), 
researchers questioned patients with Alzheimer’s dis-
ease who had witnessed the devastating earthquake that 
struck Kobe, Japan, in 1995. They found that memory of 
this frightening event was inversely correlated with 
amygdala damage: The more a patient’s amygdala was 
degenerated, the less likely it was that the patient re-
membered the earthquake.
As we saw in Chapter 7, Patient I. R., a woman who 
had sustained damage to the auditory association cortex, 
was unable to perceive or produce melodic or rhythmic 
aspects of music (Peretz et al., 2001). She could not even 
tell the difference between consonant (pleasant) and 
dissonant (unpleasant) music. However, she was still 
able to recognize the mood conveyed by music. Gosselin 
et al. (2005) found that patients with damage to the 
amygdala showed the opposite symptoms: They had no 
trouble with musical perception but were unable to rec-
ognize scary music. They could still recognize happy and 
Suppose that a while later you visit your friend again 
and once more agree to make a cake. Your friend tells you 
that the electric mixer is perfectly safe. It has been fixed. 
Just seeing the mixer and thinking of holding it again 
makes you a little nervous, but you accept your friend’s 
assurance and pick it up. Just then, it makes the same 
sputtering noise that it did when it shocked you. What 
would your response be? Almost certainly, you would 
drop the mixer again, even if it did not give you a shock. 
And your pupils would dilate, your heart rate and blood 
pressure would increase, and your endocrine glands 
would secrete some stress-related hormones. In other 
words, the sputtering sound would trigger a conditioned 
emotional response.
Evidence indicates that the amygdala is involved in 
emotional responses in humans. One of the earliest 
studies observed the reactions of people who were being 
evaluated for surgical removal of parts of the brain to 
treat severe seizure disorders. These studies found that 
stimulation of parts of the brain (for example, the hypo-
thalamus) produced autonomic responses that are of-
ten associated with fear and anxiety but that only when 
the amygdala was stimulated did people also report that 
they actually felt afraid (White, 1940; Halgren et al., 
1978; Gloor et al., 1982).
Many studies have shown that lesions of the amyg-
dala decrease people’s emotional responses. For exam-
ple, Bechara et al. (1995) and LaBar et al. (1995) found 
that people with lesions of the amygdala showed im-
paired acquisition of a conditioned emotional response, 
just as rats do.
Most human fears are probably acquired socially, 
not through firsthand experience with painful stimuli 
(Olsson, Nearing, and Phelps, 2007). For example, a 
child does not have to be attacked by a dog to develop a 
fear of dogs: He or she can develop this fear by watching 
another person being attacked or (more often) by see-
ing another person display signs of fear when encoun-
tering a dog. People can also acquire a conditioned fear 
response through instruction. For example, suppose 
that someone is told (and believes) that if a warning 
light in a control panel goes on, he or she should leave 
the room immediately because the light is connected to 
a sensor that detects toxic fumes. If the light does go on, 
the person will leave the room and is also likely to expe-
rience a fear response while doing so.
We saw that studies with laboratory animals indicate 
that the vmPFC plays a critical role in extinction of a 
conditioned emotional response. The same is true for 
humans. Phelps et al. (2004) directly established a con-
ditioned emotional response in human subjects by pair-
ing the appearance of a visual stimulus with electric 
shocks to the wrist and then extinguished the response 
by presenting the squares alone, without any shocks.  
As Figure 11.4 shows, increased activity of the medial 
figure 11.4  Control of Extinction
These graphs show the correlation between activation of 
the medial prefrontal cortex and establishment of extinction.
(Based on data from Phelps et al., 2004)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
–0.2
–0.4
–8
–7
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
Medial prefrontal cortex activation
Extinction success

	
Emotions as Response Patterns 	
365
attacks depends on many factors, including the nature 
of the eliciting stimuli in the environment and the ani-
mal’s previous experience. The activity of the brain 
stem circuits appears to be controlled by the hypothala-
mus and the amygdala, which also influence many other 
species-typical behaviors. And, of course, the activity of 
the limbic system is controlled by perceptual systems 
that detect the status of the environment, including the 
presence of other animals.
A series of studies by Shaikh, Siegel, and their col-
leagues (reviewed by Gregg and Siegel, 2001) investi-
gated the neural circuitry involved in aggressive attack 
and predation in cats. The investigators placed elec-
trodes in various regions of the brain and observed the 
effects of electrical stimulation of these regions on the 
animals’ behavior. In some cases the electrode was actu-
ally a stainless-steel cannula, coated with an insulating 
material except for the tip. These devices (called can-
nula electrodes) could be used to infuse chemicals into 
the brain as well as to stimulate it. The investigators 
found that aggressive attack and predation can be elic-
ited by stimulation of different parts of the PAG and that 
the hypothalamus and the amygdala influence these  
behaviors through excitatory and inhibitory connections 
with the PAG. They found that the three principal  
regions of the amygdala and two regions of the hypothala-
mus affect defensive rage and predation, both of which  
appear to be organized by the PAG. (They assessed pre-
dation by presenting the cats with an anesthetized rat, so 
no pain was inflicted.) A possible connection between 
the lateral hypothalamus and the ventral PAG has not 
yet been verified. Rather than listing the connections 
and their effects, I will direct you to Figure 11.5.
Role of Serotonin.  An overwhelming amount of evi-
dence suggests that the activity of serotonergic synapses 
inhibits aggression. In contrast, destruction of serotone­
rgic axons in the forebrain facilitates aggressive attack, 
presumably by removing an inhibitory effect (Vergnes et al., 
1988).
A group of researchers has studied the relationship 
between serotonergic activity and aggressiveness in a 
free-ranging colony of rhesus monkeys (reviewed by 
sad music. Thus, amygdala lesions impair recognition of 
a musical style that is normally associated with fear.
Anger, Aggression,  
and Impulse Control
Almost all species of animals engage in aggressive behav-
iors, which involve threatening gestures or actual attack 
directed toward another animal. Aggressive behaviors 
are species typical; that is, the patterns of movements 
(for example, posturing, biting, striking, and hissing) 
are organized by neural circuits whose development is 
largely programmed by an animal’s genes. Many aggres-
sive behaviors are related to reproduction. For example, 
aggressive behaviors that gain access to mates, defend 
territory needed to attract mates or to provide a site for 
building a nest, or defend offspring against intruders 
can all be regarded as reproductive behaviors. Other 
aggressive behaviors are related to self-defense, such as 
that of an animal threatened by a predator or an in-
truder of the same species.
Aggressive behavior can consist of actual attacks, or 
they may simply involve threat behaviors, which consist 
of postures or gestures that warn the adversary to leave 
or it will become the target of an attack. The threatened 
animal might show defensive behaviors—threat behav-
iors or an actual attack against the animal that is threat-
ening it—or it might show submissive behaviors— 
behaviors that indicate that it accepts defeat and will not 
challenge the other animal. In the natural environment 
most animals display far more threats than actual at-
tacks. Threat behaviors are useful in reinforcing social 
hierarchies in organized groups of animals or in warn-
ing intruders away from an animal’s territory. They have 
the advantage of not involving actual fighting, which 
can harm one or both of the combatants.
Predation is the attack of a member of one species 
on a member of another, usually because the latter serves 
as food for the former. While engaged in attacking a 
member of the same species or defending itself against 
the attack, an animal appears to be extremely aroused 
and excited, and the activity of the sympathetic branch 
of its autonomic nervous system is high. In contrast, the 
attack of a predator is much more “cold blooded”; it is 
generally efficient and not accompanied by a high level 
of sympathetic activation. A predator is not angry with its 
prey; attacking the prey is simply a means to an end.
Research With Laboratory Animals
Neural Control of Aggressive Behavior.  The neu-
ral control of aggressive behavior is hierarchical. That 
is, the particular muscular movements that an animal 
makes in attacking or defending itself are programmed 
by neural circuits in the brain stem. Whether an animal 
x threat behavior  A stereotypical species-typical behavior that 
warns another animal that it may be attacked if it does not flee or 
show a submissive behavior.
x defensive behavior  A species-typical behavior by which an 
animal defends itself against the threat of another animal.
x submissive behavior  A stereotyped behavior shown by an 
animal in response to threat behavior by another animal; serves to 
prevent an attack.
x predation  Attack of one animal directed at an individual of 
another species on which the attacking animal normally preys.

366	
Chapter 11  Emotion
Genetic studies with other species confirm the con-
clusion that serotonin has an inhibitory role in aggres-
sion. For example, selective breeding of rats and silver 
foxes have yielded animals that display tameness and 
friendly responses to human contact. These animals 
showed increased brain levels of serotonin and 5-HIAA 
(Popova, 2006).
Research With Humans
Human violence and aggression are serious social prob-
lems. Consider the following case histories:
Born to an alcoholic teen mother who raised 
him with an abusive alcoholic stepfather, Steve 
was hyperactive, irritable, and disobedient as a 
toddler. . . . After dropping out of school at age 
14, Steve spent his teen years fighting, stealing, 
taking drugs, and beating up girlfriends. . . . 
School counseling, a probation officer, and 
meetings with child protective service failed to 
forestall disaster: At 19, several weeks after his 
last interview with researchers, Steve visited a 
girlfriend who had recently dumped him, found 
her with another man, and shot him to death. 
The same day he tried to kill himself. Now he’s 
serving a life sentence without parole. (Holden, 
2000, p. 580)
By the time Joshua had reached the age of 2, . . . 
he would bolt out of the house and into traffic. 
He kicked and head-butted relatives and friends. 
He poked the family hamster with a pencil and 
tried to strangle it. He threw regular temper 
Howell et al., 2007). They assessed serotonergic activity 
by capturing the monkeys, removing a sample of cere-
brospinal fluid (CSF), and analyzing it for 5-HIAA, a 
metabolite of serotonin (5-HT). When 5-HT is released, 
most of the neurotransmitter is taken back into the ter-
minal buttons by means of reuptake, but some escapes 
and is broken down to 5-HIAA, which finds its way into 
the CSF. Thus, high levels of 5-HIAA in the CSF indi-
cates an elevated level of serotonergic activity. The inves-
tigators found that young male monkeys with the lowest 
levels of 5-HIAA showed a pattern of risk-taking behav-
ior, including high levels of aggression directed toward 
animals that were older and much larger than them-
selves. They were much more likely to take dangerous, 
unprovoked long leaps from tree to tree at a height of 
more than 7 m (27.6 ft). They were also more likely to 
pick fights that they could not possibly win. Of forty-nine 
preadolescent male monkeys that the investigators fol-
lowed for four years, 46 percent of those with the lowest 
5-HIAA levels died, while all of the monkeys with the 
highest levels survived. (See Figure 11.6.) Most of the 
monkeys that died were killed by other monkeys. In fact, 
the first monkey to be killed had the lowest level of 
5-HIAA and was seen attacking two mature males the 
night before his death. Clearly, serotonin does not sim-
ply inhibit aggression; rather, it exerts a controlling in-
fluence on risky behavior, which includes aggression.
figure 11.5  Neural Circuitry in Defensive 
Behavior and Predation
The diagram shows interconnections of parts of the 
amygdala, hypothalamus, and periaqueductal gray matter 
(PAG) and their effects on defensive rage and predation 
in cats, based on the studies by Shaikh, Siegel, and their 
colleagues. Black arrows indicate excitation; red arrows 
indicate inhibition.
Basal
nucleus
Medial
hypothalamus
Lateral
hypothalamus
Ventral PAG
Dorsal PAG
Amygdala
Defensive
rage
Predation
Central
nucleus
Medial
nucleus
figure 11.6  Serotonin and Risk-Taking Behavior
The graph shows the percentage of young male monkeys 
alive or dead as a function of 5-HIAA level in the 
cerebrospinal fluid, measured four years previously.
(Based on data from Higley et al., 1996.)
Dead
Alive
Low
Low-mid
High-mid
High
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
5–HIAA Concentration in CSF
Percentage alive or dead

	
Emotions as Response Patterns 	
367
judgments. In fact, the skills involved include some  
of the most complex ones we possess. These skills are 
not localized in any one part of the cerebral cortex, 
although research does suggest that the right hemi-
sphere is more important than the left. But the ventro-
medial prefrontal cortex—which includes the medial 
orbitofrontal cortex and the subgenual anterior cingulate  
cortex—plays a special role.
As we saw earlier in the discussion of the process of 
extinction, the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) 
plays a role in inhibiting emotional responses. The 
vmPFC is located just where its name suggests, at  
the bottom front of the cerebral hemispheres. (See 
Figure 11.7.) The vmPFC receives direct inputs from the 
dorsomedial thalamus, temporal cortex, ventral teg-
mental area, olfactory system, and amygdala. Its out-
puts go to several brain regions, including the cingu-
late cortex, hippocampal formation, temporal cortex, 
lateral hypothalamus, and amygdala. Finally, it commu-
nicates with other regions of the prefrontal cortex. 
Thus, its inputs provide it with information about what 
is happening in the environment and what plans are 
being made by the rest of the frontal lobes, and its outputs 
permit it to affect a variety of behaviors and physiological 
tantrums and would stage toy-throwing frenzies. 
“At one point he was hurting himself—banging 
his head against a wall, pinching himself”, not to 
mention leaping off the refrigerator [said his 
mother]. . . . Showering Joshua with love . . . 
made little difference: By age 3, his behavior got 
him kicked out of his preschool. (Holden, 2000, 
p. 581)
Role of Heredity.  Early experiences can certainly fos-
ter the development of aggressive behavior, but studies 
have shown that heredity plays a significant role. For 
example, Viding et al. (2005, 2008) studied a group of 
same-sex twins at the ages of 7 years and 9 years and 
found a higher correlation between monozygotic twins 
than dizygotic twins on measures of antisocial behavior 
and levels of callous, unemotional behavior, which indi-
cates a genetic component in development of these 
traits. No evidence was found that a shared environment 
played a role.
Role of Serotonin.  Several studies have found that 
serotonergic neurons play an inhibitory role in human 
aggression. For example, a depressed rate of serotonin 
release (indicated by low levels of 5-HIAA in the CSF) 
are associated with aggression and other forms of anti-
social behavior, including assault, arson, murder, and 
child beating (Lidberg et al., 1984, 1985; Virkkunen et al., 
1989). Coccaro et al. (1994) studied a group of men 
with personality disorders (including a history of impul-
sive aggression). They found that the men with the low-
est serotonergic activity were most likely to have close 
relatives with a history of similar behavior problems.
If low levels of serotonin release contribute to ag-
gression, perhaps drugs that act as serotonin agonists 
might help to reduce antisocial behavior. In fact, a study 
by Coccaro and Kavoussi (1997) found that fluoxetine 
(Prozac), a serotonin agonist, decreased irritability and 
aggressiveness, as measured by a psychological test. 
Joshua, the little boy described in the introduction to 
this subsection, came under the care of a psychiatrist 
who prescribed monoaminergic agonists and began a 
course of behavior therapy that managed to stem Joshua’s 
violent outbursts and risk-taking behaviors.
Role of the Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex.  Many 
investigators believe that impulsive violence is a conse-
quence of faulty emotional regulation. For most of us, 
frustrations may elicit an urge to respond emotionally, 
but we usually manage to calm ourselves and suppress 
these urges. As we shall see, the ventromedial prefrontal 
cortex plays an important role in regulating our 
responses to such situations. The analysis of social situa-
tions involves much more than sensory analysis; it 
involves experiences and memories, inferences and 
figure 11.7  The Ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex
Ventromedial
prefrontal cortex

368	
Chapter 11  Emotion
or practical dilemmas—he always gave sensible an-
swers and justified them with carefully reasoned logic. 
However, his own life was a different matter. He frit-
tered away his life’s savings on investments that his 
family and friends pointed out were bound to fail. He 
lost one job after another because of his irresponsibil-
ity. He became unable to distinguish between trivial 
decisions and important ones, spending hours trying 
to decide where to have dinner but failing to use good 
judgment in situations that concerned his occupation 
and family life. (His wife finally left him and sued for 
divorce.) As the authors noted, “He had learned and 
used normal patterns of social behavior before his 
brain lesion, and although he could recall such pat-
terns when he was questioned about their applicabil-
ity, real-life situations failed to evoke them” (p. 1737). Evi-
dence suggests that the vmPFC serves as an interface 
between brain mechanisms involved in automatic 
emotional responses (both learned and unlearned) 
and those involved in the control of complex behav-
iors. This role includes using our emotional reac-
tions to guide our behavior and in controlling the 
occurrence of emotional reactions in various social 
situations.
Mr. V., described in the opener to this chapter, 
had brain damage that impaired his judgment with-
out affecting traditional measures of verbal intelli-
gence. This damage included the right frontal and 
parietal lobes, so we cannot attribute his symptoms to 
any single region.
Damage to the vmPFC causes serious and often de-
bilitating impairments of behavioral control and deci-
sion making. These impairments appear to be a conse-
quence of emotional dysregulation. Anderson et al. 
(2006) obtained ratings of emotional behaviors of pa-
tients with lesions of the vmPFC, such as frustration tol-
erance, emotional instability, anxiety, and irritability, 
from the patients’ relatives. They also obtained ratings 
of the patients’ real-world competencies, such as judg-
ment, planning, social inappropriateness, and financial 
and occupational status, from both relatives and clini-
cians. They found a significant correlation between 
emotional dysfunction and impairments in real-world 
competencies. There was no relationship between cog-
nitive abilities and real-world competencies, which 
strongly suggests that emotional problems lie at the base 
of the real-world difficulties exhibited by people with 
vmPFC damage.
An interesting functional imaging study by Nili  
et al. (2010) suggests that the vmPFC plays a role in 
brain mechanisms of courage. Nili and his colleagues 
scanned the brains of people who were or were not 
afraid of snakes. While the people were in the scan-
ner, they could press buttons that controlled the ac-
tion of a conveyer belt that brought a live snake  
responses, including emotional responses organized by 
the amygdala.
The fact that the vmPFC plays an important role in 
control of emotional behavior is shown by the effects of 
damage to this region. The first—and most famous—
case comes from the mid-1800s. Phineas Gage, the fore-
man of a railway construction crew, was using a steel rod 
to ram a charge of blasting powder into a hole that had 
been drilled in solid rock. Suddenly, the charge ex-
ploded and sent the rod into his cheek, through his 
brain, and out the top of his head. (See Figure 11.8.) He 
survived, but he was a different man. Before his injury 
he was serious, industrious, and energetic. Afterward, he 
became childish, irresponsible, and thoughtless of oth-
ers. His outbursts of temper led some people to remark 
that it looked as if Dr. Jekyll had become Mr. Hyde. He 
was unable to make or carry out plans, and his actions 
appeared to be capricious and whimsical. His accident 
had largely destroyed the vmPFC bilaterally (Damasio  
et al., 1994).
People whose vmPFC has been damaged by dis-
ease or accident are still able to accurately assess the 
significance of particular situations but only in a theo-
retical sense. For example, Eslinger and Damasio 
(1985) found that a patient with bilateral damage of 
the vmPFC (produced by a benign tumor, which was 
successfully removed) displayed excellent social judg-
ment. When he was given hypothetical situations that 
required him to make decisions about what the people 
involved should do—situations involving moral, ethical, 
figure 11.8  Phineas Gage’s Accident
The steel rod entered his left cheek and exited through 
the top of his head.
(From Damasio, H., Grabowski, T., Frank, R., et al. Science, 1994, 264, 1102–1105. 
Copyright 1994 American Association for the Advancement of Science.)

	
Emotions as Response Patterns 	
369
somehow, imagining yourself pushing a person’s body 
and causing his death seems more emotionally wrench-
ing than throwing a switch that changes the course of a 
runaway trolley. Thus, moral judgments appear to be 
guided by emotional reactions and are not simply the 
products of a rational, logical decision-making processes.
In a functional-imaging study, Greene et al. (2001) 
presented people with moral dilemmas such as the one 
I just described and found that thinking about them 
activated several brain regions involved in emotional 
reactions, including the vmPFC. Making innocuous  
decisions, such as whether to take a bus or train to some 
destination, did not activate these regions. Perhaps, 
then, our reluctance to push someone to his death is 
guided by the unpleasant emotional reaction we feel 
when we contemplate this action.
Let’s reconsider the contrast between the decision 
to throw a switch to save four lives and the decision to 
shove someone onto the tracks to accomplish the same 
goal. Consideration of the first dilemma raises a much 
smaller emotional reaction than consideration of the 
second dilemma does, and consideration of only the 
second dilemma strongly activates the vmPFC. We might 
expect that people with vmPFC damage, who show im-
pairments of emotional reaction, might chose to push 
the man onto the track in the second dilemma. In fact, 
that is exactly what they do. They demonstrate utilitarian 
moral judgment: Killing one person is better than let-
ting five people get killed. Koenigs et al. (2007) pre-
sented nonmoral, impersonal moral, and personal 
moral scenarios to patients with vmPFC lesions, patients 
with brain damage not including this region, and nor-
mal controls. For example, the switch-throwing scenario 
we just considered is an impersonal moral dilemma, and 
the person-pushing dilemma is a personal moral di-
lemma. Table 11.1 lists examples of the scenarios that 
the investigators of the study presented to their subjects. 
(See Table 11.1.)
Koenigs and his colleagues predicted that patients 
with vmPFC lesions should make the same decisions as 
subjects in the other two groups on the nonmoral and 
impersonal moral judgments, because these decisions 
are normally solved rationally, without a strong emo-
tional component. Only the outcome, or utility, of the 
choice need be considered. However, the emotional 
deficits of patients with prefrontal damage would be 
expected to lead to utilitarian judgments even in the 
case of personal moral judgments—and that is precisely 
what was seen. Figure 11.9 shows the proportion of the 
subjects from each of the three groups who endorsed a 
decision to act in high-conflict personal moral dilem-
mas, such as the lifeboat scenario. As you can see, the 
patients with vmPFC lesions were much more likely to 
say “yes” to the question posed at the end of the sce-
narios. (See Figure 11.9.)
toward or away from them. People who were not afraid 
of snakes brought the snake near them and showed 
no signs of fear. However, people who were afraid of 
snakes did show signs of fear as the snake approached. 
Some of the fearful people pressed the button that 
moved the snake away from them, but others brought 
the snake near to them, even though they were plainly 
afraid. In other words, they showed courage—they 
overcame their fear. A display of courage was accom-
panied by activation of a region of the vmPFC, the 
subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (sgACC). Sub-
jects who succumbed to their fear—that is, those who 
moved the snake away—did not show activation of the 
sgACC.
Evidence suggests that emotional reactions guide 
moral judgments as well as decisions involving per-
sonal risks and rewards and that the prefrontal cortex 
plays a role in these judgments as well. In previous 
years, moral judgments were believed to be a product 
of conscious, rational decision making. However, re-
cent research on the role of neural mechanisms of 
emotion suggest that emotions play an important 
role—perhaps the most important role—in the formation 
of moral judgments.
Consider the following moral dilemma (Thomson, 
1986): You see a runaway trolley with five people aboard 
hurtling down a track leading to a cliff. Without your 
intervention these people will soon die. However, you 
are standing near a switch that will shunt the trolley off 
to another track, where the vehicle will stop safely. But 
a worker is standing on that track, and he will be killed 
if you throw the switch to save the five helpless passen-
gers. Should you stand by and watch the trolley go off 
the cliff, or should you save them—and kill the man on 
the track?
Most people conclude that the better choice would 
be to throw the switch; saving five people justifies the 
sacrifice of one man. This decision is based on con-
scious, logical application of a rule that it is better to kill 
one person than five people. But consider a variation of 
this dilemma. As before, the trolley is hurtling toward 
doom, but there is no switch at hand to shunt it to  
another track. Instead, you are standing on a bridge 
over the track. An obese man is standing there too, and 
if you give him a push, his body will fall onto the track 
and stop the trolley. (You are too small to stop the trolley, 
so you cannot save the five people by sacrificing yourself.) 
What should you do?
Most people feel repugnance at the thought of 
pushing the man off the bridge and balk at the idea of 
doing so, even though the result would be the same as 
the first dilemma: one person lost, five people saved. 
Whether we kill someone by sending a trolley his way or 
by pushing him off a bridge into the path of an oncom-
ing trolley, he dies when the trolley strikes him. But 

370	
Chapter 11  Emotion
action and see the man fall to his death. If this is true, 
then perhaps people with vmPFC lesions say that they 
are willing to push the man off the bridge because think-
ing about doing so does not evoke an unpleasant emo-
tional reaction. In fact, Moretto et al. (2009) found that 
people without brain damage showed physiological 
signs of an unpleasant emotional reaction when they 
contemplated pushing the man off the bridge—and 
said that they would not push him. People with vmPFC 
lesions did not show signs of this emotional reaction—
and said that they would push him.
It might seem that I have been getting away from 
the topic of this section: anger and aggression. However, 
recall that many investigators believe that impulsive vio-
lence is a consequence of faulty emotional regulation. 
The amygdala plays an important role in provoking an-
ger and violent emotional reactions, and the prefrontal 
cortex plays an important role in suppressing such be-
havior by making us see its negative consequences. The 
amygdala matures early in development, but the pre-
frontal cortex matures much later, during late child-
hood and early adulthood. As the prefrontal cortex ma-
tures, adolescents show increases in speed of cognitive 
processing, abstract reasoning ability, ability to shift at-
tention from one topic to another, and ability to inhibit 
inappropriate responses (Yurgelun-Todd, 2007). In fact, 
a structural imaging study by Whittle et al. (2008) found 
I mentioned earlier that our reluctance to push 
someone to his death even though that action would 
save the lives of others might be caused by the unpleas-
ant thought of what it would feel like to commit that 
table 11.1  Examples of Scenarios Involving Nonmoral, Impersonal Moral, and Personal Moral  
Judgments from the Study by Koenigs et al. (2007)
Brownies (Nonmoral scenario)
You have decided to make a batch of brownies for yourself. You open your recipe book and find a recipe for brownies. The 
recipe calls for a cup of chopped walnuts. You don’t like walnuts, but you do like macadamia nuts. As it happens, you have 
both kinds of nuts available to you.
Would you substitute macadamia nuts for walnuts in order to avoid eating walnuts?
Speedboat (Impersonal moral scenario)
While on vacation on a remote island, you are fishing from a seaside dock. You observe a group of tourists board a small 
boat and set sail for a nearby island. Soon after their departure you hear over the radio that there is a violent storm brew-
ing, a storm that is sure to intercept them. The only way that you can ensure their safety is to warn them by borrowing a 
nearby speedboat. The speedboat belongs to a miserly tycoon who would not take kindly to your borrowing his property.
Would you borrow the speedboat in order to warn the tourists about the storm?
Lifeboat (Personal moral scenario)
You are on a cruise ship when there is a fire on board, and the ship has to be abandoned. The lifeboats are carrying many 
more people than they were designed to carry. The lifeboat you’re in is sitting dangerously low in the water—a few inches 
lower, and it will sink. The seas start to get rough, and the boat begins to fill with water. If nothing is done it will sink before 
the rescue boats arrive, and everyone on board will die. However, there is an injured person who will not survive in any 
case. If you throw that person overboard the boat will stay afloat and the remaining passengers will be saved.
Would you throw this person overboard in order to save the lives of the remaining passengers?
figure 11.9  Moral Decisions and the vmPFC
The graph shows the percentage of people with lesions  
of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and normal controls 
who endorse decisions of nonmoral, impersonal moral, and 
personal moral scenarios like the ones listed in Table 11.1.
(Based on data from Keonigs et al., 2007.)
JPM
IPS
L
Normal controls
vmPFC
0
20
40
60
Percentage of subjects
 endorsing decision
Nonmoral
Impersonal
Personal

	
Emotions as Response Patterns 	
371
As we saw earlier, impulsive aggression has been 
successfully treated with specific serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors such as fluoxetine (Prozac). A functional- 
imaging study by New et al. (2004) measured regional 
brain activity of people with histories of impulsive  
aggression before and after 12 weeks of treatment with 
fluoxetine. They found that the drug increased the activity 
of the prefrontal cortex and reduced aggressiveness.
Hormonal Control of Aggressive 
Behavior
As we saw, many instances of aggressive behavior are in 
some way related to reproduction. For example, males 
of some species establish territories that attract females 
during the breeding season. To do so, they must defend 
the territories against the intrusion of other males. Even 
in species in which breeding does not depend on the 
establishment of a territory, males may compete for ac-
cess to females, competition that also involves aggressive 
behavior. Females, too, often compete with other fe-
males for space in which to build nests or dens in which 
to rear their offspring, and they will defend their off-
spring against the intrusion of other animals. As you 
learned in Chapter 10, most reproductive behaviors are 
controlled by the organizational and activational effects 
of hormones; therefore, we should not be surprised that 
many forms of aggressive behavior are, like mating,  
affected by hormones.
Aggression in Males
Adult males of many species fight for territory or access 
to females. In laboratory rodents, androgen secretion 
occurs prenatally, decreases, and then increases again at 
the time of puberty. Intermale aggressiveness also be-
gins around the time of puberty, which suggests that the 
behavior is controlled by neural circuits that are stimu-
lated by androgens. Indeed, many years ago, Beeman 
(1947) found that castration reduced aggressiveness 
and that injections of testosterone reinstated it.
In Chapter 10 we saw that early androgenization has 
an organizational effect. The secretion of androgens early 
in development modifies the developing brain, making 
neural circuits that control male sexual behavior become 
more responsive to testosterone. Similarly, early andro-
genization has an organizational effect that stimulates 
the development of testosterone-sensitive neural circuits 
that facilitate intermale aggression. (See Figure 11.10.)
The organizational effect of androgens on inter-
male aggression (aggressive displays or actual fights be-
tween two males of the same species) is important, but 
it is not an all-or-none phenomenon. Prolonged admin-
istration of testosterone will eventually induce intermale 
aggression even in rodents that were castrated immediately 
that aggressive behavior during parent–child interac-
tions during adolescence was positively related to the 
volume of the amygdala and negatively related to the 
relative volume of the right medial prefrontal cortex.
Raine et al. (1998) found evidence of decreased 
prefrontal activity and increased subcortical activity  
(including the amygdala) in the brains of convicted 
murderers. These changes were primarily seen in impulsive,  
emotional murderers. Cold-blooded, calculating, preda-
tory murderers—whose crimes were not accompanied 
by anger and rage—showed more normal activity. Pre-
sumably, increased activation of the amygdala reflected 
an increased tendency for display of negative emotions, 
and the decreased activation of the prefrontal cortex 
reflected a decreased ability to inhibit the activity of the 
amygdala and thus control the people’s emotions. Raine 
et al. (2002) found that people with antisocial personal-
ity disorder showed an 11 percent reduction in volume 
of the gray matter of the prefrontal cortex.
Earlier in this chapter we saw that decreased activity 
of serotonergic neurons is associated with aggression, 
violence, and risk taking. As we saw in this subsection, 
decreased activity of the prefrontal cortex is also associ-
ated with antisocial behavior. These two facts appear to 
be linked. The prefrontal cortex receives a major projec-
tion of serotonergic axons. Research indicates that sero-
tonergic input to the prefrontal cortex activates this re-
gion. For example, a functional-imaging study by Mann 
et al. (1996) showed that fenfluramine, a drug that 
stimulates the release of 5-HT, increases the activity of 
the prefrontal cortex, which presumably inhibits the 
activity of the amygdala and suppresses aggressive be-
havior. Crockett et al. (2010) found that a single high 
dose of a 5-HT agonist decreased the likelihood of sub-
jects making a decision to cause harm in scenarios that 
presented moral dilemmas. In other words, the in-
creased serotonergic activity made them less likely to 
make utilitarian decisions. It seems likely, therefore, 
that an abnormally low level of serotonin release can 
result in decreased activity of the prefrontal cortex and 
increased likelihood of utilitarian judgments or, in the 
extreme, antisocial behavior.
Several studies have found evidence for deficits in 
serotonergic innervation of the ventromedial prefrontal 
cortex. New et al. (2002) found that a serotonin-releasing 
drug increased the activity of the orbitofrontal cortex in 
normal, nonviolent subjects but failed to do so in sub-
jects with a history of impulsive aggression. A functional- 
imaging study found evidence for lower levels of sero-
tonin transporters in the medial prefrontal cortex of 
people with impulsive aggression (Frankle et al., 2005). 
Because serotonin transporters are found in the mem-
brane of serotonergic terminal buttons, this study sug-
gests that the medial prefrontal cortex of these people 
contains decreased serotonergic input.

372	
Chapter 11  Emotion
Aggression in Females
Two adult female rodents that meet in a neutral ter-
ritory are less likely than males to fight. But aggres-
sion between females, like aggression between males, 
appears to be facilitated by testosterone. Van de Poll 
et al. (1988) ovariectomized female rats and then 
gave them daily injections of testosterone, estradiol, 
or a placebo for 14 days. The animals were then 
placed in a test cage, and an unfamiliar female was 
introduced. As Figure 11.11 shows, testosterone in-
creased aggressiveness, whereas estradiol had no effect. 
(See Figure 11.11.)
Androgens have an organizational effect on the ag-
gressiveness of females, and a certain amount of prena-
tal androgenization appears to occur naturally. Most 
rodent fetuses share their mother’s uterus with brothers 
and sisters, arranged in a row like peas in a pod. A fe-
male mouse may have zero, one, or two brothers adja-
cent to her. Researchers refer to these females as 0M, 
1M, or 2M, respectively. (See Figure 11.12.) Being next to 
a male fetus has an effect on a female’s blood levels of 
androgens prenatally. Vom Saal and Bronson (1980) 
found that females located between two males had sig-
nificantly higher levels of testosterone in their blood 
than did females located between two females (or be-
tween a female and the end of the uterus). When they 
are tested as adults, 2M females are more likely to exhibit 
interfemale aggressiveness.
Females of some primate species (for example, 
rhesus monkeys and baboons) are more likely to en-
gage in fights around the time of ovulation (Carpenter, 
1942; Saayman, 1971). This phenomenon is probably 
caused by their increased sexual interest and conse-
quent proximity to males. As Carpenter noted, “She 
actively approaches males and must overcome their 
after birth. Data reviewed by vom Saal (1983) show that 
exposure to androgens early in life decreases the amount 
of exposure that is necessary to activate aggressive be-
havior later in life. Thus, early androgenization sensitizes 
the neural circuits: The earlier the androgenization, the 
more effective is the sensitization.
We also saw in Chapter 10 that androgens stimulate 
male sexual behavior by interacting with androgen re-
ceptors in neurons located in the medial preoptic area 
(MPA). This region also appears to be important in 
mediating the effects of androgens on intermale aggres-
sion. Bean and Conner (1978) found that implanting 
testosterone in the MPA reinstated intermale aggression 
in castrated male rats. Presumably, the testosterone di-
rectly activated the behavior by stimulating the androgen- 
sensitive neurons located there. The medial preoptic 
area, then, appears to be involved in several behaviors 
related to reproduction: male sexual behavior, maternal 
behavior, and intermale aggression.
Males readily attack other males but usually do not 
attack females. Their ability to discriminate the sex of the 
intruder appears to be based on the presence of particu-
lar pheromones. Bean (1982) found that intermale ag-
gression was abolished in mice by cutting the vomerona-
sal nerve, which deprives the brain of input from the 
vomeronasal organ. And if the urine of female mice  
is painted on a male mouse, he will not be attacked if  
he is introduced into another male’s cage (Dixon and  
Mackintosh, 1971; Dixon, 1973). Stowers et al. (2002) found  
that a targeted mutation against a protein that is essential 
for the detection of pheromones by the vomeronasal 
organ abolishes a male mouse’s ability to discriminate 
between males and females. Because male intruders were 
not recognized as rival males, they were not attacked. In 
fact, the mice with the targeted mutation attempted to 
copulate with the intruders. (
Simulate pheromones 
and sexual recognition on MyPsychLab.)
figure 11.10  Organizational and Activational 
Effects of Testosterone on Social Aggression
Treatment
Organizational
Effect
Activational
Effect
Low
aggressiveness
Low
aggressiveness
High
aggressiveness
Immediately
after birth
When rat is
fully grown
Placebo
Testosterone
Testosterone
Testosterone
Testosterone
No injection
Resulting
Behavior
figure 11.11  Effects of Estradiol and 
Testosterone on Interfemale Aggression in Rats
(Based on data from van de Poll et al., 1988.)
0
Estradiol Testosterone
Placebo
5.0
10.0
Frequency of fighting

	
Emotions as Response Patterns 	
373
puberty, and their testosterone affects their muscles as 
well as their brains, so we cannot be sure that the effect 
is hormonally produced or, if it is, that it is mediated by 
the brain.
As we just saw, the small amount of prenatal expo-
sure to androgens that a 2M female receives has mea-
surable organizational effects on aggressive behavior. 
Cohen-Bendahan et al. (2005) compared the prone-
ness to aggression in 13-year-old female dizygotic twins 
who had shared the uterus with a brother (1M females) 
with those who had shared it with a sister (1F females). 
They found a modest but statistically significant in-
crease in aggressiveness in the 1M girls. The testoster-
one levels of the 1M and 1F girls did not differ, so the 
increased aggressiveness presumably was a result of in-
creased prenatal exposure to androgens. Of course, we 
cannot rule out the possibility that being raised with a 
same-aged brother might have an effect on a girl’s 
proneness to aggression.
As we saw in Chapter 10, girls with congenital ad-
renal hyperplasia (CAH) are exposed to abnormally 
high levels of androgens—produced by their own  
adrenal glands—during prenatal development. The 
effects of this exposure include a preference for boys 
as playmates, interest in toys and games that boys typ-
ically prefer, and, in adulthood, an increased preva-
lence of sexual attraction to other women. Beren-
baum and Resnick (1997) found that women and 
adolescent girls with CAH displayed higher levels  
of aggression, as measured by parents’ ratings and  
paper-and-pencil tests.
Scientifically rigorous evidence concerning the acti-
vational effects of androgens on aggression in adult-
hood is difficult to obtain in humans. Obviously, we 
cannot randomly castrate some men to find out whether 
their aggressiveness declines. In the past, authorities at-
tempted to suppress sex-related aggression by castrating 
convicted male sex offenders. Investigators have re-
ported that both heterosexual and homosexual aggres-
sive attacks disappear, along with the offender’s sex 
drive (Hawke, 1951; Sturup, 1961; Laschet, 1973). How-
ever, the studies typically lack appropriate control 
groups and usually do not measure aggressive behavior 
directly.
Some cases of aggressiveness, especially sexual as-
sault, have been treated with synthetic steroids that in-
hibit the production of androgens by the testes. Clearly, 
treatment with drugs is preferable to castration, because 
the effects of drugs are not irreversible. However, the 
efficacy of treatment with antiandrogens has yet to be 
established conclusively. According to Walker and 
Meyer (1981), these drugs decrease sex-related aggres-
sion but have no effect on other forms of aggression. In 
fact, Zumpe et al. (1991) found that one of these drugs 
decreased sexual activity and aggression toward females 
usual resistance to close association, hence she be-
comes an object of attacks by them” (p. 136). Another 
period of fighting occurs just before menstruation 
(Sassenrath, Powell, and Hendrickx, 1973; Mallow, 
1979). During this time, females tend to attack other 
females.
Effects of Androgens on Human  
Aggressive Behavior
Boys are generally more aggressive than girls. Clearly, 
most societies tolerate assertiveness and aggressive be-
havior from boys more than they do from girls. Without 
doubt, the way we treat boys and girls and the models to 
which we expose them play important roles in sex differ-
ences in aggressiveness in our species. The question is 
not whether socialization has an effect (certainly, it 
does) but whether biological influences, such as expo-
sure to androgens, have an effect too.
Prenatal androgenization increases aggressive be-
havior in all species that have been studied, including 
primates. Therefore, if androgens did not affect aggres-
sive behavior in humans, our species would be excep-
tional. After puberty, androgens also begin to have acti-
vational effects. Boys’ testosterone levels begin to 
increase during the early teens, at which time aggressive 
behavior and intermale fighting also increase (Mazur, 
1983). Of course, boys’ social status changes during 
figure 11.12  0M, 1M, and 2M Female Mouse 
Fetuses
(Adapted from vom Saal, F. S., in Hormones and Aggressive Behavior, edited by 
B. B. Svare. New York: Plenum Press, 1983.)
Vagina
Male
Male
Uterus
2M female
1M female
Male
0M female
Oviducts
(Fallopian tubes)
Amniotic
sac

374	
Chapter 11  Emotion
authors note, we cannot be certain that the steroid is 
responsible for the increased aggressiveness; it could 
simply be that the men who were already more com-
petitive and aggressive were the ones who chose to 
take the steroids.
An interesting set of experiments with another 
species of primates might have some relevance to hu-
man aggression. Evidence suggests that the effects of 
alcohol may interact with those of androgens. Winslow 
and Miczek (1985, 1988) found that alcohol increases 
intermale aggression in dominant male squirrel mon-
keys, but only during the mating season, when their 
blood level of testosterone is two to three times higher 
than that during the nonmating season. These studies 
suggest that the effects of alcohol interact both with 
social status and with testosterone. (See Figure 11.13.) 
This suggestion was confirmed by Winslow, Ellingoe, 
and Miczek (1988), who tested monkeys during the 
nonmating season. They found that alcohol increased 
the aggressive behavior of dominant monkeys if the 
monkeys were also given injections of testosterone. 
However, these treatments were ineffective in subordi-
nate monkeys, which presumably had learned not  
to be aggressive. The next step will be to find the  
neural mechanisms that are responsible for these  
interactions.
when administered to male monkeys but actually in-
creased intermale aggression.
Another way to determine whether androgens af-
fect aggressiveness in humans is to examine the testos-
terone levels of people who exhibit varying levels of ag-
gressive behavior. However, even though this approach 
poses fewer ethical problems, it presents methodologi-
cal ones. First, let me review some evidence. In a review 
of the literature, Archer (1994) found that most studies 
found a positive relationship between men’s testoster-
one levels and their level of aggressiveness. For example, 
Dabbs and Morris (1990) studied 4462 U.S. military 
veterans. The men with the highest testosterone levels 
had records of more antisocial activities, including as-
saults on other adults and histories of more trouble with 
parents, teachers, and classmates during adolescence. 
The largest effects were seen in men of lower socioeco-
nomic status.
Mazur and Booth (1998) suggest that the primary 
social effect of androgens may be not on aggression, but 
on dominance. If androgens enhance motivation to 
dominate others, that motivation may sometimes lead to 
aggression but not in all situations. For example, a per-
son might strive to defeat others symbolically (through 
athletic competition or acquisition of symbols of status) 
rather than through direct aggression.
In any event we must remember that correlation does 
not necessarily indicate causation. A person’s environ-
ment can affect his or her testosterone level. For exam-
ple, losing a tennis match or a wrestling competition 
causes a fall in blood levels of testosterone (Mazur and 
Lamb, 1980; Elias, 1981). Even winning or losing a sim-
ple game of chance carried out in a psychology labora-
tory can affect participants’ testosterone levels: Winners 
feel better afterward and have a higher level of testoster-
one (McCaul, Gladue, and Joppa, 1992). Bernhardt  
et al. (1998) found that basketball and soccer fans showed 
an increase in testosterone levels if their team won and a 
decrease if it lost. Thus, we cannot be sure in any corre-
lational study that high testosterone levels cause people to 
become dominant or aggressive; perhaps their success  
in establishing a position of dominance increases their 
testosterone levels relative to those of the people they 
dominate.
As news reports have publicized, some athletes 
take anabolic steroids to increase their muscle mass 
and strength and, supposedly, to increase their com-
petitiveness. Anabolic steroids include natural andro-
gens and synthetic hormones with androgenic effects. 
Thus, we might expect that these hormones would 
increase aggressiveness. Indeed, several studies have 
found exactly that. For example, Yates, Perry, and 
Murray (1992) found that male weight lifters who 
were taking anabolic steroids were more aggressive 
and hostile than those who were not. But, as the  
figure 11.13  Alcohol, Mating, and Aggressive 
Behavior in Monkeys
The graph shows the effect of alcohol intake on 
frequency of aggressive behavior of dominant and 
subordinate male squirrel monkeys during the mating 
season and the nonmating season.
(Based on data from Winslow and Miczek, 1988.)
Dominant monkeys
Subordinate monkeys
Control
Control
Alcohol
Alcohol
Frequency of aggressive behavior
0
10
20
30
40
Mating Season
Nonmating Season

	
Emotions as Response Patterns 	
375
Section Summary
Emotions as Response Patterns
The word emotion refers to behaviors, physiological 
responses, and feelings. This section has discussed 
emotional response patterns, which consist of behav-
iors that deal with particular situations and physiologi-
cal responses (both autonomic and hormonal) that 
support the behaviors. The amygdala organizes 
behavioral, autonomic, and hormonal responses to a 
variety of situations, including those that produce 
fear, anger, or disgust. In addition, it is involved in 
the effects of odors and pheromones on sexual and 
maternal behavior. It receives inputs from the olfac-
tory system, the association cortex of the temporal 
lobe, the frontal cortex, and the rest of the limbic sys-
tem. Its outputs go to the frontal cortex, hypothala-
mus, hippocampal formation, and brain stem nuclei 
that control autonomic functions and some species-
typical behaviors. Electrical recordings of single  
neurons in the amygdala indicate that some of them 
respond when the animal perceives particular stimuli 
with emotional significance. Stimulation of the amyg-
dala leads to emotional responses, and its destruction 
disrupts them. Pairing of neutral stimuli with those 
that elicit emotional responses results in classically 
conditioned emotional responses. Learning of these 
responses takes place primarily in the amygdala. 
Extinction of conditioned emotional responses 
involves inhibitory control of amygdala activity by the 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
Studies of people with amygdala lesions and 
functional-imaging studies with humans indicate that 
the amygdala is involved in emotional reactions in our 
species, too. However, many of our conditioned emo-
tional responses are acquired by observing the 
responses of other people or even through verbal 
instruction. Study of people with amygdala lesions 
and functional-imaging studies indicate that the 
amygdala is involved in the effects of emotions on 
learning.
Aggressive behaviors are species-typical and 
serve useful functions most of the time. In addition, 
animals may exhibit threat or submissive behaviors, 
which may avoid an actual fight. The periaqueductal 
gray matter appears to be involved in defensive 
behavior and predation. These mechanisms are  
modulated by the hypothalamus and amygdala.
The activity of serotonergic neurons appears to 
inhibit risk-taking behaviors, including aggression. 
Destruction of serotonergic axons in the forebrain 
enhances aggression, and administration of drugs 
that facilitate serotonergic transmission reduces it. 
Low CSF levels of 5-HIAA (a metabolite of serotonin) 
are correlated with increased risk-taking and aggres-
sive behavior in monkeys and humans. The presence 
of short alleles of the serotonin transporter gene 
increase the likelihood of a reactive amygdala and 
development of depression and anxiety disorders. 
Genetic factors play a role in people’s level of aggres-
sion and antisocial behavior.
The ventromedial prefrontal cortex plays an 
important role in emotional reactions. This region 
communicates with the dorsomedial thalamus, tem-
poral cortex, ventral tegmental area, olfactory system, 
amygdala, cingulate cortex, lateral hypothalamus, and 
other regions of the frontal cortex, including the dor-
solateral prefrontal cortex. People with ventromedial 
prefrontal lesions show impulsive behavior and often 
display outbursts of inappropriate anger. They are 
able to explain the implications of complex social sit-
uations but often respond inappropriately when they 
find themselves in these situations. The activity of the 
vmPFC increases where people show courageous 
behavior—letting a snake approach them even 
though they fear snakes.
Evidence indicates that the ventromedial prefron-
tal cortex is involved in making moral judgments. 
When people make judgments that involve conflicts 
between utilitarian judgments (one person dies but 
five people live) and personal moral judgments (are 
you willing to push a man to his death to save oth-
ers?), the ventromedial prefrontal cortex is activated. 
People with damage to the vmPFC display utilitarian 
moral judgments. Evidence suggests that nonpsycho-
pathic people are reluctant to harm others because 
thinking about doing so produces an unpleasant 
emotional reaction. The release of serotonin in the 
prefrontal cortex activates this region, and some 
investigators believe that the serotonergic input to 
this region is responsible for the ability of serotonin 
to inhibit aggression and risky behavior. A single high 
(continued on next page)

376	
Chapter 11  Emotion
postural changes, facial expressions, and nonverbal 
sounds (such as sighs, moans, and growls). These ex-
pressions serve useful social functions: They tell other 
individuals how we feel and—more to the point—
what we are likely to do. For example, they warn a rival 
that we are angry or tell friends that we are sad and 
would like some comfort and reassurance. They can 
also indicate that a danger might be present or that 
something interesting seems to be happening. This 
section examines such expression and communica-
tion of emotions.
Communication of Emotions
The previous section described emotions as organized 
responses (behavioral, autonomic, and hormonal) 
that prepare an animal to deal with existing situations 
in the environment, such as events that pose a threat 
to the organism. For our earliest premammalian an-
cestors that is undoubtedly all there was to emotions. 
But over time, other responses, with new functions, 
evolved. Many species of animals (including our own) 
communicate their emotions to others by means of 
dose of a 5-HT agonist decreases the likelihood that 
a person will make utilitarian decisions in a moral 
dilemma task. The ventromedial prefrontal cortex of 
people with impulsive aggression contains less dense 
serotonergic input.
Because many aggressive behaviors are related 
to reproduction, these behaviors are influenced by 
hormones, especially sex steroid hormones. 
Androgens primarily affect offensive attack; they are 
not necessary for defensive behaviors, which are 
shown by females as well as males. In males, andro-
gens have organizational and activational effects on 
offensive attack, just as they have on male sexual 
behavior. The effects of androgens on intermale 
aggression appear to be mediated by the medial pre-
optic area.
Female rodents will fight when they meet in neu-
tral territory but less often than males. Female 
rodents that have been slightly androgenized (2M 
females) are more likely to attack other females. 
Female primates are most likely to fight around the 
time of ovulation, perhaps because their increased 
sexual interest brings them closer to males.
Androgens apparently promote aggressive 
behavior in humans, but this topic is more difficult to 
study in our species than in laboratory animals. 
Evidence from girls with congenital adrenal hyperpla-
sia and female dizygotic twins who shared the uterus 
with a brother suggests that prenatal androgens pro-
mote aggressive behavior later in life. Research sug-
gests that the primary effect of androgens may be to 
increase motivation to achieve dominance and that 
increased aggression may be secondary to this effect. 
In any case we cannot be sure whether higher andro-
gen levels promote dominance or whether successful 
dominance increases androgen levels. Studies with 
monkeys suggest that testosterone and alcohol have 
synergistic effects, particularly in dominant animals. 
(Synergy, from a Greek word meaning “working 
together,” refers to combinations of factors that are 
more effective than the sum of their individual 
actions.) Perhaps these effects are related to our 
observations that some men with a history of violent 
behavior become more aggressive when they drink.
 THOUGHT QUESTIONS
1.	 Phobias can be seen as dramatic examples of con-
ditioned emotional responses. These responses can 
even be contagious; we can acquire them without 
direct experience with an aversive stimulus. For 
example, a child who sees a parent show signs of 
fright in the presence of a dog may also develop a 
fear reaction to the dog. Do you think that some 
prejudices might be learned in this way, too?
2.	 Suppose a man sustained brain damage that 
destroyed his ventral prefrontal cortex, and soon 
afterward he began exhibiting antisocial behavior. 
One day, while he was in his car waiting for a red 
light to change, he saw a man with whom he had 
previously had a violent argument cross the street 
in front of him. He suddenly stepped on the accel-
erator, struck the man, and killed him. Should the 
fact of his brain damage play any role in his prose-
cution and judgment in court? Why or why not?
3.	 From the point of view of evolution, aggressive 
behavior and a tendency to establish dominance 
have useful functions. In particular, they increase 
the likelihood that only the healthiest and most vig-
orous animals will reproduce. Can you think of 
examples of good and bad effects of these tenden-
cies among members of our own species?

	
Communication of Emotions	
377
Other researchers have compared the facial expres-
sions of blind and normally sighted people. They rea-
soned that if the facial expressions of the two groups are 
similar, then the expressions are natural for our species 
and do not require learning by imitation. In fact, the  
facial expressions of young blind and sighted children 
are very similar (Woodworth and Schlosberg, 1954; Izard, 
1971). In addition, a study of the emotional expressions 
of people competing (and winning or losing) athletic 
events in the 2004 Paralympic Games found no differ-
ences between the expressions of congenitally blind, non-
congenitally blind, and sighted athletes (Matsumoto and 
Willingham, 2009). Thus, both the cross-cultural studies 
and the investigations of blind people confirm the natu-
ralness of these facial expressions of emotions.
A study by Sauter et al. (2010) reached similar con-
clusions. The investigators carried out a vocal version of 
the study by Ekman and Friesen. They presented Euro-
pean English-speakers and natives of isolated northern 
Namibian villages with recordings of sounds of nonver-
bal vocalizations to situations that would be expected to 
produce the emotions of anger, disgust, fear, sadness, 
surprise, or amusement. The participants were told a 
Facial Expression of Emotions:  
Innate Responses
Charles Darwin (1872/1965) suggested that human ex-
pressions of emotion have evolved from similar expres-
sions in other animals. He said that emotional expres-
sions are innate, unlearned responses consisting of a 
complex set of movements, principally of the facial mus-
cles. Thus, a person’s sneer and a wolf’s snarl are bio-
logically determined response patterns, both controlled 
by innate brain mechanisms, just as coughing and sneez-
ing are. (Of course, people can sneer and wolves can 
snarl for quite different reasons.) Some of these move-
ments resemble the behaviors themselves and may have 
evolved from them. For example, a snarl shows one’s 
teeth and can be seen as an anticipation of biting.
 Darwin obtained evidence for his conclusion that 
emotional expressions were innate by observing his own 
children and by corresponding with people living in vari-
ous isolated cultures around the world. He reasoned that 
if people all over the world, no matter how isolated, show 
the same facial expressions of emotion, then these expres-
sions must be inherited instead of learned. The logical ar-
gument goes like this: When groups of people are isolated 
for many years, they develop different languages. Thus, we 
can say that the words people use are arbitrary; there is no 
biological basis for using particular words to represent 
particular concepts. However, if facial expressions are in-
herited, then they should take approximately the same 
form in people from all cultures, despite their isolation 
from one another. Darwin did, indeed, find that people in 
different cultures used the same patterns of movement of 
facial muscles to express a particular emotional state.
Research by Ekman and his colleagues (Ekman and 
Friesen, 1971; Ekman, 1980) tends to confirm Darwin’s 
hypothesis that facial expression of emotion uses an in-
nate, species-typical repertoire of movements of facial 
muscles (Darwin, 1872/1965). For example, Ekman and 
Friesen (1971) studied the ability of members of an iso-
lated tribe in New Guinea to recognize facial expres-
sions of emotion produced by Westerners. They had no 
trouble doing so and they themselves produced facial 
expressions that Westerners readily recognized. Figure 
11.14 shows four photographs taken from videotapes of 
a man from this tribe reacting to stories designed to 
evoke facial expressions of happiness, sadness, anger, 
and disgust. I am sure that you will have no trouble rec-
ognizing which is which. (See Figure 11.14.)
Because the same facial expressions were used by 
people who had not previously been exposed to each 
other, Ekman and Friesen concluded that the expres-
sions were unlearned behavior patterns. In contrast, dif-
ferent cultures use different words to express particular 
concepts; production of these words does not involve 
innate responses but must be learned.
figure 11.14  Facial Expressions in a New Guinea 
Tribesman
The tribesman made faces when he heard the following 
stories: (a) “Your friend has come and you are happy.”  
(b) “Your child had died.” (c) “You are angry and about 
to fight.” (d) “You see a dead pig that has been lying 
there a long time.”
(From Ekman, P., The Face of Man: Expressions of Universal Emotions in a New 
Guinea Village. New York: Garland STPM Press, 1980. Reprinted with permission.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

378	
Chapter 11  Emotion
Laterality of Emotional Recognition
We recognize other people’s feelings by means of vision 
and audition—seeing their facial expressions and hear-
ing their tone of voice and choice of words. Many studies 
have found that the right hemisphere plays a more im-
portant role than the left hemisphere in comprehension 
of emotion. For example, Bowers et al. (1991) found 
that patients with right hemisphere damage had diffi-
culty producing or describing mental images of facial 
expressions of emotions. Subjects were asked to imagine 
the face of someone who was very happy (or very sad, 
angry, or afraid). Then they were asked questions about 
the facial expression—for example, Do the eyes look twin-
kly? Is the brow raised? Are the corners of the lips raised up? 
People with right hemisphere damage had trouble an-
swering these questions but could easily answer ques-
tions about nonemotional images, such as What’s higher 
off the ground: a horse’s knee or the top of its tail? or What 
number from one to nine does a peanut look like?
Several functional-imaging studies have confirmed 
these results. For example, George et al. (1996) had sub-
jects listen to some sentences and identify their emotional 
content. In one condition the subjects listened to the 
meaning of the words and said whether they described a 
situation in which someone would be happy, sad, angry, 
or neutral. In another condition the subjects judged the 
emotional state from the tone of the voice. The investiga-
tors found that comprehension of emotion from word 
meaning increased the activity of the prefrontal cortex 
bilaterally, the left more than the right. Comprehension 
of emotion from tone of voice increased the activity of 
only the right prefrontal cortex. (See Figure 11.16.)
Heilman, Watson, and Bowers (1983) recorded a par-
ticularly interesting case of a man with a disorder called 
pure word deafness, caused by damage to the left temporal 
cortex. (This syndrome is described in Chapter 14.)  
The man could not comprehend the meaning of speech 
but had no difficulty identifying the emotion being ex-
pressed by its intonation. This case, like the functional-
imaging study by George et al. (1996), indicates that com-
prehension of words and recognition of tone of voice are 
independent functions.
Role of The Amygdala  
And Prefrontal Cortex
As we saw in the previous section, the amygdala plays a 
special role in emotional responses. It plays a role in 
emotional recognition as well. For example, several 
studies have found that lesions of the amygdala (the re-
sult of degenerative diseases or surgery for severe sei-
zure disorders) impair people’s ability to recognize fa-
cial expressions of emotion, especially expressions of 
fear (Adolphs et al., 1994, 1995; Young et al., 1995; 
Calder et al., 1996; Adolphs et al., 1999). In addition, 
functional-imaging studies (Morris et al., 1996; Whalen 
et al., 1998) have found large increases in the activity of 
story and then heard two different vocalizations (sighs, 
groans, laughs, and so on), one of which would be ap-
propriate for the emotion produced by the story. Mem-
bers of both cultures had no difficulty choosing the 
correct vocalizations of members of their culture and 
the other culture. (See Figure 11.15.)
Neural Basis of the Communication 
of Emotions: Recognition
Effective communication is a two-way process. That is, 
the ability to display one’s emotional state by changes in 
expression is useful only if other people are able to rec-
ognize them. In fact, Kraut and Johnston (1979) unob-
trusively observed people in circumstances that would 
be likely to make them happy. They found that happy 
situations (such as making a strike while bowling, seeing 
the home team score, or experiencing a beautiful day) 
produced only small signs of happiness when the peo-
ple were alone. However, when the people were inter-
acting socially with other people, they were much more 
likely to smile. For example, bowlers who made a strike 
usually did not smile when the ball hit the pins, but 
when they turned around to face their companions, 
they often smiled. Jones et al. (1991) found that even 
10-month-old children showed this tendency. (No, I’m 
not suggesting that infants have been observed while 
bowling.)
Recognition of another person’s facial expression 
of emotions is generally automatic, rapid, and accurate. 
Tracy and Robbins (2008) found that observers quickly 
recognized brief expressions of a variety of emotions. If 
they were given more time to think about the expression 
they had seen, they showed very little improvement.
figure 11.15  Identification of Nonverbal Vocal 
Expressions of Emotions in a Different Culture
The graph shows the mean number of correct responses 
in identifying audio recordings of nonverbal emotional 
expressions of English speakers and Himba speakers 
(residents of northern Namibia) by speakers of English 
and Himba. Accuracy for cross-cultural identification was 
almost as good as intra-cultural identification.
(Based on data from Sauter et al., 2010.)
2.0
2.5
3.0
4.0
3.5
Mean number of
correct responses
Own language
Other language
Language spoken by people whose
nonverbal sounds were listened to

	
Communication of Emotions	
379
bodies posed in gestures of fear activates the amygdala, 
just as the sight of fearful faces does (Hadjikhani and de 
Gelder, 2003). Meeren, van Heijnsbergen, and de Gelder 
(2005) prepared computer-modified photographs of 
people showing facial expressions of emotions that were 
either congruent with the person’s body posture (for 
example, a facial expression of fear and a body posture of 
fear) or incongruent (for example, a facial expression of 
anger and a body posture of fear). The investigators 
asked people to identify the facial expressions shown in 
the photos and found that the ratings were faster and 
more accurate when the facial and body expressions were 
congruent. In other words, when we look at other peo-
ple’s faces, our perception of their emotion is affected by 
their body posture as well as their facial expression.
As we saw in Chapter 6, the visual cortex receives 
information from two systems of neurons. The magnocel-
lular system (named for layers of large cells in the lateral 
geniculate nucleus of the thalamus that relay visual infor-
mation from the eye to the visual cortex) provides infor-
mation about movement, depth, and very subtle differ-
ences in brightness in the scene before our eyes. This 
system appeared early in evolution of the mammalian 
brain and provides most mammals (dogs and cats, for 
example) with a monochromatic, somewhat fuzzy image 
of the world. The parvocellular system (named for layers of 
small cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus) is found only 
in some primates, including humans. This system pro-
vides us with color vision and detection of fine details. 
The part of the visual association cortex responsible for 
recognition of faces, the fusiform face area, receives infor-
mation primarily (but not solely) from the parvocellular 
system. The information that the amygdala receives from 
the superior colliculus and the pulvinar has its origin in 
the more primitive magnocellular system.
the amygdala when people view photographs of faces 
expressing fear but only small increases (or even de-
creases) when they look at photographs of happy faces. 
However, although amygdala lesions impair visual rec-
ognition of facial expressions of emotion, several studies 
have found that they do not appear to affect people’s 
ability to recognize emotions in tone of voice (Anderson 
and Phelps, 1998; Adolphs and Tranel, 1999).
Several studies suggest that the amygdala receives vi-
sual information that we use to recognize facial expres-
sions of emotion directly from the thalamus and not from 
the visual association cortex. Adolphs (2002) notes that 
the amygdala receives visual input from two sources: sub-
cortical and cortical. The subcortical input (from the supe-
rior colliculus and the pulvinar, a large nucleus in the 
posterior thalamus) appears to provide the most impor-
tant information for this task. In fact, some people with 
blindness caused by damage to the visual cortex can recog-
nize facial expressions of emotion even though they have no 
conscious awareness of looking at a person’s face, a phenome-
non known as affective blindsight (de Gelder et al., 1999; 
Anders et al., 2004). Tamietto et al. (2009) confirmed that 
“emotional contagion” can take place even without con-
scious awareness. They presented photographs of faces 
expressing happiness or fearfulness to the sighted and 
blind fields of people with unilateral visual cortex lesions. 
Although the people did not report seeing an emotional 
expression (or even a face) in their blind fields, they auto-
matically made facial expressions of their own that matched 
those of the faces in the photographs. Figure 11.17 shows 
the contraction of a “smile muscle” and a “frown muscle” 
under these conditions. Note that the appropriate muscles 
contracted when the happy or fearful face was presented 
to either the sighted field (“seen stimuli”) or the blind 
field (“unseen stimuli”). (See Figure 11.17.)
People can express emotions through their body lan-
guage, as well as through muscular movements of their 
face (de Gelder, 2006). For example, a clenched fist 
might accompany an angry facial expression, and a fear-
ful person might run away. The sight of photographs of 
figure 11.16  Perception of Emotions
The PET scans indicate brain regions activated by listening to emotions expressed by 
meanings of words (red) or tone of voice (green).
(Tracings of brain activity from George et al., 1996.)
Right
Left
Meanings
of words
Tone of voice
x affective blindsight  The ability of a person who cannot see 
objects in his or her blind field to accurately identify facial 
expressions of emotion while remaining unconscious of perceiving 
them; caused by damage to the visual cortex.

380	
Chapter 11  Emotion
An ingenious functional-imaging study by Vuilleumier 
et al. (2003) presented people with pictures of faces show-
ing neutral or fearful expressions. Some of the pictures 
were normal, some had been filtered with a computer pro-
gram so that they showed only high spatial frequencies, and 
some had been filtered to show only low spatial frequencies. 
(Chapter 6 described the concept of spatial frequencies.) 
As Figure 11.18 shows, high spatial frequencies show fine 
details of transitions between light and dark, and low spatial 
frequencies show fuzzy images. As you may have deduced, 
these photos primarily stimulate the parvocellular and mag-
nocellular systems, respectively. (See Figure 11.18.)
Vuilleumier and his colleagues found that the fusi-
form face area was better at recognizing individual faces 
and primarily used high spatial frequency (parvocellular) 
information to do so. In contrast, the amygdala (and the 
superior colliculus and pulvinar, which provide it with vi-
sual information) was able to recognize an expression of 
fear based on low spatial frequency (magnocellular) in-
formation but not on high spatial frequency information.
Krolak-Salmon et al. (2004) recorded electrical po-
tentials from the amygdala and visual association cortex 
through electrodes that had been implanted in people 
who were being evaluated for neurosurgery to alleviate 
a seizure disorder. They presented the people with 
photog­raphs of faces showing neutral expressions or 
figure 11.17  Unconscious Imitation of Facial Expressions of Emotions
When patients with unilateral damage to the visual cortex saw photographs of happy 
or fearful faces, they smiled or frowned when the photographs were presented to their 
sighted or blind field, which indicates that visual information concerning emotional 
expressions can take place without conscious awareness.
(Based on data from Tamietto et al., 2009.)
0
– 0.5
1
0.5
Time from stimulus onset (msec)
400
800
1200
2000
1600
Zygomaticus major
(smile muscle)
Unseen stimuli
Seen stimuli
–1
0
– 0.5
1
0.5
–1
Corrugator supercilli
(frown muscle)
Happy face
Happy face
Fearful face
Fearful face
EMG response (  V)
µ
EMG response (  V)
µ
figure 11.18  Involvement of Magnocellular and 
Parvocellular Systems in Emotional Perception
The figure shows the stimuli used by Vuilleumier et al. (2003). 
The more primitive magnocellular system is sensitive to low 
spatial frequencies (SF), and the more recently evolved 
parvocellular system is sensitive to high spatial frequencies.
(From Vuilleumier, P., Armony, J. L., Driver, J., and Dolan, R. J. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2003, 6, 624–631.)
Broad SF
High SF
Low SF

	
Communication of Emotions	
381
S. M. did not look at eyes suggests a cause for her failure 
to detect only this emotion. In fact, when Adolphs et al. 
(2005) instructed S. M. to look at the eyes of the face she 
was examining, she was able to recognize an expression 
of fear. However, unless she was reminded to do so, she 
soon stopped looking at eyes, and her ability to recog-
nize a fearful expression disappeared again. It will be 
interesting to learn whether other people with amygdala 
damage can also recognize expressions of fear if they 
are instructed to look at eyes.
Perception of Direction of Gaze
Perrett and his colleagues (see Perrett et al., 1992) have 
discovered an interesting brain function that may be 
related to recognition of emotional expression. They 
found that neurons in the monkey’s superior temporal 
sulcus (STS) are involved in recognition of the direction 
of another monkey’s gaze—or even that of a human. 
They found that some neurons in this region responded 
when the monkey looked at photographs of a monkey’s 
face or a human face but only when the gaze of the face 
in the photograph was oriented in a particular direc-
tion. For example, Figure 11.21 shows the activity level 
of a neuron that responded when a human face was 
looking upward. (See Figure 11.21.)
Why is gaze important in recognition of emotions? 
First, it is important to know whether an emotional ex-
pression is directed toward you or toward someone else. 
For example, an angry expression directed toward you 
means something very different from a similar expres-
sion directed toward someone else. And if someone else 
shows signs of fear, the expression can serve as a useful 
warning, but only if you can figure out what the person 
is looking at. In fact, Adams and Kleck (2005) found 
that people more readily recognized anger if the eyes of 
another person were directed toward the observer and 
fear if they were directed somewhere else. As Blair 
expressions of fear, happiness, or disgust. They found 
that fearful faces produced the largest response and 
that the amygdala showed activity before the visual cor-
tex did. The rapid response supports the conclusion 
that the amygdala receives visual information from the 
magnocellular system (which conducts information 
very rapidly) that permits it to recognize facial expres-
sions of fear.
So far, the evidence suggests that the amygdala plays 
an indispensable role in recognition of facial expres-
sions of fear. However, a study by Adolphs et al. (2005) 
suggests that, under the appropriate conditions, other 
regions of the brain can perform this task. Adolphs and 
his colleagues discovered that S. M., a woman with bilat-
eral amygdala damage, failed to look at the eyes when 
she examined photographs of faces. Spezio et al. (2007) 
conducted a similar study, but this one measured S. M.’s 
eye movements while she was actually conversing with 
another person. Like the study by Adolphs et al., this 
one found that S. M. failed to direct her gaze to the 
other person’s eyes. In contrast, she spent an abnor-
mally large amount of time looking at the other per-
son’s mouth. (See Figure 11.19.)
By themselves, eyes are able to convey a fearful ex-
pression. (See Figure 11.20.) A functional-imaging study 
by Whalen et al. (2004) found that viewing the fearful 
eyes shown in Figure 11.20 activated the ventral amyg-
dala, the region that receives the majority of the cortical 
and subcortical inputs to the amygdala. So the fact that 
figure 11.19  Eye Fixations After Amygdala Damage
The figure shows the numbers of fixations on a person’s 
face made by a patient with bilateral amygdala damage 
(Patient S. M.) and a normal subject. Warmer colors 
indicate increasing numbers of fixations. Note that 
Patient S. M. does not look at the other person’s eyes.
(From Spezio, M. L., Huang, P.-Y. S., Castelli, F., and Adolphs, R. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 3994–3997. Copyright 2007, The Society for Neuroscience.)
Patient  S. M.
Normal subject
figure 11.20  Role of the Whites of Eyes  
in Emotional Perception
The stimuli used in the study by Whalen et al. (2004) 
show that the whites of the eyes alone can convey the 
impression of a fearful expression.
(From Whalen, P. J., Kagan, J., Cook, R. G., et al. Science, 2004, 306, 2061. 
Copyright 2004 American Association for the Advancement of Science.)
Fear
Happiness

382	
Chapter 11  Emotion
when we see a facial expression of an emotion, we uncon-
sciously imagine ourselves making that expression. Of-
ten, we do more than imagine making the expressions—
we actually imitate what we see. Adolphs et al. suggest 
that the somatosensory representation of what it feels like 
to make the perceived expression provides cues that we 
use to recognize the emotion being expressed in the face 
we are viewing. In support of this hypothesis, Adolphs 
and his colleagues report that the ability of patients with 
right hemisphere lesions to recognize facial expressions 
of emotions is correlated with their ability to perceive 
somatosensory stimuli. That is, patients with somatosensory 
(2008) notes, an angry expression directed toward the 
observer means that the other person wants the ob-
server to stop what he or she is doing.
The neocortex that lines the STS seems to provide 
such information. Lesions there disrupt monkeys’ abil-
ity to discriminate the direction of another animal’s 
gaze, but they do not impair the monkeys’ ability to 
recognize other animals’ faces (Campbell et al., 1990; 
Heywood and Cowey, 1992). As we saw in Chapter 6, the 
posterior parietal cortex—the endpoint of the dorsal 
stream of visual analysis—is concerned with perceiving 
the location of objects in space. A functional-imaging 
study by Pelphrey et al. (2003) had people watch an 
animated cartoon of a face. When the direction of gaze 
changed, increased activity was seen in the right STS 
and posterior parietal cortex. Presumably, the connec-
tions between neurons in the STS and the parietal cor-
tex enable the orientation of another person’s gaze to 
direct one’s attention to a particular location in space.
Role of Imitation in Recognition of 
Emotional Expressions: The Mirror  
Neuron System
Adolphs et al. (2000) discovered a possible link between 
somatosensation and emotional recognition. They com-
piled computerized information about the locations of 
brain damage in 108 patients with localized brain lesions 
and correlated this information with the patients’ ability 
to recognize and identify facial expressions of emotions. 
They found that the most severe damage to this ability 
was caused by damage to the somatosensory cortex of the 
right hemisphere. (See Figure 11.22.) They suggest that, 
figure 11.21  A Gaze-Direction Cell
The graph shows the responses of a single neuron in the cortex lining the superior 
temporal sulcus of a monkey’s brain. The cell fired most vigorously when the monkey 
was presented a photograph of a face looking upward.
(From Perrett, D. I., Harries, M. H., Mistlin, A. J., et al. International Journal of Comparative Psychology, 1992, 4, 25–55.)
10
20
30
40
50
Response (spikes/sec)
figure 11.22  Brain Damage and Recognition  
of Facial Expressions of Emotion
This computer-generated image shows performance of 
subjects with localized brain damage on recognition of 
facial expressions of emotion. The colored areas outline 
the site of the lesions. Lesions that resulted in good 
performance are shown in shades of blue; those that 
resulted in poor performance are shown in red and yellow.
(From Adolphs, R., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., Cooper, G., and Damasio, A. R. The 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2000, 20, 2683–2690.)
Left hemisphere
Right hemisphere

	
Communication of Emotions	
383
In Chapter 8 I described research on audiovisual  
neurons—neurons that respond to the sounds of particular 
actions and to the sight of those actions. Warren et al. 
(2006) obtained evidence that audiovisual neurons play a 
role in communication of emotions, too. The investiga-
tors asked volunteers to make emotional sounds in  
response to written scenarios that presented situations 
expected to evoke triumph, amusement, fear, and disgust. 
The volunteers were asked not to make verbal responses 
such as “yuck” or “yippee” but to restrict themselves to 
nonverbal vocal responses. These sounds were presented 
to subjects while they underwent fMRI scanning. The 
scans showed that hearing the emotional vocalizations 
activated the same regions of the brain that were activated 
by facial expressions of these emotions. In other words, 
when we hear other people make nonverbal emotional 
sounds, our mirror neuron system is activated, and the 
feedback from this activation may contribute to our rec-
ognition of the emotions being expressed by these sounds.
Disgust
And now for something completely different. Several stud-
ies have found that damage to the insular cortex and basal 
ganglia impairs people’s ability to recognize facial expres-
sions of disgust (Sprengelmeyer et al., 1996, 1997; Calder 
et al., 2000). In addition, a functional-imaging study by 
Wicker et al. (2003) found that both smelling a disgusting 
odor and seeing a face of a person showing an expression 
of disgust activate the insular cortex. Disgust (literally, 
“bad taste”) is an emotion provoked by something that 
tastes or smells bad—or by an action that we consider to 
be in bad taste (figuratively, not literally). Disgust pro-
duces a very characteristic facial expression; if you want to 
see a good example, refer back to Figure 11.14d. As we saw 
in Chapter 7, the insula contains the primary gustatory 
cortex, so perhaps it is not a coincidence that this region 
is also involved in recognition of “bad taste.”
A functional-imaging study by Thielscher and Pes-
soa (2007) asked subjects to press one of two levers to 
indicate whether the facial expression they saw was one 
of disgust or fear. The expressions varied in intensity, 
and one of them was actually neutral, indicating nei-
ther disgust nor fear. Nevertheless, the subjects were 
asked to press one of the levers on every trial, indicating 
disgust or fear. When the subjects saw faces expressing 
disgust, the insular cortex and part of the basal ganglia 
were activated. What was particularly interesting was 
that even when the subjects were watching a neutral 
expression, if they pressed the “disgust” lever, the “dis-
gust” regions of the brain were activated.
The results of an online survey presented on the 
British Broadcasting Corporation Science web site sug-
gests that the emotion of disgust has its origins in avoid-
ance of disease. The survey presented pairs of photos and 
asked people to indicate which photos were more dis-
gusting. The people who responded indicated that the 
impairments (caused by right-hemisphere lesions) also 
had impairments in recognition of emotions.
Hussey and Safford (2009) review a considerable 
amount of evidence that supports this hypothesis (the  
so-called simulationist hypothesis). For example, neuroim-
aging studies have shown that brain regions that are acti-
vated when particular emotional expressions are observed 
are also activated when these expressions are imitated. In 
addition, a study by Pitcher et al. (2008) used transcranial 
magnetic stimulation to disrupt the normal activity of 
brain regions involved in visual perception of faces or 
perception of somatosensory feedback from one’s own 
face. They found that disruption of either region impaired 
people’s ability to recognize facial expressions of emo-
tion. Finally, a study by Oberman et al. (2007) had people 
hold a pen between their teeth in a way that interfered 
with smiling. When they did so, they had difficulty recog-
nizing facial expressions of happiness, but not expres-
sions of disgust, fear, and sadness, which involve the upper 
part of the face more than smiling does.
We are beginning to understand the neural circuit 
that provides this form of feedback. In Chapter 8 I de-
scribed the role of mirror neurons in the control of move-
ment. Mirror neurons are activated when an animal per-
forms a particular behavior or when it sees another 
animal performing that behavior. Presumably, these 
neurons are involved in learning to imitate the actions of 
others. These neurons, which are located in the ventral 
premotor area of the frontal lobe, receive input from the 
superior temporal sulcus and the posterior parietal cor-
tex. As we saw in Chapter 8, this circuit is activated when 
we see another person perform a goal-directed action, 
and feedback from this activity helps us to understand 
what the person is trying to accomplish. Carr et al. (2003) 
suggest that the mirror neuron system, which is activated 
when we observe facial movements of other people, pro-
vides feedback that helps us to understand how other 
people feel. In other words, the mirror neuron system 
may be involved in our ability to empathize with the emo-
tions of other people. (I will have more to say about 
empathy in the last section of this chapter.)
A neurological disorder known as Moebius syn-
drome provides further support for this hypothesis. 
Moebius syndrome is a congenital condition that in-
volves defective development of the sixth (abducens) 
and seventh (facial) cranial nerves and results in facial 
paralysis and inability to make lateral eye movements. 
Because of this paralysis, people affected with Moebius 
syndrome cannot make facial expressions of emotion. 
In addition, they have difficulty recognizing the emo-
tional expressions of other people (Cole, 2001). Per-
haps their inability to produce facial expressions of 
emotions makes it impossible for them to imitate the 
expressions of other people, and the lack of internal 
feedback from the motor system to the somatosensory 
cortex may make the task of recognition more difficult.

384	
Chapter 11  Emotion
Neural Basis of the Communication 
of Emotions: Expression
Facial expressions of emotion are automatic and invol-
untary (although, as we saw, they can be modified by 
display rules). It is not easy to produce a realistic facial 
expression of emotion when we do not really feel that 
way. In fact, Ekman and Davidson have confirmed an 
early observation by a nineteenth-century neurologist, 
Guillaume-Benjamin Duchenne de Boulogne, that gen-
uinely happy smiles, as opposed to false smiles or social 
smiles people make when they greet someone else, in-
volve contraction of a muscle near the eyes, the lateral 
part of the orbicularis oculi—now sometimes referred 
to as Duchenne’s muscle (Ekman, 1992; Ekman and 
Davidson, 1993). As Duchenne put it, “The first [zygo-
matic major muscle] obeys the will but the second [or-
bicularis oculi] is only put in play by the sweet emotions 
of the soul; the . . . fake joy, the deceitful laugh, cannot 
provoke the contraction of this latter muscle” (Duch-
enne, 1862/1990, p. 72). (See Figure 11.24.) The diffi-
culty actors have in voluntarily producing a convincing 
facial expression of emotion is one of the reasons that 
led Constantin Stanislavsky to develop his system of 
method acting, in which actors attempt to imagine them-
selves in a situation that would lead to the desired emotion. 
figure 11.23  Disease and Disgust
The figure shows pairs of photographs with high and low 
relation to the threat of disease used in the online survey 
presented on the BBC Science web site. The numbers in 
red or green indicate the mean ratings (range = 1–5) 
made by people who completed the survey.
(From Curtis, V., Aunger, R., and Rabie, T. Biology Letters, 2004, 271, S131–S133.)
one that appeared to hold a potential threat of disease 
was more disgusting. For example, a yellow liquid that 
has soaked a tissue looks more like a body fluid than a 
blue liquid does. (See Figure 11.23.)
figure 11.24  An Artificial Smile
The photograph shows Dr. Duchenne electrically 
stimulating muscles in the face of a volunteer, causing 
contraction of muscles around the mouth that become 
active during a smile. As Duchenne discovered, however, 
a true smile also involves muscles around the eyes.

	
Communication of Emotions	
385
Which alternative below finishes the joke?
	 a.	 “Oops!” as he steps on a rake that barely misses  
his face.
	 b.	 “Fine, then you won’t be wanting your golf clubs—
I’ll just borrow them.”
	 c.	 “Oh well, can I borrow it when you’re done, then?”
	 d.	 “The birds are always eating my grass seed.”
Once the emotion is evoked, the facial expressions  
follow naturally (Stanislavsky, 1936).
This observation is confirmed by two neurological 
disorders with complementary symptoms (Hopf, Mueller-
Forell, and Hopf, 1992; Topper, Kosinski, and Mull, 
1995; Urban et al., 1998; Michel et al., 2008). The first, 
volitional facial paresis, is caused by damage to the face 
region of the primary motor cortex or to the fibers con-
necting this region with the motor nucleus of the facial 
nerve, which controls the muscles responsible for move-
ment of the facial muscles. (Paresis, from the Greek “to 
let go,” refers to a partial paralysis.) The interesting 
thing about volitional facial paresis is that the patient 
cannot voluntarily move the facial muscles but will  
express a genuine emotion with those muscles. For ex-
ample, Figure 11.25(a) shows a woman trying to pull 
her lips apart and show her teeth. Because of the lesion 
in the face region of her right primary motor cortex, 
she could not move the left side of her face. However, 
when she laughed (Figure 11.25b), both sides of her 
face moved normally. (See Figure 11.25a and 11.25b.) In 
contrast, emotional facial paresis is caused by damage 
to the insular region of the prefrontal cortex, to the 
white matter of the frontal lobe, or to parts of the thala-
mus. This system joins the system responsible for volun-
tary movements of the facial muscles in the medulla or 
caudal pons. People with this disorder can move their 
face muscles voluntarily but do not express emotions 
on the affected side of the face. Figure 11.25(c) shows 
a man pulling his lips apart to show his teeth, which he 
had no trouble doing. Figure 11.25(d) shows him smil-
ing; as you can see, only the left side of his mouth is 
raised. He had a stroke that damaged the white matter 
of the left frontal lobe. (See Figure 11.25c and 11.25d.) 
These two syndromes clearly indicate that different 
brain mechanisms are responsible for voluntary move-
ments of the facial muscles and automatic, involuntary 
expression of emotions involving the same muscles.
Several studies have investigated the brain mecha-
nisms involved in laughter, an expression of emotion 
more intense than smiling. Arroyo et al. (1993) reported 
the case of a patient who had seizures that were accom-
panied by mirthless laughter—that is, the patient 
laughed but was neither happy nor amused. Recordings 
made with depth electrodes indicated that the seizure 
began in the left anterior cingulate gyrus. Removal of a 
noncancerous tumor located nearby ended both the 
seizures and the mirthless laughter. The authors suggest 
that anterior cingulate cortex may be involved in the 
muscular movements that produce laughter. Shammi 
and Stuss (1999) found that damage to the right vmPFC 
impaired people’s ability to understand—and be amused 
by—jokes. For example, consider the following joke:
Mr. Smith’s neighbor approaches him and asks, 
“Say, are you using your lawnmower this after-
noon?” “Yes, I am,” replies Mr. Smith.
x volitional facial paresis  Difficulty in moving the facial muscles 
voluntarily; caused by damage to the face region of the primary 
motor cortex or its subcortical connections.
x emotional facial paresis  Lack of movement of facial muscles 
in response to emotions in people who have no difficulty moving 
these muscles voluntarily; caused by damage to the insular 
prefrontal cortex, subcortical white matter of the frontal lobe, or 
parts of the thalamus.
figure 11.25  Emotional and Volitional Paresis
(a) A woman with volitional facial paresis caused by a 
right hemisphere lesion tries to pull her lips apart and 
show her teeth. Only the right side of her face responds. 
(b) The same woman shows a genuine smile. (c) A man 
with emotional facial paresis caused by a left-hemisphere 
lesion shows his teeth. (d) The same man smiles. Only the 
left side of his face responds.
(From Hopf, H. C., Mueller-Forell, W., and Hopf, N. J., Neurology, 1992, 42, 
1918–1923.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

386	
Chapter 11  Emotion
motor control is contralateral, the results suggest that 
the right hemisphere is more expressive than the left.
Moscovitch and Olds (1982) made more natural 
observations of people in restaurants and parks and 
found that the left side of their faces appeared to make 
stronger expressions of emotions. They confirmed these 
results in the laboratory by analyzing videotapes of peo-
ple telling sad or humorous stories. A review of the lit-
erature by Borod et al. (1998) found forty-eight other 
studies that obtained similar results.
Using the chimerical faces technique, Hauser 
(1993) found that rhesus monkeys, like humans, ex-
press emotions more strongly in the left sides of their 
faces. Analysis of videotapes further showed that emo-
tional expressions also begin sooner in the left side of 
the face. These findings suggest that hemispherical spe-
cialization for emotional expression appeared before 
The funny alternative is, of course, (b). But people 
with ventromedial prefrontal damage usually chose (a), 
presumably because its slapstick aspect reminded them 
of humor that they had seen in the past. Clearly, they 
did not get the point of the joke.
A functional-imaging study by Goel and Dolan 
(2001) found that different types of jokes activated dif-
ferent regions of the brain, but all of them activated one 
region: the right ventromedial prefrontal cortex. An-
other functional-imaging study by the same authors 
(Goel and Dolan, 2007) presented subjects with socially 
appropriate and socially inappropriate cartoon jokes. 
(The inappropriate jokes had strong sexual content that 
some subjects found offensive.) The investigators found 
that increasingly funny jokes produced increasing acti-
vation of several regions, including the nucleus accum-
bens (a region involved in reinforcement and reward) 
and the right vmPFC, while jokes with increasing viola-
tion of social norms produced increasing activation of 
several regions, including the right amygdala and the 
left orbital frontal cortex. (See Figure 11.26.)
As we saw in the previous subsection, the right hemi-
sphere plays a more significant role in recognizing emo-
tions in the voice or facial expressions of other people—
especially negative emotions. The same hemispheric 
specialization appears to be true for expressing emo-
tions. When people show emotions with their facial mus-
cles, the left side of the face usually makes a more in-
tense expression. For example, Sackeim and Gur (1978) 
cut photographs of people who were expressing emo-
tions into right and left halves, prepared mirror images 
of each of them, and pasted them together, producing 
so-called chimerical faces (from the mythical Chimera, a 
fire-breathing monster, part goat, part lion, and part 
serpent). They found that the left halves were more ex-
pressive than the right ones. (See Figure 11.27.) Because 
figure 11.26  Humor and Violation of Social Norms
The graph shows the activation of the right ventromedial prefrontal cortex and the left 
orbitofrontal cortex, as measured by fMRI, by exposure to humorous cartoons with 
increasing funniness and increasing violation of social norms.
(Based on data from Goel and Dolan, 2007.)
0
2
4
6
–2
Activation
vmPFC
Increasing funniness
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
–1
–2
Activation
OFC
1
2
3
Increasing social norm violation
figure 11.27  Chimerical Faces
(a) Original photo. (b) Composite of the right side of the 
man’s face. (c) Composite of the left side of the man’s face.
(Reprinted with permission from Neuropsychologia, 16, H. A. Sackeim and  
R. C. Gur, Lateral asymmetry in intensity of emotional expression. Copyright  
1978, Pergamon Press.)
(a)
(b)
(c)

	
Communication of Emotions	
387
Left hemisphere lesions do not usually impair vocal 
expressions of emotion. For example, people with  
Wernicke’s aphasia (described in Chapter 14) usually 
modulate their voice according to mood, even though 
the words they say make no sense. In contrast, right-
hemisphere lesions do impair expression of emotion, 
both facially and by tone of voice.
We saw in the previous subsection that the amyg-
dala is involved in the recognition of facial expression 
of emotions. Research indicates that it is not involved in 
emotional expression. Anderson and Phelps (2000) re-
ported the case of S. P., a 54-year-old woman whose 
right amygdala was removed to treat a serious seizure 
disorder. Because of a preexisting lesion of the left 
amygdala, the surgery resulted in a bilateral amygdalec-
tomy. After the surgery, S. P. lost the ability to recognize 
facial expressions of fear, but she had no difficulty rec-
ognizing individual faces, and she could easily identify 
male and female faces and accurately judge their ages. 
What is particularly interesting is that the amygdala le-
sions did not impair S. P.’s ability to produce her own 
facial expressions of fear. She had no difficulty accu-
rately expressing fear, anger, happiness, sadness, dis-
gust, and surprise. However, when she saw a photo-
graph of herself showing fear, she could not tell what 
emotion her face had been expressing.
the emergence of our own species. Figure 11.28 shows 
six videotape frames of a monkey’s fear grimace ex-
pressed during the course of an interaction with a more 
dominant monkey. (See Figure 11.28.)
figure 11.28  Emotional Expression and the Right 
Hemisphere
Successive frames from a videotape of a rhesus monkey 
show a fear grimace in response to an interaction with a 
more dominant monkey. The movement begins in the left 
side of the face, controlled by the right hemisphere.
(From Hauser, M. D., Science, 1993, 261, 475–477. Copyright 1993, American 
Association for the Advancement of Science.)
Section Summary
Communication of Emotions
We (and members of other species) communicate our 
emotions primarily through facial gestures. Darwin 
believed that such expressions of emotion were 
innate—that these muscular movements were inher-
ited behavioral patterns. Ekman and his colleagues 
performed cross-cultural studies with members of an 
isolated tribe in New Guinea. Their results supported 
Darwin’s hypothesis.
Recognition of other people’s emotional expres-
sions involves the right hemisphere more than the 
left. Studies with normal people have shown that 
people can judge facial expressions or tone of voice 
better when the information is presented to the right 
hemisphere than when it is presented to the left 
hemisphere. Functional imaging indicates that when 
people judge the emotions of voices, the right hemi-
sphere is activated more than the left. Studies of peo-
ple with left- or right-hemisphere brain damage cor-
roborate these findings. In addition, studies show that 
recognition of particular faces involves neural circuits 
different from those needed to recognize facial 
expressions of emotions. Finally, the amygdala plays 
a role in recognition of facial expressions of fearful-
ness; lesions of the amygdala disrupt this ability, and 
functional-imaging studies show increased activity of 
the amygdala while the subject is engaging in this 
task. The ability to judge emotions by a person’s tone 
of voice is not affected.
The amygdala receives magnocellular (primitive) 
visual information from the superior colliculus and 
pulvinar, and this information is used in making judg-
ments about fearful expressions. Because of this 
input, people with damage to the visual cortex that 
leads to blindness in part of the visual field can never-
theless recognize facial expressions of emotions pre-
sented there, a phenomenon called affective blind-
sight. We can also recognize emotions expressed in a 
person’s body posture or movement, and the amyg-
dala receives and processes this input as well. One of 
(continued on next page)

388	
Chapter 11  Emotion
these responses, and it is this feedback that constitutes 
our feeling of emotion.
James said that our own emotional feelings are 
based on what we find ourselves doing and on the sen-
sory feedback we receive from the activity of our muscles 
and internal organs. For example, when we find our-
selves trembling and feel queasy, we experience fear. 
Where feelings of emotions are concerned, we are self-
observers. Thus, the two aspects of emotions reported in 
the first two sections of this chapter (patterns of emo-
tional responses and expressions of emotions) give rise 
to the third: feelings. (See Figure 11.29.)
James’s description of the process of emotion might 
strike you as being at odds with your own experience. 
Many people think that they experience emotions di-
rectly, internally. They consider the outward manifesta-
tions of emotions to be secondary events. But have you 
Feelings of Emotions
So far, we have examined two aspects of emotions: the 
organization of patterns of responses that deal with the 
situation that provokes the emotion and the communica-
tion of emotional states with other members of the spe-
cies. The final aspect of emotion to be examined in this 
chapter is the subjective component: feelings of emotion.
The James-Lange Theory
William James (1842–1910), an American psychologist, 
and Carl Lange (1834–1900), a Danish physiologist,  
independently suggested similar explanations for emo-
tion, which most people refer to collectively as the 
James-Lange theory ( James, 1884; Lange, 1887). Basi-
cally, the theory states that emotion-producing situa-
tions elicit an appropriate set of physiological responses, 
such as trembling, sweating, and increased heart rate. 
The situations also elicit behaviors, such as clenching of 
the fists or fighting. The brain receives sensory feedback 
from the muscles and from the organs that produce 
the reasons that bilateral amygdala damage impairs 
recognition of fearful facial expressions appears to be 
failure to look at people’s eyes.
The direction of the gaze of a person expressing 
an emotion has information value. Neurons in the 
superior temporal sulcus are sensitive to direction of 
gaze and transmit this information to other parts of 
the brain, including the amygdala. Mirror neurons in 
the ventral premotor cortex receive visual information 
concerning the facial expression of other people that 
activate the neural circuits responsible for these 
expressions. Feedback from this activity, which may 
be transmitted to the somatosensory cortex, helps us 
to comprehend the emotional intentions of other 
people. Damage to the basal ganglia and insular cor-
tex disrupts recognition of facial expressions of dis-
gust, and functional-imaging studies show increased 
activity in the insular cortex (which contains the  
primary gustatory cortex) when people smell  
disgusting odors or see faces displaying disgust.
Facial expression of emotions (and other stereo-
typical behaviors such as laughing and crying) are 
almost impossible to simulate. For example, only a 
genuine smile of pleasure causes the contraction of 
the lateral part of the orbicularis oculi (Duchenne’s 
muscle). The anterior cingulate gyrus appears to play 
a role in the motor aspects of laughter, while the 
appreciation of humor appears to involve the right 
ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Genuine expressions 
of emotion are controlled by special neural circuits. 
The best evidence for this assertion comes from the 
complementary syndromes of emotional and voli-
tional facial paresis. People with emotional facial 
paresis can move their facial muscles voluntarily but 
not in response to an emotion, whereas people with 
volitional facial paresis show the opposite symptoms. 
In addition, the left halves of people’s faces—and the 
faces of monkeys—tend to be more expressive than 
the right halves.
 Thought Questions
1.	 Do you think it is important to be able to recognize 
other people’s emotions? Why? Suppose that you 
could no longer recognize people’s facial expres-
sions of emotions. What consequences would that 
loss have for you?
2.	 Novelists will sometimes say that a person’s smile 
did not reach his or her eyes. What do they mean 
by that?
x James-Lange theory  A theory of emotion that suggests that 
behaviors and physiological responses are directly elicited by 
situations and that feelings of emotions are produced by feedback 
from these behaviors and responses.

	
Feelings of Emotions	
389
behaviors do. We do not know how the animals feel; we 
know only that they will snarl and attempt to bite if 
threatened. In any case, James did not attribute all feel-
ings of emotion to the internal organs; he also said that 
feedback from muscles was important. The threat might 
make the animal snarl and bite, and the feedback from 
the facial and neck muscles might constitute a “feeling” 
of anger, even if feedback from the internal organs was 
cut off. But we have no way to ask the animal how it felt.
James’s theory is difficult to verify experimentally be-
cause it attempts to explain feelings of emotion, not the 
causes of emotional responses, and feelings are private 
events. Some anecdotal evidence supports the theory. For 
example, Sweet (1966) reported the case of a man in 
whom some sympathetic nerves were severed on one side 
of the body to treat a cardiovascular disorder. The man—
a music lover—reported that the shivering sensation he 
felt while listening to music now occurred only on the 
unoperated side of his body. He still enjoyed listening to 
music, but the surgery had altered his emotional reaction.
In one of the few tests of James’s theory, Hohman 
(1966) collected data from people with spinal cord dam-
age. He asked these people about the intensity of their 
emotional feelings. If feedback is important, one would 
expect that emotional feelings would be less intense if 
the injury were high (that is, close to the brain) than if 
it were low, because a high spinal cord injury would 
make the person become insensitive to a larger part of 
the body. In fact, this result is precisely what Hohman 
found: The higher the injury, the less intense the feeling 
was. As one of Hohman’s subjects said:
I sit around and build things up in my mind, and 
I worry a lot, but it’s not much but the power of 
thought. I was at home alone in bed one day and 
dropped a cigarette where I couldn’t reach it.  
I finally managed to scrounge around and put  
it out. I could have burned up right there, but 
the funny thing is, I didn’t get all shook up 
about it. I just didn’t feel afraid at all, like you 
would suppose. (Hohman, 1966, p. 150)
Another subject showed that angry behavior (an emo-
tional response) does not appear to depend on feelings 
of emotion. Instead, the behavior is evoked by the situa-
tion (and by the person’s evaluation of it) even if the 
spinal cord damage has reduced the intensity of the 
person’s emotional feelings:
Now, I don’t get a feeling of physical animation, 
it’s sort of cold anger. Sometimes I act angry 
when I see some injustice. I yell and cuss and raise 
hell, because if you don’t do it sometimes, I’ve 
learned people will take advantage of you, but it 
doesn’t have the heat to it that it used to. It’s a 
mental kind of anger. (Hohman, 1966, p. 151)
ever found yourself in an unpleasant confrontation with 
someone else and discovered that you were trembling, 
even though you did not think that you were so bothered 
by the encounter? Or did you ever find yourself blushing 
in response to some public remark that was made about 
you? Or did you ever find tears coming to your eyes while 
you watched a film that you did not think was affecting 
you? What would you conclude about your emotional 
states in situations like these? Would you ignore the evi-
dence from your own physiological reactions?
A well-known physiologist, Walter Cannon, criticized 
James’s theory. He said that the internal organs were rela-
tively insensitive and that they could not respond very 
quickly, so feedback from them could not account for our 
feelings of emotions. In addition, he observed that cut-
ting the nerves that provide feedback from the internal 
organs to the brain did not alter emotional behavior 
(Cannon, 1927). However, subsequent research indicated 
that Cannon’s criticisms are not relevant. For example, 
although the viscera are not sensitive to some kinds of 
stimuli, such as cutting and burning, they provide much 
better feedback than Cannon suspected. Moreover, many 
changes in the viscera can occur rapidly enough that they 
could be the causes of feelings of emotion.
Cannon cited the fact that cutting the sensory 
nerves between the internal organs and the central ner-
vous system does not abolish emotional behavior in 
laboratory animals. However, this observation misses 
the point. It does not prove that feelings of emotion 
survive this surgical disruption—only that emotional 
figure 11.29  The James-Lange Theory of Emotion
An event in the environment triggers behavioral, 
autonomic, and endocrine responses. Feedback from 
these responses produces feelings of emotions.
Event that produces
emotional reaction
Muscles
Behavior
Autonomic
nervous system
Autonomic
response
Endocrine
response
Endocrine
system
Brain
Feedback produces
feelings of emotion

390	
Chapter 11  Emotion
that emotion. As you know, injections of a very dilute 
solution of botulinum toxin (Botox) into facial muscles 
can reduce wrinkling of the skin caused by chronic con-
traction of facial muscles. Lewis and Bowler studied 
people who had been treated with injections of Botox 
into the corrugator muscle, whose contraction is re-
sponsible for a large part of the facial expression of 
frowning, which is associated with negative emotions. 
They found that these people showed significantly less 
negative mood, compared with people who had receive 
other forms of cosmetic treatment. These results, like 
those described earlier in this subsection, suggest that 
feedback from a person’s facial expressions can affect 
his or her mood.
A functional-imaging study by Damasio et al. (2000) 
asked people to recall and try to reexperience past 
episodes from their lives that evoked feelings of sad-
ness, happiness, anger, and fear. The investigators 
found that recalling these emotions activated the sub-
jects’ somatosensory cortex and upper brain stem nu-
clei involved in control of internal organs and detec-
tion of sensations received from them. These responses 
are certainly compatible with James’s theory. As Damasio 
et al. put it,
Emotions are part of a neural mechanism  
based on structures that regulate the organ-
ism’s current state by executing specific actions 
via the musculoskeletal system, ranging from 
facial and postural expressions to complex be-
haviors, and by producing chemical and neural 
responses aimed at the internal milieu, viscera 
and telencephalic neural circuits. The conse-
quences of such responses are represented in 
both subcortical regulatory structures . . . and in 
cerebral cortex . . . , and those representations 
constitute a critical aspect of the neural basis of 
feelings. (p. 1049)
I suspect that if James were still alive, he would approve 
of these words.
The tendency to imitate the expressions of other 
people appears to be innate. Field et al. (1982) had 
adults make facial expressions in front of infants. The 
infants’ own facial expressions were videotaped and 
were subsequently rated by people who did not know 
what expressions the adults were displaying. Field and 
her colleagues found that even newborn babies (with an 
average age of 36 hours) tended to imitate the expres-
sions they saw. Clearly, the effect occurs too early in life 
to be a result of learning. Figure 11.30 shows three pho-
tographs of the adult expressions and the expressions 
they elicited in a baby. Can you look at them yourself 
without changing your own expression, at least a little? 
(See Figure 11.30.)
Feedback from Emotional  
Expressions
James stressed the importance of two aspects of emo-
tional responses: emotional behaviors and autonomic 
responses. As we saw earlier in this chapter, a particular 
set of muscles—those of the face—helps us to commu-
nicate our emotional state to other people. Several ex-
periments suggest that feedback from the contraction of 
facial muscles can affect people’s moods and even alter 
the activity of the autonomic nervous system.
Ekman and his colleagues (Ekman, Levenson, and 
Friesen, 1983; Levenson, Ekman, and Friesen, 1990) 
asked subjects to move particular facial muscles to sim-
ulate the emotional expressions of fear, anger, sur-
prise, disgust, sadness, and happiness. They did not 
tell the subjects what emotion they were trying to make 
them produce, but only what movements they should 
make. For example, to simulate fear, they told the sub-
jects, “Raise your brows. While holding them raised, 
pull your brows together. Now raise your upper eyelids 
and tighten the lower eyelids. Now stretch your lips 
horizontally.” (These movements produce a facial ex-
pression of fear.) While the subjects made the expres-
sions, the investigators monitored several physiologi-
cal responses controlled by the autonomic nervous 
system.
The simulated expressions did alter the activity of 
the autonomic nervous system. In fact, different facial 
expressions produced somewhat different patterns of 
activity. For example, anger increased heart rate and 
skin temperature, fear increased heart rate but de-
creased skin temperature, and happiness decreased 
heart rate without affecting skin temperature.
Why should a particular pattern of movements of 
the facial muscles cause changes in mood or in the 
activity of the autonomic nervous system? Perhaps the 
connection is a result of experience; in other words, 
perhaps the occurrence of particular facial move-
ments along with changes in the autonomic nervous 
system leads to classical conditioning, so that feed-
back from the facial movements becomes capable of 
eliciting the autonomic response—and a change in 
perceived emotion. Or perhaps the connection is in-
nate. As we saw earlier, the adaptive value of emo-
tional expressions is that they communicate feelings 
and intentions to others. The research presented ear-
lier in this chapter on the role of mirror neurons and 
the somatosensory cortex suggests that one of the 
ways we communicate feelings is through unconscious 
imitation.
A study by Lewis and Bowler (2009) found that in-
terfering with muscular movement associated with a par-
ticular emotion decreased people’s ability to experience 

	
Feelings of Emotions	
391
someone else smile is that their smile makes us smile 
and feel happy. In fact, a functional-imaging study by 
Pfeifer et al. (2008) found that when normal 10-year-old 
children watched and imitated emotional expressions, 
increased activity was seen in the frontal mirror neuron 
system. In addition, the level of neural activation was 
positively correlated with measures of the children’s em-
pathetic behavior and their interpersonal skills.
Perhaps imitation provides one of the channels by 
which organisms communicate their emotions—and 
evoke feelings of empathy. For example, if we see some-
one looking sad, we tend to assume a sad expression 
ourselves. The feedback from our own expression helps 
to put us in the other person’s place and makes us more 
likely to respond with solace or assistance. And perhaps 
one of the reasons we derive pleasure from making 
figure 11.30  Imitation in an Infant
The photographs show happy, sad, and surprised faces posed by an adult and the 
responses made by the infant.
(From Field, T., in Development of Nonverbal Behavior in Children, edited by R. S. Feldman. New York: Springer-Verlag, 
1982. Reprinted with permission.)
(b)
(c)
(a)
Section Summary
Feelings of Emotions
From the earliest times, people recognized that 
emotions were accompanied by feelings that 
seemed to come from inside the body, which prob-
ably provided the impetus for developing physiologi-
cal theories of emotion. James and Lange suggested 
that emotions were primarily responses to situations. 
Feedback from the physiological and behavioral 
reactions to emotion-producing situations gave rise 
to the feelings of emotion; thus, feelings are the 
results, not the causes, of emotional reactions. 
Hohman’s study of people with spinal cord damage 
supported the James-Lange theory; people who 
could no longer feel the reactions from most of their 
body reported that they no longer experienced 
intense emotional states.
Ekman and his colleagues have shown that even 
simulating an emotional expression causes changes in 
the activity of the autonomic nervous system. Perhaps 
feedback from these changes explains why an emo-
tion can be “contagious”: We see someone smile 
with pleasure, we ourselves imitate the smile, and the 
internal feedback makes us feel at least somewhat 
happier. The tendency to mimic the facial expression 
of others appears to be a consequence of activity in 
the brain’s system of mirror neurons.
 Thought Questions
1.	 Some people are more conscious of their own 
bodily reactions than most people. What effect 
would this sensitivity have on their mood?
2.	 Can you think of any evolutionary advantage of  
the fact that human infants can mimic the facial 
emotional expressions of adults?

392	
Chapter 11  Emotion
1.  Discuss the behavioral, autonomic, and hormonal 
components of an emotional response and the role 
of the amygdala in controlling them.
2.  Discuss the nature, functions, and neural control of 
aggressive behavior.
3.  Discuss the role of the ventral prefrontal cortex in the 
analysis of social situations and the effects of damage 
to this region.
4.  Discuss the hormonal control of aggression in males 
and aggression in females.
5.  Discuss the effects of androgens on human aggressive 
behavior.
Review Questions
6.  Discuss cross-cultural studies on the expression and 
comprehension of emotions.
7.  Describe the neural control of the recognition of 
emotional expression in normal people and people 
with brain damage.
8.  Discuss the neural control of emotional expression in 
normal people and people with brain damage.
9.  Discuss the James-Lange theory of feelings of emotion 
and evaluate relevant research.
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Emotion and Stress
Emotion and stress have profound effects on cognition. Although distinct, the 
neural circuits underlying emotion and stress interact. The Emotion and Stress 
module of the virtual brain will help you visualize the brain regions involved in 
the generation and perception of emotion. It will also help you visualize those 
regions involved in the generation of the stress response.
Study and Review on MyPsychLab

Ingestive Behavior
Outline
12
 Physiological Regulatory 
Mechanisms
 Drinking
Some Facts About Fluid Balance
Two Types of Thirst
Neural Mechanisms of Thirst
Section Summary
 Eating: Some Facts  
About Metabolism
Section Summary
 What Starts a Meal?
Signals from the Environment
Signals from the Stomach
Metabolic Signals
Section Summary
 What Stops a Meal?
Head Factors
Gastric Factors
Intestinal Factors
Liver Factors
Insulin
Long-Term Satiety: Signals  
from Adipose Tissue
Section Summary
 Brain Mechanisms
Brain Stem
Hypothalamus
Section Summary
 Obesity
Possible Causes
Treatment
Section Summary
 Anorexia Nervosa/Bulimia 
Nervosa
Possible Causes
Treatment
Section Summary
chapter

A
s the French physiologist Claude Bernard 
(1813–1878) said, “The constancy of the inter-
nal milieu is a necessary condition for a free 
life.” This famous quotation says succinctly what or-
ganisms must do to be able to exist in environments 
that are hostile to the living cells that compose them 
(that is, to live a “free life”): They must provide a barrier 
between their cells and the external environment— 
in the case of mammals this barrier consists of skin  
and mucous membrane. Within the barrier they must 
regulate the nature of the internal fluid that bathes 
the cells.
The physiological characteristics of the cells that 
constitute our bodies evolved long ago, when these cells 
floated freely in the ocean. In essence, what the evolu-
tionary process has accomplished is the ability to make 
our own seawater for bathing our cells, to add to this 
seawater the oxygen and nutrients that our cells need, 
and to remove from it waste products that would other-
wise poison them. To perform these functions, we have 
digestive, respiratory, circulatory, and excretory systems. 
We also have the behaviors necessary for finding and 
ingesting food and water.
Regulation of the fluid that bathes our cells is part of 
a process called homeostasis (“similar standing”). This 
chapter discusses the means by which we mammals achieve 
homeostatic control of the vital characteristics of our extra-
cellular fluid through our ingestive behavior: intake of 
food, water, and minerals such as sodium. First, we will 
examine the general nature of regulatory mechanisms; 
then we will consider drinking and eating and the neural 
mechanisms that are responsible for these behaviors.  
Finally, we will look at some research on the eating disorders.
Physiological Regulatory 
Mechanisms
A physiological regulatory mechanism is one that main-
tains the constancy of some internal characteristic of the 
organism in the face of external variability—for example, 
Carrie was a frail little baby. She nursed poorly, appar-
ently because she was so weak. For several years she was 
underweight. Her motor development and cognitive 
development were much slower than normal, she often 
seemed to have trouble breathing, and her hands and 
feet were especially small. Finally, her appetite seemed 
to improve. She began gaining weight and soon sur-
passed other children of her age. Previously, she had 
been passive and well behaved, but she now became 
difficult and demanding. She also showed compulsive 
behavior—picking at her skin, collecting and lining up 
objects, and protesting violently when her parents tried 
to put things away.
The worst problem, though, was her appetite. She ate 
everything she could and never seemed satisfied. At first 
her parents were so pleased to see Carrie finally gaining 
weight that they gave her food whenever she asked for it. 
But after a while it was clear that she was becoming obese. 
A specialist diagnosed her condition and told her parents 
that they would have to strictly limit Carrie’s food intake. 
Because of her weak muscles and low metabolic rate, she 
needed only 1200 Calories per day to maintain a normal 
weight. But Carrie was constantly looking for food. She 
would raid the refrigerator until her parents installed a lock 
on it and on the cabinets where they put food. They had  
to be careful of how they disposed of leftover food, 
vegetable peels, or meat trimmings because Carrie would 
raid the garbage can and eat them.
When Carrie went to school, she began gaining 
weight once more. She would quickly eat everything on 
her lunch tray and would then eat everything her class-
mates did not finish. If anyone dropped food on the floor 
near her, she would pick that up and eat it too. Because  
of Carrie’s special needs, the school appointed an aide to 
monitor her food intake to be sure that she ate only the 
low-calorie meal that she was served.
Carrie has Prader-Willi syndrome, caused by deletion 
of several genes in a segment of chromosome 15. This 
region appears to be involved in production of proteins 
that are critical to normal functioning of the hypothalamus. 
Most cases of Prader-Willi syndrome are apparently caused 
by random accidents that occur during the production of 
the father’s sperm cells. As you will learn in this chapter, 
much progress has been made in our understanding of the 
neural and hormonal mechanisms that control appetite and 
regulate body weight. Undoubtedly, we will soon learn 
which of these mechanisms are disrupted in Prader-Willi 
syndrome.
x homeostasis (home ee oh stay sis)  The process by which the 
body’s substances and characteristics (such as temperature and 
glucose level) are maintained at their optimal level.

	
Physiological Regulatory Mechanisms	
395
the body’s depleted stores of water or nutrients. Because 
of the delay between ingestion and replenishment of 
the depleted stores, ingestive behaviors are controlled 
by satiety mechanisms as well as by detectors that moni-
tor the system variables. Satiety mechanisms are re-
quired because of the physiology of our digestive system. 
For example, suppose you spend some time in a hot, dry 
environment and lose body water. The loss of water 
causes internal detectors to initiate the correctional 
mechanism: drinking. You quickly drink a glass or two of 
water and then stop. What stops your ingestive behav-
ior? The water is still in your digestive system, not yet in 
the fluid surrounding your cells, where it is needed. 
Therefore, although drinking was initiated by detectors 
that measure your body’s need for water, it was stopped by 
other means. There must be a satiety mechanism that says, 
in effect, “Stop—this water, when absorbed by the diges-
tive system into the blood, will eventually replenish the 
body’s need.” Satiety mechanisms monitor the activity of 
the correctional mechanism (in this case, drinking), not 
the system variables themselves. When a sufficient 
amount of drinking occurs, the satiety mechanisms stop 
further drinking in anticipation of the replenishment 
that will occur later. (See Figure 12.2.)
keeping body temperature constant despite changes in 
the ambient temperature. A regulatory mechanism con-
tains four essential features: the system variable (the 
characteristic to be regulated), a set point (the optimal 
value of the system variable), a detector that monitors 
the value of the system variable, and a correctional mech-
anism that restores the system variable to the set point.
An example of a regulatory system is a room whose 
temperature is regulated by a thermostatically con-
trolled heater. The system variable is the air tempera-
ture of the room, and the detector for this variable is a 
thermostat. This device can be adjusted so that contacts 
of a switch will be closed when the temperature falls 
below a preset value (the set point). Closure of the con-
tacts turns on the correctional mechanism—the coils of 
the heater. (See Figure 12.1.) If the room cools below the 
set point of the thermostat, the thermostat turns the 
heater on, and the heater warms the room. The rise in 
room temperature causes the thermostat to turn the 
heater off. Because the activity of the correctional mech-
anism (heat production) feeds back to the thermostat 
and causes it to turn the heater off, this process is called 
negative feedback. Negative feedback is an essential 
characteristic of all regulatory systems.
This chapter considers regulatory systems that in-
volve ingestive behaviors: drinking and eating. These 
behaviors are correctional mechanisms that replenish 
x ingestive behavior (in jess tiv)  Eating or drinking.
x system variable  A variable that is controlled by a regulatory 
mechanism, for example, temperature in a heating system.
x set point  The optimal value of the system variable in a 
regulatory mechanism.
x detector  In a regulatory process, a mechanism that signals 
when the system variable deviates from its set point.
x correctional mechanism  In a regulatory process, the mecha-
nism that is capable of changing the value of the system variable.
x negative feedback  A process whereby the effect produced 
by an action serves to diminish or terminate that action; a 
characteristic of regulatory systems.
x satiety mechanism  A brain mechanism that causes cessation 
of hunger or thirst, produced by adequate and available supplies 
of nutrients or water.
figure 12.1  Example of a Regulatory System
Electric heater
(correctional mechanism)
Negative
feedback
Temperature setting
(set point)
Heat
Air temperature
(system variable)
Thermostat
(detector)
figure 12.2  Outline of the System That Controls Drinking
1
2
3
4
5
6 Water is absorbed;
body fluids back to normal
Body
fluids
Detectors
Correctional
mechanism
(drinking)
Stomach
Satiety
mechanism
Body
loses
water
Detectors
signal
loss of water
Drinking
occurs
Inhibition
Stomach fills
with water,
sends signal
to brain
Satiety mechanism
inhibits further
drinking

396	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
so water does not tend to move into or out of the cells. 
If the interstitial fluid loses water (becomes more con-
centrated, or hypertonic), water will be pulled out of 
the cells. On the other hand, if the interstitial fluid 
gains water (becomes more dilute, or hypotonic), water 
will move into the cells. Either condition endangers 
cells; a loss of water deprives them of the ability to per-
form many chemical reactions, and a gain of water can 
cause their membranes to rupture. Therefore, the con-
centration of the interstitial fluid must be closely regu-
lated. (See Figure 12.4.)
The volume of the blood plasma must be closely 
regulated because of the mechanics of the operation of 
the heart. If the blood volume falls too low, the heart 
can no longer pump the blood effectively; if the volume 
is not restored, heart failure will result. This condition is 
called hypovolemia, literally “low volume of the blood” 
(-emia comes from the Greek haima, “blood”). The vas-
cular system of the body can make some adjustments for 
loss of blood volume by contracting the muscles in 
smaller veins and arteries, thereby presenting a smaller 
space for the blood to fill, but this correctional mecha-
nism has definite limits.
The two important characteristics of the body fluids—
the solute concentration of the intracellular fluid and 
the volume of the blood—are monitored by two differ-
ent sets of receptors. A single set of receptors would not 
work because it is possible for one of these fluid com-
partments to be changed without affecting the other. 
For example, a loss of blood obviously reduces the vol-
ume of the intravascular fluid, but it has no effect on the 
volume of the intracellular fluid. On the other hand, a 
salty meal will increase the solute concentration of the 
interstitial fluid, drawing water out of the cells, but it will 
not cause hypovolemia. Thus, the body needs two sets of 
receptors, one measuring blood volume and another 
measuring cell volume.
Drinking
To maintain our internal milieu at its optimal state, we 
have to drink some water from time to time. This section 
describes the control of this form of ingestive behavior.
Some Facts About Fluid Balance
Before you can understand the physiological control of 
drinking, you must know something about the fluid 
compartments of the body and their relationships with 
each other. The body contains four major fluid com-
partments: one compartment of intracellular fluid and 
three compartments of extracellular fluid. Approxi-
mately two-thirds of the body’s water is contained in the 
intracellular fluid, the fluid portion of the cytoplasm of 
cells. The rest is extracellular fluid, which includes the 
intravascular fluid (the blood plasma), the cerebrospi-
nal fluid, and the interstitial fluid. Interstitial means 
“standing between”; indeed, the interstitial fluid stands 
between our cells—it is the “seawater” that bathes them. 
For the purposes of this chapter we will ignore the cere-
brospinal fluid and concentrate on the other three com-
partments. (See Figure 12.3.)
Two of the fluid compartments of the body must be 
kept within precise limits: the intracellular fluid and 
the intravascular fluid. The intracellular fluid is con-
trolled by the concentration of solutes in the interstitial 
fluid. (Solutes are the substances dissolved in a solu-
tion.) Normally, the interstitial fluid is isotonic (from 
isos, “equal,” and tonos, “tension”) with the intracellular 
fluid. That is, the concentration of solutes in the cells 
and in the interstitial fluid that bathes them is balanced, 
figure 12.3  Relative Size of the Body’s Fluid 
Compartments
67%
Interstitial
fluid
26%
Intravascular fluid
(blood plasma) 7%
Cerebrospinal fluid
(less than 1%)
Intracellular
fluid
Extracellular
fluid
x intracellular fluid  The fluid contained within cells.
x extracellular fluid  All body fluids outside cells: interstitial 
fluid, blood plasma, and cerebrospinal fluid.
x intravascular fluid  The fluid found within the blood vessels.
x interstitial fluid  The fluid that bathes the cells, filling the 
space between the cells of the body (the “interstices”).
x isotonic  Equal in osmotic pressure to the contents of a cell.  
A cell placed in an isotonic solution neither gains nor loses water.
x hypertonic  The characteristic of a solution that contains 
enough solute that it will draw water out of a cell placed in it, 
through the process of osmosis.
x hypotonic  The characteristic of a solution that contains so 
little solute that a cell placed in it will absorb water, through the 
process of osmosis.
x hypovolemia (hy poh voh lee mee a)  Reduction in the volume 
of the intravascular fluid.

	
Drinking	
397
fluid and intravascular fluid compartments. For the 
sake of simplicity, only a few cells are shown, and the 
volume of the interstitial fluid is greatly exaggerated. 
Water is lost directly from the interstitial fluid, which 
becomes slightly more concentrated than either the 
intracellular or the intravascular fluid. This change 
draws water from both the cells and the blood plasma. 
Eventually, the loss of water from the cells and the 
blood plasma will be great enough that both osmomet-
ric thirst and volumetric thirst will be produced. (See 
Figure 12.5.)
Osmometric Thirst
Osmometric thirst occurs when the solute concentra-
tion of the interstitial fluid increases. This increase 
draws water out of the cells, and they shrink in volume. 
The term osmometric refers to the fact that the detectors 
are actually responding to (metering) changes in the 
concentration of the interstitial fluid that surrounds 
them. Osmosis is the movement of water through a semi-
permeable membrane from a region of low solute con-
centration to one of high solute concentration.
The existence of neurons that respond to changes 
in the solute concentration of the interstitial fluid was 
Two Types of Thirst
As we just saw, for our bodies to function properly, the 
volume of two fluid compartments—intracellular and 
intravascular—must be regulated. Most of the time, we 
ingest more water and sodium than we need, and the 
kidneys excrete the excess. However, if the levels of 
water or sodium fall too low, correctional mecha-
nisms—drinking water or ingesting sodium—are acti-
vated. Everyone is familiar with the sensation of thirst, 
which occurs when we need to ingest water. However, a 
salt appetite is much more rare because it is difficult 
for people not to get enough sodium in their diet, even 
if they do not put extra salt on their food. Nevertheless, 
the mechanisms to increase sodium intake exist, even 
though they are seldom called upon in members of 
our species.
Because loss of water from either the intracellular 
or intravascular fluid compartments stimulates drink-
ing, researchers have adopted the terms osmometric 
thirst and volumetric thirst to describe them. The term 
volumetric is clear; it refers to the metering (measuring) 
of the volume of the blood plasma. The term osmometric 
requires more explanation, which will be provided in 
the next section. The term thirst means different things 
in different circumstances. Its original definition re-
ferred to a sensation that people say they have when 
they are dehydrated. Here I use it in a descriptive 
sense. Because we do not know how other animals feel, 
thirst simply means a tendency to seek water and to  
ingest it.
Our bodies lose water continuously, primarily 
through evaporation. Each breath exposes the moist 
inner surfaces of the respiratory system to the air; 
thus, each breath causes the loss of a small amount of 
water. In addition, our skin is not completely water-
proof; some water finds its way through the layers of 
the skin and evaporates from the surface. The mois-
ture that is lost through evaporation is, of course, pure 
distilled water. (The body loses water through sweat-
ing, too; but because it loses salt along with the water, 
sweating produces a need for sodium as well as for 
water.) Figure 12.5 illustrates how the loss of water 
through evaporation depletes both the intracellular 
figure 12.4  Effects of Differences in Solute Concentration on the Movement 
of Water Molecules
Solution A
Solution B
Solution C
Solution A is hypertonic
to solution B; water is
drawn out of solution B
Solution C is hypotonic
to solution B; water is
drawn into solution B
x osmometric thirst  Thirst produced by an increase in the 
osmotic pressure of the interstitial fluid relative to the intracellular 
fluid, thus producing cellular dehydration.
figure 12.5  Water Loss Through Evaporation
1
2
3a
3b
Skin
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
H2O
Water is lost
through evaporation
Concentration of
interstitial fluid
increases
Capillaries lose
water by osmosis
Cells lose water
by osmosis

398	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
familiar with one of these: the area postrema, discussed 
in Chapter 2. (See Figure 12.6.)
The OVLT (if you really want to know, that stands 
for the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis) and 
the subfornical organ (SFO), like the other circumven-
tricular organs, are located outside the blood–brain 
barrier. That means that substances dissolved in the 
blood pass easily into the interstitial fluid within these 
organs. Evidence suggests that most of the osmorecep-
tors responsible for osmometric thirst are located in 
first hypothesized by Verney (1947). Verney suggested 
that these detectors, which he called osmoreceptors, 
were neurons whose firing rate was affected by their 
level of hydration. That is, if the interstitial fluid sur-
rounding them became more concentrated, they would 
lose water through osmosis. The shrinkage would cause 
them to alter their firing rate, which would send signals 
to other parts of the brain.
When we eat a salty meal, we incur a pure osmo-
metric thirst. The salt is absorbed from the digestive 
system into the blood plasma; hence, the blood plasma 
becomes hypertonic. This condition draws water from 
the interstitial fluid, which makes this compartment 
become hypertonic too and thus causes water to leave 
the cells. The osmoreceptors responsible for osmomet-
ric thirst are located in a region known as the lamina 
terminalis, found just rostral to the ventral portion of 
the third ventricle. The lamina terminalis contains two 
specialized circumventricular organs: the OVLT and the 
SFO. The brain contains several circumventricular  
organs, specialized regions with rich blood supplies 
located along the ventricular system. You are already 
x OVLT (organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis)  A 
circumventricular organ located anterior to the anteroventral 
portion of the third ventricle; served by fenestrated capillaries and 
thus lacks a blood–brain barrier.
x subfornical organ (SFO)  A small organ located in the 
confluence of the lateral ventricles, attached to the underside of 
the fornix; contains neurons that detect the presence of angioten-
sin in the blood and excite neural circuits that initiate drinking.
figure 12.6  The Circumventricular Organs
This sagittal section of the rat brain shows the location of the circumventricular organs. 
Inset: A hypothetical circuit connecting the subfornical organ with the median preoptic 
nucleus.
OVLT
(Organum vasculosum
of the lamina terminalis)
Median
preoptic
nucleus
Median
preoptic
nucleus
Anterior
commissure
SFO
Commissure of the
ventral fornix
Corpus
callosum
Corpus
callosum
Cerebellum
Fourth
ventricle
Area postrema
Anterior
pituitary gland
Posterior
pituitary gland
Optic
chiasm
OVLT
Third
ventricle
Neuron
detects
angiotensin
in blood
Thalamus
SFO
(Subfornical organ)
Lamina
terminalis
x osmoreceptor  A neuron that detects changes in the solute 
concentration of the interstitial fluid that surrounds it.

	
Drinking	
399
secretion of vasopressin, a hormone secreted by the 
posterior pituitary that regulates the excretion of water 
by the kidneys.
Research supports the basic nature of Verney’s  
hypothetical osmoreceptors (Bourque, 2008). A. Zhang 
et al. (2007) found that osmoreceptors are a special 
kind of mechanoreceptor that transduces changes in 
the volume of the cell into changes in membrane poten-
tial, and hence in neural firing rate. They also found 
that actin filaments are necessary for the osmorecep-
tors’ sensitivity to changes in cell volume. (You will recall 
that the mechanoreceptors responsible for detection of 
sound vibrations in the inner ear also contain actin fila-
ments.) The investigators placed a micropipette against 
the membranes of individual osmoreceptors and found 
that the application of pressure or suction could alter 
the membrane potential of the cells. For example, if  
a cell was exposed to a hypertonic solution, the cell  
lost water and its membrane potential fell. If pressure 
was then applied, the volume of the cell increased  
and the membrane potential returned to normal. (See 
Figure 12.7.)
A functional-imaging study by Egan et al. (2003) 
found that the human lamina terminalis also appears 
to contain osmoreceptors. The investigators adminis-
tered intravenous injections of hypertonic saline to 
normal subjects while their brain were being scanned. 
They observed strong activation of several brain re-
gions, including the lamina terminalis and the anterior 
cingulate cortex. When the subjects were permitted to 
drink water, they did so and almost immediately re-
ported that their thirst had been satisfied. Simultane-
ously, the activity in the anterior cingulate cortex re-
turned to baseline values. However, the activity in the 
lamina terminalis remained high. These results suggest 
that the activity of the anterior cingulate cortex  
reflected the subjects’ thirst, which was immediately 
H2O
H2O
H2O H2O
Hypotonic solution 
added to medium 
surrounding
osmoreceptor.  
Water enters,
cell expands
Suction applied,
cell shrinks
Hypertonic solution
added to medium
surrounding
osmoreceptor.
Water leaves,
cell shrinks
Pressure applied,
cell expands
(a)
(b)
Osmoreceptor
Osmoreceptor
Micropipette
–50
0
50
100
150
200
–50
0
50
100
150
200
Time (sec)
Time (sec)
1.2
2.0
1.1
1.0
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.9
0.8
Membrane 
conductance (nS)
Membrane 
conductance (nS)
Cell volume 
(arbitrary units)
Cell volume 
(arbitrary units)
figure 12.7  Action of an Osmoreceptor
Actin filaments in brain osmoreceptors detect changes in 
solute concentration in the interstitial fluid when the cell 
membrane expands or contracts. Changes in cell volume 
cause changes in the membrane potential, which serve as 
the signal for osmometric thirst. (a) When a hypotonic 
solution was added to the culture medium of an isolated 
osmoreceptor, the cell volume increased and the 
membrane potential decreased. When suction was then 
applied through the micropipette, the cell volume 
decreased and the membrane potential increased.  
(b) Opposite effects were seen when cell volume was 
reduced by a hypertonic solution and then increased  
by applying pressure through the micropipette.
(Adapted from Zhang, Z., Kindrat, A. N., Sharif-Naeini, R., and Bourque, C. W. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 4008–4013.)
the OVLT, but some are also located in the SFO (McKin-
ley et al., 2004). The supraoptic nucleus of the hypo-
thalamus contains osmoreceptors that control the  

400	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
loss of blood volume (hypovolemia) without depleting 
the intracellular fluid.
Loss of blood is the most obvious cause of pure 
volumetric thirst. From the earliest recorded history, 
reports of battles note that the wounded survivors called 
out for water. In addition, because hypovolemia involves 
a loss of sodium as well as water (that is, the sodium that 
was contained in the isotonic fluid that was lost), volu-
metric thirst leads to a salt appetite.
The Role of Angiotensin.  The kidneys contain cells 
that are able to detect decreases in the flow of blood to 
the kidneys. The usual cause of a reduced flow of blood 
is a loss of blood volume; thus, these cells detect the 
presence of hypovolemia. When the flow of blood to 
the kidneys decreases, these cells secrete an enzyme 
called renin. Renin enters the blood, where it catalyzes 
the conversion of a protein called angiotensinogen into a 
hormone called angiotensin. In fact, there are two 
forms of angiotensin. Angiotensinogen becomes angio-
tensin I, which is quickly converted by an enzyme to 
angiotensin II. The active form is angiotensin II, which 
I shall abbreviate as AII.
Angiotensin II has several physiological effects: It 
stimulates the secretion of hormones by the posterior 
pituitary gland and the adrenal cortex that cause the 
kidneys to conserve water and sodium, and it in-
creases blood pressure by causing muscles in the small 
arteries to contract. In addition, AII has two behav-
ioral effects: It initiates both drinking and a salt ap-
petite. Therefore, a reduction in the flow of blood to 
the kidneys causes water and sodium to be retained by 
the body, helps to compensate for their loss by reduc-
ing the size of the blood vessels, and encourages the 
animal to find and ingest both water and salt. (See 
Figure 12.9.)
McKinley et al. (2008) found that mice with a tar-
geted mutation against the gene responsible for the 
production of angiotensinogen (and hence of AII) 
abolished volumetric thirst and the salt appetite that 
normally accompanies it without affecting osmometric 
thirst.
Hypertension (high blood pressure) is sometimes 
caused by oversecretion of renin—or, more precisely, by 
the increased blood levels of AII that follows. Captopril, 
a drug that blocks the enzyme that converts AI to AII, is 
often used to treat such forms of hypertension.
relieved by a drink of water. (As we saw in Chapter 7, 
activity of this region is correlated with people’s per-
ception of the unpleasantness of painful stimuli.) In 
contrast, the continued activity in the lamina termina-
lis reflected the fact that the blood plasma was still hy-
pertonic. After all, it takes around 20 minutes for a 
drink of water to be absorbed into the general circula-
tion. As we saw in the discussion of Figure 12.2, satiety 
is an anticipatory mechanism, triggered by the act of 
drinking. The fall in the activity of the anterior cingu-
late cortex appears to reflect the activation of this sati-
ety mechanism. (See Figure 12.8.)
Two other functional-imaging studies (Farrell et al., 
2006; Xiao et al., 2006) confirm that thirst activates 
the anterior cingulate cortex. An anatomical tracing 
study by Hollis et al. (2008) found that in rats, osmo-
receptive neurons in the OVLT were connected to the 
cingulate cortex via the dorsal midline nuclei of the 
thalamus. This pathway between the osmoreceptors in 
the OVLT and the cingulate cortex is probably respon-
sible for the activation seen in the functional-imaging 
studies.
Volumetric Thirst
Volumetric thirst occurs when the volume of the blood 
plasma—the intravascular volume—decreases. As we 
saw earlier, when we lose water through evaporation, we 
lose it from all three fluid compartments: intracellular, 
interstitial, and intravascular. Thus, evaporation pro-
duces both volumetric thirst and osmometric thirst. In 
addition, loss of blood, vomiting, and diarrhea all cause 
figure 12.8  Osmometric Thirst in Humans
Functional MRI scans show brain activation produced by 
osmometric thirst. (a) Activation in the anterior cingulate 
cortex and hypothalamus, corresponding to a sensation 
of thirst. (b) Activation in the lamina terminalis, the 
location of the brain’s osmoreceptors.
(From Egan, G., Silk, T., Zamarripa, F., et al. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Science, USA, 2004, 100, 15241–15246.)
(a)
(b)
x volumetric thirst  Thirst produced by hypovolemia.
x renin (ree nin)  A hormone secreted by the kidneys that causes 
the conversion of angiotensinogen in the blood into angiotensin.
x angiotensin (ann gee oh ten sin)  A peptide hormone that 
constricts blood vessels, causes the retention of sodium and water, 
and produces thirst and a salt appetite.

	
Drinking	
401
Neural Mechanisms of Thirst
As you have already learned, the osmoreceptors that 
initiate drinking are located in the OVLT and SFO. 
The lamina terminalis seems to be the part of the brain 
where osmometric and volumetric signals are inte-
grated to control drinking. The signal for volumetric 
thirst is provided by angiotensin II. Because this pep-
tide does not cross the blood–brain barrier, it cannot 
directly affect neurons in the brain except for those 
located in one of the circumventricular organs. In fact, 
research indicates that the subfornical organ is the site 
at which blood angiotensin acts to produce thirst. This 
structure gets its name from its location, just below  
the commissure of the ventral fornix. (Refer again to 
Figure 12.6.)
Simpson, Epstein, and Camardo (1978) found that 
very low doses of angiotensin injected directly into the 
SFO caused drinking and that destruction of the SFO or 
injection of a drug that blocks angiotensin receptors 
abolished the drinking that normally occurs when an-
giotensin is injected into the blood. In addition, Phillips 
and Felix (1976) found that injections of minute quanti-
ties of angiotensin into the SFO increased the firing rate 
of single neurons located there; evidently, these neu-
rons contain angiotensin receptors.
Neurons in the subfornical organ send their axons 
to another part of the lamina terminalis: the median 
preoptic nucleus (not to be confused with the medial 
preoptic nucleus), a small nucleus wrapped around the 
front of the anterior commissure, a fiber bundle that 
connects the amygdala and anterior temporal lobe. (Refer 
to the inset in Figure 12.6.)
figure 12.9  Detection of Hypovolemia by the 
Kidney and the Renin–Angiotensin System
Renin
Hypovolemia
Reduced flow of
blood to kidneys
Angiotensinogen
Retention of sodium
Increase in blood pressure
Salt appetite
Drinking
Kidney
Angiotensin I
Angiotensin II
Retention of water
Little Billy started eating salt. He always liked plenty of 
salt on his food, but his craving had finally gotten out 
of hand. His mother noticed that a carton of salt 
lasted only a few days, and one afternoon she caught 
Billy in the kitchen with the container of salt on the 
counter next to him, eating something out of his hand. 
It was salt, pure salt! She grabbed his hand and shook 
the salt out of it into the sink and then put the con-
tainer on a shelf where Billy couldn’t reach it. Billy 
started crying and said, “Mommy, don’t take it away—
I need that!”
The next morning she heard a crash in the kitchen 
and found Billy on the floor, an overturned chair next to 
him. Clearly, he was trying to get at the salt. “What’s 
wrong with you?” she cried. Billy sobbed and said, 
“Please, Mommy, I need some salt! I need it!” 
Bewildered but moved by his distress, she reached 
down the container and poured some salt in his hand, 
which he ate eagerly.
After consulting with the family physician, Billy’s 
parents decided to have him admitted to the hospital, 
where his bizarre craving could be investigated. 
Although Billy cried piteously that he needed salt, the 
hospital staff made sure that he received no more than 
a child normally needs. He tried several times to leave 
his room, presumably to try to find some salt, but he 
was brought back, and the door to his room was finally 
locked. Unfortunately, before definitive testing could be 
begun, Billy died.
x median preoptic nucleus  A small nucleus situated around the 
decussation of the anterior commissure; plays a role in thirst 
stimulated by angiotensin.
The diagnosis of Billy’s craving came too late to 
help him. A disease process had caused his adrenal 
glands to stop secreting aldosterone, a steroid hor-
mone that stimulates the kidneys to retain sodium. 
Without this hormone, excessive amounts of sodium 
are excreted by the kidneys, which causes the volume 
of the blood to fall. In Billy’s case the fall in blood  
volume that occurred when his access to salt was 
blocked led to a fatal loss of blood pressure. This 
unhappy story occurred several decades ago, and we 
can hope that physicians today would recognize an 
intense salt craving as a cardinal symptom of adrenal 
insufficiency.

402	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
On the basis of these findings, Thrasher and his col-
leagues (see Thrasher, 1989) suggested that the median 
preoptic nucleus acts as an integrating system for most 
or all of the stimuli for osmometric and volumetric 
thirst. As you just saw, the median preoptic nucleus re-
ceives information from angiotensin-sensitive neurons 
in the SFO. In addition, this nucleus receives informa-
tion from the OVLT (which contains osmoreceptors) 
and from the nucleus of the solitary tract (which re-
ceives information from the atrial baroreceptors). Exci-
totoxic lesions of the median preoptic nucleus, which 
destroy cell bodies but spare axons passing through the 
structure, cause severe deficits in osmometric thirst 
(Cunningham et al., 1992). According to Thrasher and 
his colleagues, the median preoptic nucleus integrates 
the information it receives and, through its efferent con-
nections with other parts of the brain, controls drinking. 
(See Figure 12.10.)
The region of the lamina terminalis seems to play a 
critical role in fluid regulation in humans as well. As we 
saw earlier, functional imaging indicates that osmomet-
ric thirst increases the activity of this region. In addition, 
McIver et al. (1991) reported that brain damage that 
includes this region can cause adipsia—lack of drinking. 
The patients report no sensation of thirst even after they 
are given an injection of hypertonic saline. To survive, 
they must deliberately drink water at regular intervals 
each day, even though they feel no need to do so.
figure 12.10  Neural Circuitry Concerned with  
the Control of Drinking
Not all connections are shown, and some connections 
may be indirect. Although most of the osmoreceptors 
are located in the OVLT (organum vasculosum of the 
lamina terminalis), some are also located in the 
subfornical organ.
(Adapted from Thrasher, T. N. Acta Physiologica Scandinavica, 1989, 136, 141–150.)
Angiotensin II
Subfornical
organ
Volumetric
thirst
Blood–brain
barrier
Blood–brain
barrier
Drinking
OVLT
osmoreceptors
Solute concentration
of blood
Osmometric
thirst
Median
preoptic
nucleus
Section Summary
A regulatory system contains four features: a system 
variable (the variable that is regulated), a set point 
(the optimal value of the system variable), a detector 
to measure the system variable, and a correctional 
mechanism to change it. Physiological regulatory sys-
tems, such as control of body fluids and nutrients, 
require a satiety mechanism to anticipate the effects 
of the correctional mechanism, because the changes 
brought about by eating and drinking occur only after 
a considerable period of time.
The body contains three major fluid compart-
ments: intracellular, interstitial, and intravascular. 
Sodium and water can easily pass between the intra-
vascular fluid and the interstitial fluid, but sodium can-
not penetrate the cell membrane. The solute concen-
tration of the interstitial fluid must be closely 
regulated. If it becomes hypertonic, cells lose water; if 
Physiological Regulatory Mechanisms and Drinking
it becomes hypotonic, they gain water. The volume  
of the intravascular fluid (blood plasma) must also be 
kept within bounds.
Osmometric thirst occurs when the interstitial 
fluid becomes hypertonic, drawing water out of cells. 
This event, which can be caused by evaporation of 
water from the body or by ingestion of a salty meal, is 
detected by osmoreceptors in the OVLT, a circum-
ventricular organ located in the lamina terminalis. 
Activation of these osmoreceptors stimulates drink-
ing. The sensation of thirst in humans appears to 
involve the anterior cingulate cortex.
Volumetric thirst occurs along with osmometric 
thirst when the body loses fluid through evapora-
tion. Pure volumetric thirst is caused by blood loss, 
vomiting, and diarrhea. The primary stimulus for vol-
umetric thirst is provided by a fall in blood flow to 

	
Eating: Some Facts About Metabolism 	
403
understand the physiology of drinking. Therefore, you 
will not be surprised that this part of the chapter begins 
with a discussion of metabolism. Your first inclination 
might be to skip over this section; but if you do so, you 
will find that you will not understand experiments that 
are described later. For example, the system variables 
that cause an animal to seek food and eat it are obviously 
related to the animal’s metabolism. This section will dis-
cuss only as much about this subject as you will need to 
understand these experiments.
When we eat, we incorporate into our own bodies 
molecules that were once part of other living organ-
isms, plant and animal. We ingest these molecules for 
two reasons: to construct and maintain our own or-
gans and to obtain energy for muscular movements 
and for keeping our bodies warm. In other words, we 
need both building blocks and fuel. Although food 
used for building blocks is essential, I will discuss only 
the food used for fuel, because most of the molecules 
we eat get “burned” to provide energy for movement 
and heating.
To stay alive, our cells must be supplied with fuel 
and oxygen. Obviously, fuel comes from the digestive 
tract, and its presence there is a result of eating. But the 
digestive tract is sometimes empty; in fact, most of us 
wake up in the morning in that condition. So there has 
to be a reservoir that stores nutrients to keep the cells of 
the body nourished when the gut is empty. Indeed, 
there are two reservoirs: one short-term and the other 
long-term. The short-term reservoir stores carbohy-
drates, and the long-term reservoir stores fats.
The short-term reservoir is located in the cells of the 
liver and the muscles, and it is filled with a complex,  
Eating: Some Facts About  
Metabolism
Clearly, eating is one of the most important things we 
do, and it can also be one of the most pleasurable. 
Much of what an animal learns to do is motivated by the 
constant struggle to obtain food; therefore, the need to 
eat undoubtedly shaped the evolutionary development 
of our own species. Control of eating is even more com-
plicated than the control of drinking and sodium in-
take. We can achieve water balance by the intake of two 
ingredients: water and sodium chloride. When we eat, 
we must obtain adequate amounts of carbohydrates, 
fats, amino acids, vitamins, and minerals other than 
sodium. Thus, our food-ingestive behaviors are more 
complex, as are the physiological mechanisms that con-
trol them.
The rest of this chapter describes research on the 
control of eating: metabolism, regulation of body 
weight, the environmental and physiological factors that 
begin and stop a meal, and the neural mechanisms that 
monitor the nutritional state of our bodies and control 
our ingestive behavior. It also describes the most serious 
eating disorders: obesity and anorexia nervosa. Despite 
all the effort that has gone into understanding the phys-
iology of ingestive behavior, these disorders are still dif-
ficult to treat. Our best hope of finding effective treat-
ments is to achieve a better understanding of the 
physiology of metabolism and ingestive behavior.
As you saw in the discussion of the physiology of 
drinking, you must know something about the fluid com-
partments of the body and the functions of the kidney to 
the kidneys. This event triggers the secretion of 
renin, which converts plasma angiotensinogen to 
angiotensin I. Angiotensin I is subsequently con-
verted to its active form, angiotensin II, which acts 
on neurons in the SFO and stimulates thirst. The 
hormone also increases blood pressure and stimu-
lates the secretion of pituitary and adrenal hor-
mones that inhibit the secretion of water and 
sodium by the kidneys and induce a sodium appe-
tite. (Sodium is needed to help restore the plasma 
volume.)
A nucleus in the lamina terminalis, the median 
preoptic nucleus, receives and integrates osmometric 
and volumetric information. Information about hypo-
volemia conveyed by angiotensin reaches the median 
preoptic nucleus directly from the SFO. Osmotic 
information reaches this nucleus from osmoreceptors 
in both the OVLT and the SFO. Neurons in the 
median preoptic nucleus stimulate drinking through 
their connections with other parts of the brain. The 
anterior cingulate cortex also receives information 
from the OVLT via the dorsal midline nucleus of the 
thalamus, and this region may be involved in sensa-
tions of thirst.
 Thought Question
What does thirst feel like? We certainly know when 
we are thirsty, but it is difficult to describe the sensa-
tion. (In contrast, most people will identify the feeling 
of hunger as coming from the stomach.) Thirst cannot 
simply be the sensation of dryness in the mouth or 
throat, because a real thirst is not quenched by taking 
a small sip of water, which moistens the mouth and 
throat as well as a big drink does.

404	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
to triglycerides, and storing them. These cells can ex-
pand enormously in size; in fact, the primary physical 
difference between an obese person and a person of 
normal weight is the size of their fat cells, which is deter-
mined by the amount of triglycerides that these cells 
contain.
The long-term fat reservoir is obviously what keeps 
us alive when we are fasting. As we begin to use the con-
tents of our short-term carbohydrate reservoir, fat cells 
start converting triglycerides into fuels that the cells can 
use and releasing these fuels into the bloodstream. As 
we just saw, when we wake in the morning with an empty 
digestive tract, our brain (in fact, all of the CNS) is living 
on glucose released by the liver. But what about the 
other cells of the body? They are living on fatty acids, 
sparing the glucose for the brain. As you will recall from 
Chapter 3, the sympathetic nervous system is primarily 
involved in the breakdown and utilization of stored nu-
trients. When the digestive system is empty, there is an 
increase in the activity of the sympathetic axons that in-
nervate adipose tissue, the pancreas, and the adrenal 
medulla. All three effects (direct neural stimulation,  
secretion of glucagon, and secretion of catecholamines) 
cause triglycerides in the long-term fat reservoir to be 
broken down into glycerol and fatty acids. The fatty ac-
ids can be directly metabolized by cells in all of the body 
except the brain, which needs glucose. That leaves glyc-
erol. The liver takes up glycerol and converts it to glu-
cose. That glucose, too, is available to the brain.
You may be asking why the cells of the rest of the 
body treat the brain so kindly, letting it consume almost 
all the glucose that the liver releases from its carbohy-
drate reservoir and constructs from glycerol. The an-
swer is simple: Insulin has several other functions be-
sides causing glucose to be converted to glycogen. One 
of these functions is controlling the entry of glucose into 
cells. Glucose easily dissolves in water, but it will not dis-
solve in fats. Cell membranes are made of lipids (fatlike 
insoluble carbohydrate called glycogen. For simplicity I 
will consider only one of these locations: the liver. Cells in 
the liver convert glucose (a simple, soluble carbohydrate) 
into glycogen and store the glycogen. They are stimu-
lated to do so by the presence of insulin, a peptide hor-
mone produced by the pancreas. Thus, when glucose and 
insulin are present in the blood, some of the glucose is 
used as a fuel, and some of it is stored as glycogen. Later, 
when all of the food has been absorbed from the digestive 
tract, the level of glucose in the blood begins to fall.
The fall in glucose is detected by cells in the pancreas 
and in the brain. The pancreas responds by stopping its 
secretion of insulin and starting to secrete a different 
peptide hormone: glucagon. The effect of glucagon is 
opposite that of insulin: It stimulates the conversion of 
glycogen into glucose. (Unfortunately, the terms glucose, 
glycogen, and glucagon are similar enough that it is easy to 
confuse them. Even worse, you will soon encounter an-
other one: glycerol.) (See Figure 12.11.) Thus, the liver 
soaks up excess glucose and stores it as glycogen when 
plenty of glucose is available, and it releases glucose from 
its reservoir when the digestive tract becomes empty and 
the level of glucose in the blood begins to fall.
The carbohydrate reservoir in the liver is reserved 
primarily for the central nervous system (CNS). When 
you wake in the morning, your brain is being fed by your 
liver, which is in the process of converting glycogen to 
glucose and releasing it into the blood. The glucose 
reaches the CNS, where it is absorbed and metabolized 
by the neurons and the glia. This process can continue 
for a few hours, until all of the carbohydrate reservoir in 
the liver is used up. (The average liver holds approxi-
mately 300 Calories of carbohydrate.) Usually, we eat 
some food before this reservoir gets depleted, which 
permits us to refill it. But if we do not eat, the CNS (and 
the rest of the body) must start living on the products of 
the long-term reservoir.
Our long-term reservoir consists of adipose tissue 
(fat tissue). This reservoir is filled with fats or, more 
precisely, with triglycerides. Triglycerides are complex 
molecules that contain glycerol (a soluble carbohydrate, 
also called glycerine) combined with three fatty acids 
(stearic acid, oleic acid, and palmitic acid). Adipose tis-
sue is found beneath the skin and in various locations in 
the abdominal cavity. It consists of cells that are capable 
of absorbing nutrients from the blood, converting them 
figure 12.11  Effects of Insulin and Glucagon on 
Glucose and Glycogen
Insulin
Glucagon
Glucose
(Simple sugar)
Glycogen
(Complex, insoluble
carbohydrate)
x glycogen (gly ko jen)  A polysaccharide often referred to as 
animal starch; stored in liver and muscle; constitutes the short-
term store of nutrients.
x insulin  A pancreatic hormone that facilitates entry of glucose 
and amino acids into the cell, conversion of glucose into glycogen, 
and transport of fats into adipose tissue.
x glucagon (gloo ka gahn)  A pancreatic hormone that promotes 
the conversion of liver glycogen into glucose.
x triglyceride (try gliss er ide)  The form of fat storage in adipose 
cells; consists of a molecule of glycerol joined with three fatty acids.
x glycerol (gliss er all)  A substance (also called glycerine) 
derived from the breakdown of triglycerides, along with fatty 
acids; can be converted by the liver into glucose.
x fatty acid  A substance derived from the breakdown of 
triglycerides, along with glycerol; can be metabolized by most 
cells of the body except for the brain.

	
Eating: Some Facts About Metabolism 	
405
of insulin, along with increased activity of the sympa-
thetic nervous system, also instruct fat cells to start draw-
ing on the long-term fat reservoir—to start breaking 
down triglycerides into fatty acids and glycerol. Most of 
the body lives on the fatty acids, and the glycerol, which 
is converted into glucose by the liver, gets used by the 
brain. If fasting is prolonged, proteins (especially pro-
tein found in muscle) will be broken down to amino 
acids, which can be metabolized by all of the body ex-
cept the CNS. (See Figure 12.12.)
The phase of metabolism that occurs when food is 
present in the digestive tract is called the absorptive 
phase. Now that you understand the fasting phase, this 
one is simple. Suppose that we eat a balanced meal of 
substances); thus, glucose cannot directly pass through 
them. To be taken into a cell, glucose must be trans-
ported there by glucose transporters—protein molecules 
that are situated in the membrane and are similar to 
those responsible for the reuptake of transmitter sub-
stances. Glucose transporters contain insulin receptors, 
which control their activity; only when insulin binds with 
these receptors can glucose be transported into the cell. 
But the cells of the nervous system are an exception to 
this rule. Their glucose transporters do not contain in-
sulin receptors, and these cells can absorb glucose even 
when insulin is not present.
Figure 12.12 reviews what I have said so far about 
the metabolism that takes place while the digestive tract 
is empty, which physiologists refer to as the fasting phase 
of metabolism. A fall in blood glucose level causes the 
pancreas to stop secreting insulin and to start secreting 
glucagon. The absence of insulin means that most of the 
cells of the body can no longer use glucose; thus, all the 
glucose present in the blood is reserved for the CNS. 
The presence of glucagon and the absence of insulin 
instruct the liver to start drawing on the short-term car-
bohydrate reservoir—to start converting its glycogen 
into glucose. The presence of glucagon and the absence 
figure 12.12  Metabolic Pathways During the Fasting Phase and Absorptive 
Phase of Metabolism
Glucose
Fat
Amino
acids
Nutrients received
from digestive system
Short-term
reservoir
Long-term
reservoir
Protein
synthesis
Triglycerides
Energy
Glycogen
(animal starch)
Glucose
Glycerol
Glucose
When digestive
system contains
food (absorptive
phase)
When digestive
system is
empty (fasting
phase)
Energy
Energy
Energy
Brain
Muscles
and Rest of Body
Adipose Tissue
Liver
Fatty acids
x fasting phase  The phase of metabolism during which nutrients 
are not available from the digestive system; glucose, amino acids, 
and fatty acids are derived from glycogen, protein, and adipose 
tissue during this phase.
x absorptive phase  The phase of metabolism during which 
nutrients are absorbed from the digestive system; glucose and 
amino acids constitute the principal source of energy for cells 
during this phase, and excess nutrients are stored in adipose 
tissue in the form of triglycerides.

406	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. The carbohydrates are 
broken down into glucose, and the proteins are broken 
down into amino acids. The fats basically remain as fats. 
Let us consider each of these three nutrients:
	 1.	 As we start absorbing the nutrients, the level of glu-
cose in the blood rises. This rise is detected by cells 
in the brain, which causes the activity of the sympa-
thetic nervous system to decrease and the activity of 
the parasympathetic nervous system to increase. 
This change tells the pancreas to stop secreting glu-
cagon and to begin secreting insulin. The insulin 
Section Summary
Eating: Some Facts About Metabolism
Metabolism consists of two phases. During the 
absorptive phase we receive glucose, amino acids, 
and fats from the intestines. The blood level of insulin 
is high, which permits all cells to metabolize glucose. 
In addition, the liver and the muscles convert glucose 
to glycogen, which replenishes the short-term reser-
voir. Excess carbohydrates and amino acids are con-
verted to fats, and fats are placed into the long-term 
reservoir in the adipose tissue.
During the fasting phase the activity of the 
parasympathetic nervous system falls, and the activ-
ity of the sympathetic nervous system increases.  
In response, the level of insulin falls, and the levels 
of glucagon and the adrenal catecholamines rise. 
These events cause liver glycogen to be converted 
to glucose and triglycerides to be broken down 
into glycerol and fatty acids. In the absence of insu-
lin, only the central nervous system can use the glu-
cose that is available in the blood; the rest of the 
body lives on fatty acids. Glycerol is converted to 
glucose by the liver, and the glucose is metabolized 
by the brain.
 Thought Question
In your opinion, what features of the environment of 
the distant ancestors of our species favored the evo-
lution of two nutrient reservoirs and the ability to con-
vert one type of nutrient to another?
What Starts a Meal?
Regulation of body weight requires a balance between 
food intake and energy expenditure. If we ingest more 
calories than we burn, we will gain weight; carbohydrates 
and proteins contain about 4 kcal/gm, and fats contain 
about 9 kcal/gm. (The “Calorie” you might see printed 
on a food label is actually a kilocalorie—1000 calories— 
or enough energy to raise the temperature of a liter of 
water by 1° C.) In this section I will discuss the factors that 
control when and how much we eat. I will have more to say 
about control of energy expenditure later in this chapter.
Assuming that our energy expenditure is constant, 
we need two mechanisms to maintain a relatively con-
stant body weight. One mechanism must increase our 
motivation to eat if our long-term nutrient reservoir is 
becoming depleted, and another must restrain our food 
intake if we begin to take in more calories than we need. 
permits all the cells of the body to use glucose as a 
fuel. Extra glucose is converted into glycogen, which 
fills the short-term carbohydrate reservoir. If some 
glucose is left over, it is converted into fat and ab-
sorbed by fat cells.
	 2.	 A small proportion of the amino acids received 
from the digestive tract are used as building blocks 
to construct proteins and peptides; the rest are con-
verted to fats and stored in adipose tissue.
	 3.	 Fats are not used as a fuel at this time; they are 
simply stored in adipose tissue. (Look again at 
Figure 12.12.)
Unfortunately, the first mechanism is more effective 
than the second one.
Signals from the Environment
The environment of our ancestors shaped the evolution 
of these regulatory mechanisms. In the past, starvation 
was a much greater threat to survival than overeating 
was. In fact, a tendency to overeat in times of plenty pro-
vided a reserve that could be drawn upon if food became 
scarce again—which it often did. A feast-or-famine envi-
ronment favored the evolution of mechanisms that were 
quick to detect losses from the long-term reservoir and 
provide a strong signal to seek and eat food. Natural se-
lection for mechanisms that detected weight gain and 
suppressed overeating was much less significant.
The answer to the question posed by the title of this 
section, “What starts a meal?” is not simple. Most peo-
ple, if they were asked why they eat, would say that they 

	
What Starts a Meal?	
407
(2005) found that a single intravenous injection of 
ghrelin not only enhanced appetite in normal subjects, 
it also elicited vivid images of foods that the subjects 
liked to eat. As we saw in the case at the beginning of 
this chapter, one of the most obvious symptoms of 
Prader-Willi syndrome is obesity caused by almost con-
tinuous eating. A possible cause of the overeating is 
chronic elevation in the blood level of ghrelin—a level 
that remains high even after a meal (DelParigi et al., 
2002). We do not yet know the reason for the increased 
ghrelin secretion. In addition, as we will see later in this 
chapter, the most successful form of obesity surgery—a 
particular type of gastric bypass operation—suppresses 
ghrelin secretion and probably owes at least some of its 
success to this fact.
Ghrelin secretion is suppressed when an animal eats 
or when an experimenter infuses food into the animal’s 
stomach. Injections of nutrients into the blood do not 
suppress ghrelin secretion, so the release of the hor-
mone is controlled by the contents of the digestive sys-
tem and not by the availability of nutrients in the blood 
(Schaller et al., 2003). Williams et al. (2003) operated 
on rats and installed devices similar to miniature blood-
pressure cuffs around the pylorus, the junction between 
the stomach and the duodenum. The duodenum is the 
uppermost part of the small intestine. (The original 
Greek name for this part of the gut was dodekadaktulon, 
or “twelve fingers long.” In fact, the duodenum is twelve 
finger widths long.) When a cuff was inflated, it would 
compress the pylorus and prevent the contents of the 
stomach from leaving. Surprisingly, Williams and her 
do so because they get hungry. By that, they probably 
mean that something happens inside their body that 
provides a sensation that makes them want to eat. But if 
this is true, just what is happening inside our bodies? 
The factors that motivate us to eat when food is readily 
available are very different from those that motivate us 
when food is scarce. When food is plentiful, we tend to 
eat when our stomach and upper intestine are empty. 
This emptiness provides a hunger signal—a message to 
our brain that indicates that we should begin to eat. The 
time it takes for food to leave our stomach would seem 
to encourage the establishment of a pattern of eating 
three meals a day. In addition, our ancestors undoubt-
edly found it most practical to prepare food for a group 
of people and have everyone eat at the same time. Most 
modern-day work schedules follow this routine as well.
Although an empty stomach is an important signal, 
many factors start a meal, including the sight of a plate 
of food, the smell of food cooking in the kitchen, the 
presence of other people sitting around the table, or the 
words “It’s time to eat!” I am writing this in the late af-
ternoon. I am anticipating a tasty meal this evening and 
look forward to eating it. I don’t feel particularly hun-
gry, but I like good food and expect to enjoy my dinner. 
My short-term and long-term nutrient reservoirs are well 
stocked, so my motivation to eat will not be based upon 
a physiological need for nourishment.
Signals from the Stomach
As we just saw, an empty stomach and upper intestine 
provide an important signal to the brain that it is time 
to start thinking about finding something to eat.  
Recently, researchers discovered one of the ways this 
signal may be communicated to the brain. The gastro-
intestinal system (especially the stomach) releases a 
peptide hormone called ghrelin (Kojima et al., 1999). 
The name ghrelin is a contraction of GH releasin, which 
reflects the fact that this peptide is also involved in 
controlling the release of growth hormone, usually  
abbreviated as GH. Studies with laboratory animals 
have found that blood levels of ghrelin increase with 
fasting and are reduced after a meal and that ghrelin 
antibodies or ghrelin receptor antagonists inhibit eating. 
Also, subcutaneous injections or infusions of ghrelin 
into the cerebral ventricles cause weight gain by in-
creasing food intake and decreasing the metabolism of 
fats. In humans, too, injections of ghrelin increase  
eating. Also, blood levels of ghrelin increase shortly 
before each meal, which suggests that this peptide is 
involved in the initiation of a meal (Cummings, 2006). 
Figure 12.13 shows the relationship between blood lev-
els of ghrelin and food intake during the course of a 
day. (See Figure 12.13.)
Ghrelin is a potent stimulator of food intake, and it 
even stimulates thoughts about food. Schmid et al. 
figure 12.13  Levels of Ghrelin in Human Blood 
Plasma
A rise in the level of this peptide preceded each meal.
(Based on data from Cummings et al., 2001.)
1200
1600
2000
2400
0400
0800
Time of day (hours)
300
400
500
600
700
800
Ghrelin (pg/ml)
Breakfast
Lunch
Dinner
x ghrelin (grell in)  A peptide hormone released by the stomach 
that increases eating; also produced by neurons in the brain.
x duodenum  The first portion of the small intestine, attached 
directly to the stomach.

408	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
already familiar with this chemical, because I described 
several experiments in previous chapters that used ra-
dioactive 2-DG in conjunction with PET scanners or 
autoradiography to study the metabolic rate of different 
parts of the brain. When (nonradioactive) 2-DG is given 
in large doses, it interferes with glucose metabolism by 
competing with glucose for access to the mechanism 
that transports glucose through the cell membrane and 
for access to the enzymes that metabolize glucose. Both 
hypoglycemia and 2-DG cause glucoprivation; that is, 
they deprive cells of glucose. And glucoprivation, what-
ever its cause, stimulates eating.
Hunger can also be produced by causing lipopriva-
tion—depriving cells of lipids. More precisely, they are 
deprived of the ability to metabolize fatty acids through 
injection of a drug such as mercaptoacetate.
What is the nature of the detectors that monitor the 
level of metabolic fuels, and where are they located? 
The evidence that has been gathered so far indicates 
that there are two sets of detectors: one set located in 
the brain and another set located in the liver. The detec-
tors in the brain monitor the nutrients that are available 
on their side of the blood–brain barrier, and the detec-
tors in the liver monitor the nutrients that are available 
to the rest of the body. Because the brain can use only 
glucose, its detectors are sensitive to glucoprivation, and 
because the rest of the body can use both glucose and 
fatty acids, the detectors in the liver are sensitive to both 
glucoprivation and lipoprivation.
Let’s first review the evidence for the detectors in 
the liver. A study by Novin, VanderWeele, and Rezek 
(1973) suggested that receptors in the liver can stimulate 
glucoprivic hunger; when these neurons are deprived of 
nutrients, they cause eating. The investigators infused 
2-DG into the hepatic portal vein. This vein brings blood 
from the intestines to the liver; thus, an injection of a 
drug into this vein (an intraportal infusion) delivers it 
directly to the liver. (See Figure 12.14.) The investigators 
found that the intraportal infusions of 2-DG caused im-
mediate eating. When they cut the vagus nerve, which 
connects the liver with the brain, the infusions no longer 
stimulated eating. Thus, the brain receives the hunger 
signal from the liver through the vagus nerve.
Now let’s look at some of the evidence that indicates 
that the brain has its own nutrient detectors. Because 
the brain can use only glucose, it would make sense that 
these detectors respond to glucoprivation—and, in-
deed, they do. Ritter, Dinh, and Zhang (2000) found 
colleagues found that an infusion of food into the stom-
ach would not suppress the secretion of ghrelin when 
the cuff was inflated. However, when the pylorus was 
open, an infusion of food into the stomach, which could 
then reach the small intestine, did suppress ghrelin se-
cretion. Subsequently, Overduin et al. (2005) found that 
infusion of food directly into the small intestine, bypass-
ing the stomach, suppressed ghrelin secretion. Thus, 
although the stomach secretes ghrelin, its secretion ap-
pears to be controlled by receptors present in the upper 
part of the small intestine, not in the stomach itself.
Although ghrelin is an important short-term hun-
ger signal, it clearly cannot be the only one. For exam-
ple, people who have undergone successful gastric by-
pass surgery have almost negligible levels of ghrelin in 
the blood. Although they eat less and lose weight, they 
certainly do not stop eating. In addition, mice with a 
targeted mutation against the ghrelin gene or the ghre-
lin receptor have normal food intake and body weight 
(Sun, Ahmed, and Smith, 2003; Sun et al., 2004). How-
ever, Zigman et al. (2005) found that this mutation pro-
tected mice from overeating and gaining weight when 
they were fed a tasty, high-fat diet that induces obesity in 
normal mice. Thus, alternative mechanisms can stimu-
late feeding, which, given the vital importance of food, 
is not surprising. In fact, one of the factors that compli-
cates research on ingestive behavior is the presence of 
redundant systems. (But we are undoubtedly better off 
with these complicating factors.)
Metabolic Signals
Most of the time, we begin a meal a few hours after the 
previous one, so our nutrient reservoirs are seldom in 
serious need of replenishment. But if we skip several 
meals, we get hungrier and hungrier, presumably be-
cause of physiological signals indicating that we have 
been withdrawing nutrients from our long-term reser-
voir. What happens to the level of nutrients in our body 
as time passes after a meal? As you learned earlier in this 
chapter, during the absorptive phase of metabolism we 
live on food that is being absorbed from the digestive 
tract. After that we start drawing on our nutrient reser-
voirs: The brain lives on glucose, and the rest of the 
body lives on fatty acids. Although the metabolic needs 
of the cells of the body are being met, we are taking fuel 
out of our long-term reservoir—making withdrawals 
rather than deposits. Clearly, this is the time to start 
thinking about our next meal.
A fall in blood glucose level (a condition known as 
hypoglycemia) is a potent stimulus for hunger. Hypoglyce-
mia can be produced experimentally by giving an ani-
mal a large injection of insulin, which causes cells in the 
liver, muscles, and adipose tissue to take up glucose and 
store it away. We can also deprive cells of glucose by in-
jecting an animal with 2-deoxyglucose (2-DG). You are 
x glucoprivation  A dramatic fall in the level of glucose available 
to cells; can be caused by a fall in the blood level of glucose or by 
drugs that inhibit glucose metabolism.
x lipoprivation  A dramatic fall in the level of fatty acids available 
to cells; usually caused by drugs that inhibit fatty acid metabolism.
x hepatic portal vein  The vein that transports blood from the 
digestive system to the liver.

	
What Starts a Meal?	
409
To summarize: The brain contains detectors that 
monitor the availability of glucose (its only fuel) inside 
the blood–brain barrier, and the liver contains detectors 
the monitor the availability of nutrients (glucose and fatty 
acids) outside the blood–brain barrier. (See Figure 12.15.)
Before closing this section, I should emphasize that 
no single set of receptors is solely responsible for the 
information the brain uses to control eating. As we saw, 
mice with a knockout of the ghrelin gene eat almost 
normally. In addition, Tordoff, Hopfenbeck, and Novin 
(1982) found that cutting the hepatic branch of the va-
gus nerve, which prevents hunger signals originating in 
the liver from reaching the brain, had little effect on an 
animal’s day-to-day eating. Finally, lesions of the me-
dulla that abolish both glucoprivic and lipoprivic signals 
do not lead to long-term disturbances in the control of 
feeding (Ritter, Brenner, and Yox, 1992). Apparently, 
the control of metabolism and ingestive behavior is just 
too important to entrust to one mechanism.
that injections of 5-TG into two regions of the hind-
brain—the dorsomedial and ventrolateral medulla— 
induced eating. (5-TG, like 2-DG, produces glucopriva-
tion.) The role of these regions in control of food intake 
and metabolism is discussed later in this chapter.
Lipoprivic hunger appears to be stimulated by recep-
tors in the liver. Ritter and Taylor (1990) induced lipo-
privic hunger with an injection of mercaptoacetate and 
found that cutting the vagus nerve abolished this hunger. 
Thus, the liver appears to contain receptors that detect 
low availability of glucose or fatty acids (glucoprivation or 
lipoprivation) and send this information to the brain 
through the vagus nerve (Friedman, Horn, and Ji, 2005).
figure 12.14  The Hepatic Portal Blood Supply
The liver receives water, minerals, and nutrients from the 
digestive system through this blood supply.
Small intestine
Water and nutrients
pass from small
intestines to liver
Artery from
heart
Branch of
hepatic portal
 vein
Liver
Vein to heart
figure 12.15  Nutrient Receptors
The figure shows the probable location of nutrient 
receptors responsible for hunger signals.
The brain cannot metabolize
fatty acids; receptors detect
only glucose levels.
Signal to brain
via vagus nerve
The liver can metabolize glucose and fatty acids;
receptors detect levels of both nutrients.
Section Summary
What Starts a Meal?
Many stimuli, environmental and physiological, can initi-
ate a meal. Natural selection has endowed us with 
strong mechanisms to encourage eating but weaker 
ones to prevent overeating and weight gain. Stimuli 
associated with eating—such as clocks indicating lunch-
time or dinnertime, the smell or sight of food, or an 
empty stomach—increase appetite. Ghrelin, a peptide 
hormone released by the stomach when it and the upper 
intestine are empty, is a potent stimulator of food intake.
Studies with inhibitors of the metabolism of glu-
cose and fatty acids indicate that low levels of both 
of these nutrients are involved in hunger; that is, ani-
mals will eat in response to both glucoprivation and 
lipoprivation. These signals are normally present only 
after more than one meal has been missed. 
Receptors in the liver detect both glucoprivation and 
lipoprivation and transmit this information to the 
brain through sensory axons of the vagus nerve. 
Glucoprivic eating can also be stimulated by interfer-
ing with glucose metabolism in the medulla; thus, 
the brain stem contains its own glucose-sensitive 
detectors.

410	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
when the experimenters infused an equal amount of 
soup into their stomachs with a flexible tube. Appar-
ently, the act of tasting and swallowing the soup contrib-
uted to the feeling of fullness caused by the presence of 
the soup in the stomach.
Gastric Factors
The stomach apparently contains receptors that can de-
tect the presence of nutrients. Davis and Campbell (1973) 
allowed rats to eat their fill; shortly thereafter, they re-
moved food from the rats’ stomachs through an im-
planted tube. When the rats were permitted to eat again, 
they ate almost exactly the same amount of food that had 
been taken out. This finding suggests that animals are 
able to monitor the amount of food in their stomachs.
Deutsch and Gonzalez (1980) confirmed and ex-
tended these findings. They found that when they re-
moved food from the stomach of a rat that had just 
eaten all it wanted, the animal would immediately eat 
just enough food to replace what had been removed—
even if the experimenters replaced the food with a non-
nutritive saline solution. Obviously, the rats did not sim-
ply measure the volume of the food in their stomachs, 
because they were not fooled by the infusion of a saline 
solution. Of course, this study indicates only that the 
stomach contains nutrient receptors; it does not prove 
that there are not detectors in the intestines as well.
Intestinal Factors
Indeed, the intestines do contain nutrient detectors. 
Studies with rats have shown that afferent axons arising 
from the duodenum are sensitive to the presence of 
glucose, amino acids, and fatty acids (Ritter, Brenner, 
and Yox, 1992). In fact, some of the chemoreceptors 
found in the duodenum are also found in the tongue. 
These axons may transmit a satiety signal to the brain.
A study by Feinle, Grundy, and Read (1997) found 
evidence for intestinal satiety factors in humans. The in-
vestigators had people swallow an inflatable bag attached 
to the end of a thin, flexible tube. When the stomach and 
duodenum were empty, the subjects reported that they 
simply felt bloated when the bag was inflated, filling the 
stomach. However, when fats or carbohydrates were in-
fused into the duodenum while the bag was being in-
flated, the people reported sensations of fullness like 
those experienced after eating a meal. Thus, stomach 
and intestinal satiety factors can interact. That’s not sur-
prising, given the fact that, by the time we finish a normal 
What Stops a Meal?
There are two primary sources of satiety signals—the 
signals that stop a meal. Short-term satiety signals come 
from the immediate effects of eating a particular meal, 
which begin long before the food is digested. To search 
for these signals, we will follow the pathway traveled by 
ingested food: the eyes, nose, and mouth; the stomach; 
the small intestine; and the liver. Each of these locations 
can potentially provide a signal to the brain that indi-
cates that food has been ingested and is progressing on 
the way toward absorption. Long-term satiety signals 
arise in the adipose tissue, which contains the long-term 
nutrient reservoir. These signals do not control the be-
ginning and end of a particular meal, but they do, in the 
long run, control the intake of calories by modulating 
the sensitivity of brain mechanisms to the hunger and 
satiety signals that they receive.
As I have already mentioned, because the conse-
quences of starvation are much more serious than the 
consequences of overeating, the process of natural se-
lection has given us strong mechanisms to start eating 
and weaker ones to stop eating. The relatively weak in-
hibitory control of eating is shown by the fact that many 
environmental factors can increase meal size. If there 
were strong constraints on food intake, then it should 
be difficult to get a person to eat more than a normal 
amount. De Castro and his colleagues (reviewed by de 
Castro, 2004) found that people ate a larger meal if the 
food was especially tasty, if it was eaten in the company 
of other people, if the portions were larger, and if the 
meal began later than usual in the day. People ate a 
smaller meal if their stomach still contained food or if 
the food was unpalatable. (However, palatability is not 
normally an important factor, because people usually 
choose what they eat.)
Head Factors
The term head factors refers to several sets of receptors 
located in the head: the eyes, the nose, the tongue, and 
the throat. Information about the appearance, odor, 
taste, texture, and temperature of food has some auto-
matic effects on food intake, but most of the effects in-
volve learning. The mere act of eating does not produce 
long-lasting satiety; an animal with a gastric fistula (a 
tube that drains food out of the stomach before it can 
be digested) will eat indefinitely.
Undoubtedly, the most important role of head fac-
tors in satiety is the fact that taste and odor of food can 
serve as stimuli that permit animals to learn about the 
caloric contents of different foods. For example, Cecil, 
Francis, and Read (1998) found that people became 
more satiated when they ate a bowl of high-fat soup than 
x gastric fistula  A tube that drains out the contents of the 
stomach.

	
What Stops a Meal?	
411
decrease the size of meals eaten by members of several 
species, including rats and both lean and obese humans 
(Batterham et al., 2007; Schloegl et al., 2011). In addi-
tion, Stoeckel et al. (2008) found that the amount of 
PYY released after a meal correlates positively with peo-
ple’s ratings of satiety. (See Figure 12.16.)
Liver Factors
Satiety produced by gastric factors and duodenal factors 
is anticipatory; that is, these factors predict that the food 
in the digestive system will, when absorbed, eventually 
restore the system variables that cause hunger. Not until 
nutrients are absorbed from the intestines can they be 
used to nourish the cells of the body and replenish the 
body’s nutrient reservoirs. The last stage of satiety ap-
pears to occur in the liver, which is the first organ to learn 
that food is finally being received from the intestines.
Evidence that nutrient detectors in the liver play a 
role in satiety comes from several sources. For example, 
Tordoff and Friedman (1988) infused small amounts of 
two nutrients, glucose and fructose, into the hepatic 
portal vein. The amounts they used were similar to those 
that are produced when a meal is being digested. Both 
meal, our stomachs are full and a small quantity of nutri-
ents has been received by the duodenum.
After food reaches the stomach, it is mixed with 
hydrochloric acid and pepsin, an enzyme that breaks 
proteins into their constituent amino acids. As digestion 
proceeds, food is gradually introduced from the stom-
ach into the duodenum. There, the food is mixed with 
bile and pancreatic enzymes, which continue the diges-
tive process. The duodenum controls the rate of stom-
ach emptying by secreting a peptide hormone called 
cholecystokinin (CCK). This hormone receives its name 
from the fact that it causes the gallbladder (cholecyst) to 
contract, injecting bile into the duodenum. (Bile breaks 
fats down into small particles so that they can be ab-
sorbed from the intestines.) CCK is secreted in response 
to the presence of fats, which are detected by receptors 
in the walls of the duodenum. In addition to stimulating 
contraction of the gallbladder, CCK causes the pylorus 
to constrict and inhibits gastric contractions, thus keep-
ing the stomach from giving the duodenum more food.
Obviously, the blood level of CCK must be related 
to the amount of nutrients (particularly fats) that the 
duodenum receives from the stomach. Thus, this hor-
mone could potentially provide a satiety signal to the 
brain, telling it that the duodenum was receiving food 
from the stomach. Many studies have indeed found that 
injections of CCK suppress eating (Moran, 2009). How-
ever, mice with a targeted mutation against the gene 
responsible for the production of CCK ate normal 
amounts of food and did not become obese. Presum-
ably, compensatory mechanisms such as the secretion of 
PYY prevented the animals from overeating. CCK does 
not act directly on the brain; instead, it acts on receptors 
located in the junction between the stomach and the 
duodenum (Moran et al., 1989). South and Ritter 
(1988) found that the appetite-suppressing effect of 
CCK was abolished by the application of capsaicin to the 
vagus nerve. Capsaicin, a drug extracted from chile pep-
pers, destroys sensory axons in the vagus nerve. This 
finding indicates that signals from CCK receptors are 
transmitted to the brain via the vagus nerve.
As we saw earlier in this chapter, secretion of ghre-
lin by the stomach provides a signal that increases hun-
ger. Once a meal begins and food starts to enter the 
duodenum, the secretion of ghrelin is suppressed. The 
suppression of a hunger signal could well be another 
factor that brings a meal to its end.
Investigators have discovered a chemical produced 
by cells in the gastrointestinal tract that appears to serve 
as an additional satiety signal. This chemical, peptide 
YY3–36 (let’s just call it PYY), is released by the small intes-
tine after a meal in amounts proportional to the calories  
that were just ingested (Pedersen-Bjergaard et al., 1996). 
Only nutrients caused PYY to be secreted; a large drink 
of water had no effect. Injections of PYY significantly 
x cholecystokinin (CCK) (coal i sis toe ky nin)  A hormone 
secreted by the duodenum that regulates gastric motility and 
causes the gallbladder (cholecyst) to contract; appears to provide 
a satiety signal transmitted to the brain through the vagus nerve.
x peptide YY3–36 (PYY)  A peptide released by the gastrointestinal 
system after a meal in amounts proportional to the size of the meal.
figure 12.16  Effects of PYY on Hunger
The graph shows the amount of food (in kilocalories) 
eaten at a buffet meal thirty minutes after people received 
a ninety-minute intravenous infusion of saline or PYY. Data 
points from each subject are connected by straight lines.
(Data from Batterham, R. L., ffytche, D. H., Rosenthal, J. M., et al. Nature, 2007, 
450, 106–109.)
Caloric intake (kcal)
Saline
PYY
Treatment
1800
1400
1000
600
200

412	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
1991). Thus, signals arising from the long-term nutrient 
reservoir may alter the sensitivity of the brain to hunger 
signals or short-term satiety signals.
What exactly is the system variable that permits the 
body weight of most organisms to remain relatively stable? 
It seems highly unlikely that body weight itself is regulated; 
this variable would have to be measured by detectors in 
the soles of our feet or (for those of us who are sedentary) 
in the skin of our buttocks. What is more likely is that some 
variable related to body fat is regulated. The basic differ-
ence between obese and nonobese people is the amount 
of fat stored in their adipose tissue. Perhaps fat tissue pro-
vides a signal to the brain that indicates how much of it 
there is. If so, the signal is almost certainly some sort of 
chemical, because cutting the nerves that serve the fat tis-
sue in an animal’s body does not affect its total body fat.
The discovery of a long-term satiety signal from fat 
tissue came after years of study with a strain of geneti-
cally obese mice. The ob mouse (as this strain is called) 
has a low metabolism, overeats, and gets exceedingly 
fat. It also develops diabetes in adulthood, just as many 
obese people do. Researchers in several laboratories 
reported the discovery of the cause of the obesity 
(Campfield et al., 1995; Halaas et al., 1995; Pelleymounter 
et al., 1995). A particular gene, called OB, normally 
produces a peptide hormone that has been given the 
name leptin (from the Greek word leptos, “thin”). Leptin 
of the infusions “fooled” the liver; both nutrients re-
duced the amount of food that the rats ate. Fructose 
cannot cross the blood–brain barrier and is metabolized 
very poorly by cells in the rest of the body, but it can 
readily be metabolized by the liver. Therefore, the sig-
nal from this nutrient must have originated in the liver. 
These results strongly suggest that when the liver re-
ceives nutrients from the intestines, it sends a signal to 
the brain that produces satiety. More accurately, the 
signal continues the satiety that was already started by 
signals arising from the stomach and upper intestine.
Insulin
As you will recall, the absorptive phase of metabolism is 
accompanied by an increased level of insulin in the 
blood. Insulin permits organs other than the brain to 
metabolize glucose, and it promotes the entry of nutri-
ents into fat cells, where they are converted into triglyc-
erides. You will also recall that cells in the brain do not 
need insulin to metabolize glucose. Nevertheless, the 
brain contains insulin receptors (Unger et al., 1989). 
What purpose do these insulin receptors serve? The 
answer is that they appear to detect insulin present in 
the blood, which tells the brain that the body is probably 
in the absorptive phase of metabolism. Thus, insulin 
may serve as a satiety signal (Woods et al., 2006).
Insulin is a peptide and would not normally be ad-
mitted to the brain. However, a transport mechanism 
delivers it through the blood–brain barrier, and it 
reaches neurons in the hypothalamus that are involved 
in regulation of hunger and satiety. Infusion of insulin 
into the third ventricle inhibits eating and causes a loss 
of body weight (Woods et al., 1979). In addition, Brüning 
et al. (2000) prepared a targeted mutation in mice that 
prevented the production of insulin receptors in the 
brain without affecting their production elsewhere in 
the body. The mice became obese, especially when they 
were fed a tasty, high-fat diet, which would be expected 
if one of the factors that promotes satiety was absent.
Long-Term Satiety: Signals  
from Adipose Tissue
So far, I have discussed short-term satiety factors—those 
arising from a single meal. But in most people, body 
weight appears to be regulated over the long term. If an 
animal is force fed so that it becomes fatter than nor-
mal, it will reduce its food intake once it is permitted to 
choose how much to eat (Wilson et al., 1990). (See 
Figure 12.17.) Similar studies have shown that an animal 
will adjust its food intake appropriately if it is given a 
high-calorie or low-calorie diet. And if an animal is put 
on a diet that reduces its body weight, short-term satiety 
factors become much less effective (Cabanac and Lafrance, 
figure 12.17  Effects of Force Feeding
After rats were fed an excess of their normal food intake, 
their subsequent food intake fell and recovered only 
when their body weight returned to normal.
(Based on data from Wilson et al., 1990.)
5
10
15
20
25
30
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Days
280
300
320
340
360
380
400
Body weight (g)
Food intake (g)
Force-fed
x ob mouse  A strain of mice whose obesity and low metabolic 
rate are caused by a mutation that prevents the production of leptin.
x leptin  A hormone secreted by adipose tissue; decreases food 
intake and increases metabolic rate, primarily by inhibiting 
NPY-secreting neurons in the arcuate nucleus.

	
What Stops a Meal?	
413
is normally secreted by well-nourished fat cells. Because 
of a genetic mutation, the fat cells of ob mice are un-
able to produce leptin.
Leptin has profound effects on metabolism and eat-
ing, acting as an antiobesity hormone. If ob mice are 
given daily injections of leptin, their metabolic rate in-
creases, their body temperature rises, they become more 
active, and they eat less. As a result, their weight returns 
to normal. Figure 12.18 shows a picture of an untreated 
ob mouse and an ob mouse that has received injections 
of leptin. (See Figure 12.18.)
The discovery of leptin has stimulated much inter-
est among researchers who are interested in finding 
ways to treat human obesity. Because it is a natural 
hormone, it appeared to provide a way to help people 
to lose weight without the use of drugs that have poten-
tially harmful effects. Unfortunately, as we shall see 
later in this chapter, leptin is not a useful treatment for 
obesity.
figure 12.18  Effects of Leptin on Obesity in Mice 
of the Ob Strain
The ob mouse on the left is untreated; the one on the 
right received daily injections of leptin.
(HO Agence France Presse/Newscom)
Section Summary
What Stops a Meal?
Short-term satiety signals control the size of a meal. 
These signals include feedback from the nose and 
mouth about the nutritive value of the food eaten, 
from gastric factors that are activated by the entry 
of food into the stomach, from intestinal factors 
that are activated by the passage of food from the 
stomach into the duodenum, and from liver factors 
that are activated by the presence of newly 
digested nutrients in the blood carried by the 
hepatic portal artery.
The signals from the stomach include informa-
tion about the volume and chemical nature of the 
food it contains. A fall in ghrelin secretion also pro-
vides a satiety signal to the brain. Another satiety 
signal from the intestine is provided by CCK, which 
is secreted by the duodenum when it receives fat-
rich food from the stomach. Information about the 
secretion of CCK is transmitted to the brain through 
the afferent axons of the vagus nerve. PYY, a peptide 
secreted after a meal by the intestines, also acts as a 
satiety signal. A satiety signal also comes from the 
liver, which detects nutrients being received from the 
intestines through the hepatic portal vein. Finally, 
although a high level of insulin in the blood causes 
glucoprivic eating by driving down blood levels of 
glucose, moderately high levels, associated with the 
absorptive phase of metabolism, provide a satiety 
signal to the brain.
Signals arising from fat tissue affect food intake 
on a long-term basis, apparently by modulating the 
effectiveness of short-term hunger and satiety signals. 
Force-feeding facilitates satiety, and starvation inhib-
its it. Studies of the ob mouse led to the discovery of 
leptin, a peptide hormone secreted by well-nourished 
adipose tissue that increases an animal’s metabolic 
rate and decreases food intake.
 Thought Questions
1.	 Do you find hunger unpleasant? I find that when 
I’m looking forward to a meal I particularly like, I 
don’t mind being hungry, knowing that I’ll enjoy 
the meal that much more. But then, I’ve never gone 
without eating for several days.
2.	 The drive-reduction hypothesis of motivation and 
reinforcement says that drives are aversive and 
satiety is pleasurable. Clearly, satisfying hunger is 
pleasurable, but what about satiety? Which do you 
prefer, eating a meal while you are hungry or feel-
ing full afterward?

414	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
hunger and satiety signals. They drink more sucrose af-
ter having been deprived of food for 24 hours, and they 
drink less of it if some sucrose is first injected directly 
into their stomachs. They also eat in response to gluco-
privation. These studies indicate that the brain stem con-
tains neural circuits that can detect hunger and satiety 
signals and control at least some aspects of food intake.
The region of the dorsal medulla that includes the 
area postrema and the nucleus of the solitary tract 
(henceforth referred to as the AP/NST) receives taste 
information from the tongue and a variety of sensory  
information from the internal organs, including signals 
from detectors in the stomach, duodenum, and liver. In 
addition, we saw that this region contains a set of detec-
tors that are sensitive to the brain’s own fuel: glucose. All 
this information is transmitted to regions of the forebrain 
that are more directly involved in control of eating and 
metabolism. Evidence indicates that events that produce 
hunger increase the activity of neurons in the AP/NST. 
In addition, lesions of this region abolish both gluco-
privic and lipoprivic feeding (Ritter and Taylor, 1990; 
Ritter, Dinh, and Friedman, 1994). (See Figure 12.20.)
Hypothalamus
Discoveries made in the 1940s and 1950s focused the 
attention of researchers interested in ingestive behavior 
on two regions of the hypothalamus: the lateral area and 
Brain Mechanisms
Although hunger and satiety signals originate in the di-
gestive system and in the body’s nutrient reservoirs, the 
target of these signals is the brain. This section looks at 
some of the research on the brain mechanisms that con-
trol food intake and metabolism.
Brain Stem
Ingestive behaviors are phylogenetically ancient; obvi-
ously, all our ancestors ate and drank or died pre­
maturely of dehydration or starvation. Therefore, we 
should expect that the basic ingestive behaviors of chew-
ing and swallowing are programmed by phylogenetically 
ancient brain circuits. Indeed, studies have shown that 
these behaviors can be performed by decerebrate rats, 
whose brains were transected between the diencepha-
lon and the midbrain (Norgren and Grill, 1982; Flynn 
and Grill, 1983; Grill and Kaplan, 1990). Decerebration 
disconnects the motor neurons of the brain stem and 
spinal cord from the neural circuits of the cerebral 
hemispheres (such as the cerebral cortex and basal gan-
glia) that normally control them. The only behaviors 
that decerebrate animals can display are those that are 
directly controlled by neural circuits located within the 
brain stem. (See Figure 12.19.)
Decerebrate rats cannot approach and eat food; the 
experimenters must place food, in liquid form, into their 
mouths. Decerebrate rats can distinguish between differ-
ent tastes; they drink and swallow sweet or slightly salty 
liquids and spit out bitter ones. They even respond to 
x decerebration  A surgical procedure that severs the brain 
stem, disconnecting the hindbrain from the forebrain.
figure 12.19  Decerebration
The operation disconnects the forebrain from the 
hindbrain so that the muscles involved in ingestive 
behavior are controlled solely by hindbrain mechanisms.
Forebrain
Hindbrain
Neural circuits in
the forebrain cannot
affect behaviors
controlled by motor
neurons caudal
to the transection.
Neural circuits in
the hindbrain can
affect behaviors
controlled by motor
neurons caudal
to the transection.
Control of muscles
involved in ingestive
behavior
Decerebration is accomplished
by transecting the brain stem.
figure 12.20  Role of the Brain Stem in Hunger
Lesions of the nucleus of the solitary tract and adjacent 
area postrema abolished both lipoprivic hunger (MA 
treatment) and glucoprivic hunger (2-DG treatment).
(Based on data from Ritter, S., and Taylor, J. S. American Journal of Physiology, 
1990, 258, R1395–R1401.)
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Control
AP/NST lesion
Placebo
MA
2-DG
Food intake (gm)
Drug Treatment

	
Brain Mechanisms	
415
Melanin-concentrating hormone received its name 
from its role in regulating changes in skin pigmentation 
in fish and other nonmammalian vertebrates (Kawauchi 
et al., 1983). In mammals it serves as a neurotransmitter. 
Orexin (from the Greek word orexin, “appetite”) was 
discovered by Sakurai et al. (1998). (This peptide is also 
known as hypocretin.) As we saw in Chapter 9, degenera-
tion of neurons that secrete orexin is responsible for 
narcolepsy. Evidence reviewed there suggests that it 
plays a role in keeping the brain’s sleep–waking switch 
in the “waking” position.
Researchers refer to MCH and orexin as orexigens, 
“appetite-inducing chemicals.” Injections of either of 
these peptides into the lateral ventricles or various regions 
the ventromedial area. For many years, investigators be-
lieved that these two regions controlled hunger and sa-
tiety, respectively; one was the accelerator, and the other 
was the brake. The basic findings were these: After the 
lateral hypothalamus was destroyed, animals stopped 
eating or drinking (Anand and Brobeck, 1951; Teitelbaum 
and Stellar, 1954). Electrical stimulation of the same 
region would produce eating, drinking, or both behav-
iors. Conversely, lesions of the ventromedial hypothalamus 
produced overeating that led to gross obesity, whereas 
electrical stimulation suppressed eating (Hetherington 
and Ranson, 1942). (See Figure 12.21.)
Role in Hunger
Researchers have discovered several peptides produced 
by neurons in the hypothalamus that play a special role 
in the control of feeding and metabolism (Arora and 
Anubhuti, 2006). Two of these peptides, melanin- 
concentrating hormone (MCH) and orexin, produced 
by neurons in the lateral hypothalamus, stimulate hunger 
and decrease metabolic rate, thus increasing and pre-
serving the body’s energy stores. (See Figure 12.22.)
figure 12.21  Regions of the Hypothalamus Involved in Eating and Metabolism
(Adapted from Swanson, L. W. Brain Maps: Structure of the Rat Brain. New York: Elsevier, 1992.)
Paraventricular
nucleus (PVN)
Third
ventricle
Arcuate
nucleus
Arcuate
nucleus
Ventromedial
nucleus of the
hypothalamus
(VMH)
Ventromedial
nucleus of the
hypothalamus
(VMH)
Lateral
hypothalamus
Fornix
Thalamus
Fimbria
Hippocampus
Corpus
callosum
Lateral
ventricle
x melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH)  A peptide neu-
rotransmitter found in a system of lateral hypothalamic neurons 
that stimulate appetite and reduce metabolic rate.
x orexin  A peptide neurotransmitter found in a system of lateral 
hypothalamic neurons that stimulate appetite and reduce 
metabolic rate.

416	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
orexin-secreting neurons after feeding may contribute 
to the sleepiness that is often felt after a meal.
The axons of MCH and orexin neurons travel to a 
variety of brain structures that are known to be involved 
in motivation and movement, including the neocortex, 
periaqueductal gray matter, reticular formation, thala-
mus, and locus coeruleus. These neurons also have con-
nections with neurons in the spinal cord that control 
the autonomic nervous system, which explains how they 
can affect the body’s metabolic rate (Sawchenko, 1998; 
Nambu et al., 1999). These connections are shown in 
Figure 12.23.
As we saw earlier, hunger signals caused by an empty 
stomach or by glucoprivation or lipoprivation arise from 
detectors in the abdominal cavity and brain stem. How 
do these signals activate the MCH and orexin neurons 
of the lateral hypothalamus? Part of the pathway in-
volves a system of neurons that secrete a neurotransmit-
ter called neuropeptide Y (NPY), an extremely potent 
stimulator of food intake (Clark et al., 1984). Infusion of 
NPY into the hypothalamus produces ravenous, almost 
frantic eating. Rats that receive an infusion of this pep-
tide into the brain will work very hard, pressing a lever 
of the brain induce eating. If rats are deprived of food, 
production of MCH and orexin in the lateral hypothala-
mus increases (Qu et al., 1996; Sakurai et al., 1998; 
Dube, Kalra, and Kalra, 1999). Of these two orexigenic 
hypothalamic peptides, MCH appears to play the more 
important role in stimulating feeding. Mice with a tar-
geted mutation against the MCH gene or those that re-
ceive injections of an MCH receptor antagonist eat less 
than normal mice and are consequently underweight 
(Shimada et al., 1998; Ito et al., 2010). In addition, ge-
netically engineered mice with increased production of 
MCH in the hypothalamus overeat and gain weight 
(Ludwig et al., 2001).
Besides playing a role in the regulation of sleep cy-
cles (as we saw in Chapter 9), orexin may also play a role 
in the relationship between eating and sleep. Mieda et al. 
(2004) studied mice with a targeted mutation against 
the orexin gene. Normal mice that are fed one meal at 
the same time each day show increased locomotor activity 
shortly before mealtime. They also show increased levels 
of fos protein in orexin-secreting neurons at this time. 
Presumably, in the wild this anticipatory activity would 
manifest itself in a hunger-induced search for food. 
Mieda and his colleagues found that mice with the 
orexin knockout adjusted their intake so that they  
received a sufficient amount of food during the single 
meal, but they did not show increased wakefulness or 
anticipatory activity just before mealtime. Yamanaka et al. 
(2003) suggest that the decreased activity seen in 
figure 12.22  Peptides in the Hypothalamus
The diagram shows melanin-concentrating hormone 
(MCH) neurons and orexin neurons of the lateral 
hypothalamus. Abbreviations: ic = internal capsule, ot = 
optic tract, ZI = zona incerta, LH = lateral hypothalamus, fx 
= fornix, 3v = third ventricle, Mt = mammillothalamic tract.
(Adapted from Elias, C. F., Saper, C. B., Maratos-Flier, E., et al. Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 1998, 402, 442–459.)
3v
Arcuate
nucleus
VMH
fx
LH
ot
ic
ZI
Mt
MCH
Orexin
figure 12.23  Feeding Circuits in the Brain
This schematic diagram shows connections of the MCH 
neurons and orexin neurons of the lateral hypothalamus.
Cerebral
cortex
Periaqueductal
gray matter
Locus
coeruleus
Reticular
formation
Thalamus
Lateral
hypothalamus
Excitatory effects
on eating,
reduction of
metabolic rate
Effects on
metabolism
MCH
Orexin
Neurons in
spinal cord that
control the
ANS
x neuropeptide Y (NPY)  A peptide neurotransmitter found in a 
system of neurons of the arcuate nucleus that stimulate feeding, 
insulin and glucocorticoid secretion, decrease the breakdown of 
triglycerides, and decrease body temperature.

	
Brain Mechanisms	
417
prevents ghrelin receptors from being produced in the 
hypothalamus ate less and gained weight more slowly 
than normal rats did. Evidence indicates that ghrelin 
exerts its effects on appetite and metabolism by stimulating 
receptors located on NPY neurons (Willesen, Kristensen, 
and Romer, 1999; Nakazato et al., 2001; Van den Top  
et al., 2004). Thus, two important hunger signals— 
glucoprivation and ghrelin—activate the orexigenic 
NPY neurons.
A study by Abizaid et al. (2006) found that ghrelin 
also activates neurons in the mesolimbic motivation and 
reinforcement system. Dopaminergic neurons in the 
ventral tegmental area (VTA) contain ghrelin receptors, 
and the investigators found that intraperitoneal injec-
tions of ghrelin or infusion of ghrelin directly into the 
VTA elicited eating in rats and mice. The administration 
of ghrelin also increased the activity of DA neurons and 
triggered the release of activity in the nucleus accum-
bens, the major target of VTA dopaminergic neurons.
NPY neurons of the arcuate nucleus send a projec-
tion directly to MCH and orexin neurons in the lateral 
hypothalamus (Broberger et al., 1998; Elias et al., 
1998b). These connections appear to be primarily re-
sponsible for the feeding elicited by activation of NPY 
neurons. In addition, NPY neurons send a projection of 
axons to the paraventricular nucleus (PVN), a region of 
the hypothalamus where infusions of NPY affect meta-
bolic functions, including the secretion of insulin (Bai 
et al., 1985).
The terminals of hypothalamic NPY neurons release 
another orexigenic peptide in addition to neuropeptide Y: 
agouti-related protein, otherwise known as AGRP (Hahn 
et al., 1998). The two hormones appear to act together. 
AGRP, like NPY, is a potent and extremely long-lasting 
orexigen. Infusion of a very small amount of this peptide 
into the third ventricle of rats produces an increase in 
food intake that lasts for six days (Lu et al., 2001).
I should briefly mention one other category of 
orexigenic compounds: the endocannabinoids. (See 
Di Marzo and Matias, 2005, and Bellocchio, 2010, for 
reviews of the evidence cited in this paragraph.) One 
of the effects of the THC contained in marijuana is an 
increase in appetite—especially for highly palatable 
many times for each morsel of food; they will eat food 
made bitter with quinine; and they will continue to 
drink milk even when doing so means that they receive 
an electric shock to their tongue (Flood and Morley, 
1991; Jewett et al., 1992).
Yang et al. (2009) found that a genetic manipula-
tion that increased the production of NPY in the hypo-
thalamus increased food intake in rats. In contrast, a 
manipulation that decreased its production reduced 
eating, obesity, and diabetes of members of a strain of 
rats that had been selectively bred to overeat and be-
come obese.
The cell bodies of most of the neurons that secrete 
NPY are found in the arcuate nucleus, located in the 
hypothalamus at the base of the third ventricle. The ar-
cuate nucleus also contains neurosecretory cells whose 
hormones control the secretions of the anterior pitu-
itary gland. (Refer again to Figure 12.21.)
Neurons that secrete NPY are affected by hunger 
and satiety signals; Sahu, Kalra, and Kalra (1988) found 
that hypothalamic levels of NPY are increased by food 
deprivation and lowered by eating. In addition, Myers et al. 
(1995) found that hypothalamic injections of a drug 
that blocks neuropeptide Y receptors suppress eating 
caused by food deprivation. Specific hunger signals have 
been shown to activate NPY neurons. For example, Sindelar 
et al. (2004) found that in normal mice, glucoprivation 
produced by injections of 2-DG caused a 240 percent 
increase in NPY messenger RNA in the hypothalamus. 
They also found that mice with a targeted mutation 
against the gene for NPY showed a feeding deficit in 
response to glucoprivation.
As we saw earlier, injections of 5-TG (a drug similar 
to 2-DG) into two regions of the medulla activates glucose- 
sensitive neurons and produces eating. One of these 
regions, located in the ventrolateral medulla, contains 
neurons that release NPY. The terminals of these neu-
rons ascend to the forebrain, where they form syn-
apses with NPY neurons in the arcuate nucleus. Li and 
Ritter (2004) found that glucoprivation increased the 
production of NPY in these neurons. The investigators 
also injected a toxin into the arcuate nucleus that was 
taken up by the NPY terminals and carried back to the 
cell bodies in the medulla, which subsequently died. 
The death of these neurons abolished glucoprivic eat-
ing. Thus, the signal for glucoprivic eating is carried 
by the axons of NPY neurons in the medulla to NPY 
neurons in the arcuate nucleus. As we saw earlier, glu-
coprivation is detected in the liver and in the medulla. 
Presumably, the neurons destroyed by Li and Ritter 
also carry signals from detectors in the liver to the 
hypothalamus.
As we saw earlier, ghrelin, released by the stomach, 
provides a potent hunger signal to the brain. Shuto et al. 
(2002) found that rats with a targeted mutation that 
x arcuate nucleus  A nucleus in the base of the hypothalamus 
that controls secretions of the anterior pituitary gland; contains 
NPY-secreting neurons involved in feeding and control of 
metabolism.
x paraventricular nucleus (PVN)  A nucleus of the hypothalamus 
located adjacent to the dorsal third ventricle; contains neurons 
involved in control of the autonomic nervous system and the 
posterior pituitary gland.
x agouti-related protein (AGRP)  A neuropeptide that acts as 
an antagonist at MC4 receptors and increases eating.

418	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
obesity. In fact, a drug company paid a large sum of 
money for the rights to develop this compound. How-
ever, it turns out that most obese people already have a 
high blood level of leptin, and increasing this level with 
injections of the peptide has little or no effect on their 
food intake. I will discuss this issue further later in this 
chapter, in the section on obesity.
The arcuate nucleus contains another system of 
neurons that secrete two peptides, both of which serve as 
anorexigens, or “appetite-suppressing chemicals.” Douglass, 
McKinzie, and Couceyro (1995) discovered the first of 
these peptides, which is now called CART (for cocaine- 
and amphetamine-regulated transcript). When cocaine or  
foods. The endocannabinoids, whose actions are mim-
icked by THC, stimulate eating, apparently by increas-
ing the release of MCH and orexin. (As you will recall 
from Chapter 4, cannabinoid receptors are found on 
terminal buttons, where they regulate the release of 
other neurotransmitters.) Levels of endocannabinoids 
are highest during fasting and lowest during feeding. 
A genetic mutation that disrupts the production of 
FAAH, the enzyme that destroys the endocannabinoids 
after they have been released, causes overweight and 
obesity. Cannabinoid agonists have been used to in-
crease the appetite of cancer patients, and until ad-
verse side effects were discovered, cannabinoid antago-
nists were used as an aid to weight reduction. (I will 
discuss this use later in this chapter, in the section on 
obesity.)
In summary, activity of MCH and orexin neurons of 
the lateral hypothalamus increases food intake and de-
creases metabolic rate. These neurons are activated by 
NPY/AGRP-secreting neurons of the arcuate nucleus, 
which are sensitive to ghrelin and which receive excit-
atory input from NPY neurons in the medulla that are 
sensitive to glucoprivation. The NPY/AGRP neurons of 
the arcuate nucleus also project to the paraventricular 
nucleus, which plays a role in control of insulin secre-
tion and metabolism. The endocannabinoids stimulate 
appetite by increasing the release of MCH and orexin. 
(See Figure 12.24.)
Role in Satiety
As we saw earlier in this chapter, leptin, a hormone se-
creted by well-fed adipose tissue, suppresses eating and 
raises the animal’s metabolic rate. The interactions of 
this long-term satiety signal with neural circuits involved 
in hunger are now being discovered. Leptin produces its 
behavioral and metabolic effects by binding with recep-
tors in the brain—in particular, on neurons that secrete 
the orexigenic peptides NPY and AGRP.
Activation of leptin receptors on NPY/AGRP-secreting 
neurons in the arcuate nucleus has an inhibitory effect 
on these neurons (Glaum et al., 1996; Jobst, Enriori, 
and Cowley, 2004). Because NPY/AGRP neurons nor-
mally activate orexin and MCH neurons, the presence 
of leptin in the arcuate nucleus decreases the release of 
these orexigens. Leptin appears to suppress animals’ 
sensitivity to both olfactory and gustatory stimuli associ-
ated with food. Getchell et al. (2006) found that ob 
mice, who lack the leptin gene, found buried food much 
faster than normal mice did. An injection of leptin into 
the mutant mice increased their time to find food. Kawai 
et al. (2000) found that leptin decreased the sensitivity 
of gustatory sweet receptors to the taste of sucrose and 
saccharine.
When leptin was discovered, researchers hoped that 
this naturally occurring peptide could be used to treat 
figure 12.24  Action of Hunger Signals  
on Feeding Circuits in the Brain
The diagram shows connections of the NPY neurons  
of the arcuate nucleus.
Excitatory effects
on eating,
reduction of
metabolic rate
MCH
Orexin
Lateral
hypothalamus
fatty acids, de
Decreased insulin secretion,
decreased breakdown of
creased body
temperature
Stomach
i
ion
n
Ghrelin secret
increases whe
stomach empt es
NPY
Glucose-sensitive
neurons in medulla
(and liver?)
Endocannabinoids
facilitate release
of MCH and orexin
NPY/AGRP
Ventrolateral
medulla
Paraventricular
nucleus
Brain stem
nuclei that control
ANS
Arcuate nucleus
x CART  Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript; a 
peptide neurotransmitter found in a system of neurons of the  
arcuate nucleus that inhibit feeding.

	
Brain Mechanisms	
419
body weight by its effects on metabolism as well as on 
behavior (Hwa et al., 2001).
Earlier in this chapter, I mentioned an anorexi-
genic peptide, PYY, which is produced by cells in the 
gastrointestinal tract in amounts proportional to the 
calories that were just ingested. PYY binds with the Y2 
receptor, an inhibitory autoreceptor found on NPY/
AGRP neurons in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothala-
mus. When PYY binds with the Y2 receptor, it suppresses 
the release of NPY and AGRP. Both peripheral injection 
of PYY and infusion directly into the arcuate nucleus of 
the hypothalamus suppresses food intake (Batterham  
et al., 2002).
Batterham et al. (2007) note that in most industrial-
ized societies today, food intake is determined largely by 
nonhomeostatic factors, including cognitive and emo-
tional factors such as the signals from the environment 
that I described earlier. In a functional-imaging study, 
Batterham and her colleagues scanned the brains of 
hungry subjects while they received intravenous infu-
sions of saline or PYY. Thirty minutes later, the subjects 
were offered a large buffet meal. The investigators 
found that when the subjects were being infused with 
saline (the placebo), the level of activation of the hypo-
thalamus predicted the amount of food they ate later: 
Increased hypothalamic activation predicted larger 
meals. When the subjects were being infused with PYY, 
the level of activation of the orbitofrontal cortex pre-
dicted the amount of food eaten: Increased orbitofron-
tal activation predicted smaller meals. (See Figure 12.25.) 
Presumably, the activation of the hypothalamus during 
the saline infusions reflected the activity of circuits in-
volved in hunger. Infusion of PYY reduced the activity of 
these circuits, and nonhomeostatic cognitive and emo-
tional factors took control of the amount of food that 
the subjects ate.
In summary, leptin appears to exert at least some of 
its satiating effects by binding with leptin receptors on 
neurons in the arcuate nucleus. Leptin inhibits NPY/
AGRP neurons, which suppresses the feeding that these 
peptides stimulate and prevents the decrease in metabolic 
rate that they provoke. Leptin activates CART/a-MSH 
neurons, which then inhibit MCH and orexin neurons 
in the lateral hypothalamus and prevent their stimulatory 
effect on appetite. PYY, released by the gastrointestinal 
tract just after a meal, inhibits orexigenic NPY/AGRP 
neurons. (See Figure 12.26.)
amphetamine is administered to an animal, levels of 
this peptide increase, which may have something to 
do with the fact that these drugs suppress appetite. 
CART neurons appear to play an important role in 
satiety. If animals are deprived of food, levels of CART 
decrease. CART is almost totally absent in ob mice, 
which lack leptin, but injection of leptin into their 
cerebral ventricles stimulates the production of CART. 
Injection of CART into the cerebral ventricles inhibits 
feeding, including the feeding stimulated by NPY. Fi-
nally, infusion of a CART antibody, which destroys 
molecules of CART, increases feeding (Kristensen et 
al., 1998).
CART neurons are located in the arcuate nucleus 
and send their axons to a variety of locations, including 
several other hypothalamic nuclei, the periaqueductal 
gray matter, and regions of the spinal cord that control 
the autonomic nervous system (Koylu et al., 1998). Ac-
tivity of CART neurons appears to suppress eating by 
inhibiting MCH and orexin neurons and to increase 
metabolic rate through connections of these neurons 
with neurons in the paraventricular nucleus. CART neu-
rons contain leptin receptors that have an excitatory ef-
fect; thus, activation of CART-secreting neurons appears 
to be at least partly responsible for the satiating effect of 
leptin (Elias et al., 1998a).
A second anorexigen, a-melanocyte-stimulating 
hormone (a-MSH), is also released by CART neurons. 
This peptide is an agonist of the melanocortin 4 receptor  
(MC4R); it binds with the receptor and inhibits feeding. 
You will recall that NPY neurons also release AGRP, 
which stimulates eating. Both a-MSH and AGRP bind 
with the MC4R. However, whereas AGRP binds with 
MC4 receptors and causes feeding (as we saw in the 
previous subsection), a-MSH binds with MC4 receptors 
and inhibits eating. CART/a-MSH neurons are activated 
by leptin, and NPY/AGRP neurons are inhibited by 
leptin. (See Elmquist, Elias, and Saper, 1999, and Wynne 
et al., 2005, for specific references.) So high levels of 
leptin stimulate the release of the anorexigens CART 
and a-MSH and inhibit the release of the orexigens NPY 
and AGRP. Low levels of leptin have just the opposite 
effects: the anorexigenic CART/a-MSH neurons are 
not activated and the orexigenic NPY/AGRP neurons 
are not inhibited.
The peptide a-MSH and the MC4 receptor appear 
to play an important role in the control of eating. Al-
though the MC4 receptor has two natural ligands, one 
with an orexigenic effect and the other with an an-
orexigenic effect, its primary function seems to be to 
suppress appetite: Huszar et al. (1997) found that mice 
with a targeted mutation against the gene for the MC4 
receptor became obese. Agonists for the MC4 receptor 
such as a-MSH increase metabolic rate as well as sup-
press eating; thus, activation of this receptor reduces 
x a-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (-MSH)  A neuropeptide 
that acts as an agonist at MC4 receptors and inhibits eating.
x melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R)  A receptor found in the 
brain that binds with a-MSH and agouti-related protein; plays a 
role in control of appetite.

420	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
Appetite for food is controlled by a balance between 
orexigenic and anorexigenic factors. We saw that ghrelin 
activates NPY/AGRP neurons, which directly increases 
appetite. Ghrelin also inhibits CART/a-MSH neurons, 
which decreases the anorexic effect of these two peptides 
(Cowley et al., 2003). Another appetite-stimulating pep-
tide, orexin, also inhibits CART/a-MSH neurons (Ma et al., 
2007). Thus, two important orexigenic peptides inhibit 
the activity of anorexigenic peptides.
figure 12.25  Effects of PYY on Activity of the 
Hypothalamus and OFC
The graph shows correlation between activation of the 
hypothalamus and orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and the 
amount that subjects ate after receiving intravenous infusions 
of PYY or saline. On saline days, high activity of the 
hypothalamus predicted increased food intake. On PYY days, 
high activity of the OFC predicted decreased food intake.
(Data from Batterham, R. L., ffytche, D. H., Rosenthal, J. M., et al. Nature, 2007, 
450, 106–109.)
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
–1
1
3
5
7
0
2
4
6
8
10
OFC signal change (percent)
Hypothalamic signal  change (percent)
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
750
1000
1250
1500
1750
Caloric intake (kcal)
Caloric intake (kcal)
500
500
Saline day
PYY day
PYY day
Saline day
figure 12.26  Action of Satiety Signals  
on Hypothalamic Neurons Involved in Control  
of Hunger and Satiety
Brain stem 
nuclei that control
ANS
Paraventricular
nucleus
Decreased insulin secretion,
decreased breakdown of
fatty acids, decreased body
temperature
Excitatory effects
on eating,
reduction of
metabolic rate
Lateral
hypothalamus
Arcuate nucleus
Inhibitory
effects
Excitatory effect
of leptin
Leptin secretion by
well-nourished fat cells
Adipose tissue
MCH
Orexin
Gastrointestinal
system
NPY/AGRP
CART/
 -MSH
Inhibitory effects
of PYY secretion
after a meal
α
Section Summary
Brain Mechanisms
The brain stem contains neural circuits that are able to 
control acceptance or rejection of sweet or bitter 
foods and can even be modulated by satiation or 
physiological hunger signals, such as a decrease in 
glucose metabolism or the presence of food in the 
digestive system. The area postrema and nucleus of 
the solitary tract (AP/NST) receive signals from the 
tongue, stomach, small intestine, and liver and send 
the information on to many regions of the forebrain. 
These signals interact and help to control food intake. 
Lesions of the AP/NST disrupt both glucoprivic and 
lipoprivic eating.
The lateral hypothalamus contains two sets of 
neurons whose activity increases eating and decreases 
metabolic rate. These neurons secrete the peptides 
orexin and MCH (melanin-concentrating hormone). 

	
Obesity	
421
Possible Causes
What causes obesity? As we will see, genetic differences—
and their effects on development of the endocrine sys-
tem and brain mechanisms that control food intake and 
metabolism—appear to be responsible for the over-
whelming majority of people with extreme obesity. But, 
as we just saw, the problem of obesity has been growing 
over recent years. Clearly, changes in the gene pool can-
not account for this increase; instead, we must look to 
environmental causes that have produced changes in 
people’s behavior.
Body weight is the result of the difference between 
two factors: calories consumed and energy expended. If 
we consume more calories than we expend as heat and 
work, we gain weight. If we expend more than we con-
sume, we lose weight. In modern industrialized societ-
ies, inexpensive, convenient, good-tasting, high-fat food 
is readily available, which promotes an increase in in-
take. In most places, fast-food restaurants are close at 
hand, parking is convenient (or even unnecessary at 
Obesity
Obesity is a widespread problem that can have serious 
medical consequences. In the United States, approxi-
mately 67 percent of men and 62 percent of women are 
overweight, defined as having a body mass index (BMI) 
of over 25. In the past twenty years, the incidence of 
obesity, defined as a BMI of over 30, has doubled in the 
population as a whole and has tripled for adolescents. 
Obesity is also increasing in developing countries as 
household incomes rise. For example, over a ten-year 
period, the incidence of obesity in young urban chil-
dren in China increased by a factor of eight (Ogden, 
Carroll, and Flegal, 2003; Zorrilla et al., 2006). The 
known health hazards of obesity include cardiovascular 
disease, diabetes, stroke, arthritis, and some forms of 
cancer. One hundred years ago, type 2 diabetes was al-
most never seen in people before the age of 40. How-
ever, because of the increased incidence of obesity in 
children, this disorder is now seen even in 10-year-olds. 
(See Figure 12.27.)
Food deprivation increases the level of these pep-
tides, and mice with a targeted mutation against MCH 
undereat. Secretion of orexin also keeps animals from 
sleeping through the time for a meal if food is avail-
able only intermittently. The axons of these neurons 
project to regions of the brain involved in motivation, 
movement, and metabolism.
The release of neuropeptide Y in the lateral 
hypothalamus induces ravenous eating, an effect that 
is produced by excitatory connections of NPY-
secreting neurons with the orexin and MCH neurons. 
NPY neurons in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothala-
mus receive input from glucose-sensitive neurons in 
the medulla. NPY neurons are the primary target of 
ghrelin in the hypothalamus. Ghrelin also activates 
the mesolimbic reinforcement system by stimulating 
dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area, 
which increases the release of DA in the nucleus 
accumbens. When NPY is infused in the paraventricu-
lar nucleus, it decreases metabolic rate. Levels of 
NPY increase when an animal is deprived of food and 
fall again when the animal eats. A drug that blocks 
NPY receptors suppresses eating. NPY neurons also 
release a peptide called AGRP. This peptide serves 
as an antagonist at MC4 receptors and, like NPY, 
stimulates eating. Endocannabinoids, whose action  
is mimicked by THC, the active ingredient in mari-
juana, also stimulate eating, apparently by increasing 
the release of MCH and orexin.
Leptin, the long-term satiety hormone secreted 
by well-stocked adipose tissue, desensitizes the brain 
to hunger signals. It binds with receptors in the arcu-
ate nucleus of the hypothalamus, where it inhibits 
NPY-secreting neurons, increasing metabolic rate 
and suppressing eating. However, low levels of 
leptin, which indicate a loss of fat tissue, provide a 
hunger signal more potent than high levels of leptin, 
which indicate a gain of fat tissue. The arcuate 
nucleus also contains neurons that secrete CART 
(cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript), a 
peptide that suppresses eating. These neurons, 
which are activated by leptin, have inhibitory connec-
tions with MCH and orexin neurons in the lateral 
hypothalamus. CART neurons also secrete a peptide 
called -MSH, which serves as an agonist at MC4 
receptors and inhibits eating. Ghrelin, which activates 
NPY/AGRP neurons and stimulates hunger, also 
inhibits CART/-MSH neurons and suppresses the 
satiating effect of the peptides secreted by these 
neurons. The anorexigenic peptide, PYY, which is 
released by the gastrointestinal system, suppresses 
the release of NPY and AGRP.

422	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
available to their young students. In fact, school adminis-
trators often welcome the installation of vending ma-
chines because of the income they provide. As Bray, 
Nielsen, and Popkin (2004) point out, intake of high-
fructose corn syrup, which is found in many prepared 
foods, including soft drinks, fruit drinks, flavored yogurts, 
and baked goods, may contribute to obesity. Fructose, 
unlike glucose, does not stimulate insulin secretion or 
enhance leptin production, so this form of sugar is less 
likely to activate the brain’s satiety mechanisms (Teff et al., 
2004). A 1994–1996 survey reported that the average daily 
consumption of fructose for an American over 2 years of 
age is approximately 318 kcal. Almost certainly, this figure 
is larger today.
Another modern trend that contributes to the obe-
sity epidemic involves changes in people’s expenditure 
of energy. The proportion of people employed in jobs 
that require a high level of physical activity has de-
creased considerably, which means that on the average 
we need less food than our forbears did. Our hunter-
gatherer ancestors probably consumed about 3000 kcal 
per day and expended about 1000 kcal in their every-
day activities. People with sedentary occupations in to-
day’s industrialized societies consume a little less than 
their ancestors—about 2400 kcal—but they burn up 
only about 300 kcal in physical activity (Booth and 
Neufer, 2005).
We expend energy in two basic ways: through phys-
ical activity and through the production of heat. Not all 
physical activity can be categorized as “exercise.” A 
study by Levine, Eberhardt, and Jensen (1999) fed non-
obese people a diet for eight weeks that contained 1000 
calories more than they needed to sustain their weight. 
Approximately 39 percent of the calories were con-
verted into fat tissue, and approximately 26 percent 
went into lean tissue, increased resting metabolic rate, 
and the energy required to digest the extra food. The 
rest, approximately 33 percent, went into an increase 
in involuntary activity: muscle tone, postural changes, 
and fidgeting. Levine and his colleagues referred to 
this phenomenon as “nonexercise activity thermogen-
esis,” or NEAT. The amount of fat tissue that a person 
gained was inversely related to his or her level of NEAT. 
Levine et al. (2005) measured NEAT levels in a group 
of people with sedentary lifestyles that included both 
lean and moderately obese individuals. The investiga-
tors found that the overweight people remained seated 
2.5 hours per day more than the lean people. The dif-
ference in energy expenditure amounted to 350 kcal 
per day.
Differences in body weight—perhaps reflecting 
physiological differences in metabolism, activity levels 
(including NEAT), or appetite—have a strong hereditary 
basis. Twin studies suggest that between 40 percent 
restaurants with drive-up windows), and the size of the 
portions they serve has increased in recent years. People 
eat out more often than they used to, and most often 
they do so at inexpensive fast-food restaurants.
Of course, fast-food restaurants are not the only envi-
ronmental factor responsible for the increased incidence 
of obesity. Snack foods are available in convenience stores 
and vending machines, and even school cafeterias make 
high-calorie, high-fat foods and sweetened beverages 
figure 12.27  Prevalence of Obesity in the United 
States
(Based on data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.)
1990
1999
2009
No data
<10%
10–14%
15–19%
20–24%
25–29%
>30%
–

	
Obesity	
423
This hypothesis has received support from epide-
miological studies. Ravussin et al. (1994) studied two 
groups of Pima Indians, who live in the southwestern 
United States and northwestern Mexico. Members of 
the two groups appear to have the same genetic back-
ground; they speak the same language and have com-
mon historical traditions. The two groups separated 
700–1000 years ago and now live under very different 
environmental conditions. The Pima Indians in the 
southwestern United States eat a high-fat American diet 
and weigh an average of 90 kg (198 lb), men and women 
combined. In contrast, the lifestyle of the Mexican Pi-
mas is probably similar to that of their ancestors. They 
spend long hours working at subsistence farming and 
eat a low-fat diet—and weigh an average of 64 kg (141 lb). 
The cholesterol level of the American Pimas is much 
higher than that of the Mexican Pimas, and the Ameri-
can Pimas’ rate of diabetes is more than five times 
higher. These findings show that genes that promote an 
efficient metabolism are of benefit to people who must 
work hard for their calories but that these same genes 
turn into a liability when people live in an environment 
where the physical demands are low and high-calorie 
food is cheap and plentiful.
As we saw earlier, study of the ob mouse led to  
the discovery of leptin, the hormone secreted by well- 
nourished adipose tissue. So far, researchers have found 
several cases of familial obesity caused by the absence of 
leptin produced by the mutation of the gene responsi-
ble for leptin production or the production of the leptin 
receptor (Farooqi and O’Rahilly, 2005). Treatment of 
leptin-deficient people with injections of leptin has dra-
matic effects on the people’s body weights. (See Figure 
12.28.) Unfortunately, leptin has no effect on people 
who lack leptin receptors. In any case, mutations of the 
genes for leptin or leptin receptors are very rare, so they 
do not explain the vast majority of cases of obesity.
As I mentioned earlier in this chapter, leptin has not 
proved to provide a useful treatment for obesity. Indeed, 
obese people already have elevated blood levels of leptin, 
and additional leptin has no effect on their food intake 
or body weight. However, several investigators have sug-
gested that a fall in blood levels of leptin should be re-
garded as a hunger signal. Starvation decreases the blood 
level of leptin, which removes an inhibitory influence on 
NPY/AGRP neurons and an excitatory influence on 
CART/-MSH neurons. That is, a low level of leptin in-
creases the release of orexigenic peptides and decreases 
the release of anorexigenic peptides. And as Flier (1998) 
suggests, people with a thrifty metabolism should show 
resistance to a high level of leptin, which would permit 
weight gain in times of plenty. People with a spendthrift 
metabolism should not show leptin resistance and 
should eat less as their level of leptin rises.
and 70 percent of the variability in body fat is due to 
genetic differences. Twin studies have found also 
strong genetic effects on the amount of weight that 
people gain or lose when they are placed on high- or 
low-calorie diets (Bouchard et al., 1990; Hainer et al., 
2001). Thus, heredity appears to affect people’s meta-
bolic efficiency. However, until recently, variations in 
only two genes were found to cause obesity in humans: 
the gene for the MC4 receptor and the FTO gene (fat 
mass and obesity related gene), which codes for an 
enzyme that acts in hypothalamic regions related to 
energy balance, such as the PVN, and the arcuate nu-
cleus (Olszewski et al., 2009; Willer et al., 2009). A 
massive study with 145 authors (Willer et al., 2009) 
discovered six new genetic loci that are associated with 
body mass index (BMI). However, these genes are very 
rare, so none of them can account for the prevalence 
of obesity in the general population. The high level of 
heritability of obesity must be explained, then, as the 
additive effects of a large number of genes, each of 
which has a small effect on BMI. In any event, we can-
not blame the current epidemic of obesity and type 2 
diabetes on genetics. After all, the human genome has 
not been altered in the past few decades. A much 
more likely explanation for increased obesity in re-
cent years is the availability of cheap, tasty, calorie-rich 
food and decreased levels of exercise.
Just as cars differ in their fuel efficiency, so do living 
organisms, and hereditary factors can affect the level of 
efficiency. For example, farmers have bred cattle, pigs, 
and chickens for their efficiency in converting feed into 
muscle tissue, and researchers have done the same with 
rats (Pomp and Nielsen, 1999). As we just saw, people 
differ in this form of efficiency too. Those with an effi-
cient metabolism have calories left over to deposit in the 
long-term nutrient reservoir; thus, they have difficulty 
keeping this reservoir from growing. Researchers have 
referred to this condition as a “thrifty phenotype.” In 
contrast, people with an inefficient metabolism (a “spend-
thrift phenotype”) can eat large meals without getting fat. 
A fuel-efficient automobile is desirable, but a fuel-efficient 
body runs the risk of becoming obese—at least in an  
environment where food is cheap and plentiful.
Why are there genetic differences in metabolic ef-
ficiency? As we saw earlier in this chapter, natural selec-
tion for mechanisms that helped our ancestors to avoid 
starvation was much stronger than natural selection for 
mechanisms that helped them to avoid becoming obese. 
Perhaps individual differences in metabolic efficiency 
reflect the nature of the environment experienced by 
their ancestors. Perhaps people whose ancestors lived in 
regions where food was scarce or subject to periods  
of famine are more likely to have inherited efficient 
metabolisms.

424	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
their caloric intake are related to the mechanisms that 
make it difficult for people to stop taking addictive 
drugs. In other words, we might view overeating as a 
form of addiction. For example, although some over-
weight people who participate in treatment programs 
may succeed in eating less and lose weight, they often 
relapse and regain the weight they lost. Similarly, people 
who succeed in stopping a drug habit often have diffi-
culty continuing to abstain. In both cases, stress and 
anxiety can cause reinstatement of the eating or drug 
taking, apparently by means of similar brain mecha-
nisms (Nair et al., 2009). Both dopamine, which plays 
an important role in reinforcement, and CRH, which 
plays an important role in stress, are involved in relapse 
in both food seeking and drug seeking. Cottone et al. 
(2009) found that rats that had become accustomed to 
a tasty, high-calorie diet, showed signs of stressful with-
drawal symptoms, accompanied by increased CRH se-
cretion and increased activation of the central nucleus 
of the amygdala when their access to the tasty diet was 
curtailed. In fact, in some ways, defeating a “food addic-
tion” is easier than defeating a drug addiction. It is pos-
sible to cease taking a drug altogether and stay away 
from people and places associated with obtaining and 
abusing the drug, but it is not possible to abstain from 
eating.
Whatever the cause of obesity, the metabolic fact of 
life is this: If calories in exceed calories out, then body 
fat will increase. Because it is difficult to increase the 
“calories out” side of the equation enough to bring an 
obese person’s weight back to normal, most treatments 
for obesity attempt to reduce the “calories in.” The ex-
traordinary difficulty that obese people have in reducing 
Treatment
Obesity is extremely difficult to treat; the enormous  
financial success of diet books, health spas, and weight 
reduction programs attests to the trouble people have in 
losing weight. More precisely, many programs help peo-
ple to lose weight initially, but then the weight is quickly 
regained. Kramer et al. (1989) reported that four to five 
years after participating in a fifteen-week behavioral 
weight-loss program, fewer than 3 percent of the par-
ticipants managed to maintain the weight loss they had 
achieved during the program. Some experts have sug-
gested that, given the extremely low long-term success 
rate, perhaps we should stop treating people for obesity 
until our treatments are more successful. As Wooley and 
Garner (1994) said,
We should stop offering ineffective treatments 
aimed at weight loss. Researchers who think 
they have invented a better mousetrap should 
test it in controlled research before setting out 
their bait for the entire population. Only by 
admitting that our treatments do not work—
and showing that we mean it by refraining from 
offering them—can we begin to undo a century 
of recruiting fat people for failure. (p. 656)
Perhaps the fact that there are so many different weight 
treatments offered to the public simply shows that we 
really do not know how to train people to lose weight 
over the long term. If there were a method that really 
worked, that is the only one that would be practiced.
Evidence suggests that the physiological mecha-
nisms that make it difficult for obese people to reduce 
figure 12.28  Hereditary Leptin Deficiency
The photographs show three patients with hereditary leptin deficiency before (a) and 
after (b) treatment with leptin for 18 months. The faces of the patients are obscured for 
privacy. Two normal-weight nurses are shown for comparison purposes.
(From Licinto, J., Caglayan, S., Ozata, M., et al. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA, 2004, 101, 4531–4536.)
(a)
(b)

	
Obesity	
425
the United States alone, approximately 200,000 bariatric 
surgeries are performed each year. Brolin (2002) re-
ported that the average postsurgical loss of excessive 
weight of obese patients was 65–75 percent, or about  
35 percent of their initial weight. Even patients who 
sustained smaller weight losses showed improved health, 
including reductions in hypertension and diabetes. A 
meta-analysis of 147 studies by Maggard et al. (2005) 
reported an average weight loss of 43.5 kg (approxi-
mately 95 lb) one year after RYGB surgery and 41.5 kg 
after three years. And although the biological response 
to starvation is very strong—and is seen in obese people 
who are successfully losing weight—RYGB surgery does 
not induce these changes. Instead, after surgery people 
report that they feel less hungry and their level of exer-
cise increases (Berthoud, Shin, and Zheng, 2011). As 
Berthoud and his colleagues note, these results are  
“almost too good to be true.” However, like other forms 
of major surgery, adverse outcomes (including death) 
occasionally occur, but the rate of complications is low-
est for surgeons with a higher-than-average experience 
performing the procedures (Smith et al., 2010).
One important reason for the success of the RYGB 
procedure appears to be that it disrupts the secretion of 
ghrelin. The procedure also increases blood levels of 
PYY (Chan et al., 2006; Reinehr et al., 2007). Both of 
these changes would be expected to decrease food in-
take: A decrease in ghrelin should reduce hunger, and 
an increase in PYY should increase satiety. A plausible 
explanation for the decreased secretion of ghrelin could 
be disruption of communication between the upper in-
testine and the stomach; as you will recall, although 
ghrelin is secreted by the stomach, the upper intestine 
controls this secretion. Presumably, because the surgery 
decreases the speed at which food moves through the 
small intestine, more PYY is secreted. Suzuki et al. (2005) 
prepared an animal model of the RYGB procedure. 
They performed bariatric surgery on a genetically obese 
strain of rats and monitored the animals’ food intake, 
weight, ghrelin, and PYY levels. They found that the rats 
that sustained a RYGB procedure (but not rats that re-
ceived sham surgery) ate less, lost weight, and showed 
decreased ghrelin levels and increased PYY levels. These 
results support the conclusion that changes in the secre-
tion of these two peptides contribute to the success of 
this procedure.
Figure 12.30 shows the effects of RYGB surgery in 
two strains of rats: normal rats and those from a strain 
that was bred for overeating and obesity (Shin et al., 
2011). As you can see, even normal rats continue to gain 
weight when they are housed in a cage with food always 
available, but the obesity surgery suppressed weight gain 
in both strains of animals. (See Figure 12.30.)
A less drastic form of therapy for obesity—exercise—
has significant benefits. As I mentioned earlier,  
caloric intake for a sustained period of time (that is, for 
the rest of their lives) has led to the development of 
some extraordinary means. In this section I shall de-
scribe some surgical, pharmacological, and behavioral 
methods that have been devised to make obese people 
eat less.
Surgeons have become involved in trying to help 
obese people lose weight. The procedures they have 
developed (called bariatric surgery, from the Greek barys, 
“heavy,” and iatrikos, “medical”) are designed to reduce 
the amount of food that can be eaten during a meal or 
interfere with absorption of calories from the intestines. 
Bariatric surgery has been aimed at the stomach, the 
small intestine, or both.
The most effective form of bariatric surgery is a 
special form of gastric bypass called the Roux-en-Y gas-
tric bypass, or RYGB. This procedure produces a small 
pouch in the upper end of the stomach. The jejunum 
(the second part of the small intestine, immediately 
“downstream” from the duodenum) is cut, and the up-
per end is attached to the stomach pouch. The effect 
is to produce a small stomach whose contents enter 
the jejunum, bypassing the duodenum. Digestive en-
zymes that are secreted into the duodenum pass 
through the upper intestine and meet up with the 
meal that has just been received from the stomach 
pouch. (See Figure 12.29.)
The RYGB procedure works well, although it often 
causes an iron and vitamin B12 deficiency, which may be 
controlled by increased intake of these substances. In 
figure 12.29  Roux-en-Y Gastric Bypass (RYGB) 
Surgery
This procedure almost totally suppresses the secretion of 
ghrelin.
Gall bladder
Pouch (20–30 ml capacity)
Roux limb
(50–100 cm
of jejunum)
Duodenum
Jejunum
(15–20 cm)

426	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
eat from being digested, and increase their metabolic 
rate (that is, provide them with a “spendthrift pheno-
type”). Unfortunately, a drug that successfully de-
creases eating by any of these means without produc-
ing unacceptable side effects has not yet been brought 
to the market.
Some serotonergic agonists suppress eating. How-
ever, a drug used for this purpose, fenfluramine, was 
found to have hazardous side effects, including pulmo-
nary hypertension and damage to the valves of the heart, 
so the drug was withdrawn from the market in the 
United States (Blundell and Halford, 1998). Fenflura-
mine acts by stimulating the release of 5-HT. Another 
drug, sibutramine, has similar therapeutic effects on 
eating, but a study of people who were taking the drug 
found increased incidence of heart attacks and strokes, 
so this drug, too, was withdrawn from the market (Li 
and Cheung, 2011).
Another drug, orlistat, interferes with the absorp-
tion of fats by the small intestine. As a result, some of the 
fat in the person’s diet passes through the digestive sys-
tem and is excreted with the feces. Possible side effects 
include anal leaking of undigested fat. (That sounds 
unpleasant!) A double-blind, placebo-controlled study 
by Hill et al. (1999) found that orlistat helped people to 
maintain weight loss they had achieved by participating 
in a conventional weight-loss program. People who re-
ceived the placebo were much more likely to regain the 
weight they had lost.
As I mentioned earlier, the fact that marijuana of-
ten elicits a craving for highly palatable foods led to 
the discovery that the endocannabinoids have an orex-
igenic effect. The drug rimonabant, which blocks CB1 
cannabinoid receptors, was found to suppress appetite, 
produce a significant weight loss, lower blood levels of 
triglycerides and insulin, and increase blood levels of 
HDL (“good” cholesterol), with apparently minimal 
adverse side effects (Di Marzo and Matias, 2005). How-
ever, use of rimonabant was subsequently found to be 
associated with depressive mood disorders, anxiety, 
and increased suicide risk, so it is no longer on the 
market as an antiobesity treatment (Christensen et al., 
2007). As we will see in Chapter 18, rimonabant has 
also been shown to help people stop smoking.  
Although the drug is not approved for this purpose 
either, its efficacy suggests that craving for nicotine, 
like the craving for food, involves the release of endo-
cannabinoids in the brain.
As we have seen, appetite can be stimulated by 
activation of NPY, MCH, orexin, and ghrelin recep-
tors, and it can be suppressed by the activation of 
leptin, CCK, CART, and MC4 receptors. Appetite can 
also be suppressed by activation of inhibitory presyn-
aptic Y2 autoreceptors by PYY. Most of these orexi-
genic and anorexigenic chemicals also affect metabolism: 
decreased physical activity is an important cause of the 
increased number of overweight people. Exercise 
burns off calories, of course, but it also appears to have 
beneficial effects on metabolic rate. Bunyard et al. 
(1998) found that when middle-aged men participated 
in an aerobic exercise program for six months, their 
body fat decreased and their daily energy requirement 
increased—by 5 percent for obese men and by 8 per-
cent for lean men. (Remember, a less efficient metabo-
lism means that it is easier to avoid gaining weight.) 
Gutin et al. (1999) found that an exercise program 
helped obese children to lose fat and had the addi-
tional benefit of increasing bone density. Hill et al. 
(2003) calculated that an increased energy expendi-
ture through exercise of only 100 kcal per day could 
prevent weight gain in most people. The effort would 
require only a small change in behavior—about 14 
minutes of walking each day. Of course, if it were easy 
to convince people to commit to an exercise program, 
the incidence of obesity would be considerably lower 
than it is.
Another type of therapy for obesity—drug treatment—
is the subject of active research programs by the phar-
maceutical industry. There are three possible ways in 
which drugs could help people lose weight: reduce the 
amount of food they eat, prevent some of the food they 
figure 12.30  Effect of RYGB Surgery in Rats
Rats genetically selected for development of obesity 
decreased their food intake and lost weight after 
receiving RYGB surgery. Their weight eventually reached 
that of normal rats that received the same operation.
(Data from Shin, A. C., Zheng, H., Pistell, P. J., and Berthoud, H. R. International 
Journal of Obesity, 2011, 35, 642–651.)
700
800
500
400
600
0
Obesity 
prone rats
Normal rats
Normal rats
0
40
Body weight (g)
80
120
160
Time after surgery (days)
Obesity
prone rats
RYGB
surgery
Sham
surgery

	
Obesity	
427
The variety of methods—surgical, behavioral, and 
pharmacological—that therapists and surgeons have  
developed to treat obesity attests to the tenacity of the 
problem. The basic difficulty, beyond that caused by 
having an efficient metabolism, is that eating is pleasur-
able and satiety signals are easy to ignore or override. 
Despite the fact that relatively little success has been 
seen until now, I am optimistic about what the future 
may hold. I think that if we learn more about the physi-
ology of hunger signals, satiety signals, and the rein-
forcement provided by eating, we will be able to develop 
safe and effective drugs that attenuate the signals that 
encourage us to eat and strengthen those that encour-
age us to stop eating.
Orexigenic chemicals tend to decrease metabolic 
rate, and anorexigenic chemicals tend to increase it. 
In addition, uncoupling protein causes nutrients to 
be “burned”—converted into heat instead of adipose 
tissue. Do these discoveries hold any promise for the 
treatment of obesity? Is there any possibility that re-
searchers will find drugs that will stimulate or block 
these receptors, thus decreasing people’s appetite 
and increasing the rate at which they burn rather 
than store their calories? Drug companies certainly 
hope so, and they are working hard on developing 
medications that will do so, because they know that 
there will be a very large number of people willing to 
pay for them.
Section Summary
Obesity
Obesity presents serious health problems. As we saw 
earlier, natural selection has given us strong hunger 
mechanisms and weaker mechanisms of long-term 
satiety. Obesity is strongly affected by heredity. Some 
people have inherited a thrifty metabolism, which 
makes it difficult for them to lose weight. One of the 
manifestations of a thrifty metabolism is a low level of 
nonexercise activity thermogenesis, or NEAT. A high 
percentage of Pima Indians who live in the United 
States and consume a high-fat diet become obese 
and, as a consequence, develop diabetes. In contrast, 
Mexican Pima Indians, who work hard at subsistence 
farming and eat a low-fat diet, remain thin and have a 
low incidence of obesity.
Obesity in humans is related to a hereditary 
absence of leptin or leptin receptors only in a few 
families. In general, obese people have very high 
levels of leptin in their blood. However, they show 
resistance to the effects of this peptide, apparently 
because the transport of leptin through the blood–
brain barrier is reduced. The most significant sim-
ple genetic cause of severe obesity are mutation of 
the gene for the MC4 receptor and the FTO gene. 
The MC4 receptor responds to the orexigen AGRP 
and the anorexigen -MSH, and the FTO gene 
codes for an enzyme that acts in hypothalamic 
regions involved in energy balance. In addition, 
mutations that inactivate the genes responsible for 
the production of leptin or leptin receptors result 
in obesity.
Researchers have tried many behavioral, surgi-
cal, and pharmacological treatments for obesity, 
but no panacea has yet been found. The RYGB 
procedure, a special form of gastric bypass opera-
tion, is the most successful form of bariatric sur-
gery. The effectiveness of this operation is proba-
bly due primarily to its suppression of ghrelin 
secretion and stimulation of PYY secretion. The 
best hope for the future probably comes from 
drugs. Two drugs initially appeared to show some 
promise in the treatment of obesity. Fenfluramine, 
a serotonin agonist, and rimonabant, a cannabinoid 
antagonist, suppress appetite, but adverse side 
effects have prevented their use. At present many 
pharmaceutical companies are trying to apply the 
results of the discoveries of orexigens and anorexi-
gens described in this chapter to the development 
of antiobesity drugs.
This section and the previous one introduced sev-
eral neuropeptides and peripheral peptides that play 
a role in control of eating and metabolism. Table 12.1 
summarizes information about these compounds. 
(See Table 12.1.)
 Thought Question
One of the last prejudices that people admit to pub-
licly is a dislike of fat people. Is this fair, given that 
genetic differences in metabolism are such an impor-
tant cause of obesity?

428	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
table 12.1  Neuropeptides and Peripheral Peptides Involved in Control of Food Intake and Metabolism
Neuropeptides
Name 
Location of Cell 
Bodies
Location of Terminals 
Interaction with Other 
Peptides
Physiological or 
Behavioral Effects
Melanin-
concentrating 
hormone (MCH) 
 
Lateral  
hypothalamus 
 
 
Neocortex, periaqueductal gray 
matter, reticular formation, thal-
amus, locus coeruleus, neurons 
in spinal cord that control the 
sympathetic nervous system
Activated by NPY/
AGRP; inhibited by 
leptin and CART/-MSH 
 
Eating, decreased 
metabolic rate 
 
 
Orexin 
 
Lateral  
hypothalamus 
Similar to those of MCH  
neurons 
Activated by NPY/
AGRP; inhibited by 
leptin and CART/-MSH
Eating, decreased 
metabolic rate 
Neuropeptide  
Y (NPY) 
Arcuate  
nucleus of 
hypothalamus
Paraventricular nucleus, MCH 
and orexin neurons of the  
lateral hypothalamus
Activated by ghrelin; 
inhibited by leptin 
Eating, decreased 
metabolic rate 
Agouti-related 
protein (AGRP) 
 
Arcuate nucleus 
of hypothala-
mus (colocalized 
with NPY)
Same regions as NPY neurons 
 
 
Inhibited by leptin 
 
 
Eating, decreased 
metabolic rate; acts 
as antagonist at MC4 
receptors
Cocaine- and 
amphetamine-
regulated tran-
script (CART) 
Arcuate  
nucleus of 
hypothalamus 
 
Paraventricular nucleus, lateral 
hypothalamus, periaqueductal 
gray matter, neurons in spinal 
cord that control the sympa-
thetic nervous system
Activated by leptin 
 
 
 
Suppression of eating, 
increased metabolic 
rate 
 
-melanocyte 
stimulating  
hormone (a-MSH) 
Arcuate nucleus 
of hypothalamus 
(colocalized with 
CART)
Same regions as CART neurons 
 
 
Activated by leptin 
 
 
Suppression of eating, 
increased metabolic 
rate; acts as agonist 
at MC4 receptors
Name
Where Produced
Site of Actions
Physiological or Behavioral Effects
Leptin 
Fat tissue 
Inhibits NPY/AGRP neurons; 
excites CART/-MSH neurons
Suppression of eating, increased 
metabolic rate
Insulin
Pancreas
Similar to leptin
Similar to leptin
Ghrelin
Gastrointestinal system
Activates NPY/AGRP neurons
Eating
Cholecystokinin (CCK)
Duodenum
Neurons in pylorus
Suppression of eating
Peptide YY3–36 (PYY)
Gastrointestinal system
Inhibits NPY/AGRP neurons
Suppression of eating
Anorexia Nervosa/Bulimia  
Nervosa
Most people, if they have an eating problem, tend to 
overeat. However, some people, especially among ado-
lescent women, have the opposite problem: They eat 
too little, even to the point of starvation. This disorder 
is called anorexia nervosa. Another eating disorder, 
bulimia nervosa, is characterized by a loss of control of 
food intake. (The term bulimia comes from the Greek 
bous, “ox,” and limos, “hunger.”) People with bulimia 
nervosa periodically gorge themselves with food, espe-
cially dessert or snack food and especially in the after-
noon or evening. These binges are usually followed by 
self-induced vomiting or the use of laxatives, along with 
Peripheral Peptides

	
Anorexia Nervosa/Bulimia Nervosa 	
429
which they had no use. At first, they were gregarious, 
but as time went on, they became withdrawn and iso-
lated. They lost interest in sex, and many even “wel-
comed the freedom from sexual tensions and frustra-
tions normally present in young adult men” (Keys et 
al., p. 840).
The obsessions with food and weight loss and the 
compulsive rituals that people with anorexia nervosa 
develop suggest a possible linkage with obsessive- 
compulsive disorder (described in more detail in Chapter 
17). However, the fact that these obsessions and com-
pulsions were seen in the subjects of the Minnesota 
study—none of whom showed these symptoms previ-
ously—suggests that they are effects rather than causes 
of the eating disorder.
Both anorexia and semistarvation include symp-
toms such as mood swings, depression, and insomnia. 
Even hair loss is seen in both conditions. The suicide 
rate in patients with anorexia is higher than that of the 
rest of the population (Pompili et al., 2004). None of 
the volunteers in the Minnesota study committed sui-
cide, but one cut off three of his fingers. This volunteer 
said, “I have been more depressed than ever in my life . . . 
I thought that there was only one thing that would pull 
me out of the doldrums, that is release from [the ex-
periment]. I decided to get rid of some fingers . . . It was 
premeditated” (Keys et al., 1950, pp. 894–895).
Although binge eating is a symptom of anorexia, 
eating very slowly is, too. Patients with anorexia tend to 
dawdle over a meal, and so did the volunteers in the 
Minnesota study. “Toward the end of starvation some of 
the men would dawdle for almost two hours over a meal 
which previously they would have consumed in a matter 
of minutes” (Keys et al., p. 833).
As we saw, excessive exercising is a prominent symp-
tom of anorexia (Zandian et al., 2007). In fact, Manley, 
O’Brien, and Samuels (2008) found that many fitness 
instructors recognize that some of their clients may have 
an eating disorder and have expressed concern about 
ethical or liability issues in permitting such clients to 
participate in their classes or facilities.
Studies with animals suggest that the increased ac-
tivity may actually be a result of the fasting. When rats 
are allowed access to food for one hour each day, they 
will spend more and more time running in a wheel if 
one is available and will lose weight and eventually die 
feelings of depression and guilt. With this combination 
of binging and purging, the net nutrient intake (and 
consequently, the body weight) of bulimics can vary; 
Weltzin et al. (1991) reported that 19 percent of bulim-
ics undereat, 37 percent eat a normal amount, and  
44 percent overeat. Episodes of bulimia are seen in 
some patients with anorexia nervosa. The incidence of 
anorexia nervosa is estimated at 0.5–2 percent; that  
of bulimia nervosa at 1–3 percent. Women are ten to 
twenty times more likely than men to develop anorexia 
nervosa and approximately ten times more likely to de-
velop bulimia nervosa. (See Klein and Walsh, 2004.)
Possible Causes
The literal meaning of the word anorexia suggests a loss 
of appetite, but people with this disorder are usually in-
terested in—even preoccupied with—food. They may 
enjoy preparing meals for others to consume, collect 
recipes, and even hoard food that they do not eat. Al-
though anorexics might not be oblivious to the effects 
of food, they express an intense fear of becoming obese, 
which continues even if they become dangerously thin. 
Many exercise by cycling, running, or almost constant 
walking and pacing.
Anorexia is a serious disorder. Five to 10 percent of 
people with anorexia die of complications of the disease 
or of suicide. Many anorexics suffer from osteoporosis, 
and bone fractures are common. When the weight loss 
becomes severe enough, anorexic women cease men-
struating. Some disturbing reports (Artmann et al., 
1985; Herholz, 1996; Kingston et al., 1996; Katzman et al., 
2001) indicate the presence of enlarged ventricles and 
widened sulci in the brains of anorexic patients, which 
indicate shrinkage of brain tissue.
Many researchers and clinicians have concluded 
that anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are symp-
toms of an underlying mental disorder. However, evi-
dence suggests just the opposite: that the symptoms of 
eating disorders are actually symptoms of starvation. 
A famous study carried out at the University of Minnesota 
by Ancel Keys and his colleagues (Keys et al., 1950) 
recruited thirty-six physically and psychologically 
healthy young men to observe the effects of semistar-
vation. For six months, the men ate approximately 50 
percent of what they had been eating previously and, 
as a result, lost approximately 25 percent of their 
original body weight. As the volunteers lost weight, 
they began displaying disturbing symptoms, including 
preoccupation with food and eating, ritualistic eating, 
erratic mood, impaired cognitive performance, and 
physiological changes such as decreased body tem-
perature. They began hoarding food and nonfood 
objects and were unable to explain (even to them-
selves) why they bothered to accumulate objects for 
x anorexia nervosa  A disorder that most frequently afflicts 
young women; exaggerated concern with being overweight that 
leads to excessive dieting and often compulsive exercising; can 
lead to starvation.
x bulimia nervosa  Bouts of excessive hunger and eating, often 
followed by forced vomiting or purging with laxatives; sometimes 
seen in people with anorexia nervosa.

430	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
starvation it stimulates wheel-running activity instead. 
The likely explanation for this phenomenon is that, if 
food is not present, NPY increases the animals’ activity 
level, which would normally increase the likelihood that 
they would find food. Just before the end of the Second 
World War, food became very scarce in the Netherlands, 
and thousands of people starved to death. During this 
“Hunger Winter,” many people began taking long trips 
walking or riding bicycles in an attempt to find food, 
even though they expended much energy doing so 
(Södersten et al., 2008). Perhaps the increased wheel-
running activity of semistarved rats and the food-seeking 
activity of starving people are caused by an increased 
secretion of NPY. Increased levels of NPY may also play 
a role in the obsession with food that is often seen in 
patients with anorexia.
By now, you are probably wondering why anorexia 
gets started in the first place. Even if the symptoms of 
anorexia are largely those of starvation, what begins the 
behavior that leads to starvation? The simple answer is 
that we still do not know. One possibility is a genetic 
predisposition for this behavior. There is good evidence, 
primarily from twin studies, that hereditary factors play 
an important role in the development of anorexia ner-
vosa (Russell and Treasure, 1989; Walters and Kendler, 
1995; Kortegaard et al., 2001). In fact, between 58 and 
76 percent of the variability in the occurrence of an-
orexia nervosa appears to be under control of genetic 
factors (Klein and Walsh, 2004). In addition, the inci-
dence of anorexia nervosa is higher in girls who were 
born prematurely or who had sustained birth trauma 
during complicated deliveries (Cnattingius et al., 1999), 
which suggests that biological factors independent of 
heredity may play a role. Perhaps some young women 
(and a small number of young men) go on a diet to 
bring their body weight closer to what they perceive as 
ideal. Once they get set on this course and begin losing 
weight, physiological and endocrinological changes 
bring about the symptoms of starvation previously out-
lined, and the vicious cycle begins. In fact, at the end of 
the Minnesota semistarvation study when the volunteers 
were permitted to eat normally again, Keys and his col-
leagues found that a few of them displayed symptoms of 
anorexia, engaging in dieting behavior and complain-
ing about the fat in their abdomens and thighs (Keys et al., 
1950). This phenomenon suggests that strongly re-
stricted access to food can apparently produce anorexia 
in people (men, in this case) with a predisposition to 
this disorder.
The fact that anorexia nervosa is seen primarily in 
young women has prompted both biological and social 
explanations. Most psychologists favor the latter, con-
cluding that the emphasis that most modern industrial-
ized societies places on slimness—especially in women—
is responsible for this disorder. Another possible cause 
of emaciation (Smith, 1989). Nergårdh et al. (2007) 
placed rats in individual cages. Some of the cages were 
equipped with running wheels so that the rats’ running 
activity levels could be measured. After adaptation to 
the cages, the animals were given access to food once a 
day for varying amounts of time between one and twenty-
four hours (no food restriction). The rats in cages with 
running wheels that received food on restricted sched-
ules began to spend more time running. In fact, the rats 
with the most restrictive feeding schedules ran the most. 
Clearly, the increased running was counterproductive, 
because these animals lost much more weight than did 
the animals housed in cages without running wheels. 
(See Figure 12.31.)
One explanation for the increased activity of rats on 
a semistarvation diet is that it reflects an innate ten-
dency to seek food when it becomes scarce. Normally, 
rats would expend their activity by exploring the envi-
ronment and searching for food, but because of their 
confinement the tendency to explore results only in fu-
tile wheel running. The fact that starving rats increase 
their activity suggests that the excessive activity of an-
orexic patients and the people subjected to the extreme 
conditions during the Hunger Winter discussed in the 
following paragraph may be a symptom of starvation, 
not a weight-loss strategy.
Blood levels of NPY are elevated in patients with 
anorexia. Nergårdh et al. (2007) found that infusion of 
NPY into the cerebral ventricles further increased the 
time spent running in rats on a restricted feeding sched-
ule. Normally, NPY stimulates eating (as it does in rats 
with unlimited access to food), but under conditions of 
figure 12.31  Activity, Food Restriction,  
and Weight Loss
The graph shows changes in body weight of rats that 
were permitted one-hour or twenty-four-hour access to 
food each day. Rats with access to a running wheel spent 
time running and lost weight, especially those with only 
one hour of access to food.
(Data from Nergårdh, R., Ammar, A., Brodin, U., et al. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 
2007, 32, 493–502.)
240
200
160
Body weight (g)
24-hour
access
1-hour
access
No wheel
No wheel
Wheel
Wheel
1
4
7
10
13
Days

	
Anorexia Nervosa/Bulimia Nervosa 	
431
theories of the causation of the disorders are too 
non-specific to generate effective programs of pre-
vention. New models are urgently required. (p. 65)
Researchers have tried to treat anorexia nervosa 
with many drugs that increase appetite in laboratory 
animals or in people without eating disorders—for ex-
ample, antipsychotic medications, drugs that stimulate 
adrenergic 2 receptors, l-DOPA, and THC (the active 
ingredient in marijuana). Unfortunately, none of these 
drugs has been shown to be helpful (Mitchell, 1989). In 
any event, the fact that anorexics are usually obsessed 
with food (and show high levels of neuropeptide Y and 
ghrelin) suggests that the disorder is not caused by the 
absence of hunger. Researchers have had better luck 
with bulimia nervosa; several studies suggest that sero-
tonin agonists such as fluoxetine (an antidepressant 
drug that is best known as Prozac) may aid in the treat-
ment of this disorder (Advokat and Kutlesic, 1995; Kaye 
et al., 2001). However, fluoxetine does not help an-
orexic patients (Attia et al., 1998).
Bergh, Södersten, and their colleagues (Zandian et al., 
2007; Court, Bergh, and Södersten, 2008) have devised 
a novel and apparently effective treatment protocol for 
anorexia. The patients are taught to eat faster by placing 
a plate of food on an electronic scale attached to a com-
puter that displays the time course of their actual and 
ideal intake. After the meal the patients are kept in a 
warm room, which reduces their anxiety and their activity 
level. Anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa are serious 
conditions; understanding their causes is more than an 
academic matter. We can hope that research on the bio-
logical and social control of feeding and metabolism 
and the causes of compulsive behaviors will help us to 
understand this puzzling and dangerous disorder.
could be the changes in hormones that accompany pu-
berty. Whatever the cause, young men and women differ 
in their response to even a short period of fasting. 
Södersten, Bergh, and Zandian (2006) had high school 
students visit their laboratory at noon one day, where 
they were given all the food they wanted to eat for lunch. 
Seven days later, they returned to the laboratory again. 
This time, they had been fasting since lunch on the pre-
vious day. The men ate more food than they had the first 
time. However, the women actually ate less than they had 
before. (See Figure 12.32.) Apparently, women have dif-
ficulty compensating for a period of food deprivation by 
eating more food. As the authors note, “Dieting may be 
dangerous in women and in particular in those who are 
physically active and therefore need to eat more food, 
[such as] athletes” (p. 575).
Treatment
Anorexia is very difficult to treat successfully. Cognitive 
behavior therapy, considered by many clinicians to be 
the most effective approach, has a success rate of less 
than 50 percent and a relapse rate of 22 percent during 
a one-year treatment period (Pike et al., 2003). A meta-
analysis by Steinhausen (2002) indicates that the success 
rate in treating anorexia has not improved in the last 
fifty years. As Ben-Tovim (2003) notes,
Much of the literature on the treatment and 
outcome of eating disorders lacks methodologi-
cal robustness and ignores basic epidemiological 
principles. The absence of authoritative evidence 
for treatment effectiveness makes it increasingly 
hard to protect resource intensive treatments in 
anorexia and bulimia nervosa, and existing  
figure 12.32  Reactions of Young Men and Women on Fasting
The graph shows food intake and eating rate during a buffet lunch after a 24-hour 
period of fasting or after a period during which they ate meals at their normal times.
(Data from Södersten, P., Bergh, C., and Zandian, M. Hormones and Behavior, 2006, 50, 572–578.)
Not food deprived
Food deprived
200
400
600
0
Food intake (g)
Women
Men
28
38
48
58
Women
Men
Eating rate (g/min)

432	
Chapter 12  Ingestive Behavior
Section Summary
Anorexia Nervosa/Bulimia Nervosa
Anorexia nervosa is a serious—even life-threatening—
disorder. Although anorexic patients avoid eating, 
they are often preoccupied with food. Bulimia ner-
vosa consists of periodic binging and purging and a 
low body weight. Anorexia nervosa has a strong 
hereditary component and is seen primarily in young 
women.
Some researchers believe that the symptoms of 
anorexia—preoccupation with food and eating, ritual-
istic eating, erratic mood, excessive exercising, 
impaired cognitive performance, and physiological 
changes such as decreased body temperature—are 
symptoms of starvation and not the underlying 
causes of anorexia. A study carried out over fifty 
years ago found that several months of semistarva-
tion caused similar symptoms to emerge in previ-
ously healthy people. If rats are allowed access to 
food for a limited time each day, they will spend 
much time in a running wheel if one is available and 
will consequently eat less and lose weight. This 
response may reflect increased exploratory behavior 
that, in the natural environment, might result in the 
discovery of food. It may also reflect an attempt to 
increase body temperature, which is lowered by  
fasting. A study with normal adolescents found that 
instead of eating more after a 24-hour fast, women 
actually ate less, which suggests that they have diffi-
culty compensating for a period of food deprivation. 
Perhaps a period of dieting causes some young 
women to begin a vicious circle that leads to starva-
tion and its ensuing symptoms. A therapeutic proto-
col based on findings such as these has shown prom-
ise in helping anorexic patients overcome the 
disorder. Researchers have tried to treat anorexia 
with drugs that increase appetite, but none has been 
found to be helpful. However, fluoxetine, a serotonin 
agonist used to treat depression, may help to  
suppress episodes of bulimia.
 Thought Question
Undoubtedly, anorexia has both environmental and 
physiological causes. After reading the last section of 
this chapter, what do you think is the cause of the sex 
difference in the incidence of this disorder (that is, the 
fact that almost all anorexics are female)? Is it caused 
entirely by social factors (such as the emphasis on 
thinness in our society), or do you think that biologi-
cal factors also play a significant role?
1.  Explain the characteristics of a regulatory mechanism.
2.  Describe the fluid compartments of the body and 
explain the control of osmometric and volumetric 
thirst.
3.  Discuss the neural control of thirst.
4.  Describe the characteristics of the two nutrient reservoirs 
and the absorptive and fasting phases of metabolism.
5.  Discuss social and environmental factors that begin a 
meal and stomach and environmental hunger signals.
6.  Discuss the head, gastric, and intestinal factors 
responsible for stopping a meal.
Review Questions
    7.  Describe research on the role of the brain stem and 
hypothalamus in hunger.
    8.  Describe research on the role of the hypothalamus 
in satiety.
    9.  Discuss the physiological factors that may contribute 
to obesity.
10.  Discuss some surgical, pharmacological, and behav-
ioral treatments of obesity.
11.  Discuss the physiological factors that may contribute 
to anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa.
Study and Review on MyPsychLab

	
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab	
433
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Hunger and Eating 
The neural regulation of ingestive behavior has been well described in non-
human animal species. The increasing global rate of obesity and its related dis-
eases underscores the importance of understanding the neural circuitry underly-
ing feeding behavior. The Hunger and Eating module of the virtual brain shows 
some of the brain circuits involved in regulating feeding behaviors.

434	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
Learning and Memory
Outline
13
 The Nature of Learning
Section Summary
 Synaptic Plasticity:  
Long-Term Potentiation and 
Long-Term Depression
Induction of Long-Term 
Potentiation
Role of NMDA Receptors
Mechanisms of Synaptic  
Plasticity
Long-Term Depression
Other Forms of Long-Term 
Potentiation
Section Summary
 Perceptual Learning
Learning to Recognize Stimuli
Perceptual Short-Term Memory
Section Summary
 Classical Conditioning
Section Summary
 Instrumental Conditioning
Basal Ganglia
Reinforcement
Section Summary
 Relational Learning
Human Anterograde Amnesia
Spared Learning Abilities
Declarative and Nondeclarative 
Memories
Anatomy of Anterograde 
Amnesia
Role of the Hippocampal 
Formation in Consolidation  
of Declarative Memories
Episodic and Semantic  
Memories
Spatial Memory
Relational Learning in  
Laboratory Animals
Section Summary
chapter

E
xperiences change us; encounters with our envi-
ronment alter our behavior by modifying our ner-
vous system. As many investigators have said, an 
understanding of the physiology of memory is the ulti-
mate challenge to neuroscience research. The brain is 
complex, and so are learning and remembering. 
However, despite the difficulties, the long years of work 
finally seem to be paying off. New approaches and new 
methods have evolved from old ones, and real progress 
has been made in understanding the anatomy and phys-
iology of learning and remembering.
The Nature of Learning
Learning refers to the process by which experiences 
change our nervous system and hence our behavior. We 
refer to these changes as memories. Although it is conve-
nient to describe memories as if they were notes placed 
in filing cabinets, this is certainly not the way experi-
ences are reflected within the brain. Experiences are 
not “stored”; rather, they change the way we perceive, 
perform, think, and plan. They do so by physically 
changing the structure of the nervous system, altering 
neural circuits that participate in perceiving, perform-
ing, thinking, and planning.
Learning can take at least four basic forms: percep-
tual learning, stimulus-response learning, motor learn-
ing, and relational learning. Perceptual learning is the 
ability to learn to recognize stimuli that have been per-
ceived before. The primary function of this type of 
learning is the ability to identify and categorize objects 
(including other members of our own species) and situ-
ations. Unless we have learned to recognize something, 
we cannot learn how we should behave with respect to 
it—We will not profit from our experiences with it, and 
profiting from experience is what learning is all about.
Each of our sensory systems is capable of perceptual 
learning. We can learn to recognize objects by their vi-
sual appearance, the sounds they make, how they feel, 
or how they smell. We can recognize people by the 
shape of their faces, the movements they make when 
they walk, or the sound of their voices. When we hear 
people talk, we can recognize the words they are saying 
and, perhaps, their emotional state. As we shall see, per-
ceptual learning appears to be accomplished primarily 
by changes in the sensory association cortex. That is, 
learning to recognize complex visual stimuli involves 
Patient H. M. had a relatively pure amnesia. His intellectual 
ability and his immediate verbal memory was apparently 
normal. He could repeat seven numbers forward and five 
numbers backward, and he could carry on conversations, 
rephrase sentences, and perform mental arithmetic. He 
was unable to remember events that occurred during 
several years preceding his brain surgery, but he could 
recall older memories very well. He showed no personality 
change after the operation, and he was generally polite 
and good-natured.
However, after his surgery, H. M. was unable to learn 
anything new. He could not identify by name people he had 
met since the operation (performed in 1953, when he was 
twenty-seven years old). His family moved to a new house 
after his operation, and he never learned how to get around 
in the new neighborhood. (After his parent’s death, he lived 
in a nursing home, where he could be cared for.) He was 
aware of his disorder and often said something like this:
Every day is alone in itself, whatever enjoyment I’ve 
had, and whatever sorrow I’ve had. . . . Right now, 
I’m wondering. Have I done or said anything amiss? 
You see, at this moment everything looks clear to 
me, but what happened just before? That’s what 
worries me. It’s like waking from a dream; I just don’t 
remember. (Milner, 1970, p. 37)
H. M. was capable of remembering a small amount  
of verbal information as long as he was not distracted; 
constant rehearsal could keep information in his immediate 
memory for a long time. However, rehearsal did not appear 
to have any long-term effects; if he was distracted for a 
moment, he would completely forget whatever he had 
been rehearsing. He worked very well at repetitive tasks. 
Indeed, because he so quickly forgot what previously 
happened, he did not easily become bored. He could 
endlessly reread the same magazine or laugh at the same 
jokes, finding them fresh and new each time. His time was 
typically spent solving crossword puzzles and watching 
television.
On December 2, 2008, H. M., whom we now know as 
Henry Molaison, died at the age of 82.
x perceptual learning  Learning to recognize a particular stimulus.

436	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
with a strong synapse between the somatosensory neu-
ron and the motor neuron that causes a blink (synapse 
P, for “puff”). To establish classical conditioning, we first 
present the 1000-Hz tone and then quickly follow it with 
a puff of air. After we repeat these pairs of stimuli several 
times, we find that we can dispense with the air puff; the 
1000-Hz tone produces the blink all by itself.
Over sixty years ago, Donald Hebb proposed a rule 
that might explain how neurons are changed by experi-
ence in a way that would cause changes in behavior 
(Hebb, 1949). The Hebb rule says that if a synapse re-
peatedly becomes active at about the same time that the 
postsynaptic neuron fires, changes will take place in the 
structure or chemistry of the synapse that will strengthen 
it. How would the Hebb rule apply to our circuit? If the 
1000-Hz tone is presented first, then weak synapse T 
(for “tone”) becomes active. If the puff is presented im-
mediately afterward, then strong synapse P becomes ac-
tive and makes the motor neuron fire. The act of firing 
then strengthens any synapse with the motor neuron 
that has just been active. Of course, this means synapse T. 
After several pairings of the two stimuli and after several 
increments of strengthening, synapse T becomes strong 
changes in the visual association cortex, learning to rec-
ognize complex auditory stimuli involves changes in the 
auditory association cortex, and so on.
Stimulus-response learning is the ability to learn to 
perform a particular behavior when a particular stimu-
lus is present. Thus, it involves the establishment of con-
nections between circuits involved in perception and 
those involved in movement. The behavior could be an 
automatic response such as a defensive reflex, or it 
could be a complicated sequence of movements. Stimu-
lus-response learning includes two major categories of 
learning that psychologists have studied extensively: clas-
sical conditioning and instrumental conditioning.
Classical conditioning is a form of learning in which 
an unimportant stimulus acquires the properties of an 
important one. It involves an association between two stim-
uli. A stimulus that previously had little effect on behav-
ior becomes able to evoke a reflexive, species-typical 
behavior. For example, a defensive eyeblink response 
can be conditioned to a tone. If we direct a brief puff of 
air toward a rabbit’s eye, the eye will automatically blink. 
The response is called an unconditional response (UR) 
because it occurs unconditionally, without any special 
training. The stimulus that produces it (the puff of air) 
is called an unconditional stimulus (US). Now we begin 
the training. We present a series of brief 1000-Hz tones, 
each followed 500 ms later by a puff of air. After several 
trials the rabbit’s eye begins to close even before the 
puff of air occurs. Classical conditioning has occurred; 
the conditional stimulus (CS—the 1000-Hz tone) now 
elicits the conditional response (CR—the eyeblink). 
(See Figure 13.1.)
When classical conditioning takes place, what kinds 
of changes occur in the brain? Figure 13.1 shows a sim-
plified neural circuit that could account for this type of 
learning. For the sake of simplicity we will assume that 
the US (the puff of air) is detected by a single neuron in 
the somatosensory system and that the CS (the 1000-Hz 
tone) is detected by a single neuron in the auditory  
system. We will also assume that the response—the  
eyeblink—is controlled by a single neuron in the motor 
system. Of course, learning actually involves many thou-
sands of neurons—sensory neurons, interneurons, and 
motor neurons—but the basic principle of synaptic 
change can be represented by this simple figure. (Look 
again at Figure 13.1.)
Let’s see how this circuit works. If we present a  
1000-Hz tone, we find that the animal makes no reaction 
because the synapse connecting the tone-sensitive neu-
ron with the neuron in the motor system is weak. That 
is, when an action potential reaches the terminal button 
of synapse T (tone), the excitatory postsynaptic poten-
tial (EPSP) that it produces in the dendrite of the motor 
neuron is too small to make that neuron fire. However, 
if we present a puff of air to the eye, the eye blinks. This 
reaction occurs because nature has provided the animal 
figure 13.1  A Simple Neural Model of Classical 
Conditioning
When the 1000-Hz tone is presented just before the puff 
of air to the eye, synapse T is strengthened.
Neuron in
auditory
system
Synapse T
(weak)
1000-Hz
tone
Puff of
air to
the eye
Neuron in
somatosensory
system
Synapse P
(strong)
Blink
x stimulus-response learning  Learning to automatically make a 
particular response in the presence of a particular stimulus; 
includes classical and instrumental conditioning.
x classical conditioning  A learning procedure; when a stimulus 
that initially produces no particular response is followed several 
times by an unconditional stimulus (US) that produces a defensive 
or appetitive response (the unconditional response—UR), the first 
stimulus (now called a conditional stimulus—CS) itself evokes the 
response (now called a conditional response—CR).
x Hebb rule  The hypothesis proposed by Donald Hebb that the 
cellular basis of learning involves strengthening of a synapse that 
is repeatedly active when the postsynaptic neuron fires.

	
The Nature of Learning	
437
afterward, the likelihood of its pressing the lever in-
creases. Put another way, reinforcement causes the 
sight of the lever to serve as the stimulus that elicits the 
lever-pressing response. It is not accurate to say simply 
that a particular behavior becomes more frequent. If 
no lever is present, a rat that has learned to press one 
will not wave its paw around in the air. The sight of a lever 
is needed to produce the response. Thus, the process of 
reinforcement strengthens a connection between neu-
ral circuits involved in perception (the sight of the le-
ver) and those involved in movement (the act of lever 
pressing). As we will see later in this chapter, the brain 
contains reinforcement mechanisms that control this 
process. (See Figure 13.2.)
The third major category of learning, motor learning, 
is actually a component of stimulus-response learning. 
For simplicity’s sake we can think of perceptual learn-
ing as the establishment of changes within the sensory 
systems of the brain, stimulus-response learning as the 
establishment of connections between sensory systems 
and motor systems, and motor learning as the establish-
ment of changes within motor systems. But, in fact, 
motor learning cannot occur without sensory guidance 
from the environment. For example, most skilled move-
ments involve interactions with objects: bicycles, video 
enough to cause the motor neuron to fire by itself. 
Learning has occurred. (Look once more at Figure 13.1.)
When Hebb formulated his rule, he was unable to 
determine whether it was true or false. Now, finally, enough 
progress has been made in laboratory techniques that the 
strength of individual synapses can be determined, and 
investigators are studying the physiological bases of learn-
ing. We will see the results of some of these approaches 
later in this chapter.
The second major class of stimulus-response learning 
is instrumental conditioning (also called operant condition-
ing). Whereas classical conditioning involves automatic, 
species-typical responses, instrumental conditioning in-
volves behaviors that have been learned. And whereas 
classical conditioning involves an association between two 
stimuli, instrumental conditioning involves an association 
between a response and a stimulus. Instrumental condition-
ing is a more flexible form of learning. It permits an or-
ganism to adjust its behavior according to the conse-
quences of that behavior. That is, when a behavior is 
followed by favorable consequences, the behavior tends 
to occur more frequently; when it is followed by unfavor-
able consequences, it tends to occur less frequently.  
Collectively, “favorable consequences” are referred to as 
reinforcing stimuli, and “unfavorable consequences” are 
referred to as punishing stimuli. For example, a response 
that enables a hungry organism to find food will be rein-
forced, and a response that causes pain will be punished. 
(Psychologists often refer to these terms as reinforcers and 
punishers.)
Let’s consider the process of reinforcement. Briefly 
stated, reinforcement causes changes in an animal’s 
nervous system that increase the likelihood that a par-
ticular stimulus will elicit a particular response. For ex-
ample, when a hungry rat is first put in an operant 
chamber (a “Skinner box”), it is not very likely to press 
the lever mounted on a wall. However, if it does press 
the lever and if it receives a piece of food immediately 
figure 13.2  A Simple Neural Model of Instrumental Conditioning
Reinforcing stimulus
(e.g., food)
Reinforcement
system
Stimulus
(e.g., sight
of lever)
Neural circuit that
detects a particular
stimulus
Neural circuit
that controls a
particular behavior
Behavior
(e.g., lever
press)
When rat
presses lever,
it receives food
Reinforcement system
strengthens this connection
Perceptual System
Motor System
x instrumental conditioning  A learning procedure whereby the 
effects of a particular behavior in a particular situation increase 
(reinforce) or decrease (punish) the probability of the behavior; 
also called operant conditioning.
x reinforcing stimulus  An appetitive stimulus that follows a 
particular behavior and thus makes the behavior become more 
frequent.
x punishing stimulus  An aversive stimulus that follows a particular 
behavior and thus makes the behavior become less frequent.
x motor learning  Learning to make a new response.

438	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
of perceptual learning involves connections between 
different areas of the association cortex. When we hear 
the sound of a cat meowing in the dark, we can imagine 
what a cat looks like and what it would feel like if we 
stroked its fur. Thus, the neural circuits in the auditory 
association cortex that recognize the meow are some-
how connected to the appropriate circuits in the visual 
association cortex and the somatosensory association 
cortex. These interconnections, too, are accomplished 
as a result of learning.
Perception of spatial location—spatial learning—
also involves learning about the relationships among 
many stimuli. For example, consider what we must learn 
to become familiar with the contents of a room. First, we 
must learn to recognize each of the objects. In addition, 
we must learn the relative locations of the objects with 
respect to each other. As a result, when we find our-
selves in a particular place in the room, our perceptions 
of these objects and their locations relative to us tell us 
exactly where we are.
Other types of relational learning are even more 
complex. Episodic learning—remembering sequences of 
events (episodes) that we witness—requires us to keep 
track of and remember not only individual events but 
also the order in which they occur. As we will see in the 
last section of this chapter, a special system that involves 
the hippocampus and associated structures appears to 
perform coordinating functions required for many types 
of learning that go beyond simple perceptual, stimulus-
response, or motor learning.
game controllers, tennis racquets, knitting needles, and 
so on. Even skilled movements that we make by our-
selves, such as solitary dance steps, involve feedback 
from the joints, muscles, vestibular apparatus, eyes, and 
contact between the feet and the floor. Motor learning 
differs from other forms of learning primarily in the 
degree to which new forms of behavior are learned; the 
more novel the behavior, the more the neural circuits 
in the motor systems of the brain must be modified. 
(See Figure 13.3.)
A particular learning situation can involve varying 
amounts of all three types of learning that I have de-
scribed so far: perceptual, stimulus-response, and mo-
tor. For example, if we teach an animal to make a new 
response whenever we present a stimulus it has never 
seen before, the animal must learn to recognize the 
stimulus (perceptual learning) and make the response 
(motor learning), and a connection must be established 
between these two new memories (stimulus-response 
learning). If we teach the animal to make a response 
that it has already learned whenever we present a new 
stimulus, only perceptual learning and stimulus- 
response learning will take place.
The three forms of learning I have described so far 
consist primarily of changes in one sensory system, be-
tween one sensory system and the motor system, or in 
the motor system. But obviously, learning is usually 
more complex than that. The fourth form of learning 
involves learning the relationships among individual 
stimuli. For example, a somewhat more complex form 
figure 13.3  An Overview of Perceptual, Stimulus–Response (S-R), and Motor 
Learning
Perceptual System
Motor System
Stimulus
Changes in
neural circuit
that detects
a particular
stimulus
Changes in
neural circuit
that controls
a particular
behavior
Response
Perceptual
learning
Motor
learning
S-R learning
Section Summary
The Nature of Learning
Learning produces changes in the way we perceive, 
act, think, and feel. It does so by producing 
changes in the nervous system in the circuits 
responsible for perception, in those responsible for 
the control of movement, and in connections 
between the two.
Perceptual learning consists primarily of changes 
in perceptual systems that make it possible for us to 

	
Synaptic Plasticity: Long-Term Potentiation and Long-Term Depression	
439
shape. Therefore, it is difficult to show what it looks like 
with a diagram on a two-dimensional sheet of paper. 
Fortunately, the structure of the hippocampal forma-
tion is orderly; a slice taken anywhere perpendicular to 
its curving long axis contains the same set of circuits.
Figure 13.4 shows a slice of the hippocampal forma-
tion, illustrating a typical procedure for producing long-
term potentiation. The primary input to the hippocam-
pal formation comes from the entorhinal cortex. The axons 
of neurons in the entorhinal cortex pass through the 
perforant path and form synapses with the granule cells of 
the dentate gyrus. A stimulating electrode is placed in the 
perforant path, and a recording electrode is placed in the 
dentate gyrus, near the granule cells. (See Figure 13.4b.) 
First, a single pulse of electrical stimulation is delivered to 
the perforant path, and then the resulting population 
EPSP is recorded in the dentate gyrus. The population 
EPSP is an extracellular measurement of the excitatory 
postsynaptic potentials (EPSP) produced by the synapses 
of the perforant path axons with the dentate granule 
cells. The size of the first population EPSP indicates the 
strength of the synaptic connections before long-term 
potentiation has taken place. Long-term potentiation can 
Synaptic Plasticity: Long-Term 
Potentiation and Long-Term 
Depression
On theoretical considerations alone, it would appear 
that learning must involve synaptic plasticity: changes in 
the structure or biochemistry of synapses that alter their 
effects on postsynaptic neurons. Recent years have seen 
an explosion of research on this topic, largely stimu-
lated by the development of methods that permit re-
searchers to observe structural and biochemical changes 
in microscopically small structures: the presynaptic and 
postsynaptic components of synapses.
Induction of Long-Term Potentiation
Electrical stimulation of circuits within the hippocampal 
formation can lead to long-term synaptic changes that 
seem to be among those responsible for learning. Lømo 
(1966) discovered that intense electrical stimulation of 
axons leading from the entorhinal cortex to the dentate 
gyrus caused a long-term increase in the magnitude of 
excitatory postsynaptic potentials in the postsynaptic 
neurons; this increase has come to be called long-term 
potentiation (LTP). (The word potentiate means “to 
strengthen, to make more potent.”)
First, let’s review some anatomy. The hippocampal 
formation is a specialized region of the limbic cortex 
located in the temporal lobe. (Its location in a human 
brain is shown in Figure 13.6.) Because the hippocam-
pal formation is folded in one dimension and then 
curved in another, it has a complex, three-dimensional 
recognize stimuli so that we can respond to them 
appropriately. Stimulus-response learning consists of 
connections between perceptual and motor systems. 
The most important forms are classical and instrumen-
tal conditioning. Classical conditioning occurs when  
a neutral stimulus is followed by an unconditional 
stimulus (US) that naturally elicits an unconditional 
response (UR). After this pairing, the neutral stimulus 
becomes a conditional stimulus (CS); it now elicits the 
response by itself, which we refer to as the condi-
tional response (CR).
Instrumental conditioning occurs when a response 
is followed by a reinforcing stimulus, such as a drink 
of water for a thirsty animal. The reinforcing stimulus 
increases the likelihood that the other stimuli that 
were present when the response was made will evoke 
the response. Both forms of stimulus-response learning 
may occur as a result of strengthened synaptic con-
nections, as described by the Hebb rule.
Motor learning, although it may primarily involve 
changes within neural circuits that control movement, 
is guided by sensory stimuli; thus, it is actually a form 
of stimulus-response learning. Relational learning, the 
most complex form of learning, includes the ability to 
recognize objects through more than one sensory 
modality, to recognize the relative location of objects 
in the environment, and to remember the sequence 
in which events occurred during particular episodes.
 Thought Question
Can you think of specific examples of each of the cat-
egories of learning described in this section? Can you 
think of some examples that include more than one 
category?
x long-term potentiation (LTP)  A long-term increase in the 
excitability of a neuron to a particular synaptic input caused by 
repeated high-frequency activity of that input.
x hippocampal formation  A forebrain structure of the temporal 
lobe, constituting an important part of the limbic system; includes 
the hippocampus proper (Ammon’s horn), dentate gyrus, and 
subiculum.
x population EPSP  An evoked potential that represents the 
EPSPs of a population of neurons.

440	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
burst of pulses was delivered, long-term potentiation has 
occurred. (See Figure 13.5.)
Long-term potentiation can be produced in other 
regions of the hippocampal formation and in many 
other places in the brain. It can last for several months 
(Bliss and Lømo, 1973). It can be produced in isolated 
slices of the hippocampal formation as well as in the 
brains of living animals, which allows researchers to 
stimulate and record from individual neurons and to 
analyze biochemical changes. The brain is removed 
from the skull, the hippocampal complex is dissected, 
and slices are placed in a temperature-controlled cham-
ber filled with liquid that resembles interstitial fluid. 
Under optimal conditions a slice remains alive for up to 
forty hours.
Many experiments have demonstrated that long-
term potentiation in hippocampal slices can follow the 
Hebb rule. That is, when weak and strong synapses to a 
single neuron are stimulated at approximately the same 
time, the weak synapse becomes strengthened. This phe-
nomenon is called associative long-term potentiation  
because it is produced by the association (in time) between 
the activity of the two sets of synapses. (See Figure 13.6.)
be induced by stimulating the axons in the perforant 
path with a burst of approximately one hundred pulses of 
electrical stimulation, delivered within a few seconds. Evi-
dence that long-term potentiation has occurred is ob-
tained by periodically delivering single pulses to the per-
forant path and recording the response in the dentate 
gyrus. If the response is greater than it was before the 
figure 13.5  Long-Term Potentiation
Population EPSPs were recorded from the dentate gyrus 
before and after electrical stimulation that led to long-term 
potentiation.
(From Berger, T. W. Science, 1984, 224, 627–630. Copyright 1984 by the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted with permission.)
Before long-term
potentiation
After long-term
potentiation
Population EPSP
1 hour
24 hours
48 hours
96 hours
72 hours
x associative long-term potentiation  A long-term potentiation 
in which concurrent stimulation of weak and strong synapses to a 
given neuron strengthens the weak ones.
figure 13.4  The Hippocampal Formation and Long-Term Potentiation
This schematic diagram shows the connections of the components of the hippocampal 
formation and the procedure for producing long-term potentiation.
(Photograph from Swanson, L. W., Köhler, C., and Björklund, A., in Handbook of Chemical Neuroanatomy. Vol. 5: 
Integrated Systems of the CNS, Part I. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishers, 1987. Reprinted with permission.)
Mossy
fiber
Dentate
gyrus
Stimulate
axons in
perforant
path
Record from
dentate gyrus
Entorhinal
cortex
Subicular
complex
Axon in
perforant
path
Schaffer
commissural
axon
Fimbria
Field
CA1
Field
CA3
To septum,
mammillary bodies
Schaffer
collateral
axon
(a)	
(b)

	
Synaptic Plasticity: Long-Term Potentiation and Long-Term Depression	
441
Role of NMDA Receptors
Nonassociative long-term potentiation requires some 
sort of additive effect. That is, a series of pulses deliv-
ered at a high rate all in one burst will produce LTP, but 
the same number of pulses given at a slow rate will not. 
(In fact, as we shall see, low-frequency stimulation can 
lead to the opposite phenomenon: long-term depres-
sion.) The reason for this phenomenon is now clear. A 
rapid rate of stimulation causes the excitatory postsyn-
aptic potentials to summate, because each successive 
EPSP occurs before the previous one has dissipated. 
This means that rapid stimulation depolarizes the post-
synaptic membrane much more than slow stimulation 
does. (See Figure 13.7.)
Several experiments have shown that synaptic 
strengthening occurs when molecules of the neurotrans-
mitter bind with postsynaptic receptors located in a den-
dritic spine that is already depolarized. Kelso, Ganong, 
and Brown (1986) found that if they used a microelec-
trode to artificially depolarize a neuron in field CA1 and 
then stimulated the axons that formed synapses with 
this neuron, the synapses became stronger. However, if 
the stimulation of the synapses and the depolarization 
of the neuron occurred at different times, no effect was 
seen; therefore, the two events had to occur together. 
(See Figure 13.8.)
Experiments such as the ones I just described indi-
cate that LTP requires two events: activation of synapses 
and depolarization of the postsynaptic neuron. The  
figure 13.6  Associative Long-Term Potentiation
If the weak stimulus and strong stimulus are applied at 
the same time, the synapses activated by the weak 
stimulus will be strengthened.
Field
CA1
Field
CA3
Dentate
gyrus
Entorhinal
cortex
Strong stimulus
Record EPSP
Weak stimulus
figure 13.7  The Role of Summation in Long-Term 
Potentiation
If axons are stimulated rapidly, the EPSPs produced by 
the terminal buttons will summate, and the postsynaptic 
membrane will depolarize enough for long-term 
potentiation to occur. If axons are stimulated slowly, the 
EPSPs will not summate, and long-term potentiation will 
not occur.
Threshold for establishment
of long-term potentiation
EPSPs produced
by a high rate of
stimulation summate
and reach the 
threshold
Low rate of stimulation
does not depolarize
membrane sufficiently
Membrane potential
Stimulation
Time
High
Low
figure 13.8  Long-Term Potentiation
Synaptic strengthening occurs when synapses are  
active while the membrane of the postsynaptic cell is 
depolarized.
Stimulate
axon that
forms synapse
with neuron
Dendritic
spine
Synapse is 
strengthened
Pyramidal
cell
Depolarize
cell
Axon

442	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
first step in the process events that establishes LTP: the 
entry of calcium ions into dendritic spines.
In Chapter 2 you learned that only axons are capa-
ble of producing action potentials. Actually, they can 
also occur in dendrites of some types of pyramidal cells, 
including those in field CA1 of the hippocampal forma-
tion. The threshold of excitation for dendritic spikes (as 
these action potentials are called) is rather high. As far 
as we know, they occur only when an action potential is 
triggered in the axon of the pyramidal cell. The back-
wash of depolarization across the cell body triggers a 
dendritic spike, which is propagated up the trunk of the 
dendrite. This means that whenever the axon of a pyra-
midal cell fires, all of its dendritic spines become depo-
larized for a brief time.
A study by Magee and Johnston (1997) proved that 
the simultaneous occurrence of synaptic activation and 
a dendritic spike strengthens the active synapse. The 
investigators injected individual CA1 pyramidal cells in 
hippocampal slices with calcium-green-1, a fluorescent 
dye that permitted them to observe the influx of cal-
cium. They found that when individual synapses became 
explanation for this phenomenon, at least in many parts 
of the brain, lies in the characteristics of a very special 
type of glutamate receptor. The NMDA receptor has 
some unusual properties. It is found in the hippocam-
pal formation, especially in field CA1. It gets its name 
from a drug that specifically activates it: N-methyl-d-as-
partate. The NMDA receptor controls a calcium ion 
channel. This channel is normally blocked by a magne-
sium ion (Mg2+), which prevents calcium ions from en-
tering the cell even when the receptor is stimulated by 
glutamate. But if the postsynaptic membrane is depolar-
ized, the Mg2+ is ejected from the ion channel, and the 
channel is free to admit Ca2+ ions. Thus, calcium ions 
enter the cells through the channels controlled by 
NMDA receptors only when glutamate is present and 
when the postsynaptic membrane is depolarized. This 
means that the ion channel controlled by the NMDA 
receptor is a neurotransmitter- and voltage-dependent 
ion channel. (See Figure 13.9 and 
Simulate the 
NMDA receptor on MyPsychLab.)
Cell biologists have discovered that the calcium ion 
is used by many cells as a second messenger that acti-
vates various enzymes and triggers biochemical pro-
cesses. The entry of calcium ions through the ion chan-
nels controlled by NMDA receptors is an essential step 
in long-term potentiation (Lynch et al., 1984). AP5 
(2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoate), a drug that blocks 
NMDA receptors, prevents calcium ions from entering 
the dendritic spines and thus blocks the establishment 
of LTP (Brown et al., 1989). These results indicate that 
the activation of NMDA receptors is necessary for the 
figure 13.9  The NMDA Receptor
The NMDA receptor is a neurotransmitter- and voltage-dependent ion channel.  
(a) When the postsynaptic membrane is at the resting potential, Mg2+ blocks the ion 
channel, preventing Ca2+ from entering. (b) When the membrane is depolarized, the 
magnesium ion is evicted. Thus, the attachment of glutamate to the binding site causes 
the ion channel to open, allowing calcium ions to enter the dendritic spine.
NMDA
receptor
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+ Ca2+
Depolarization of the
membrane evicts the
magnesium ion and
unblocks the channel. Now
glutamate can open the ion
channel and permit the
entry of calcium ions.
Depolarization
Mg2+
Mg2+
(a)
(b)
Molecule of
glutamate
If a molecule of glutamate
binds with the NMDA
receptor, the calcium channel
cannot open because the
magnesium ion blocks the 
channel
x NMDA receptor  A specialized ionotropic glutamate receptor 
that controls a calcium channel that is normally blocked by Mg2+ 
ions; involved in long-term potentiation.
x AP5  2-Amino-5-phosphonopentanoate, a drug that blocks 
NMDA receptors.
x dendritic spike  An action potential that occurs in the dendrite 
of some types of pyramidal cells.

	
Synaptic Plasticity: Long-Term Potentiation and Long-Term Depression	
443
the postsynaptic membrane enough to eject the magne-
sium ions from the calcium channels of the NMDA re-
ceptors in the dendritic spines. If some weak synapses 
become active right then, calcium will enter the den-
dritic spines and cause the synapses to become strength-
ened. Thus, the special properties of NMDA receptors 
account not only for the existence of long-term potentia-
tion but also for its associative nature. (See Figure 13.10 
and 
Simulate associative LTP on MyPsychLab.)
Mechanisms of Synaptic Plasticity
What is responsible for the increases in synaptic strength 
that occur during long-term potentiation? Dendritic 
spines on CA1 pyramidal cells contain two types of gluta-
mate receptors: NMDA receptors and AMPA receptors. 
Research indicates that strengthening of an individual syn-
apse is accomplished by insertion of additional AMPA re-
ceptors into the postsynaptic membrane of the dendritic 
spine (Shi et al., 1999). AMPA receptors control sodium 
active at the same time that a dendritic spike had been 
triggered, calcium “hot spots” occurred near the acti-
vated synapses. Moreover, the size of the excitatory post-
synaptic potential produced by these activated synapses 
became larger. In other words, these synapses became 
strengthened. To confirm that the dendritic spikes were 
necessary for the synaptic potentiation to take place, the 
investigators infused a small amount of tetrodotoxin 
(TTX) onto the base of the dendrite just before trigger-
ing an action potential. The TTX prevented the forma-
tion of dendritic spikes by blocking voltage-dependent 
sodium channels. Under these conditions, long-term 
potentiation did not occur.
I think that considering what you already know 
about associative LTP, you can anticipate the role that 
NMDA receptors play in this phenomenon. If weak syn-
apses are active by themselves, nothing happens because 
the membrane of the dendritic spine does not depolar-
ize sufficiently for the calcium channels controlled by the 
NMDA receptors to open. (Remember that, for these 
channels to open, the postsynaptic membrane must first 
depolarize and displace the magnesium ions that nor-
mally block them.) However, if the activity of strong syn-
apses located elsewhere on the postsynaptic cell has 
caused the cell to fire, then a dendritic spike will depolarize 
figure 13.10  Associative Long-Term Potentiation
If the activity of strong synapses is sufficient to trigger an action potential in the neuron, 
the dendritic spike will depolarize the membrane of dendritic spines, priming NMDA 
receptors so that any weak synapses active at that time will become strengthened.
Action potential
reaches terminal
button; glutamate
is released
Dendritic spike
washes back
along dendrite;
primes NMDA
receptors in
dendritic
spines
Dendritic
spine
Action potential
reaches terminal
button of strong
synapse; produces
strong EPSP
(depolarization)
in pyramidal cell
Strong
synapse
Dendritic
spike
Axon
Action potential
in axon
Long-term
potentiation:
synapse is 
strengthened
Dendrite of
pyramidal cell
Depolarization is
sufficient to trigger
action potential
in axon of
pyramidal cell
x AMPA receptor  An ionotropic glutamate receptor that 
controls a sodium channel; when open, it produces EPSPs.

444	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
excitatory postsynaptic potential. In other words, the syn-
apse becomes stronger.
Where do these new AMPA receptors come from? 
Makino and Malinow (2009) used a two-photon laser 
scanning microscope to watch the movement of AMPA 
receptors in dendrites of CA1 pyramidal neurons in hip-
pocampal slices. They found that the establishment of 
LTP first caused movement of AMPA receptors into the 
postsynaptic membranes of dendritic spines from adja-
cent nonsynaptic regions of the dendrites. Several min-
utes later, AMPA receptors were carried from the inte-
rior of the cell to the dendritic shaft, where they replaced 
the AMPA receptors that had been inserted in the post-
synaptic membrane of the spines. (See Figure 13.11.)
How does the entry of calcium ions into the den-
dritic spine cause AMPA receptors to move into the 
postsynaptic membrane? This process appears to begin 
with the activation of several enzymes, including CaM-KII 
(type II calcium-calmodulin kinase), an enzyme found 
in dendritic spines. CaM-KII is a calcium-dependent en-
zyme, which is inactive until a calcium ion binds with it 
and activates it. Many studies have shown that CaM-KII 
plays a critical role in long-term potentiation. For ex-
ample, Silva et al. (1992a) found that LTP could not be 
established in field CA1 of hippocampal slices taken 
from mice with a targeted mutation against the gene 
responsible for the production of CaM-KII. A two-photon 
laser scanning microscope study by Shen and Meyer  
(1999) found that after LTP was established in cultured 
hippocampal neurons, CaM-KII molecules accumulated 
in the postsynaptic densities of dendritic spines. Lledo 
et al. (1995) found that injection of activated CaM-KII 
directly into CA1 pyramidal cells strengthened synaptic 
transmission in those cells.
Two other changes that accompany LTP are altera-
tion of synaptic structure and production of new syn-
apses. Many studies have found that the establishment 
of LTP also includes changes in the size and shape of 
dendritic spines. For example, Bourne and Harris 
(2007) suggest that LTP causes the enlargement of thin 
spines into fatter, mushroom-shaped spines. Figure 
13.12 shows the variety of shapes that dendritic spines 
and their associated postsynaptic density can take. (See 
Figure 13.12.) Nägerl et al. (2007) found that the estab-
lishment of LTP even causes the growth of new den-
dritic spines. After about fifteen to nineteen hours, the 
new spines formed synaptic connections with terminals 
of nearby axons. (See Figure 13.13.)
figure 13.11  Synaptic Strengthening
(a) When the conditions for long-term potentiation are 
met, Ca2+ ions enter the dendritic spine through NMDA 
receptors. The calcium ions activate enzymes in the spine. 
(b) The activated enzymes cause AMPA receptors to move 
into the spine. (c) An increased number of AMPA receptors 
in the postsynaptic membrane strengthens the synapse. 
(Details of this process are shown in Figure 13.14.)
NMDA
receptor
AMPA
receptor
Dendritic
spine
(a)
(b)
(c)
Ca2+
Entry of Ca2+
ions activates 
enzymes,
initiates LTP
AMPA receptors
move into spine
Increased number
of AMPA receptors
strengthens synapse
Later, AMPA receptors
from interior of cell replace
those moved into spine
Molecule of
glutamate
channels; thus, when they are activated by glutamate, they 
produce EPSPs in the membrane of the dendritic spine. 
Therefore, with more AMPA receptors present, the re-
lease of glutamate by the terminal button causes a larger 
x CaM-KII  Type II calcium-calmodulin kinase, an enzyme that 
must be activated by calcium; may play a role in the establishment 
of long-term potentiation.
nitric oxide synthase  An enzyme responsible for the production 
of nitric oxide.

	
Synaptic Plasticity: Long-Term Potentiation and Long-Term Depression	
445
button. After all, alterations in synapses presumably re-
quire coordinated changes in both presynaptic and 
postsynaptic elements. But how could a process that 
begins postsynaptically, in the dendritic spines, cause 
presynaptic changes? A possible answer comes from the 
discovery that a simple molecule, nitric oxide, can com-
municate messages from one cell to another. As we saw 
in Chapter 4, nitric oxide is a soluble gas produced from 
the amino acid arginine by the activity of an enzyme 
known as nitric oxide synthase. Once produced, NO 
lasts only a short time before it is destroyed. Thus, if it 
were produced in dendritic spines in the hippocampal 
formation, it could diffuse only as far as the nearby ter-
minal buttons, where it might produce changes related 
to the induction of LTP.
Several experiments suggest that NO may indeed be 
a retrograde messenger that contributes to the forma-
tion of LTP. (Retrograde means “moving backward”; in 
this context it refers to messages sent from the dendritic 
spine back to the terminal button.) Endoh, Maiese, and 
Wagner (1994) found that a calcium-activated NO syn-
thase is found in several regions of the brain, including 
the dentate gyrus and fields CA1 and CA3 of the hip-
pocampus. Arancio, Kandel, and Hawkins (1995) ob-
tained evidence that NO acts by stimulating the produc-
tion of cyclic GMP, a second messenger, in presynaptic 
terminals. Although there is good evidence that NO is 
one of the signals the dendritic spine uses to communi-
cate with the terminal button, most investigators believe 
that postsynaptic changes play a more important role in 
the establishment of LTP. There must be other signals 
as well.
For several years after its discovery, researchers  
believed that LTP involved a single process. Since then it 
has become clear that LTP consists of several stages. Early 
LTP (E-LTP) involves the process I have been describing 
so far: membrane depolarization, release of glutamate, 
activation of NMDA receptors, entry of calcium ions,  
activation of enzymes such as CaM-KII, and movement  
of AMPA receptors into the postsynaptic membrane.  
Researchers believe that LTP may also involve pre-
synaptic changes in existing synapses, such as an increase 
in the amount of glutamate that is released by the terminal 
figure 13.12  Dendritic Spines in Field CA1
According to Bourne and Harris (2007), long-term 
potentiation may convert thin spines into mushroom-
shaped spines. (a) Colorized photomicrograph. Dendrite 
shafts are yellow, spine necks are blue, spine heads are 
green, and presynaptic terminals are orange. (b) Three-
dimensional reconstruction of a portion of a dendrite 
(yellow) showing the variation in size and shape of 
postsynaptic densities (red).
(From Bourne, J., and Harris, K. M. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 2007, 17, 
381–386. Reprinted with permission.)
(a)
(b)
figure 13.13  Growth of Dendritic Spines After Long-Term Potentiation
Two-photon microscopic images show a segment of a dendrite of a CA1 pyramidal 
neuron before and after electrical stimulation that established long-term potentiation. 
Numbers in each box indicate the time before or after the stimulation.
(From Nägerl, U. V., Köstinger, G., Anderson, J. C., Martin, K. A. C., and Bonhoeffer, T. Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 
8149–8156. Reprinted with permission.)
–0.5h
+2h
+21h

446	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
(Yao et al., 2008; Migues et al., 2010; Sacktor, 2010; West-
mark et al., 2010; Westmark, 2011). The gene responsible 
for the production of PKM-zeta is constantly active, tran-
scribing the DNA of the gene into messenger RNA, which 
is transported to the vicinity of the dendritic spines. An 
enzyme called Pin1 inhibits translation of PKM-zeta 
mRNA into the PKM-zeta protein. Because messenger 
RNA has only a limited life, only a limited amount of this 
mRNA accumulates. (See Figure 13.14a.) Now, let’s sup-
pose that the conditions for LTP are met: The dendritic 
spine is depolarized, and glutamate is released by the 
terminal button. The NMDA receptors open and calcium 
ions enter the dendritic spine. As we just saw, the entry  
of calcium ions activates several enzymes, including  
CAM-KII. The activated enzymes bind with Pin1 and de-
activate it, which permits the synthesis of PKM-zeta to 
take place. PKM-zeta, acting on a trafficking protein called 
NSF, moves AMPA receptors laterally from the dendritic 
shaft into the postsynaptic membrane of the dendritic 
spine. The addition of AMPA receptors produces the first 
stage, E-LTP. (See Figure 13.14b.)
PKM-zeta has several effects besides stimulating the 
transport of AMPA receptors into the postsynaptic mem-
brane. It also starts a positive feedback loop. It binds 
Long-lasting LTP—that is, LTP that lasts more than a few 
hours—requires protein synthesis. Frey et al. (1988) 
found that drugs that block protein synthesis also pre-
vented the establishment of L-LTP in field CA1. If the 
drug was administered before, during, or immediately 
after a prolonged burst of stimulation was delivered,  
E-LTP occurred, but it disappeared a few hours later. 
However, if the drug was administered one hour after 
the synapses had been stimulated, the LTP persisted. Ap-
parently, the protein synthesis is not necessary for the 
establishment of E-LTP, but it is required for establishing 
the later phase of long-lasting LTP, which normally oc-
curs within an hour of the establishment of E-LTP.
What protein (or proteins) might be required for 
the establishment of L-LTP? For several years, investiga-
tors have realized that a special enzyme, PKMz, plays a 
role in this process. (That strange symbol is a lower-case 
Greek letter zeta. It is printed here so that you can rec-
ognize it if you come across journal articles that use it, 
but I’m going to call the enzyme PKM-zeta from now 
on.) Research carried out in the past few years has be-
gun to clarify the exact nature of this role.
Take a deep breath—this is a rather long story. Each 
step is not very complicated, but there are many of them 
figure 13.14  Role of PKM-zeta in Long-Lasting Long-Term Potentiation
(a) The messenger RNA for PKM-zeta is constantly transcribed from DNA in the nucleus 
and transported to dendritic spines. However, the action of the enzyme Pin1 blocks the 
translation of the mRNA into the PKM-zeta protein. (b) When the conditions for LTP are 
met, Ca2+ ions enter the spine and activate several enzymes, including CAM-KII. This 
enzyme then suppresses the action of Pin1, which permits PKM-zeta mRNA to direct 
the production of the PKM-zeta protein, which activates the enzyme NSF. Activated 
NSF initiates the movement of AMPA receptors into the dendritic spine, as was shown 
in Figure 13.11. (c) PKM-zeta not only activates NSF; it suppresses Pin1 and thus 
insures that molecules of PKM-zeta protein continue to be produced.
NMDA
receptor
AMPA
receptor
 CAM-KII
NSF
 CAM-KII
NSF
NSF
Pin1
Pin1
Pin1
PKM-zeta
mRNA
PKM-zeta
mRNA
PKM-zeta
mRNA
From nucleus
From nucleus
From nucleus
PKM-
zeta
PKM-
zeta
Ca2+
activates 
CAM-KII
PKM-zeta
is produced
From nucleus
From nucleus
From nucleus
Pin1
suppressed
Pin1
suppressed
Glutamate
AMPA receptors moved 
into dendritic spine
Ca2+
(a)
(b)
(c)
Translation blocked
by Pin1

	
Synaptic Plasticity: Long-Term Potentiation and Long-Term Depression	
447
rates ranging from 1 to 50 Hz. They found that frequen-
cies above 10 Hz caused long-term potentiation, whereas 
those below 10 Hz caused long-term depression. Both of 
these effects were blocked by application of AP5, the 
NMDA receptor blocker; thus, both effects require the 
activation of NMDA receptors. (See Figure 13.15.)
Several studies have demonstrated associative long-
term depression, which is produced when synaptic inputs 
are activated at the same time that the postsynaptic mem-
brane is either weakly depolarized or hyperpolarized (De-
banne, Gähwiler, and Thompson, 1994; Thiels et al., 1996).
As we saw, the most commonly studied form of long-
term potentiation involves an increase in the number of 
AMPA receptors in the postsynaptic membrane of den-
dritic spines. Long-term depression appears to involve 
the opposite: a decrease in the number of AMPA recep-
tors in these spines (Carroll et al., 1999). And just as 
AMPA receptors are inserted into dendritic spines dur-
ing LTP, they are removed from the spines in vesicles 
during LTD (Lüscher et al., 1999).
In field CA1, long-term depression, like long-term 
potentiation, involves the activation of NMDA receptors, 
with Pin1 and deactivates it, which guarantees that its 
own synthesis will continue. CaM-KII and the other en-
zymes, which initially deactivated Pin1 and enabled the 
process of E-LTP to take place, are no longer needed. 
The self-sustaining synthesis of PKM-zeta makes long-
term LTP possible. (See Figure 13.14c.)
To recapitulate: E-LTP involves (1) entry of calcium 
ions, (2) activation of CaM-KII and other calcium-acti-
vated enzymes, (3) deactivation of Pin1, (4) synthesis of 
PKM-zeta from its mRNA, (5) with the cooperation of 
NSF, movement of AMPA receptors into the postsynap-
tic membrane. Conversion of E-LTP to L-LTP takes 
place through another effect of PKM-zeta: continued 
suppression of Pin1, permitting synthesis of new PKM-
zeta molecules as the old ones eventually break apart. 
Remember, the gene for PKM-zeta is always active, 
pumping out mRNA in the nucleus of the cell. (Have 
another look at Figure 13.14.)
Why have I spent so much space talking about the 
role of PKM-zeta? For many years, neuroscientists have 
tried to understand what mechanisms in our brain make 
it possible for our memories of long-lived animals such 
as ourselves to last so long—up to many decades. As we 
will see, it is now clear that L-LTP is the basis for some 
very important forms of memory, which means that we 
must understand what makes L-LTP last for so long.
PKM-zeta is both necessary and sufficient for L-LTP. 
Infusion of PKM-zeta into CA1 pyramidal cells produces 
LTP even without stimulation of NMDA receptors or the 
entry of calcium ions, and infusion of ZIP, a drug that 
blocks PKM-zeta, abolishes both L-LTP and some (but 
not all) forms of long-term memories in many parts of 
the brain (Saktor, 2011). Westmark et al. (2010) pre-
pared mice with a targeted mutation against the Pin1 
gene, which resulted in increased synthesis of PKM-zeta 
in hippocampal dendrites. (Remember, Pin1 normally 
inhibits the activity of PKM-zeta.) The investigators 
found that high-frequency electrical stimulation of hip-
pocampal slices from these mice established normal  
E-LTP, but L-LTP was significantly enhanced.
I will say more about the role of LTP in memory—
including the contribution of PKM-zeta—later in this 
chapter.
Long-Term Depression
I mentioned earlier that low-frequency stimulation of 
the synaptic inputs to a cell can decrease rather than in-
crease their strength. This phenomenon, known as long-
term depression (LTD), also plays a role in learning. 
Apparently, neural circuits that contain memories are 
established by strengthening some synapses and weak-
ening others. Dudek and Bear (1992) stimulated Schaf-
fer collateral inputs to CA1 neurons in hippocampal 
slices with 900 pulses of electrical current, delivered at 
x long-term depression (LTD)  A long-term decrease in the 
excitability of a neuron to a particular synaptic input caused by 
stimulation of the terminal button while the postsynaptic mem-
brane is hyperpolarized or only slightly depolarized.
figure 13.15  Long-Term Potentiation and Long-
Term Depression
The graph shows changes in the sensitivity of synapses of 
Schaffer collateral axons with CA1 pyramidal cells after 
electrical stimulation at various frequencies.
(Based on data from Dudek, 1992.)
20
10
0
–10
–20
1
3
5
10
50
Long-term potentiation
Long-term depression
Frequency of stimulation of
Schaffer collateral axons (Hz)
Percent change in slope of EPSP

448	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
Other Forms of Long-Term  
Potentiation
Long-term potentiation was discovered in the hippo-
campal formation and has been studied more in this 
region than in others, but it also occurs in many other 
regions of the brain. Later in this chapter we will see the 
role of LTP in particular forms of learning. In some but 
not all of these regions, LTP is initiated by stimulation 
of NMDA receptors. For example, in the hippocampal 
formation, NMDA receptors are present in highest con-
centrations in field CA1 and in the dentate gyrus. How-
ever, very few NMDA receptors are found in the region 
of field CA3 that receives mossy fiber input from the 
dentate gyrus (Monaghan and Cotman, 1985). High-
frequency stimulation of the mossy fibers produces LTP 
that gradually decays over a period of several hours 
(Staubli, Larson, and Lynch, 1990). AP5, the drug that 
blocks NMDA receptors and prevents the establishment 
of LTP in CA1 neurons, has no effect on LTP in field 
CA3. In addition, long-term potentiation in field CA3 
appears to involve only presynaptic changes; no altera-
tions are seen in the structure of dendritic spines after 
LTP has taken place (Reid et al., 2004).
and its establishment is disrupted by AP5. How can acti-
vation of the same receptor produce opposite effects? 
An answer was suggested by Lisman (1989), who noted 
that sustained, low-frequency stimulation of synapses on 
pyramidal cells in this region that produces LTD would 
cause a modest but prolonged increase in intracellular 
Ca2+, whereas the intense, high-frequency stimulation 
that produces LTP would cause a much greater increase 
in Ca2+. Perhaps small and large increases in intracellu-
lar calcium ions trigger different mechanisms.
Evidence in favor of this hypothesis was obtained by 
a study by Liu et al. (2004). NMDA receptors come in at 
least two forms. One form contains one type of subunit, 
and the other contains a different type of subunit. Liu 
and his colleagues found that LTP was prevented by a 
drug that blocked one type of NMDA receptor and that 
LTD was prevented by a drug that blocked the other 
type of NMDA receptor. Receptors that produce LTP 
permit an influx of large amounts of Ca2+ if they are 
stimulated repeatedly in a short amount of time. In con-
trast, receptors that produce LTD permit less calcium to 
enter the cell, but if they are stimulated slowly over a 
long period of time, they permit the buildup of a mod-
est but prolonged increase in intracellular calcium.
Section Summary
Synaptic Plasticity: Long-Term Potentiation and Long-Term Depression
The study of long-term potentiation in the hippocam-
pal formation has suggested a mechanism that might 
be responsible for at least some of the synaptic 
changes that occur during learning. A circuit of neu-
rons passes from the entorhinal cortex through the 
hippocampal formation. High-frequency stimulation of 
the axons in this circuit strengthens synapses; it leads 
to an increase in the size of the EPSPs in the dendritic 
spines of the postsynaptic neurons. Associative long-
term potentiation can also occur, in which weak syn-
apses are strengthened by the action of strong ones. 
In fact, the only requirement for LTP is that the post-
synaptic membrane be depolarized at the same time 
that the synapses are active.
In field CA1, in the dentate gyrus, and in several 
other parts of the brain, NMDA receptors play a spe-
cial role in LTP. These receptors, sensitive to gluta-
mate, control calcium channels but can open them 
only if the membrane is already depolarized. Thus, 
the combination of membrane depolarization (for 
example, from a dendritic spike produced by the 
activity of strong synapses) and activation of an 
NMDA receptor causes the entry of calcium ions.  
The increase in calcium activates several calcium-
dependent enzymes that trigger the movement of 
AMPA receptors into the membrane of the dendritic 
spine, which increases the strength of their response 
to glutamate released by the terminal button. This 
change is accompanied by structural alterations in the 
shape of the dendritic spine and by the growth of 
new spines, which establish new synapses. LTP may 
also involve presynaptic changes, through the activa-
tion of NO synthase, an enzyme responsible for the 
production of nitric oxide. This soluble gas may dif-
fuse into nearby terminal buttons, where it facilitates 
the release of glutamate. Long-lasting LTP requires 
protein synthesis. The gene that codes for the pro-
duction of the enzyme PKM-zeta is constantly pro-
duced in the nucleus and transported to dendritic 
spines, where its translation is blocked by the action 
of another enzyme, Pin1. When the conditions for LTP 
are met, the entry of calcium ions activates several 

	
Perceptual Learning	
449
responses of neurons in their visual association cortex 
(Rolls, 1995).
As we saw in Chapter 6, the primary visual cortex 
receives information from the lateral geniculate nucleus 
of the thalamus. After the first level of analysis the infor-
mation is sent to the extrastriate cortex, which sur-
rounds the primary visual cortex (striate cortex). After 
analyzing particular attributes of the visual scene, such 
as form, color, and movement, subregions of the  
extrastriate cortex send the results of their analysis to the 
next level of the visual association cortex, which is di-
vided into two “streams.” The ventral stream, which is in-
volved with object recognition, continues ventrally into 
the inferior temporal cortex. The dorsal stream, which is 
involved with perception of the location of objects, con-
tinues dorsally into the posterior parietal cortex. Most 
investigators agree that the ventral stream is involved 
with the what of visual perception, and the dorsal stream 
is involved with the where. (See Figure 13.16.)
Many studies have shown that lesions that damage 
the inferior temporal cortex—the end of the ventral 
stream—disrupt the ability to discriminate among visual 
stimuli. These lesions impair the ability to perceive (and 
thus to learn to recognize) particular kinds of visual in-
formation. As we saw in Chapter 6, people with damage 
to the inferior temporal cortex may have excellent vi-
sion but be unable to recognize familiar, everyday ob-
jects such as scissors, clothespins, or light bulbs—and 
faces of friends and relatives.
Perceptual learning clearly involves changes in syn-
aptic connections in the visual association cortex that 
establish new neural circuits—changes such as the ones 
described in the previous section of this chapter. At a 
later time, when the same stimulus is seen again and the 
same pattern of activity is transmitted to the cortex, 
these circuits become active again. This activity consti-
tutes the recognition of the stimulus—the readout of 
Perceptual Learning
Learning enables us to adapt to our environment and to 
respond to changes in it. In particular, it provides us 
with the ability to perform an appropriate behavior in 
an appropriate situation. Situations can be as simple as 
the sound of a buzzer or as complex as the social inter-
actions of a group of people. The first part of learning 
involves learning to perceive particular stimuli.
Perceptual learning involves learning to recognize 
things, not what to do when they are present. (Learning 
what to do is discussed in the next three sections of this 
chapter.) Perceptual learning can involve learning to 
recognize entirely new stimuli, or it can involve learning 
to recognize changes or variations in familiar stimuli. 
For example, if a friend gets a new hairstyle or replaces 
glasses with contact lenses, our visual memory of that 
person changes. We also learn that particular stimuli are 
found in particular locations or contexts or in the pres-
ence of other stimuli. We can even learn and remember 
particular episodes: sequences of events taking place at a 
particular time and place. The more complex forms of 
perceptual learning will be discussed in the last section 
of this chapter, which is devoted to relational learning.
Learning to Recognize Stimuli
In mammals with large and complex brains, objects are 
recognized visually by circuits of neurons in the visual 
association cortex. Visual learning can take place very 
rapidly, and the number of items that can be remem-
bered is enormous. In fact, Standing (1973) showed 
people 10,000 color slides and found that they could 
recognize most of the slides weeks later. Other primates 
are capable of remembering items that they have seen 
for just a few seconds, and the experience changes the 
ions, including CaM-KII. These enzymes deactivate 
Pin1, which permits the synthesis of PKM-zeta to take 
place. This enzyme causes AMPA receptors to con-
tinue to be moved into the membrane and also inhib-
its Pin1, which preserves the production of PKM-zeta.
Long-term depression occurs when a synapse is 
activated at the time that the postsynaptic membrane 
is hyperpolarized or only slightly depolarized. In field 
CA1, LTP and LTD are established by slightly different 
forms of NMDA receptors. If LTP and LTD occurred 
only in the hippocampal formation, their discovery 
would still be an interesting finding, but the fact that 
they also occur in several other regions of the brain 
suggests that they play an important role in many 
forms of learning.
 THOUGHT QUESTION
The brain is the most complex organ in the body, and 
it is also the most malleable. Every experience leaves 
at least a small trace, in the form of altered synapses. 
When we tell someone something or participate in an 
encounter that the other person will remember, we 
are (literally) changing connections in the person’s 
brain. How many synapses change each day? What 
prevents individual memories from becoming con-
fused?

450	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
visual properties of familiar stimuli. For example, Van-
denbulcke et al. (2006) found that Patient J. A., who had 
sustained damage to the right fusiform gyrus, performed 
poorly on tasks that required her to draw or describe 
visual features of various animals, fruits, vegetables, tools 
vehicles, or pieces of furniture. Her other cognitive abil-
ities, including the ability to describe nonvisual attri-
butes of objects, were normal. In addition, an fMRI 
study found that when normal control subjects were 
asked to perform the visual tasks that she performed 
poorly, activation was seen in the region of their brains 
that corresponded to J. A.’s lesion.
Kourtzi and Kanwisher (2000) found that specific 
kinds of visual information can activate very specific re-
gions of visual association cortex. As we saw in Chapter 
6, a region of the visual association cortex, MT/MST, 
plays an essential role in perception of movement. The 
investigators presented subjects with photographs that 
implied motion—for example, an athlete getting ready 
to throw a ball. They found that photographs like these, 
but not photographs of people remaining still, activated 
area MT/MST. Obviously, the photographs did not 
move, but presumably, the subjects’ memories con-
tained information about movements they had previ-
ously seen. (See Figure 13.17.)
A functional-imaging study by Goldberg, Perfetti, and 
Schneider (2006) asked people questions that involved 
the visual memory, so to speak. For example, Yang and 
Maunsell (2004) trained monkeys to detect small differ-
ences in visual stimuli whose images were projected 
onto a specific region of the retina. After the training 
was complete, the monkeys were able to detect differ-
ences much smaller than those they could detect when 
the training first started. However, they were unable to 
detect these differences when the patterns were pro-
jected onto other regions of the retina. Recordings of 
single neurons in the visual association cortex showed 
that the response properties of neurons that received 
information from the “trained” region of the retina—
but not from other regions—had become sensitive to 
small differences in the stimuli. Clearly, neural circuits 
in that region alone had been modified by the training.
Let’s look at some evidence from studies with hu-
mans that supports the conclusion that activation of neu-
ral circuits in the sensory association cortex constitutes 
the “readout” of a perceptual memory. Many years ago, 
Penfield and Perot (1963) discovered that when they 
stimulated the visual and auditory association cortex as 
patients were undergoing seizure surgery, the patients 
reported memories of images or sounds—for example, 
images of a familiar street or the sound of the patient’s 
mother’s voice. (You will recall from the opening case in 
Chapter 3 that seizure surgery is performed under a lo-
cal anesthetic so that the surgeons can test the effects of 
brain stimulation on the patients’ cognitive functions.)
Damage to regions of the brain involved in visual 
perception not only impair the ability to recognize  
visual stimuli but also disrupt people’s memory of the 
figure 13.16  The Major Divisions of the Visual 
Cortex of the Rhesus Monkey
The arrows indicate the primary direction of the flow of 
information in the dorsal and ventral streams.
Inferior temporal
cortex
Extrastriate
cortex
Posterior parietal
cortex
Primary visual
cortex
Ventral
Stream
Dorsal
Stream
figure 13.17  Evidence of Retrieval of Visual 
Memories of Movement
The bars represent the level of activation, measured by 
fMRI, of MT/MST, a region of the visual association cortex 
that responds to movement. Subjects looked at 
photographs of static scenes or scenes that implied 
motion similar to the ones shown here.
(Based on data from Kourtzi and Kanwisher, 2000.)
1
1.5
0.5
2
2.5
Implied motion 
No implied 
motion 
At rest 
Percent change in signal

	
Perceptual Learning	
451
area, is involved in recognition of places. A functional- 
imaging study by Ranganath, DeGutis, and D’Esposito 
(2004) found evidence that short-term memory for par-
ticular faces and places was associated with neural activity 
in two different regions of the ventral stream of the visual 
association cortex. The investigators trained people on a 
delayed matching-to-sample task that required them to 
remember particular faces or places for a short period of 
time. In a delayed matching-to-sample task, a subject is 
shown a stimulus (the sample), and then, after a delay 
during which the stimulus disappears, the subject must 
indicate which of several alternatives matches the sample. 
Ranganath and his colleagues found that short-term 
memories of faces activated the fusiform face area and 
that short-term memories of places activated the parahip-
pocampal place area.
As we saw in Chapter 6, transcranial magnetic stimu-
lation (TMS) of the visual association cortex interferes 
with visual perception. TMS induces a weak electrical 
current in the brain that disrupts neural activity and 
thus interferes with the normal functions of the stimu-
lated region. Oliveri et al. (2001) trained people on a 
delayed matching-to-sample task that required them to 
remember either abstract figures or the locations of a 
white square on a video screen. On some trials the inves-
tigators applied TMS to the association cortex of either 
the ventral stream or the dorsal stream during the delay 
interval, after the sample stimuli had been turned off. 
They found that, as expected, stimulating the ventral 
stream interfered with short-term memory for visual pat-
terns and stimulating the dorsal stream interfered with 
short memory for location.
Although the neural circuits responsible for learn-
ing to recognize particular stimuli appear to reside in 
the sensory association cortex, perceptual short-term 
memories involve other brain regions as well—espe-
cially the prefrontal cortex. Miyashita (2004) suggests 
that the role of the prefrontal cortex in short-term mem-
ory is to “manipulate and organize to-be-remembered 
information, devise strategies for retrieval, and also 
monitor the outcome” of these processes.
Baier et al. (2010) note that successfully remember-
ing recently presented information in short-term memory 
requires two processes: filtering out irrelevant informa-
tion and maintaining relevant information. The investiga-
tors presented stroke patients with short-term memory 
tasks that either required them to ignore extraneous,  
irrelevant information or tested their ability to hold several 
pieces of information in mind. They found that patients 
visual, auditory, tactile, and gustatory information. The 
researchers found that answering the questions activated 
the regions of association cortex involved in perception 
of the relevant sensory information. For example, ques-
tions about flavor activated the gustatory cortex, ques-
tions about tactile information activated the somatosen-
sory cortex, and questions about visual and auditory 
information activated the visual and auditory association 
cortex.
Perceptual Short-Term Memory
So far, all the studies I have mentioned involved recog-
nition of stimuli, either particular objects or their loca-
tions. Often, recognition is all that is necessary: We see 
a stimulus and immediately make the appropriate re-
sponse. But sometimes the situation demands that we 
make the appropriate response after a delay, even after 
the stimulus is no longer visible. For example, suppose 
that we have driven into a large parking lot, and because 
we will have to carry a heavy package, we want to park as 
near as possible to the entrance of a store located just in 
front of us. We look to the left and see a space about 100 
feet away. We then look to the right and see a space 
about 50 feet away. Mentally comparing the distances, 
we turn to the right. Because we could not look in both 
directions simultaneously, we had to compare the dis-
tance to the second space with our memory of the dis-
tance to first one. In other words, we had to compare a 
perception with a short-term memory of something else 
we had just perceived. A short-term memory is the mem-
ory for a stimulus or an event that lasts for a short 
while—usually on the order of a few seconds.
As we just saw, learning to recognize a stimulus in-
volves synaptic changes in the appropriate regions of 
the sensory association cortex that establish new circuits 
of neurons. Recognition of a stimulus occurs when sen-
sory input activates these established sets of neural cir-
cuits. Short-term memory of a stimulus involves activity 
of these circuits—or other circuits that are activated by 
them—that continues even after the stimulus disap-
pears. For example, learning to recognize a friend’s face 
produces changes in synaptic strengths in neural cir-
cuits in the fusiform face region of our visual association 
cortex, recognizing that she is present involves activation 
of the circuits that are established by these changes, and 
remembering that she is still in the room even when we 
look elsewhere involves continued activity of these cir-
cuits (or other circuits connected to them).
Functional-imaging studies have shown that retention 
of specific types of short-term visual memories involves 
activity of specific regions of the visual association cortex 
that we encountered in Chapter 6. One region of the ven-
tral stream, the fusiform face area, is involved in recognition 
of faces, and another region, the parahippocampal place 
x short-term memory  Memory for a stimulus or an event that 
lasts for a short while.
x delayed matching-to-sample task  A task that requires the 
subject to indicate which of several stimuli has just been perceived.

452	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
with damage to the left basal ganglia had difficulty filter-
ing out irrelevant information, and patients with damage 
to the right prefrontal cortex had difficulty retaining 
more than a few pieces of information in short-term 
memory.
A neuroimaging study by Karlsgodt et al. (2010) 
investigated the contribution of genetic factors to brain 
structure and short-term memory ability. They found 
that the size of the superior longitudinal fasciculus, as 
Section Summary
Perceptual Learning
Perceptual learning occurs as a result of changes in 
synaptic connections within the sensory association 
cortex. Damage to the inferior temporal cortex—the 
highest level of the ventral stream of the visual asso-
ciation cortex—disrupts visual perceptual learning. 
Functional-imaging studies with humans have shown 
that retrieval of memories of pictures, sounds, move-
ments, or spatial locations activates the appropriate 
regions of the sensory association cortex.
Perceptual short-term memory involves sustained 
activity of neurons in the sensory association cortex. 
Functional-imaging studies have shown that retention 
of specific types of short-term visual memories 
involves activity of specific regions of the visual asso-
ciation cortex. Transcranial magnetic stimulation of 
various regions of the human sensory association cor-
tex disrupt short-term perceptual memories. The pre-
frontal cortex is also involved in short-term memory. 
This region encodes information pertaining to the 
stimulus that must be remembered and is involved in 
manipulating and organizing information in short-term 
memory. Successful retention of information in short-
term memory requires filtering out irrelevant informa-
tion, which involves the left basal ganglia, and main-
taining relevant information, which involves the right 
prefrontal cortex.
 Thought Questions
1.	 How many perceptual memories does your brain 
hold? How many images, sounds, and odors can 
you recognize, and how many objects and surfaces 
can you recognize by touch? Is there any way we 
could estimate these quantities?
2.	 Can you think of times when you saw something that 
you needed to remember and did so by keeping in 
mind a response you would need to make rather 
than an image of the stimulus you just perceived?
measured by diffusion tensor imaging, and perfor-
mance on a test of spatial short-term memory, were 
both significantly influenced by the same genetic fac-
tors. This fiber tract is an important link between the 
parietal and frontal lobes, suggesting that communica-
tion between these two brain regions plays a role in 
spatial short-term memory. (You will recall from Chap-
ter 6 that the “where” stream of the visual system in-
volves the parietal cortex.)
Classical Conditioning
Neuroscientists have studied the anatomy and physiol-
ogy of classical conditioning using many models, such as 
the gill withdrawal reflex in Aplysia (a marine inverte-
brate) and the eyeblink reflex in the rabbit (Carew, 
1989; Lavond, Kim, and Thompson, 1993). I have chosen 
to describe a simple mammalian model of classical  
conditioning—the conditioned emotional response—to 
illustrate the results of such investigations.
The amygdala is part of an important system involved 
in a particular form of stimulus-response learning: classi-
cally conditioned emotional responses. An aversive stimu-
lus such as a painful foot shock produces a variety of be-
havioral, autonomic, and hormonal responses: freezing, 
increased blood pressure, secretion of adrenal stress hor-
mones, and so on. A classically conditioned emotional 
response is established by pairing a neutral stimulus 
(such as a tone of a particular frequency) with an aversive 
stimulus (such as a brief foot shock). As we saw in Chap-
ter 11, after these stimuli are paired, the tone becomes a 
CS; when it is presented by itself, it elicits the same type 
of responses as the unconditional stimulus does.
Because a conditioned emotional response can occur 
in the absence of the auditory cortex, I will confine my dis-
cussion to the subcortical components of this process. In-
formation about the CS (the tone) reaches the lateral nu-
cleus of the amygdala. This nucleus also receives information 
about the US (the foot shock) from the somatosensory sys-
tem. Thus, these two sources of information converge in 

	
Classical Conditioning	
453
activates neurons in the central nucleus, evoking an 
unlearned (unconditional) emotional response. If a 
tone is paired with the painful stimulus, the weak syn-
apses in the lateral amygdala are strengthened through 
the action of the Hebb rule. (See Figure 13.18.) As we saw 
in Chapter 11, this hypothesis has a considerable amount 
of support; thus, the synaptic changes responsible for 
this learning may take place within this circuit.
The evidence from many studies indicates that the 
changes in the lateral amygdala responsible for acquisi-
tion of a conditioned emotional response involve LTP. 
As we saw earlier in this chapter, LTP in many parts of 
the brain—including the amygdala—is accomplished 
through the activation of NMDA receptors and the in-
sertion of AMPA receptors into the postsynaptic mem-
brane. For example, Rumpel et al. (2005) paired a tone 
with a shock and established a conditioned emotional 
response. They found that the learning experience 
caused AMPA receptors to be inserted into dendritic 
spines of synapses between lateral amygdala neurons 
and axons that provide auditory input. They also found 
that a procedure that prevented the insertion of AMPA 
receptors into the dendritic spines also prevented the 
establishment of fear conditioning. In addition, Migues 
et al. (2010) found that blocking the activity of PKM-zeta 
in the lateral amygdala with an injection of ZIP impaired 
the establishment of a conditioned emotional response. 
In fact, the magnitude of the deficit was directly related 
to the decrease in postsynaptic AMPA receptors.
The results of these studies support the conclusion 
that LTP in the lateral amygdala, mediated by NMDA re-
ceptors and maintained by PKM-zeta, plays a critical role 
in the establishment of conditioned emotional responses.
the lateral nucleus, which means that synaptic changes re-
sponsible for learning could take place in this location.
A hypothetical neural circuit is shown in Figure 
13.18. The lateral nucleus of the amygdala contains neu-
rons whose axons project to the central nucleus. Termi-
nal buttons from neurons that transmit auditory and 
somatosensory information to the lateral nucleus form 
synapses with dendritic spines on these neurons. When 
a rat encounters a painful stimulus, somatosensory in-
put activates strong synapses in the lateral nucleus. As a 
result, the neurons in this nucleus begin firing, which 
figure 13.18  Conditioned Emotional Responses
The figure shows the probable location of the changes in 
synaptic strength produced by the classically conditioned 
emotional response that results from pairing a tone with a 
foot shock.
Tone
(CS)
Aversive
stimulus
(US)
Strong
synapse
Central
nucleus
Conditioned
emotional 
responses:
hypothalamus,
midbrain, pons,
and medulla
Basal
nucleus
Synapse
strengthened
by pairing of
CS and US
Lateral
nucleus
Section Summary
Classical Conditioning
You have already encountered the conditioned emo-
tional response in Chapter 11 and in the previous sec-
tion of this chapter, in which I discussed perceptual 
learning. When an auditory stimulus (CS) is paired with 
a foot shock (US), the two types of information con-
verge in the lateral nucleus of the amygdala. This 
nucleus is connected, directly and via the basal nucleus 
and accessory basal nucleus, with the central nucleus, 
which is connected with brain regions that control vari-
ous components of the emotional response. Lesions 
anywhere in this circuit disrupt the response.
Recordings of single neurons in the lateral 
nucleus of the amygdala indicate that classical con­
ditioning changes the response of neurons to the CS. 
The mechanism of synaptic plasticity in this system 
appears to be NMDA-mediated long-term potentia-
tion. Infusion of drugs that block LTP into the lateral 
nucleus blocks establishment of conditioned emo-
tional responses, and blocking PKM-zeta in the lateral 
amygdala prevents the establishment of a condi-
tioned emotional response.
 Thought Question
Can you think of instances of classical conditioning 
(other than the ones I’ve discussed) that play a part  
of your life? What brain regions do you think would 
contain the neural changes responsible for the estab-
lishment of these memories?

454	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
cannot communicate by means of language can ac-
quire complex responses by observing and imitating 
the behavior of other animals.)
At first, performing a behavior through observation 
or by following a set of rules is slow and awkward. And 
because so much of the brain’s resources are involved in 
recalling the rules and applying them to our behavior, we 
cannot respond to other stimuli in the environment—
we must ignore events that might distract us. But then, 
with practice, the behavior becomes much more fluid. 
Eventually, we perform it without thinking and can easily 
do other things at the same time, such as carrying on a 
conversation with passengers as we drive our car.
Evidence suggests that as learned behaviors become 
automatic and routine, they are “transferred” to the 
basal ganglia. The process seems to work like this: As we 
deliberately perform a complex behavior, the basal gan-
glia receive information about the stimuli that are pres-
ent and the responses we are making. At first the basal 
ganglia are passive “observers” of the situation, but as 
the behaviors are repeated again and again, the basal 
ganglia begin to learn what to do. Eventually, they take 
over most of the details of the process, leaving the trans-
cortical circuits free to do something else. We need no 
longer think about what we are doing.
The neostriatum—the caudate nucleus and the  
putamen—receives sensory information from all regions of 
the cerebral cortex. It also receives information from 
the frontal lobes about movements that are planned or 
are actually in progress. (So, as you can see, the basal 
ganglia have all the information they need to monitor 
the progress of someone learning to drive a car.) The 
outputs of the caudate nucleus and the putamen are 
sent to another part of the basal ganglia: the globus pal-
lidus. The outputs of this structure are sent to the fron-
tal cortex: to the premotor and supplementary motor 
cortex, where plans for movements are made, and to the 
primary motor cortex, where they are executed. (See 
Figure 13.19.)
Studies with laboratory animals have found that le-
sions of the basal ganglia disrupt instrumental condi-
tioning but do not affect other forms of learning. For 
example, Fernandez-Ruiz et al. (2001) destroyed the 
portions of the caudate nucleus and putamen that re-
ceive visual information from the ventral stream. They 
found that although the lesions did not disrupt visual 
perceptual learning, they impaired the monkeys’ ability 
to learn to make a visually guided operant response.
Williams and Eskandar (2006) trained monkeys to 
move a joystick in a particular direction (left, right, 
forward, or backward) when they saw a particular vi-
sual stimulus. Correct responses were reinforced with a 
sip of fruit juice. As the monkeys learned the task, the 
rate of firing of single neurons in the caudate nucleus 
increased. In fact, the activity of caudate neurons was 
Instrumental Conditioning
Instrumental (operant) conditioning is the means by 
which we (and other animals) profit from experience. 
If, in a particular situation, we make a response that has 
favorable outcomes, we will tend to make the response 
again. This section first describes the neural pathways 
involved in instrumental conditioning and then dis-
cusses the neural basis of reinforcement.
Basal Ganglia
As we saw in the first section of this chapter, instrumen-
tal conditioning entails the strengthening of connec-
tions between neural circuits that detect a particular 
stimulus and neural circuits that produce a particular 
response. Clearly, the circuits that are responsible for 
instrumental conditioning begin in various regions of 
the sensory association cortex, where perception takes 
place, and end in the motor association cortex of the 
frontal lobe, which controls movements. But what path-
ways are responsible for these connections, and where 
do the synaptic changes responsible for the learning 
take place?
There are two major pathways between the sensory 
association cortex and the motor association cortex: di-
rect transcortical connections (connections from one 
area of the cerebral cortex to another) and connections 
via the basal ganglia and thalamus. (A third pathway, 
involving the cerebellum and thalamus, also exists, but 
the role of this pathway in instrumental conditioning 
has until very recently received little attention from neuro­
scientists.) Both of these pathways appear to be involved 
in instrumental conditioning, but they play different 
roles.
In conjunction with the hippocampal formation, 
the transcortical connections are involved in the acqui-
sition of episodic memories—complex perceptual 
memories of sequences of events that we witness or 
that are described to us. (The acquisition of these types 
of memories is discussed in the last section of this 
chapter.) The transcortical connections are also in-
volved in the acquisition of complex behaviors that 
involve deliberation or instruction. For example, a per-
son learning to drive a car with a manual transmission 
might say, “Let’s see, push in the clutch, move the shift 
lever to the left and then away from me—there, it’s in 
gear—now let the clutch come up—oh! It died—I 
should have given it more gas. Let’s see, clutch down, 
turn the key. . . .” A memorized set of rules (or an in-
structor sitting next to us) provides a script for us to 
follow. Of course, this process does not have to be au-
dible or even involve actual movements of the speech 
muscles; a person can think in words with neural activ-
ity that does not result in overt behavior. (Animals that 

	
Instrumental Conditioning	
455
Reinforcement
Learning provides a means for us to profit from  
experience—to make responses that provide favorable 
outcomes. When good things happen (that is, when 
reinforcing stimuli occur), reinforcement mechanisms 
in the brain become active, and the establishment of 
synaptic changes is facilitated. The discovery of the ex-
istence of such reinforcement mechanisms occurred by 
accident.
Neural Circuits Involved  
in Reinforcement
In 1954, James Olds, a young assistant professor, and  
Peter Milner, a graduate student, attempted to determine  
whether electrical stimulation of the reticular formation 
would facilitate maze learning in rats. They planned to 
turn on the stimulator briefly each time an animal 
reached a choice point in the maze. First, however, they 
had to be certain that that the stimulation was not aver-
sive, because an aversive stimulus would undoubtedly in-
terfere with learning. As Olds reported,
I applied a brief train of 60-cycle sine-wave elec-
trical current whenever the animal entered one 
corner of the enclosure. The animal did not stay 
away from that corner, but rather came back 
quickly after a brief sortie which followed the 
first stimulation and came back even more 
quickly after a briefer sortie which followed the 
second stimulation. By the time the third electri-
cal stimulus had been applied the animal seemed 
indubitably to be “coming back for more.” (Olds, 
1973, p. 81)
Realizing that they were on to something big, Olds 
and Milner decided to drop their original experiment 
and study the phenomenon they had discovered. Subse-
quent research discovered that although there are sev-
eral different reinforcement mechanisms, the activity of 
dopaminergic neurons plays a particularly important 
role in reinforcement. As we saw in Chapter 4, the meso-
limbic system of dopaminergic neurons begins in the 
ventral tegmental area (VTA) of the midbrain and proj-
ects rostrally to several forebrain regions, including the 
amygdala, hippocampus, and nucleus accumbens (NAC). 
This nucleus is located in the basal forebrain rostral to 
correlated with the animals’ rate of learning. When the 
investigators increased the activation of caudate neu-
rons through low-intensity, high-frequency electrical 
stimulation during the reinforcement period, the 
monkeys learned a particular stimulus-response asso-
ciation more quickly. These results provide further  
evidence for the role of the basal ganglia in instrumen-
tal conditioning.
The transfer of memories from brain systems in-
volved in acquisition of behavior sequences to those 
involved in storage of automatic procedures can be 
seen in the basal ganglia. The dorsomedial (DM) stria-
tum of the rat (which corresponds to the caudate nu-
cleus in humans and other primates) is reciprocally 
connected with the prefrontal cortex. The dorsolateral 
(DL) striatum of the rat (which corresponds to the pri-
mate putamen) is reciprocally connected to sensory 
and motor regions of the cortex. Yin et al. (2009) and 
Thorn et al. (2010) found that the DM striatum was 
involved in early learning of new skills, but that as prac-
tice continued and the behavior became more habitual 
and automatic, the DL striatum began to take over 
control of the animal’s behavior.
As we saw in the previous section, long-term poten-
tiation appears to play a critical role in classical condi-
tioning. This form of synaptic plasticity appears to be 
involved in instrumental conditioning, as well. Packard 
and Teather (1997) found that blocking NMDA recep-
tors in the basal ganglia with an injection of AP5 dis-
rupted learning guided by a simple visual cue.
figure 13.19  A Schematic Diagram of the Basal 
Ganglia and Their Connections
Primary 
somatosensory
cortex
Primary 
motor cortex
Supplementary
motor area
Premotor
cortex
Caudate nucleus
Putamen
Neostriatum
Globus pallidus,
internal
Subthalamic 
nucleus
VA/VL thalamus
Globus pallidus,
external
x ventral tegmental area (VTA)  A group of dopaminergic 
neurons in the ventral midbrain whose axons form the mesolimbic 
and mesocortical systems; plays a critical role in reinforcement.
x nucleus accumbens (NAC)  A nucleus of the basal forebrain 
near the septum; receives dopamine-secreting terminal buttons 
from neurons of the ventral tegmental area and is thought to be 
involved in reinforcement and attention.

456	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
activate the human nucleus accumbens. For example, 
Knutson et al. (2001) found that the nucleus accum-
bens became more active (and, presumably, dopamine 
was being released there) when people were presented 
the preoptic area and immediately adjacent to the sep-
tum. (In fact, the full name of this region is the nucleus 
accumbens septi, or “nucleus leaning against the septum.”) 
(See Figure 13.20.) Neurons in the NAC project to the 
ventral part of the basal ganglia, which, as we just saw, 
are involved in learning. The mesocortical system also 
plays a role in reinforcement. This system also begins in 
the ventral tegmental area but projects to the prefrontal 
cortex, the limbic cortex, and the hippocampus.
Chapter 5 described a research technique called 
microdialysis, which enables an investigator to analyze the 
contents of the interstitial fluid within a specific region 
of the brain. Researchers using this method have shown 
that reinforcing electrical stimulation of the medial 
forebrain bundle or the ventral tegmental area or the 
administration of cocaine or amphetamine causes the 
release of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens (Moghad-
dam and Bunney, 1989; Nakahara et al., 1989; Phillips  
et al., 1992). The medial forebrain bundle connects the 
ventral tegmental area with the nucleus accumbens. 
(See Figure 13.21.) Microdialysis studies have also found 
that the presence of natural reinforcers, such as water, 
food, or a sex partner, stimulates the release of dopa-
mine in the nucleus accumbens. Thus, the effects of 
reinforcing brain stimulation seem to be similar in many 
ways to those of natural reinforcers.
Although microdialysis probes are not placed in the 
brain of humans for experimental purposes, functional- 
imaging studies have shown that reinforcing events  
figure 13.20  The Ventral Tegmental Area and the Nucleus Accumbens
Diagrams of sections through a rat brain show the location of these regions.
(Adapted from Swanson, L. W. Brain Maps: Structure of the Rat Brain. New York: Elsevier, 1992.)
Corpus
callosum
Hippocampal
formation
Substantia
nigra
Ventral
tegmental
area
Nucleus
accumbens
Anterior
commissure
Septal
area
Corpus
callosum
Basal
ganglia
figure 13.21  Dopamine and Reinforcement
Release of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens, measured 
by microdialysis is produced when a rat pressed a lever that 
delivered electrical stimulation to the ventral tegmental area.
(Based on data from Phillips et al., 1992.)
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
0
30
60
90
120
Reinforcing
brain stimulation
Dopamine level (percentage of baseline)
Time (min)

	
Instrumental Conditioning	
457
liquid) was delivered. However, once the animals 
learned the task, the VTA neurons became active when 
the auditory stimulus was presented but not when the 
reinforcing stimulus was delivered. In addition, if a rein-
forcing stimulus does not occur when it is expected, the 
activity of dopaminergic neurons suddenly decreases 
(Day et al., 2007). A functional-imaging study by Berns 
et al. (2001) found similar results with humans. Figure 
13.22 shows that when a small amount of tasty fruit juice 
was squirted in people’s mouths unpredictably, the nu-
cleus accumbens was activated, but when the delivery of 
fruit juice was predictable, no such activity occurred. 
(See Figure 13.22.)
Schultz and his colleagues suggest that activation of 
the dopaminergic neurons of the VTA tell other circuits 
in the brain that an event that has informational value 
with respect to a potentially reinforcing stimulus has just 
occurred. In other words, the activity of these neurons 
sends a signal that there is something to be learned. If 
the delivery of the reinforcer is already expected, then 
there is nothing that needs to be learned.
A functional-imaging study by Knutson and Adcock 
(2005) found that anticipation of a reinforcing stimulus 
with stimuli that indicated that they would be receiving 
money. Aharon et al. (2001) found that young hetero-
sexual men would press a lever that presented pictures 
of beautiful women (but not handsome men) and that, 
when they saw these pictures, the activity of the nucleus 
accumbens increased.
I should note that microdialysis studies have found 
that aversive stimuli, as well as reinforcing stimuli, can 
cause the release of dopamine in various parts of the 
brain, including the nucleus accumbens (Salamone, 
1992). Thus, it is clear that reinforcement is not the sole 
function of dopaminergic neurons; these neurons ap-
pear to be involved in stress as well. Also, because the 
stimulation of several regions of the brain is reinforcing, 
the mesolimbic system is only one of several reinforce-
ment systems.
Functions of the Reinforcement System
A reinforcement system must perform two functions: 
detect the presence of a reinforcing stimulus (that is, 
recognize that something good has just happened) and 
strengthen the connections between the neurons that 
detect the discriminative stimulus (such as the sight of a 
lever) and the neurons that produce the instrumental 
response (a lever press). (Refer back to Figure 13.2.)
Assuming that this proposed mechanism is correct, 
several questions remain: What activates the dopaminer-
gic neurons in the midbrain, causing their terminal but-
tons to release dopamine? What role does the release of 
dopamine play in strengthening synaptic connections? 
Where do these synaptic changes take place? Research 
that suggests some preliminary answers to these ques-
tions is discussed in the rest of this section.
Detecting Reinforcing Stimuli.  Reinforcement occurs 
when neural circuits detect a reinforcing stimulus and 
cause the activation of dopaminergic neurons in the 
ventral tegmental area. Detection of a reinforcing stim-
ulus is not a simple matter; a stimulus that serves as a 
reinforcer on one occasion may fail to do so on another. 
For example, the presence of food will reinforce the 
behavior of a hungry animal but not that of an animal 
that has just eaten. Thus, the reinforcement system is 
not automatically activated when particular stimuli are 
present; its activation also depends on the state of the 
animal.
Studies by Schultz and his colleagues, recording the 
activity of dopaminergic neurons in the nucleus accum-
bens, have discovered that the reinforcement system 
appears to be activated by unexpected reinforcing stimuli. 
For example, Mirenowicz and Schultz (1994, 1996) 
taught monkeys an operant task that required them to 
make a response when they heard an auditory stimulus. 
During training, dopaminergic neurons in the VTA re-
sponded rapidly when the reinforcing stimulus (a tasty 
figure 13.22  Expected and Unexpected Reinforcers
The functional MRI scans show the effects of expected 
and unexpected reinforcers (sips of fruit juice) on activity 
of the nucleus accumbens (arrows) in humans.
(From Berns, G. S., McClure, S. M., Pagnoni, G., and Montague, P. R. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2001, 21, 2793–2798. Reprinted with permission.)
Expected reward
Unexpected reward
x medial forebrain bundle (MFB)  A fiber bundle that runs in a 
rostral-caudal direction through the basal forebrain and lateral 
hypothalamus; electrical stimulation of these axons is reinforcing.

458	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
region in which the synaptic changes take place. This 
chemical is the third element; only if it is present can 
weak synapses be strengthened. Dopamine serves such a 
role. Several studies have shown that long-term potentia-
tion is essential for instrumental conditioning and that 
dopamine is an essential ingredient in long-lasting long-
term potentiation.
Knecht et al. (2004) taught people a vocabulary of 
artificial words. The learning took place gradually, dur-
ing five daily sessions. In a double-blind procedure, 
some subjects were given l-DOPA 90 minutes before 
each session, and others were given a placebo. (As you 
know, l-DOPA is the precursor for dopamine, so admin-
istration of this drug increases the release of dopamine 
in the brain.) The subjects who received the l-DOPA 
learned the artificial vocabulary faster and remembered 
it better than those who received the placebo. Tsai et al. 
(2009) used optogenetic stimulation to specifically acti-
vate dopaminergic neurons in the VTA and found  
that the stimulation reinforced a instrumental place- 
preference task. Navakkode et al. (2010) found that si-
multaneous application of dopamine and glutamate in 
hippocampal field CA1 produced L-LTP but that this effect 
was prevented by the application of ZIP, which indicates 
that PKM-zeta is essential for the dopamine-dependent 
establishment of L-LTP in field CA1—and, presumably, 
of learning that involves synaptic plasticity in the  
hippocampus.
In fact, infusion of ZIP into the hippocampus dis-
rupts spatial memory and memory of object locations 
(Serrano et al., 2008). In addition, infusion of ZIP into 
the gustatory cortex erases long-term memory for a 
learned taste aversion, but infusion of a genetically mod-
ified virus that increases production of PKM-? into the 
same region enhances long-term memory for this task 
(Shema et al., 2011). Many drugs will prevent the estab-
lishment of new memories, but ZIP actually erases well-
established memories—even those that are several 
months old. Moreover, once the ZIP has been broken 
down, the animal can acquire the memory again, so ZIP 
does not simply harm the neurons that it comes in con-
tact with. So far, no other chemical has this effect.
(the opportunity to win some money) increased the acti-
vation of the ventral tegmentum and some of its projec-
tion regions (including the nucleus accumbens) in hu-
mans. The investigators found that the subjects were more 
likely to remember pictures that they had seen while they 
were anticipating the chance to win some money.
As we have seen, the prefrontal cortex provides an 
important input to the ventral tegmental area. The termi-
nal buttons of the axons connecting these two areas se-
crete glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter, and the 
activity of these synapses makes dopaminergic neurons in 
the ventral tegmental area fire in a bursting pattern, 
which greatly increases the amount of dopamine they 
secrete in the nucleus accumbens (Gariano and Groves, 
1988). The prefrontal cortex is generally involved in de-
vising strategies, making plans, evaluating progress made 
toward goals, and judging the appropriateness of one’s 
own behavior. Perhaps the prefrontal cortex turns on the 
reinforcement mechanism when it determines that the 
ongoing behavior is bringing the organism nearer to its 
goals—that the present strategy is working.
Strengthening Neural Connections: Dopamine and 
Neural Plasticity.  Like classical conditioning, instru-
mental conditioning involves strengthening of synapses 
located on neurons that have just been active. However, 
instrumental conditioning involves three elements: a 
discriminative stimulus, a response, and a reinforcing 
stimulus. How are the neural manifestations of these 
three elements combined?
Let’s consider a hungry rat learning to press a lever 
and obtain food. As in classical conditioning, one ele-
ment (the discriminative stimulus—in this case the sight 
of the lever) activates only weak synapses on motor neu-
rons responsible for a movement that causes a lever 
press. The second element—the particular circum-
stance that happened to induce the animal to press the 
lever—activates strong synapses, making the neurons 
fire. The third element comes into play only if the re-
sponse is followed by a reinforcing stimulus. If it is, the 
reinforcement mechanism triggers the secretion of a 
neurotransmitter or neuromodulator throughout the 
Section Summary
Instrumental Conditioning
Instrumental conditioning entails the strengthening of 
connections between neural circuits that detect stim-
uli and neural circuits that produce responses. One of 
the locations of these changes appears to be the 
basal ganglia, especially the changes responsible for 
learning of automated and routine behaviors. The 
basal ganglia receive sensory information and infor-
mation about plans for movement from the neocortex. 

	
Relational Learning	
459
which, at first glance, appears to be the inability to 
learn new information. However, when we examine the 
phenomenon more carefully, we find that the basic 
abilities of perceptual learning, stimulus-response 
learning, and motor learning are intact but that com-
plex relational learning, of the type I just described, is 
gone. This section discusses the nature of anterograde 
amnesia in humans and its anatomical basis. The sec-
tion that follows discusses related research with labora-
tory animals.
The term anterograde amnesia refers to difficulty in 
learning new information. A person with pure antero-
grade amnesia can remember events that occurred in 
the past, from the time before the brain damage oc-
curred, but cannot retain information encountered after 
the damage. In contrast, retrograde amnesia refers to the 
inability to remember events that happened before the 
brain damage occurred. (See Figure 13.23.) As we will see, 
pure anterograde amnesia is rare; usually, there is also a 
retrograde amnesia for events that occurred for a period 
of time before the brain damage occurred.
Relational Learning
So far, this chapter has discussed relatively simple forms 
of learning, which can be understood as changes in cir-
cuits of neurons that detect the presence of particular 
stimuli or as strengthened connections between neu-
rons that analyze sensory information and those that 
produce responses. But most forms of learning are more 
complex; most memories of real objects and events are 
related to other memories. Seeing a photograph of an 
old friend may remind you of the sound of the person’s 
name and of the movements you have to make to pro-
nounce it. You may also be reminded of things you have 
done with your friend: places you have visited, conversa-
tions you have had, experiences you have shared. Each 
of these memories can contain a series of events, com-
plete with sights and sounds, that you will be able to re-
call in the proper sequence. Obviously, the neural cir-
cuits in the visual association cortex that recognize your 
friend’s face are connected to circuits in many other 
parts of the brain, and these circuits are connected to 
many others. This section discusses research on rela-
tional learning, which includes the establishment and 
retrieval of memories of events, episodes, and places.
Human Anterograde Amnesia
One of the most dramatic and intriguing phenomena 
caused by human brain damage is anterograde amnesia, 
Instrumental conditioning activates the basal ganglia, 
and damage to the basal ganglia or infusion of a drug 
that blocks NMDA receptors there disrupts instrumen-
tal conditioning.
Olds and Milner discovered that rats would per-
form a response that caused electrical current to be 
delivered through an electrode placed in their brain; 
thus, the stimulation was reinforcing. Subsequent 
studies found that stimulation of many locations had 
reinforcing effects but that the medial forebrain bun-
dle produced the strongest and most reliable ones.
Although several neurotransmitters may play a 
role in reinforcement, one is particularly important: 
dopamine. The cell bodies of the most important sys-
tem of dopaminergic neurons are located in the ven-
tral tegmental area, and their axons project to the 
nucleus accumbens, prefrontal cortex, and amygdala.
Microdialysis studies have also shown that natural 
and artificial reinforcers stimulate the release of dopa-
mine in the nucleus accumbens, and functional- 
imaging studies have shown that reinforcing stimuli 
activate the nucleus accumbens in humans. The 
dopaminergic reinforcement system appears to be 
activated by unexpected reinforcers or by stimuli that 
predict the occurrence of a reinforcer. The prefrontal 
cortex may play a role in reinforcement that occurs 
when our own behavior brings us nearer to a goal.
Dopamine induces synaptic plasticity by facilitat-
ing associative long-term potentiation. Evidence indi-
cates that dopamine can facilitate long-term potentia-
tion in the nucleus accumbens, amygdala, and 
prefrontal cortex. The establishment of long-term 
memories involves production of PKM-zeta.
 Thought Question
Have you ever been working hard on a problem and 
suddenly thought of a possible solution? Did the 
thought make you feel excited and happy? What 
would we find if we had a microdialysis probe in your 
nucleus accumbens?
x anterograde amnesia  Amnesia for events that occur after 
some disturbance to the brain, such as head injury or certain 
degenerative brain diseases.
x retrograde amnesia  Amnesia for events that preceded some 
disturbance to the brain, such as a head injury or electroconvulsive 
shock.

460	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
it were, H. M. would not have been able to remem-
ber events from early in his life, he would not have 
known how to talk, he would not have known how 
to dress himself, and so on.
	 2.	 The hippocampus is not the location of immediate (short-
term) memories. If it were, H. M. would not be able to 
carry on a conversation, because he would not have 
remembered what the other person said long 
enough to think of a reply.
	 3.	 The hippocampus is involved in converting immediate 
(short-term) memories into long-term memories. This con-
clusion is based on a particular hypothesis of mem-
ory function: that our immediate memory of an 
event is retained by neural activity and that long-
term memories consist of relatively permanent bio-
chemical or structural changes in neurons. The 
conclusion seems a reasonable explanation for the 
fact that, when presented with new information, H. M. 
seemed to understand it and remember it as long as 
he thought about it but that a permanent record of 
the information was just never made.
As we will see, these three conclusions are too sim-
ple. Subsequent research on patients with anterograde 
amnesia indicates that the facts are more complicated—
and more interesting—than they first appeared to be. 
But to appreciate the significance of the findings of 
more recent research, we must understand these three 
conclusions and remember the facts that led to them.
As we saw earlier in this chapter, most psychologists 
believe that learning consists of at least two stages: short-
term memory and long-term memory. They conceive of 
short-term memory as a means of storing a limited amount 
of information temporarily and long-term memory as a 
means of storing an unlimited amount (or at least an 
enormously large amount) of information permanently. 
We can remember a new item of information (such as a 
telephone number) for as long as we want by engaging in 
a particular behavior: rehearsal. However, once we stop 
rehearsing the information, we might or might not be 
able to remember it later; that is, the information might 
or might not get stored in long-term memory.
The simplest model of the memory process says that 
sensory information enters short-term memory, re-
hearsal keeps it there, and eventually, the information 
makes its way into long-term memory, where it is perma-
nently stored. The conversion of short-term memories 
into long-term memories has been called consolidation, 
because the memories are “made solid,” so to speak. 
(See Figure 13.24.)
In 1889, Sergei Korsakoff, a Russian physician, first 
described a severe memory impairment caused by brain 
damage, and the disorder was given his name. The most 
profound symptom of Korsakoff’s syndrome is a severe 
anterograde amnesia: The patients appear to be unable 
to form new memories, although they can still remem-
ber old ones. They can converse normally and can re-
member events that happened long before their brain 
damage occurred, but they cannot remember events 
that happened afterward. As we will see in Chapter 15, 
the brain damage that causes Korsakoff’s syndrome is 
usually (but not always) a result of chronic alcohol abuse.
Anterograde amnesia can also be caused by damage 
to the temporal lobes. Scoville and Milner (1957) re-
ported that bilateral removal of the medial temporal 
lobe produced a memory impairment in humans that 
was apparently identical to that seen in Korsakoff’s syn-
drome. H. M., the man described in the case that 
opened this chapter, received the surgery in an attempt 
to treat his severe epilepsy, which could not be con-
trolled even by high doses of anticonvulsant medication. 
The epilepsy appears to have been caused by a head in-
jury he received when he was struck by a bicycle at age 
nine (Corkin et al., 1997).
The surgery successfully treated H. M.’s seizure dis-
order, but it became apparent that the operation had 
produced a serious memory impairment. Further inves-
tigation revealed that the critical site of damage was the 
hippocampus. Once it was known that bilateral medial 
temporal lobectomy causes anterograde amnesia, neu-
rosurgeons stopped performing this operation and are 
now careful to operate on only one temporal lobe.
H. M.’s history and memory deficits were described 
in the introduction to this chapter (Milner, Corkin, and 
Teuber, 1968; Milner, 1970; Corkin et al., 1981). Be-
cause of his relatively pure amnesia, he was extensively 
studied. Milner and her colleagues based the following 
conclusions on his pattern of deficits:
	 1.	 The hippocampus is not the location of long-term memories; 
nor is it necessary for the retrieval of long-term memories. If 
figure 13.23  A Schematic Definition of 
Retrograde Amnesia and Anterograde Amnesia
Retrograde
Amnesia
Anterograde
Amnesia
Cannot remember
events prior to
brain damage
Cannot later
remember events
that occur after
brain damage
Brain
damage
occurs
Time
x Korsakoff’s syndrome  Permanent anterograde amnesia caused 
by brain damage resulting from chronic alcoholism or malnutrition.
x consolidation  The process by which short-term memories are 
converted into long-term memories.

	
Relational Learning	
461
to ones they had not heard before. The experimenters 
also presented photographs of two men along with sto-
ries of their lives: One man was said to be dishonest, 
mean, and vicious; the other was said to be nice enough 
to invite home to dinner. (Half of the patients heard 
that one of the men was the bad one, and the other half 
heard that the other man was.) Twenty days later, the 
amnesic patients said they liked the picture of the “nice” 
man better than that of the “nasty” one.
Investigators have also succeeded in demonstrating 
stimulus-response learning by H. M. and other amnesic 
subjects. For example, Woodruff-Pak (1993) found that 
H. M. and another patient with anterograde amnesia 
could acquire a classically conditioned eyeblink response. 
H. M. even showed retention of the task two years later: 
He acquired the response again in one-tenth the number 
of trials that were needed previously. Sidman, Stoddard, 
and Mohr (1968) successfully trained patient H. M. on an 
instrumental conditioning task—a visual discrimination 
task in which pennies were given for correct responses.
Finally, several studies have demonstrated motor 
learning in patients with anterograde amnesia. For ex-
ample, Reber and Squire (1998) found that subjects with 
anterograde amnesia could learn a sequence of button 
presses in a serial reaction time task. They sat in front of a 
computer screen and watched an asterisk appear— 
Now you can understand the original conclusions of 
Milner and her colleagues: If H. M.’s short-term mem-
ory is intact and if he can remember events from before 
his operation, then the problem must be that consolida-
tion does not take place. Thus, the role of the hippo-
campal formation in memory is consolidation—converting 
short-term memories to long-term memories.
Spared Learning Abilities
H. M.’s memory deficit is striking and dramatic. How-
ever, when he and other patients with anterograde amne-
sia were studied more carefully, it became apparent that 
the amnesia did not represent a total failure in learning 
ability. When patients are appropriately trained and 
tested, we find that they are capable of three of the four 
major types of learning described earlier in this chapter: 
perceptual learning, stimulus-response learning, and mo-
tor learning. A review by Spiers, Maguire, and Burgess 
(2001) summarized 147 cases of anterograde amnesia 
that are consistent with the description that follows.
First, let us consider perceptual learning. Figure 13.25 
shows two sample items from a test of the ability to rec-
ognize broken drawings; note how the drawings are suc-
cessively more complete. (See Figure 13.25.) Subjects are 
first shown the least complete set (set I) of each of 
twenty different drawings. If they do not recognize a 
figure (and most people do not recognize set I), they 
are shown more complete sets until they identify it. One 
hour later, the subjects are tested again for retention, 
starting with set I. When H. M. was given this test and 
was retested an hour later, he showed considerable im-
provement (Milner, 1970). When he was retested four 
months later, he still showed this improvement. His per-
formance was not as good as that of normal control 
subjects, but he showed unmistakable evidence of long-
term retention. (You can try the broken drawing task 
and some other tasks that people with anterograde am-
nesia can successfully learn and (
 Simulate implicit 
memory tasks in MyPsychLab.)
Johnson, Kim, and Risse (1985) found that patients 
with anterograde amnesia could learn to recognize faces. 
The researchers played unfamiliar melodies from Ko-
rean songs to amnesic patients and found that when they 
were tested later, the patients preferred these melodies 
figure 13.24  A Simple Model of the Learning 
Process
Sensory
information
Short-term
memory
Long-term
memory
Rehearsal
Consolidation
figure 13.25  Examples of Broken Drawings
(Reprinted with permission of author and publisher from Gollin, E. S. 
Developmental studies of visual recognition of incomplete objects. Perceptual  
and Motor Skills, 1960, 11, 289–298.)
Set I
Set II
Set III
Set V
Set IV

462	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
seen them before. Although the amnesic patients in 
the study by Johnson, Kim, and Risse learned to like 
some of the Korean melodies better, they did not rec-
ognize that they had heard them before; nor did they 
remember having seen the pictures of the two young 
men. Although H. M. successfully acquired a classi-
cally conditioned eyeblink response, he did not re-
member the experimenter, the apparatus, or the head-
band he wore that held the device that delivered a puff 
of air to his eye.
In the experiment by Sidman, Stoddard, and Mohr, 
although H. M. learned to make the correct response 
(press a panel with a picture of a circle on it), he was 
unable to recall having done so. In fact, once H. M. had 
learned the task, the experimenters interrupted him, 
had him count his pennies (to distract him for a little 
while), and then asked him to say what he was supposed 
to do. He seemed puzzled by the question; he had abso-
lutely no idea. But when they turned on the stimuli 
again, he immediately made the correct response.  
Finally, although the amnesic subjects in Reber and 
Squire’s study obviously learned the sequence of button 
presses, they were completely unaware that there was, in 
fact, a sequence; they thought that the movement of the 
asterisk was random.
The distinction between what people with antero-
grade amnesia can and cannot learn is obviously im-
portant because it reflects the basic organization of the 
learning process. Clearly, there are at least two major 
categories of memories. Psychologists have given them 
several different names. For example, some investiga-
tors (Eichenbaum, Otto, and Cohen, 1992; Squire, 
1992) suggest that patients with anterograde amnesia 
are unable to form declarative memories, which have 
been defined as those that are “explicitly available to 
conscious recollection as facts, events, or specific stim-
uli” (Squire, Shimamura, and Amaral, 1989, p. 218). 
The term declarative obviously comes from declare, 
which means “to proclaim; to announce.” The term 
reflects the fact that patients with anterograde amnesia 
cannot talk about experiences that they have had since 
the time of their brain damage. Thus, according to 
Squire and his colleagues, declarative memory is mem-
ory of events and facts that we can think and talk 
about.
Declarative memories are not simply verbal memo-
ries. For example, think about some event in your life, 
such as your last birthday. Think about where you were, 
when the event occurred, what other people were pres-
ent, what events occurred, and so on. Although you 
could describe (“declare”) this episode in words, the 
memory itself would not be verbal. In fact, it would 
apparently randomly—in one of four locations. Their task 
was to press the one of four buttons that corresponded to 
the location of the asterisk. As soon as they did so, the as-
terisk moved to a new location, and they pressed the cor-
responding button. (See Figure 13.26.)
Although experimenters did not say so, the sequence 
of button presses specified by the moving asterisk was not 
random. For example, it might be DBCACBDCBA, a ten-
item sequence that is repeated continuously. With prac-
tice, subjects become faster and faster at this task. It is 
clear that their rate increases because they have learned 
the sequence, because if the sequence is changed, their 
performance decreases. The amnesic subjects learned 
this task just as well as normal subjects did.
A study by Cavaco et al. (2004) tested amnesic pa-
tients on a variety of tasks modeled on real-world activi-
ties, such as weaving, tracing figures, operating a joystick 
that controlled a video display, and pouring water into 
small jars. Both amnesic patients and normal subjects 
did poorly on these tasks at first, but their performance 
improved through practice. Thus, as you can see, pa-
tients with anterograde amnesia are capable of a variety 
of tasks that require perceptual learning, stimulus- 
response learning, and motor learning.
Declarative and Nondeclarative 
Memories
If amnesic patients can learn tasks like these, you 
might ask, why do we call them amnesic? The answer is 
this: Although the patients can learn to perform these 
tasks, they do not remember anything about having 
learned them. They do not remember the experiment-
ers, the room in which the training took place, the 
apparatus that was used, or any events that occurred 
during the training. Although H. M. learned to recog-
nize the broken drawings, he denied that he had ever 
figure 13.26  The Serial Reaction Time Task
In the procedure of the study by Reber and Squire (1998), 
subjects pressed the button in a sequence indicated by 
movement of the asterisk on the computer screen.
A
B
C
D
*
DBCACBDCBA
x declarative memory  Memory that can be verbally expressed, 
such as memory for events in a person’s past.

	
Relational Learning	
463
Bayley, Frascino, and Squire (2005) taught patient E. P. 
to point to a particular member of each of a series of 
eight pairs of objects. He eventually learned to do so, but 
he had no explicit memory of which objects were cor-
rect. When asked why he chose a particular object, he 
said, “It just seems that’s the one. It’s here (pointing to 
head) somehow or another and the hand goes for it. . . . 
I can’t say memory. I just feel this is the one. . . . It’s just 
jumping out at me. ‘I’m the one. I’m the one’ ” (Bayley, 
Frascino, and Squire, 2005, p. 551). Clearly, he learned 
a nondeclarative stimulus-response task without at the 
same time acquiring any declarative memories about 
what he had learned.
What brain regions are responsible for the acquisi-
tion of nondeclarative memories? As we saw earlier in 
this chapter, perceptual memories involve the sensory 
regions of the cerebral cortex. The basal ganglia appear 
to play an essential role in stimulus-response and motor 
learning. Several experiments have shown that people 
with diseases of the basal ganglia have deficits that can be 
attributed to difficulty in learning automatic responses. 
For example, Owen et al. (1992) found that patients with 
Parkinson’s disease were impaired on learning a visually 
cued instrumental conditioning task, and Willingham 
and Koroshetz (1993) found that patients with Hunting-
ton’s disease failed to learn a sequence of button presses. 
(Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s disease are both 
degenerative diseases of the basal ganglia.)
Table 13.1 lists the declarative and nondeclarative 
memory tasks that I have described so far. (See Table 13.1.)
probably be more like a video clip running in your head, 
one whose starting and stopping points—and fast for-
wards and rewinds—you could control.
The other category of memories, often called non-
declarative memories, includes instances of percep-
tual, stimulus-response, and motor learning that we are 
not necessarily conscious of. (Some psychologists refer 
to these two categories as explicit and implicit memories, 
respectively.) Nondeclarative memories appear to op-
erate automatically. They do not require deliberate at-
tempts on the part of the learner to memorize some-
thing. They do not seem to include facts or experiences; 
instead, they control behaviors. For example, think 
about when you learned to ride a bicycle. You did so 
quite consciously and developed declarative memories 
about your attempts: who helped you learn, where you 
rode, how you felt, how many times you fell, and so on. 
But you also formed nondeclarative stimulus-response 
and motor memories; you learned to ride. You learned to 
make automatic adjustments with your hands and body 
that kept your center of gravity above the wheels.
The acquisition of specific behaviors and skills is 
probably the most important form of implicit memory. 
Driving a car, turning the pages of a book, playing a 
musical instrument, dancing, throwing and catching a 
ball, sliding a chair backward as we get up from the din-
ner table—all of these skills involve coordination of 
movements with sensory information received from the 
environment and from our own moving body parts. We 
do not need to be able to describe these activities in 
order to perform them. We may not even be aware of all 
the movements we make while we are performing them.
Patient E. P. developed a profound anterograde am-
nesia when he was stricken with a case of viral encepha-
litis that destroyed much of his medial temporal lobe. 
x nondeclarative memory  Memory whose formation does not 
depend on the hippocampal formation; a collective term for 
perceptual, stimulus-response, and motor memory.
table 13.1  Examples of Declarative and Nondeclarative Memory Tasks
Declarative Memory Tasks
Remembering past experiences
Finding way in new environment
Nondeclarative Memory Tasks
Type of Learning
Learning to recognize broken drawings
Perceptual
Learning to recognize pictures and objects
Perceptual
Learning to recognizing faces
Perceptual (and stimulus-response?)
Learning to recognize melodies
Perceptual
Classical conditioning (eyeblink)
Stimulus-response
Instrumental conditioning (choose circle)
Stimulus-response
Learning sequence of button presses
Motor

464	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
Anatomy of Anterograde Amnesia
The phenomenon of anterograde amnesia—and its im-
plications for the nature of relational learning—has led 
investigators to study this phenomenon in laboratory 
animals. But before I review this research (which has 
provided some very interesting results), we should ex-
amine the brain damage that produces anterograde am-
nesia. One fact is clear: Damage to the hippocampus or 
to regions of the brain that supply its inputs and receive 
its outputs causes anterograde amnesia.
As we saw earlier in this chapter, the hippocampal 
formation consists of the dentate gyrus, the CA fields of 
the hippocampus itself, and the subiculum (and its sub-
regions). The most important input to the hippocampal 
formation is the entorhinal cortex; neurons there have 
axons that terminate in the dentate gyrus, CA3, and 
CA1. The entorhinal cortex receives its inputs from the 
amygdala, various regions of the limbic cortex, and all 
association regions of the neocortex, either directly or 
via two adjacent regions of limbic cortex: the perirhinal 
cortex and the parahippocampal cortex. Collectively, 
these three regions constitute the limbic cortex of the me-
dial temporal lobe. (See Figure 13.27.)
The outputs of the hippocampal system come pri-
marily from field CA1 and the subiculum. Most of these 
outputs are relayed back through the entorhinal, peri-
rhinal, and parahippocampal cortex to the same re-
gions of association cortex that provide inputs.
The hippocampal formation also receives input 
from subcortical regions via the fornix. These inputs 
select and modulate the functions of the hippocampal 
formation. The fornix carries dopaminergic axons from 
the ventral tegmental area, noradrenergic axons from 
the locus coeruleus, serotonergic axons from the raphe 
nuclei, and acetylcholinergic axons from the medial sep-
tum. The fornix also connects the hippocampal forma-
tion with the mammillary bodies, located in the poste-
rior hypothalamus. The most prominent brain damage 
seen in cases of Korsakoff’s syndrome—and presumably 
the cause of the anterograde amnesia—is degeneration 
of the mammillary bodies. (See Figure 13.28.)
The clearest evidence that damage restricted to the 
hippocampal formation produces anterograde amnesia 
came from a case studied by Zola-Morgan, Squire, and 
Amaral (1986). Patient R. B., a 52-year-old man with a 
history of heart trouble, sustained a cardiac arrest. Al-
though his heart was successfully restarted, the period of 
anoxia caused by the temporary halt in blood flow re-
sulted in brain damage. The primary symptom of this 
brain damage was permanent anterograde amnesia, 
which Zola-Morgan and his colleagues carefully docu-
mented. Five years after the onset of the amnesia, R. B. 
died of heart failure. His family gave permission for 
histological examination of his brain.
x perirhinal cortex  A region of limbic cortex adjacent to the 
hippocampal formation that, along with the parahippocampal 
cortex, relays information between the entorhinal cortex and other 
regions of the brain.
x parahippocampal cortex  A region of limbic cortex adjacent 
to the hippocampal formation that, along with the perirhinal 
cortex, relays information between the entorhinal cortex and other 
regions of the brain.
figure 13.27  Cortical Connections of the 
Hippocampal Formation
(a) A view of the base of a monkey’s brain. (b) Connections 
with the cerebral cortex.
Hippocampus
Amygdala
Limbic cortex
of the medial
temporal lobe
Parahippocampal
cortex
Entorhinal
cortex
Perirhinal
cortex
(a)
Hippocampus
Parahippocampal
cortex
Entorhinal
cortex
Perirhinal
cortex
(b)

	
Relational Learning	
465
seizures, anoxia, or hypoglycemia, cause glutamatergic 
terminal buttons to release glutamate at abnormally high 
levels. The effect of this glutamate release is to stimulate 
NMDA receptors, which permit the entry of calcium. 
Within a few minutes, excessive amounts of intracellular 
calcium begin to destroy the neurons. If animals are pre-
treated with drugs that block NMDA receptors, a period 
of anoxia is much less likely to produce brain damage 
(Rothman and Olney, 1987). CA1 neurons contain many 
NMDA receptors, so long-term potentiation can quickly 
become established there. This flexibility undoubtedly 
The investigators discovered that field CA1 of the 
hippocampal formation was gone; its neurons had com-
pletely degenerated. Subsequent studies reported other 
patients with anterograde amnesia caused by CA1 dam-
age (Victor and Agamanolis, 1990; Kartsounis, Rudge, 
and Stevens, 1995; Rempel-Clower et al., 1996). (See 
Figure 13.29.)
Why is field CA1 of the hippocampus so sensitive to 
anoxia? The answer appears to lie in the fact that this 
region is especially rich in NMDA receptors. For some 
reason, metabolic disturbances of various kinds, including 
figure 13.28  The Major Subcortical Connections of the Hippocampal 
Formation
A midsagittal view of a rat brain shows these connections.
Hippocampal
formation
Cingulate cortex
Acetylcholinergic
input
Dopaminergic
input
Noradrenergic
input
Serotonergic
input
Medial
septum
Amygdala
MMB
Ventral
tegmental
area
Locus
coeruleus
Raphe
nuclei
Thalamus
figure 13.29  Damage to Field CA1 Caused by Anoxia
(a) Section through a normal hippocampus. (b) Section through the hippocampus  
of patient G. D. The pyramidal cells of field CA1 (between the two arrowheads) have 
degenerated. (DG = dentate gyrus, gl, ml, pl = layers of the dentate gyrus, PaS = 
parasubiculum, PrS = presubiculum, S = subiculum.)
(From Rempel-Clower, N. L., Zola, S. M., Squire, L. R., and Amaral, D. G. Journal of Neuroscience, 1996, 16, 5233–5255. 
Reprinted with permission.)
(a)
(b)

466	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
The fact that retrograde amnesia extends back for a 
limited period of time suggests that a gradual process 
controlled by the hippocampal formation transforms 
memories into permanent storage. Before this transfor-
mation is complete, the hippocampal formation is re-
quired for the retrieval of these memories. Later, re-
trieval of these memories can be accomplished even if 
the hippocampal formation has been damaged. Bayley, 
Hopkins, and Squire (2006) asked people with antero-
grade amnesia and control subjects questions about 
news events that had occurred during the previous thirty 
years. They found a diminishing amount of retrograde 
amnesia in the brain-damaged patients for earlier and 
earlier events. In fact, recall of events more than fifteen 
years old was about as good as that of control subjects. 
However, memory of recent events was severely im-
paired. (See Figure 13.30.)
A functional imaging study by Smith and Squire 
(2009) found evidence that supports the differential 
role of the hippocampal formation in recent memo-
ries and older ones. They used the test employed by 
contributes to our ability to learn as quickly as we do. But 
it also renders these neurons particularly susceptible to 
damage by metabolic disturbances.
Role of the Hippocampal  
Formation in Consolidation  
of Declarative Memories
As we saw earlier in this chapter, the hippocampus is not 
the location of either short-term or long-term memo-
ries; after all, patients with damage to the hippocampal 
formation can remember events that happened before 
their brain became damaged, and their short-term 
memory is relatively normal. But the hippocampal for-
mation clearly plays a role in the process through which 
declarative memories are formed. Most researchers be-
lieve that the process works something like this: The 
hippocampus receives information about what is going 
on from sensory and motor association cortex and from 
some subcortical regions, such as the basal ganglia and 
amygdala. It processes this information and then, 
through its efferent connections with these regions, mod-
ifies the memories that are being consolidated there, 
linking them together in ways that will permit us to re-
member the relationships among the elements of the 
memories—for example, the order in which events oc-
curred, the context in which we perceived a particular 
item, and so on. Without the hippocampal formation we 
would be left with individual, isolated memories without 
the linkage that makes it possible to remember—and 
think about—episodes and contexts.
As we saw, anterograde amnesia is usually accompa-
nied by retrograde amnesia—the inability to remember 
events that occurred for a period of time before the 
brain damage occurred. The following example illus-
trates retrieval of early memories by a patient with a 
profound anterograde amnesia.
Patient E. P. made the following response when he was 
asked to describe an incident from the period before he 
attended school.
When I was 5 years old, we moved from Oakland to 
the country. I was very excited and looked forward 
to the change. I remember the truck that dad 
rented. It was hardly full because we didn’t have 
much furniture. When it was time to leave, mom got 
in the car and followed behind the truck. I rode in 
the truck with dad. (Reed and Squire, 1998, p. 3951)
Patient E. P. is also able to find his way around the 
neighborhood where he grew up but is completely lost 
in the neighborhood to which he moved after he 
became amnesic (Teng and Squire, 1999).
figure 13.30  Retrograde Amnesia in Patients 
with Hippocampal Damage
Hippocampal damage appears to disrupt the gradual 
storage of long-term memories. Memories older than 
approximately fifteen years are relatively intact even in 
people with retrograde amnesia, which suggest that the 
storage process requires between ten and fifteen years to 
be completed.
(Data from Bayley, Hopkins, and Squire, 2006.)
60
40
20
30
20
15
10
25
5
Time that event occurred
Controls
Hippocampal
lesions
Years before amnesia
After
amnesia
Percent correct
x episodic memory  Memory of a collection of perceptions of 
events organized in time and identified by a particular context.
x semantic memory  A memory of facts and general information.
x semantic dementia  Loss of semantic memories caused by 
progressive degeneration of the neocortex of the lateral temporal 
lobes.

	
Relational Learning	
467
fact. Semantic memories can be acquired gradually, over 
time. Episodic memories must be learned all at once.
Acquisition of both major categories of declarative 
memories—episodic and semantic—appears to require 
the participation of the hippocampus. Manns, Hopkins, 
and Squire (2003) found that five patients with damage 
limited to the hippocampal formation showed an antero-
grade amnesia for semantic as well as episodic information.
As we saw earlier in this chapter, perceptual memo-
ries appear to be located in the sensory association cortex, 
the regions where the perceptions take place. Presum-
ably, episodic memories, which consist of an integrated 
sequence of perceptual memories, are also located there. 
What about semantic memories—memories for factual 
information? Knowing that the sun is a star certainly in-
volves memories different from knowing what the sun 
looks like. Thus, semantic memories are not simply per-
ceptual memories. A degenerative neurological disorder 
known as semantic dementia suggests that the temporal 
cortex plays an important role in storing semantic infor-
mation. Semantic dementia is caused by degeneration of 
the neocortex of the anterolateral temporal lobe (Lam-
bon Ralph and Patterson, 2008). At least in the early 
stages of the degenerative process the hippocampal for-
mation and the rest of the medial temporal lobe are not 
affected. Murre, Graham, and Hodges (2001) describe 
the case of patient A. M., born in 1930 and studied by the 
investigators between 1994 and 1997.
Bayley, Hopkins, and Squire in order to evoke the  
retrieval of memories of various ages in a group of 
people with normal memories. Retrieval of the young-
est memories caused the greatest activation of the 
hippocampus, and retrieval of the oldest ones caused 
the least activation. The opposite effect was seen in the 
frontal cortex. These results are consistent with the 
suggestion that memories initially stored in the hip-
pocampus are gradually transferred to the frontal cor-
tex. (See Figure 13.31.)
Episodic and Semantic Memories
Evidence suggests that semantic and episodic memories 
are distinct forms of declarative memory. Episodic  
memories involve context; they include information 
about when and under what conditions a particular epi-
sode occurred and the order in which the events in the 
episode took place. Episodic memories are specific to a 
particular time and place because a given episode—by 
definition—occurs only once. Semantic memories in-
volve facts, but they do not include information about 
the context in which the facts were learned. In other 
words, semantic memories are less specific than episodic 
memories. For example, knowing that the sun is a star 
involves a less specific memory than being able to re-
member when, where, and from whom you learned this 
figure 13.31  The Role of the Hippocampus and 
Cerebral Cortex in Long-Term Memory Storage
Functional imaging revealed that the retrieval of the 
youngest long-term memories activated the hippocampus 
more than the cortex of the superior frontal gyrus, but 
retrieval of older and older memories activated the 
hippocampus less and the cortex more, until at 9 years, 
both regions were activated approximately equally.
(Data from Smith and Squire, 2009.)
–10
–5
–15
0
5
10
15
Right superior
frontal gyrus
Left hippocampus
3
6
9
12
15
20
30
Years prior to testing
Relative activation
A. M. was an active, intelligent man who had received an 
undergraduate degree in engineering and a master’s 
degree in science. He worked for an internationally 
renowned company, where he was responsible for manag-
ing over 450 employees. His neurological symptoms began 
with progressive difficulty in understanding the speech of 
others and finding appropriate words of his own. By the 
time Murre and his colleagues met A. M., his speech was 
fluent and grammatical but contained little meaning.
Examiner: Can you tell me about a time you were 
in hospital?
A. M.: Well one of the best places was in April 
last year here (ha ha) and then April, May, June, 
July, August, September and then October, and 
then April today.
Examiner: Can you remember April last year?
A. M.: April last year, that was the first time, and 
eh, on the Monday, for example, they were check-
ing all my whatsit, and that was the first time, when 
my brain was, eh, shown, you know, you know that 
bar of the brain (indicates left), not the, the other 
one was okay, but that was lousy, so they did that 

468	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
moving from his preamnesia home. Although spatial 
information need not be declared (we can demonstrate 
our topographical memories by successfully getting 
from place to place), people with anterograde amnesia 
are unable to consolidate information about the loca-
tion of rooms, corridors, buildings, roads, and other 
important items in their environment.
Bilateral medial temporal lobe lesions produce the 
most profound impairment in spatial memory, but sig-
nificant deficits can be produced by damage that is lim-
ited to the right hemisphere. For example, Luzzi et al. 
(2000) reported the case of a man with a lesion of the 
right parahippocampal gyrus who lost his ability to find 
his way around a new environment. The only way he 
could find his room was by counting doorways from the 
end of the hall or by seeing a red napkin that was lo-
cated on top of his bedside table.
Functional-imaging studies have shown that the 
right hippocampal formation becomes active when a 
person is remembering or performing a navigational 
task. For example, Maguire, Frackowiak, and Frith 
(1997) had London taxi drivers describe the routes they 
would take in driving from one location to another. 
Functional imaging that was performed during their de-
scription of the route showed activation of the right hip-
pocampal formation. London taxi drivers undergo ex-
tensive training to learn how to navigate efficiently in 
that city; in fact, this training takes about two years, and 
the drivers receive their license only after passing a rigor-
ous set of tests. We would expect that this topographical 
learning would produce some changes in various parts 
of their brains, including their hippocampal formation. 
In fact, Maguire et al. (2000) found that the volume of 
the posterior hippocampus of London taxi drivers was 
larger than that of control subjects. Furthermore, the 
longer an individual taxi driver had spent in this occupa-
tion, the larger was the volume of the right posterior 
hippocampus. As we will see later in this chapter, the 
dorsal hippocampus of rats (which corresponds to the 
posterior hippocampus of humans) contains place cells—
neurons that are directly involved in navigation in space.
Iaria et al. (2003) trained subjects to navigate 
through a computerized virtual-reality maze that permit-
ted them to learn the maze either through distant spa-
tial cues or through a series of turns. About half of the 
subjects spontaneously used spatial cues, and the other 
half spontaneously learned to make a sequence of spe-
cific turns at specific locations. Functional imaging 
showed that the hippocampus was activated in subjects 
who followed the spatial strategy and the caudate nucleus 
was activated in subjects who followed the response strat-
egy. In addition, a structural MRI study by Bohbot et al. 
(2007) found that people who tended to follow a spatial 
strategy in a virtual maze had a larger-than-average hip-
pocampus, and people who tended to follow a response 
strategy had a larger-than-average caudate nucleus. (You 
As you can see, the symptoms of semantic dementia 
are quite different from those of anterograde amnesia. 
Semantic information is lost, but episodic memory for re-
cent events can be spared. The hippocampal formation 
and the limbic cortex of the medial temporal lobe appear 
to be involved in the consolidation and retrieval of de-
clarative memories, both episodic and semantic, but the 
semantic memories themselves appear to be stored in the 
neocortex—in particular, in the neocortex of the antero-
lateral temporal lobe. Pobric, Jefferies, and Lambon Ralph 
(2007) found that transcranial magnetic stimulation of 
the left anterior temporal lobe, which disrupts the normal 
neural activity of this region, produced the symptoms of 
semantic dementia. The subjects had difficulty naming 
pictures of objects and understanding the meanings of 
words, but they had no trouble performing other, nonse-
mantic, tasks such as naming six-digit numbers and match-
ing large numbers according to their approximate size.
Spatial Memory
I mentioned earlier in this chapter that patient H. M. 
was unable to find his way around his environment after 
and then doing everything like that, like this and 
probably a bit better than I am just now (indicates 
scanning by moving his hands over his head). 
(Murre, Graham, and Hodges, 2001, p. 651)
Patient A. M.’s loss of semantic information had a 
profound effect on his everyday activities. He seemed 
not to understand functions of commonplace objects. 
For example, he held a closed umbrella horizontally 
over his head during a rainstorm and brought his wife a 
lawnmower when she had asked for a stepladder. He 
put sugar into a glass of wine and put yogurt on a raw 
defrosting salmon steak and ate it. He nevertheless 
showed some surprisingly complex behaviors. Because 
he could not be trusted to drive a car, his wife surrepti-
tiously removed the car keys from his key ring. He 
noticed their absence, and rather than complaining to 
her (presumably, he realized that would be fruitless), he 
surreptitiously removed the car keys from her key ring, 
went to a locksmith, and had a duplicate set made.
Although his semantic memory was severely dam-
aged, his episodic memory was surprisingly good. The 
investigators reported that even when his dementia had 
progressed to the point at which he was scoring at 
chance levels on a test of semantic information, he 
answered a phone call that was meant for his wife, who 
was out of the house. When she returned later, he 
remembered to tell her about the call.

	
Relational Learning	
469
situated just beneath the surface of the liquid. The ex-
perimenters put the rats into the water and let them 
swim until they encountered the hidden platform and 
climbed onto it. They released the rats from a new posi-
tion on each trial. After a few trials, normal rats learned 
to swim directly to the hidden platform from wherever 
they were released.
The Morris water maze requires relational learning; 
to navigate around the maze, the animals get their bear-
ings from the relative locations of stimuli located out-
side the maze—furniture, windows, doors, and so on. 
But the maze can be used for nonrelational, stimulus-
response learning too. If the animals are always released 
at the same place, they learn to head in a particular 
direction—say, toward a particular landmark they can 
see above the wall of the maze (Eichenbaum, Stewart, 
and Morris, 1990).
If rats with hippocampal lesions are always released 
from the same place, they learn this nonrelational, stimu-
lus-response task about as well as normal rats do. How-
ever, if they are released from a new position on each trial, 
they swim in what appears to be an aimless fashion until 
they finally encounter the platform. (See Figure 13.33.)
 Many different types of studies have confirmed the 
importance of the hippocampus in spatial learning. For 
example, Gagliardo, Ioalé, and Bingman (1999) found 
that hippocampal lesions disrupted navigation in hom-
ing pigeons. The lesions did not disrupt the birds’ abil-
ity to use the position of the sun at a particular time of 
day as a compass pointing toward their home roost. 
Instead, the lesions disrupted their ability to keep track 
of where they were when they got near the end of their 
flight—at a time when the birds begin to use familiar 
landmarks to determine where they are. In a review  
of the literature, Sherry, Jacobs, and Gaulin (1992)  
will recall that the caudate nucleus, part of the basal 
ganglia, plays a role in stimulus-response learning.) Fig-
ure 13.32 shows the relationship between performance 
on test trials that could be performed only by using a 
response strategy. As you can see, the larger a person’s 
caudate nucleus is (and the smaller a person’s hippo-
campus is), the fewer errors that person made. (See 
Figure 13.32.)
Relational Learning in  
Laboratory Animals
The discovery that hippocampal lesions produced an-
terograde amnesia in humans stimulated interest in the 
exact role that this structure plays in the learning pro-
cess. To pursue this interest, researchers have developed 
tasks that require relational learning, and laboratory 
animals with hippocampal lesions show memory deficits 
on such tasks, just as humans do.
Spatial Perception and Learning
As we saw, hippocampal lesions disrupt the ability to 
keep track of and remember spatial locations. For ex-
ample, H. M. never learned to find his way home when 
his parents moved after his surgery. Laboratory animals 
show similar problems in navigation. Morris et al. (1982) 
developed a task that other researchers have adopted as 
a standard test of rodents’ spatial abilities. The task re-
quires rats to find a particular location in space solely by 
means of visual cues external to the apparatus. The 
“maze” consists of a circular pool, 1.3 meters in diame-
ter, filled with a mixture of water and something to in-
crease the opacity of the water, such as powdered milk. 
The water mixture hides the location of a small platform, 
figure 13.32  Spatial and Response Strategies
The figure shows the relation between volume of gray matter of the hippocampus 
(right) and caudate nucleus (left) and errors made on test trials in a virtual maze that 
could only be performed by using a response strategy. Increased density of the 
caudate nucleus was associated with better performance, and increased density of the 
hippocampus was associated with poorer performance.
(From Bohbot, V. D., Lerch, J., Thorndycraft, B., et al. Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 10078–10083. Reprinted with 
permission.)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Caudate nucleus
–1
0
2
1
3
4
5
Errors
Relative volume
of gray matter
(a)
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Hippocampus
–1
0
2
1
3
4
5
Errors
Relative volume
of gray matter
(b)

470	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
the animals were in different locations. A particular neu-
ron might fire twenty times per second when the animal 
was in a particular location but only a few times per hour 
when the animal was located elsewhere. For obvious 
reasons these neurons were named place cells.
Figure 13.34 shows the path (gray lines) that a rat 
took while it explored a square enclosed environment. 
The red spots indicate the firing of a single hippocam-
pal place cell that, as you can see, fired primarily when 
the rat was in a particular location (Derdikman and 
Moser, 2010). (See Figure 13.34.)
reported that the hippocampal formation of species of 
birds and rodents that normally store seeds in hidden 
caches and later retrieve them (and that have excellent 
memories for spatial locations) is larger than that of 
animals without this ability.
Place Cells in the Hippocampal  
Formation
One of the most intriguing discoveries about the hip-
pocampal formation was made by O’Keefe and Dostro-
vsky (1971), who recorded the activity of individual py-
ramidal cells in the hippocampus as an animal moved 
around the environment. The experimenters found 
that some neurons fired at a high rate only when the rat 
was in a particular location. Different neurons had dif-
ferent spatial receptive fields; that is, they responded when 
figure 13.33  The Morris Water Maze
(a) Environmental cues present in the room provide information that permits the 
animals to orient themselves in space. (b) According to the task, start positions are 
variable or fixed. Normally, rats are released from a different position on each trial. If 
they are released from the same position every time, the rats can learn to find the 
hidden platform through stimulus-response learning. (c) The graphs show the 
performance of normal rats and rats with hippocampal lesions using variable or  
fixed start positions. Hippocampal lesions impair acquisition of the relational task.  
(d) Representative samples show the paths followed by normal rats and rats with 
hippocampal lesions on the relational task (variable start positions).
(Adapted from Eichenbaum, H. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2000, 1, 41–50. Data from Eichenbaum et al., 1990.)
(a)
Variable start positions
 (relational task)
Constant start position
(stimulus–response task)
(b)
Hidden
platform
Control
Lesion
Start
Finish
(d)
6
4
2
8
12
10
20
20
40
60
40
60
80
100
120
0
Mean latency (s)
Mean latency (s)
Variable start positions
 (relational task)
Constant start position
(stimulus–response task)
Trials
Trials
(c)
Lesion
Control
2–6
7–12 13–18
x place cell  A neuron that becomes active when the animal is in 
a particular location in the environment; most typically found in 
the hippocampal formation.

	
Relational Learning	
471
connected by a corridor. Each day, rats were placed in one 
of the chambers, and a cluster of electrodes in the ani-
mals’ brains recorded the activity of hippocampal place 
cells. Each rat was always placed in the same chamber each 
day. Some of the place cells showed similar patterns of 
activity in each of the chambers, and some showed differ-
ent patterns, which suggests that the hippocampus “real-
ized” that there were two different compartments but also 
“recognized” the similarities between them. Then, on the 
last day of the experiment, the investigators placed the rats 
in the other chamber of the apparatus. For example, if a 
rat was usually placed in the north chamber, it was placed 
in the south chamber. The firing pattern of the place cells 
in at least half of the rats indicated that the hippocampus 
“thought” it was in the usual chamber—the one to the 
north. However, once the rat left the chamber and en-
tered the corridor, it saw that it had to turn to the left to 
get to the other chamber and not to the right. The animal 
apparently realized its mistake, because for the rest of that 
session the neurons fired appropriately. They displayed 
the “north” pattern in the north chamber and the “south” 
pattern in the south chamber. (See Figure 13.35.)
When a rat is placed in a symmetrical chamber, 
where there are few cues to distinguish one part of the 
apparatus from another, the animal must keep track of 
its location from objects it sees (or hears) in the environ-
ment outside the maze. Changes in these items affect 
the firing of the rats’ place cells as well as their naviga-
tional ability. When experimenters move the stimuli as a 
group, maintaining their relative positions, the animals 
simply reorient their responses accordingly. However, 
when the experimenters interchange the stimuli so that 
they are arranged in a new order, the animals’ perfor-
mance (and the firing of their place cells) is disrupted. 
(Imagine how disoriented you might be if you entered a 
familiar room and found that the windows, doors, and 
furniture were in new positions.)
The fact that neurons in the hippocampal forma-
tion have spatial receptive fields does not mean that 
each neuron encodes a particular location. Instead, this 
information is undoubtedly represented by particular 
patterns of activity in circuits of large numbers of neu-
rons within the hippocampal formation. In rodents 
most hippocampal place cells are found in the dorsal 
hippocampus, which corresponds to the posterior hip-
pocampus in humans (Best, White, and Minai, 2001).
Evidence indicates that firing of hippocampal place 
cells appears to reflect the location where an animal 
“thinks” it is. Skaggs and McNaughton (1998) constructed 
an apparatus that contained two nearly identical chambers 
figure 13.34  Activity of a Hippocampal Place Cell
The gray lines show the path a rat took exploring a 
square enclosure. Red dots indicate the firing of a 
particular cell in the hippocampal formation. As you can 
see, this cell favored a particular location.
(From Derdikman, D., and Moser, E. I. Trends in Cognitive Science, 2010, 14,  
561–568. Reprinted with permission.)
figure 13.35  Apparatus Used by Skaggs  
and McNaughton (1998)
Place cells reflect the location where the animal “thinks” 
it is. Because the rat was normally placed in the north 
chamber, its hippocampal place cells responded as if it 
were there when it was placed in the south chamber one 
day. However, once it stuck its head into the corridor, it 
saw that the other chamber was located to its right, so it 
“realized” that it had just been in the south chamber. 
From then on, the pattern of firing of the hippocampal 
place cells accurately reflected the chamber in which the 
animal was located.
N
S
E
W

472	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
Head direction cells simply fire when the animal’s 
head is facing a particular direction with respect to the 
distant cues in a particular environment. As the animal 
turns, different cells will fire according to the direction 
in which the animal is looking. These cells do not reflect 
the animal’s location in the environment, only the di-
rection of its head. The information provided by all of 
these cells clearly reflects the animal’s location and head 
direction, and this information is available to other re-
gions of the brain. In fact, the information is available to 
investigators who implant multiarray microelectrodes in 
an animal’s brain. Once a computer has correlated the 
activity of these cells with an animal’s location as it ex-
plores an environment, it can use the activity of the 
neurons to draw a plot showing the animal’s move-
ments. As we will see, if the animal is sleeping or resting 
without moving, the computer can also draw a plot of 
the animal’s “imaginary” movements. (Perhaps the term 
The hippocampus appears to receive its spatial in-
formation from the parietal lobes by means of the ento-
rhinal cortex. Sato et al. (2006) found that neurons in 
the medial parietal cortex of monkeys showed activity 
associated with specific movements at specific locations 
as the animals navigated a virtual environment with a 
joystick. (Yes, monkeys, too, can learn to play computer 
games.) When the investigators suppressed activity in 
the parietal cortex by infusing muscimol, the animals 
became lost. Quirk et al. (1992) found that neurons in 
the entorhinal cortex have spatial receptive fields, al-
though these fields are not nearly as clear-cut as those of 
hippocampal pyramidal cells. Damage to the entorhinal 
cortex disrupts the spatial receptive fields of place cells 
in the hippocampus and impairs the animals’ ability to 
navigate in spatial tasks (Miller and Best, 1980).
Since the discovery of place cells, researchers have 
found that the hippocampal region also contains grid 
cells, head direction cells, and border cells, all found in the 
entorhinal cortex. Grid cells show a evenly spaced, crystal-
like coverage of the entire environment in which the 
animal is located (Derdikman and Moser, 2010). (See 
Figure 13.36.) Border cells fire when the animal is near 
one or more boundaries of the environment, such as the 
walls of box. Figure 13.37 shows the firing rate of a bor-
der cell in a square chamber and in the same chamber 
that was elongated in a horizontal or vertical direction 
(Solstad et al., 2008). As you can see, this cell continued 
to fire along the right-hand wall. (See Figure 13.37.)
figure 13.36  Activity of a Hippocampal Grid Cell
This cell fired when the rat entered one of a series of 
points arranged in a grid-like fashion in the enclosure.
(From Derdikman, D., and Moser, E. I. Trends in Cognitive Science, 2010, 14, 
561–568. Reprinted with permission.)
figure 13.37  Activity of a Hippocampal Border Cell
The firing rate of this cell is indicated by color; “hottest” 
colors represent the highest rate of firing. As you can see, 
the cell fired preferentially when the animal was located 
along right border of the rectangular enclosure, 
regardless of the dimensions of the enclosure.
(From Solstad, T., Boccara, C. N., Kropff, E., et al. Science, 2008, 322, 1865–1868. 
Reprinted with permission.)

	
Relational Learning	
473
transfer into the cerebral cortex. Studies with laboratory 
animals support this conclusion. For example, Maviel et 
al. (2004) trained mice in a Morris water maze and tested 
later for their memory of the location of the platform. Just 
before testing the animal’s performance, the investigators 
temporarily deactivated specific regions of the animals’ 
brains with intracerebral infusions of lidocaine, a local 
anesthetic. If the hippocampus was deactivated one day 
after training, the mice showed no memory of the task. 
However, if the hippocampus was deactivated thirty days 
after training, their performance was normal. In contrast, 
inactivation of several regions of the cerebral cortex im-
paired memory retrieval thirty days after training, but not 
one day after training. These findings indicate that the 
hippocampus is required for newly learned spatial infor-
mation but not for information learned thirty days previ-
ously. The findings also suggest that sometime during 
these thirty days the cerebral cortex takes on a role in re-
tention of this information. (See Figure 13.39.)
As we saw in Chapter 9, slow-wave sleep facilitates the 
consolidation of declarative memories in human subjects, 
while REM sleep facilitates the consolidation of nonde-
clarative memories. One advantage of recording place 
cells in the hippocampus while animals perform a spatial 
task is that the investigators can detect different patterns 
of activity in these cells that changes as the animals move 
through different environments or “think about” moving 
through them. Replays of movements through an envi-
ronment occur mostly during slow-wave sleep but also  
occur when an animal is sitting quietly in the maze or in 
its home cage. These replay episodes take place during 
sharp-wave-ripple complexes (SWRs), periods of intense, 
“virtual” movements makes fewer assumptions about an 
animal’s thoughts.) I will have more to say about this 
phenomenon later.
The activity of circuits of hippocampal place cells 
provide information about more than space. Wood et al. 
(2000) trained rats on a spatial alternation task in a  
T-maze. The task required the rats to enter the left and 
the right arms on alternate trials; when they did so, they 
received a piece of food in goal boxes located at the 
ends of the arms of the T. Corridors  connecting the 
goal boxes led back to the stem of the T-maze, where the 
next trial began. (See Figure 13.38.)
Wood and her colleagues recorded from field CA1 
pyramidal cells and, as expected, found that different 
cells fired when the rat was in different parts of the 
maze. However, two-thirds of the neurons fired differen-
tially in the stem of the T on left-turn and right-turn 
trials. In other words, the cells not only encoded the 
rat’s location in the maze but also signaled whether the rat 
was going to turn right or turn left after it got to the 
choice point. Thus, the activity of CA1 neurons encodes 
both the current location and the intended destination.
Role of the Hippocampal Formation  
in Memory Consolidation
We have already seen evidence from functional-imaging 
studies and the effects of brain damage in humans that 
indicates that the hippocampal formation plays a critical 
role in consolidation of relational memories and their 
figure 13.38  Apparatus Used by Wood et al.
The rats were trained to turn right and turn left at the end 
of the stem of the T-maze on alternate trials. The firing 
patterns of hippocampal place cells with spatial receptive 
fields in the stem of the maze were different on trials 
during which the animals turned left or right.
(Adapted from Wood, E. R., Dudchenko, P. A., Robitsek, R. J., and Eichenbaum, 
H. Neuron, 2000, 27, 623–633.)
Left-turn trial
Right-turn trial
Stem of
T-maze
Animal starts
here
figure 13.39  A Schematic Description of the 
Experiment by Maviel et al. (2004)
Train
1 day
30 days
or
Inject lidocaine 
in hippocampus
then test: No memory
Inject lidocaine 
in hippocampus
then test: Good memory
Train
1 day
30 days
or
Inject lidocaine 
in cortex
then test: Good memory
Inject lidocaine 
in cortex
then test: No memory
x sharp-wave-ripple complex (SWRs)  A period of intense, 
high-frequency oscillations that originate in hippocampal fields CA1 
and CA3 and propagate to the cerebral cortex; involved in replay 
of information from periods of waking during slow-wave sleep.

474	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
scalp. The current excites so many neurons in the brain 
that it produces a seizure. Presumably, the seizure erases 
short-term memories present at the time and thus pre-
vents consolidation of these memories.
Misanin, Miller, and Lewis (1968) found that long-
term memories, which are normally not affected by sei-
zures, were vulnerable to disruption by electroconvulsive 
shock (ECS) if a reminder of the original learning expe-
rience was first presented. The investigators found that 
ECS given right after a learning experience prevented 
consolidation, but ECS given a day later did not. Appar-
ently, the seizure given right after training disrupted the 
brain activity initiated by the training session and conse-
quently interfered with consolidation. The seizure given 
the next day had no effect, because the memory had al-
ready been consolidated. However, if animals were given 
a “reminder” stimulus one day after training, which pre-
sumably reactivated the memory, an ECS treatment ad-
ministered immediately afterward caused amnesia for 
the task when the animals were tested the following day. 
Reactivation of the memory made it susceptible to dis-
ruption. (See Figure 13.40.)
A study by Ben Mamou, Gamache, and Nader 
(2006) found that the process of reconsolidation re-
quires long-term potentiation. The investigators found 
that injection of anisomycin, a drug that prevents protein 
synthesis and thus interferes with memory consolidation, 
would disrupt memory of a previously learned avoid-
ance task only if a reminder stimulus was presented. 
However, if an injection of an NMDA receptor antagonist 
high-frequency oscillations that originate in hippocampal 
fields CA1 and CA3 and propagate to the cerebral cortex 
(Taxidis et al., 2011). During SWRs, hippocampal place 
cells play back the firing sequences that occurred while 
they were learning to run through a maze. Sequences can 
be replayed at speeds much faster than occur while the 
animal is actually running through the maze (Karlsson and 
Frank, 2009), and the sequences can run either backward 
or forward (Diba and Buzsáki, 2007). When an animal 
learns a new spatial task, the sequences replayed during 
SWRs reflect the new path that the animal has just learned 
to take (Dupret et al., 2010). Presumably, the replay of the 
patterns that occur during SWRs reflect memories of prior 
sequences of behavior and facilitate consolidation of these 
memories in the cerebral cortex. In fact, Peyrache et al. 
(2009) found that patterns of neural firing in the prefron-
tal cortex seen during training were seen again during the 
occurrence of SWRs while the animals were asleep.
Girardeau et al. (2009) obtained evidence that 
strongly supports this hypothesis that SWRs play a role 
in learning. Girardeau and her colleagues trained rats 
on a spatial memory task that takes several days to learn 
and that previous experiments have shown to depend 
on an intact hippocampus. After each day’s training ses-
sion, the investigators blocked the occurrence of SWRs 
by applying a single pulse of electrical stimulation to the 
ventral hippocampal commissure (a fiber bundle that 
connects the left and right hippocampal formation) 
each time an SWR occurred. Control animals received 
the same number of pulses of electrical stimulation but 
delivered when an SWR was not taking place. Prevent-
ing SWRs during this period in experimental animals 
interfered with their ability to learn the task.
Reconsolidation of Memories
What happens to memories of events as time goes on? 
Clearly, if we learn something new about a particular 
subject, our memories pertaining to that subject must 
somehow be modified. For example, as I mentioned 
earlier in this chapter, if a friend gets a new hairstyle or 
replaces glasses with contact lenses, our visual memory 
of that person will change accordingly. And if you learn 
more about something—for example, the layout of a 
previously unfamiliar neighborhood—you will acquire a 
larger and larger number of interconnected memories. 
These examples indicate that established memories can 
be altered or connected to newer memories. In recent 
years, researchers have been investigating a phenome-
non known as reconsolidation, which appears to involve 
modification of long-term memories.
As we will see in Chapter 16, one of the side effects 
of a procedure known as electroconvulsive therapy is a 
period of retrograde amnesia. The procedure, used to 
treat cases of severe depression, involves the application 
of electricity through electrodes placed on a person’s 
x reconsolidation  A process of consolidation of a memory that 
occurs subsequent to the original consolidation that can be 
triggered by a reminder of the original stimulus; thought to 
provide the means for modifying existing memories.
figure 13.40  A Schematic Description of the 
Experiment by Misanin, Miller, and Lewis (1968)
1 day
1 day
1 day
1 day
1 day
ECS
(no delay)
ECS
(no delay)
Train
Train
Train
Test: No memory
Test: No memory
Test: Good memory
ECS
Present
CS

	
Relational Learning	
475
was first infused into the amygdala (the region involved 
in learning this task), anisomycin had no effect on mem-
ory even if a reminder stimulus was presented. These 
results indicate that when synaptic plasticity is prevented, 
reconsolidation cannot occur. Thus, reconsolidation re-
quires long-term potentiation.
The studies by Misanin, Ben Mamou, and their col-
leagues involved stimulus-response learning. More re-
cent studies have found that long-term, well-consolidated 
relational memories are also susceptible to disruption. 
Presumably, the process of reconsolidation, which in-
volves neural events similar to those responsible for the 
original consolidation, makes it possible for established 
memories to be altered or attached to new information 
(Nader, 2003). (Remember when I mentioned that see-
ing your friend with a new hairstyle would alter your vi-
sual memory of that person?) Events that interfere with 
consolidation, such as disruption of protein synthesis, 
also interfere with reconsolidation and can even erase 
memories or at least make them inaccessible. For exam-
ple, Debiec et al. (2010) trained rats on two fear condi-
tioning tasks. They paired two different tones (CSa and 
CSb) with shocks delivered to two different parts of the 
body (USa and USb). After training, they randomly pre-
sented only one of the shocks (USa or USb) to each ani-
mal followed by an infusion of anisomycin or a placebo 
into the lateral amygdala. The next day, they tested the 
animals for retention of the conditioned responses. They 
found that the animals did not freeze when they pre-
sented the tone that had been paired with the US that 
had been presented just before the infusion of anisomy-
cin on the previous day. In other words, presenting one 
of the shocks “reopened” the CS-US memory for possi-
ble reconsolidation, which made the memory link frag-
ile. Blocking protein synthesis prevented the memory 
from going back to its original state. (See Figure 13.41.)
Role of Hippocampal Neurogenesis  
in Consolidation
As we saw in Chapter 3, new neurons can be produced 
in the hippocampus and the olfactory bulb of the adult 
brain. Stem cells located in the subgranular zone of the 
hippocampus divide and, in rats, give rise to five- to ten 
thousand granule cells each day, which migrate into the 
dentate gyrus and extend axons along the mossy fiber 
tract. The new neurons form connections with other 
neurons in the dentate gyrus and with neurons in field 
CA3 (Kempermann, Wiskott, and Gage, 2004; Shors, 
2009). (See Figure 13.42.)
Gould et al. (1999) trained rats on two versions of 
the Morris water maze: one requiring relational learn-
ing and one requiring only stimulus-response learning. 
Training on the relational task, which involves the hip-
pocampus, doubled the number of newborn neurons in 
the dentate gyrus. Training on the stimulus-response 
figure 13.41  Reconsolidation and Erasure  
of Memory
Rats were trained on two fear conditioning tasks, with two 
different tones (CSa and CSb) paired with shocks to two 
different parts of the body (USa and USb). One day later, 
one of the shocks was presented again, followed by an 
infusion of a protein synthesis inhibitor (anisomycin) into 
the lateral amygdala. One day after that, the animals 
were tested with both tones.
(Based on data from Debiec et al., 2010.)
Placebo
Anisomycin
CSa–USa
24 hours
24 hours
USb
CSa
CSb
CSb–USb
Intra-LA
CSa
CSb
Percent freezing
20
40
60
80
100
Percent freezing
20
40
60
80
100
(a)
CSa–USa
24 hours
24 hours
CSa
USa
CSb
CSb–USb
Intra-LA
CSa
CSb
(b)
Testing 24 hours after infusion
task, which does not involve the hippocampus, had no 
effect on neurogenesis. Most newborn neurons die 
within a few weeks, but if the animal learns something 
new, many of the neurons survive.
Evidence also suggests that new neurons in the 
dentate gyrus participate in learning. Tronel et al. 
(2010) found that maturation of dendritic trees of new-
born neurons and their integration into neural circuits 
of the hippocampus were accelerated when animals 

476	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
suggests that neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb are also 
involved in learning. Nissant et al. (2009) found that 
LTP could be induced in newborn olfactory bulb neu-
rons soon after they arrived in the olfactory bulb, but 
that this ability declined as the neurons grew older. 
Belnoue et al. (2011) found that newborn neurons in 
the olfactory bulb participated in olfactory learning.
We still do not know why neurogenesis takes place 
in only two parts of the brain. If it is useful there, why 
does it not occur elsewhere in the brain?
were trained on a spatial learning task. They also found 
that infusion of the NMDA blocker AP5 into the lateral 
ventricle did not affect the rate of neurogenesis, but it 
impaired learning and prevented the normal learning-
induced changes in neurogenesis from taking place. 
These results suggest that long-term potentiation plays 
a role in the incorporation of newborn neurons into 
circuits that store new memories.
Although less research has been done on the role 
of neurogenesis in the olfactory bulb, some evidence 
figure 13.42  Adult Neurogenesis
Stem cells in the subgranular zone of the hippocampus divide and give rise to granule 
cells, which migrate into the dentate gyrus.
Successive divisions
of stem cells
Developing neuron
Mature neuron, integrated into
circuitry of dendate gyrus
Section Summary
Relational Learning
Brain damage can produce anterograde amnesia, 
which consists of the inability to remember events 
that happen after the damage occurs, even though 
short-term memory (such as that needed to carry on a 
conversation) is largely intact. The patients also have 
a retrograde amnesia of several years’ duration but 
can remember information from the distant past. 
Anterograde amnesia can be caused by chronic alco-
holism (Korsakoff’s syndrome), which primarily damages 
the mammillary bodies, or it can be produced by 
bilateral damage to the medial temporal lobes.
The first explanation for anterograde amnesia was 
that the ability of the brain to consolidate short-term 
memories into long-term memories was damaged. 
However, ordinary perceptual learning, stimulus-
response learning, and motor learning do not appear to 
be impaired; people can learn to recognize new stimuli, 
they are capable of instrumental and classical condition-
ing, and they can acquire motor memories. But they are 
not capable of declarative learning—of describing 
events that happen to them. The amnesia has also 
been called a deficit in explicit memory. An even more 
descriptive term—one that applies to laboratory ani-
mals as well as to humans—is relational learning.
Although other structures may be involved, 
researchers are now confident that the primary cause 

	
Relational Learning	
477
of anterograde amnesia is damage to the hippocam-
pal formation or to its inputs and outputs. Temporary 
anoxia damages field CA1 because of the high con-
centration of NMDA receptors there and produces 
anterograde amnesia. The entorhinal cortex receives 
information from all regions of the association cortex, 
directly and through its connections with the perirhi-
nal and parahippocampal cortex that surrounds it. 
The outputs of the hippocampal formation are 
relayed through these same regions.
The hippocampal formation receives information 
from other regions of the brain, processes this infor-
mation, and then, through its efferent connections 
with these regions, modifies the memories that are 
being consolidated there, linking them together in 
ways that will permit us to remember the relationships 
among the elements of the memories.
If damage is limited to the hippocampus, the antero-
grade amnesia this destruction causes will be accompa-
nied by a retrograde amnesia of a few years. Damage 
that includes the limbic cortex of the medial temporal 
lobe as well as the hippocampal formation produces a 
much longer retrograde amnesia, but patients are able to 
recall episodic information from their childhood.
Damage to the neocortex of the anterolateral 
temporal lobes causes semantic dementia, loss of 
memories of factual information. These symptoms are 
mimicked by transcranial magnetic stimulation of this 
region. If the damage is limited to this region, people 
do not sustain an anterograde amnesia and retain the 
ability to recall episodic information.
The hippocampal formation—especially the right 
posterior hippocampus—is involved in spatial memory. 
Functional-imaging studies have shown that perfor-
mance of spatial tasks increase activity in this region.
Studies with laboratory animals indicate that dam-
age to the hippocampal formation disrupts the ability 
to learn spatial relations. For example, rats with hippo-
campal damage cannot learn the Morris water maze 
unless they are always released from the same place 
in the maze, which turns the task into one of stimulus-
response learning. The hippocampal formation con-
tains place cells—neurons that respond when the  
animal is in a particular location, which implies that the 
hippocampus contains neural networks that keep track 
of the relationships among stimuli in the environment 
that define the animal’s location. Neurons in the hip-
pocampal formation reflect where an animal “thinks” 
it is. Topographical information reaches field CA1 of 
hippocampus from the parietal lobe by means of the 
entorhinal cortex. Place cells encode more than space; 
they can include information about the response that 
the animal will perform next. Besides place cells, the 
hippocampal region also contains grid cells, head-
direction cells, and border cells, which play a role in 
spatial perception and memory.
Research has shown that the hippocampal forma-
tion plays a role in memory consolidation. Similarly, 
deactivation of the dorsal hippocampus prevents con-
solidation if it occurs one day after the animal learns a 
Morris water maze task but has no effect if it occurs 
thirty days later. In contrast, deactivation of regions of 
the cerebral cortex disrupts performance if it occurs 
thirty days after training but has no effect if it occurs one 
day after training. Slow-wave sleep facilitates the consol-
idation of declarative memories, and REM sleep facili-
tates the consolidation of nondeclarative memories. 
During slow-wave sleep, place cells in field CA1 of rats 
replay the sequence of activity that they showed while 
navigating in an environment in the laboratory. During 
sharp-wave ripple complexes, which occur during slow-
wave sleep but also during times of quiet waking, hip-
pocampal place cells fire in sequences that recapitulate 
their experience in spatial learning tasks and transfer 
information to the prefrontal cortex.
Memories can be altered or connected to newer 
memories—a process known as reconsolidation. 
When a long-term memory is reactivated by stimuli 
that provide a “reminder” of the original experience, 
the memories become susceptible to events that 
interfere with consolidation, such as electroconvulsive 
shock treatment, interference with long-term poten-
tiation, or the administration of a drug that inhibits 
protein synthesis. The period of susceptibility is actu-
ally a period during which memories can be modified 
by further experience.
The dentate gyrus is one of the two places in the 
brain where adult stem cells can divide and give rise 
to new neurons. These neurons establish connections 
with neurons in field CA3 and appear to participate in 
learning. Evidence indicates that these neurons play a 
role in the formation of new memories.
 Thought Question
Although we can live only in the present, our memo-
ries are an important aspect of our identities. What 
do you think it would be like to have a memory deficit 
like H. M.’s? Imagine having no recollection of over 
thirty years of experiences. Imagine being surprised 
every time you see yourself in the mirror and discover 
someone who is several decades older than you 
believe yourself to be.

478	
Chapter 13  Learning and Memory
1.  Describe the four basic forms of learning: perceptual 
learning, stimulus-response learning, motor learning, 
and relational learning.
2.  Discuss research on the induction of long-term poten-
tiation and the role of NMDA receptors.
3.  Discuss long-term depression and other forms of 
long-term potentiation.
4.  Describe research on the role of the visual cortex in 
visual perceptual learning.
5.  Describe research on perceptual short-term memory.
6.  Discuss the physiology of the classically conditioned 
emotional response to aversive stimuli.
7.  Describe the role of the basal ganglia in instrumental 
conditioning.
8.  Discuss how the reinforcement system may detect rein-
forcing stimuli and strengthen synaptic connections.
9.  Describe the nature of human anterograde amnesia 
and the type of brain damage that causes it.
10.  Discuss the distinction between declarative memo-
ries and nondeclarative memories and their relation 
to anterograde amnesia.
11.  Review the connections of the hippocampal for-
mation with the rest of the brain and describe 
evidence that damage to the hippocampal forma-
tion and related structures causes anterograde 
amnesia.
12.  Discuss the role of the hippocampal formation in 
episodic, semantic, and spatial memories and the 
role of the prefrontal cortex in evaluating the accu-
racy of memories.
13.  Describe the role of the hippocampus in relational 
learning including spatial learning and the role of 
hippocampal place cells.
14.  Outline a possible explanation for the role of the 
hippocampal formation in learning and memory.
Review Questions
Study and Review on MyPsychLab
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Learning and Memory
There are many types of learning. Many brain regions are involved in more than 
one type of learning. However, the neural circuits underlying each appear distinct. 
The Learning and Memory module of the virtual brain will help you understand 
the brain regions involved in learning. It will also allow you to visualize how the cir-
cuits underlying each category of learning are similar and how they are different.

Human Communication
Outline
14
 Speech Production  
and Comprehension:  
Brain Mechanisms
Lateralization
Speech Production
Speech Comprehension
Aphasia in Deaf People
Prosody: Rhythm, Tone, and 
Emphasis in Speech
Recognition of People’s Voices
Stuttering
Section Summary
 Disorders of Reading  
and Writing
Relation to Aphasia
Pure Alexia
Toward an Understanding  
of Reading
Developmental Dyslexias
Toward an Understanding  
of Writing
Section Summary
chapter

V
erbal behaviors constitute one of the most impor-
tant classes of human social behavior. Our cul-
tural evolution has been possible because we can 
talk and listen, write and read. Language enables our 
discoveries to be cumulative; knowledge gained by one 
generation can be passed on to the next.
The basic function of verbal communication is seen 
in its effects on other people. When we talk to someone, 
we almost always expect our speech to induce the per-
son to engage in some sort of behavior. Sometimes, the 
behavior is of obvious advantage to us, as when we ask 
for an object or for help in performing a task. At other 
times we are simply asking for a social exchange: some 
attention and perhaps some conversation. Even “idle” 
conversation is not idle, because it causes another per-
son to look at us and say something in return.
Speech Production  
and Comprehension:  
Brain Mechanisms
Our knowledge of the physiology of language has been 
obtained primarily by observing the effects of brain  
lesions on people’s verbal behavior. Although investiga-
tors have studied people who have undergone brain 
surgery or who have sustained head injuries, brain tu-
mors, or infections, most of the observations have been 
made on people who have suffered strokes, or cerebro-
vascular accidents. The most common type of cerebro-
vascular accident is caused by obstruction of a blood 
vessel. The interruption in blood flow deprives a region 
of the brain of its blood supply, which causes cells in 
that region to die.
Another source of information about the physiol-
ogy of language comes from studies using functional-
imaging devices. Researchers have used these devices to 
gather information about language processes from nor-
mal subjects. In general, these studies have confirmed 
or complemented what we have learned by studying 
patients with brain damage.
The most important category of speech disorders 
is aphasia, a primary disturbance in the comprehen-
sion or production of speech, caused by brain dam-
age. Not all speech disturbances are aphasias; to re-
ceive a diagnosis of aphasia, a patient must have 
difficulty comprehending, repeating, or producing 
meaningful speech, and this difficulty must not be 
caused by simple sensory or motor deficits or by lack 
of motivation. For example, inability to speak caused 
by deafness or paralysis of the speech muscles is not 
considered to be aphasia. In addition, the deficit must 
be relatively isolated; that is, the patient must appear 
to be aware of what is happening in his or her environ-
ment and to recognize that others are attempting to 
communicate.
Lateralization
Verbal behavior is a lateralized function; most language 
disturbances occur after damage to the left side of the 
brain, whether people are left-handed or right-handed. 
While driving her car to visit some friends, R. F., a 39-year-
old woman, was broadsided by an intoxicated driver who 
had ignored (or was too drunk to see) a stop sign. The left 
side of R. F.’s head was fractured, and the bone fragments 
caused considerable damage to her brain. A neurosurgeon 
repaired the damage as best he could, but R. F. remained 
in a coma for several weeks. By the time my colleagues and 
I met her, she had shown considerable recovery. However, 
she had difficulty remembering the names of even the most 
common objects, and she could no longer read.
Although R. F. could not read, she could match words 
with pictures, which indicated that she could still perceive 
words. This fact was made especially apparent one day when 
she was trying (without success) to read some words that I 
had typed. Suddenly, she said, “Hey! You spelled this one 
wrong.” I looked at the word and realized that she was right; 
I had. But although she saw that the word was misspelled, 
she still could not say what it was, even when she tried very 
hard to sound it out. That evening I made up a list of eighty 
pairs of words, one spelled correctly and the other incor-
rectly. The next day I gave her a pencil and asked her to 
cross out the misspelled words. She was able to go through 
the list quickly and easily, correctly identifying 95 percent of 
the misspelled words. She was able to read only five of them.
x cerebrovascular accident  A “stroke”; brain damage caused 
by occlusion or rupture of a blood vessel in the brain.
x aphasia  Difficulty in producing or comprehending speech not 
produced by deafness or a simple motor deficit; caused by brain 
damage.

	
Speech Production and Comprehension: Brain Mechanisms  	
481
responsible for perceptions and memories; after all, 
when we make up a story, we must base it on knowledge 
that we originally acquired through perception and 
have retained in our memory.
Given that a person has something to say, actually 
doing so requires some additional brain functions. As 
we shall see in this section, the conversion of percep-
tions, memories, and thoughts into speech makes use of 
neural mechanisms located in the frontal lobes.
Damage to a region of the inferior left frontal lobe 
(Broca’s area) disrupts the ability to speak: It causes 
Broca’s aphasia. This disorder is characterized by slow, 
laborious, and nonfluent speech. When trying to talk 
with patients who have Broca’s aphasia, most people 
find it hard to resist supplying the words the patients are 
obviously groping for. But although they often mispro-
nounce words, the ones the patients manage to come 
out with are usually meaningful. The posterior part of 
the cerebral hemispheres has something to say, but the 
damage to the frontal lobe makes it difficult for the  
patients to express these thoughts.
People with Broca’s aphasia find it easier to say 
some types of words than others. They have great diffi-
culty saying the little words with grammatical meaning, 
such as a, the, some, in, or about. These words are called 
function words, because they have important grammati-
cal functions. The words that they do manage to say are 
almost entirely content words—words that convey mean-
ing, including nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs, 
such as apple, house, throw, or heavy. Here is a sample of 
speech from a man with Broca’s aphasia, who is trying to 
describe the scene shown in Figure 14.1. As you will see, 
his words are meaningful, but what he says is certainly 
not grammatical. The dots indicate long pauses:
kid . . . . kk . . . can . . . candy . . . cookie . . . 
candy . . . well I don’t know but it’s writ . . . easy 
does it . . . slam . . . early . . . fall . . . men . . . 
many no . . . girl. Dishes . . . soap . . . soap . . . 
water . . . water . . . falling pah that’s all . . .  
dish . . . that’s all.
Cookies . . . can . . . candy . . . cookies cookies . . . 
he . . . down . . . That’s all. Girl . . . slipping 
water . . . water . . . and it hurts . . . much to  
do . . . Her . . . clean up . . . Dishes . . . up  
there . . . I think that’s doing it. (Obler and 
Gjerlow, 1999, p. 41)
Using an ultrasonic procedure to measure changes in 
cerebral blood flow while people performed a verbal 
task, Knecht et al. (2000) assessed the relationship be-
tween handedness and lateralization of speech mecha-
nisms in people without any known brain damage. They 
found that right-hemisphere speech dominance was seen 
in only 4 percent of right-handed people, in 15 percent 
of ambidextrous people, and in 27 percent of left-handed 
people. The left hemisphere of approximately 90 per-
cent of the total population is dominant for speech.
Although the circuits that are primarily involved in 
speech comprehension and production are located in 
one hemisphere (almost always, the left hemisphere), it 
would be a mistake to conclude that the other hemi-
sphere plays no role in speech. When we hear and under-
stand words and when we talk about or think about our 
own perceptions or memories, we are using neural cir-
cuits besides those directly involved in speech. Thus, 
these circuits, too, play a role in verbal behavior. For ex-
ample, damage to the right hemisphere makes it difficult 
for a person to read maps, perceive spatial relations, and 
recognize complex geometrical forms. People with such 
damage also have trouble talking about things like maps 
and complex geometrical forms or understanding what 
other people have to say about them. The right hemi-
sphere also appears to be involved in organizing a narra-
tive—selecting and assembling the elements of what we 
want to say (Gardner et al., 1983). As we saw in Chapter 
11, the right hemisphere is involved in the expression 
and recognition of emotion in the tone of voice. And as 
we shall see in this chapter, it is also involved in control 
of prosody—the normal rhythm and stress found in 
speech. Therefore, both hemispheres of the brain have a 
contribution to make to our language abilities.
Speech Production
Being able to talk—that is, to produce meaningful 
speech—requires several abilities. First, the person must 
have something to talk about. Let us consider what this 
means. We can talk about something that is currently 
happening or something that happened in the past. In 
the first case we are talking about our perceptions: 
things we are seeing, hearing, feeling, smelling, and so 
on. In the second case we are talking about our memo-
ries of what happened in the past. Both perceptions of 
current events and memories of events that occurred in 
the past involve brain mechanisms in the posterior part 
of the cerebral hemispheres (the occipital, temporal, 
and parietal lobes). Thus, this region is largely respon-
sible for our having something to say.
Of course, we can also talk about something that did 
not happen. That is, we can use our imagination to make 
up a story (or to tell a lie). We know very little about the 
neural mechanisms that are responsible for imagina-
tion, but it seems likely that they involve the mechanisms 
x Broca’s aphasia  A form of aphasia characterized by agramma-
tism, anomia, and extreme difficulty in speech articulation.
x function word  A preposition, article, or other word that 
conveys little of the meaning of a sentence but is important in 
specifying its grammatical structure.
x content word  A noun, verb, adjective, or adverb that conveys 
meaning.

482	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
head of the caudate nucleus—can also produce a Broca-
like aphasia (Damasio, Eslinger, and Adams, 1984).
Watkins et al. (2002a, 2002b) studied three genera-
tions of the KE family, half of whose members are affected 
by a severe speech and language disorder caused by the 
mutation of a single gene found on chromosome 7. The 
primary deficit appears to involve the ability to perform 
the sequential movements necessary for speech, but the 
affected people also have difficulty repeating sounds 
they hear and forming the past tense of verbs. The mu-
tation causes abnormal development of the caudate 
nucleus and the left inferior frontal cortex, including 
Broca’s area.
What do the neural circuits in and around Broca’s 
area do? Wernicke (1874) suggested that Broca’s area 
contains motor memories—in particular, memories of the 
sequences of muscular movements that are needed to articulate 
words. Talking involves rapid movements of the tongue, 
lips, and jaw, and these movements must be coordinated 
with each other and with those of the vocal cords; thus, 
talking requires some very sophisticated motor control 
mechanisms. Obviously, circuits of neurons somewhere 
in our brain will, when properly activated, cause these 
sequences of movements to be executed. Because dam-
age to the inferior caudal left frontal lobe (including 
Broca’s area) disrupts the ability to articulate words, this 
region is a likely candidate for the location of these 
“programs.” The fact that this region is directly con-
nected to the part of the primary motor cortex that 
controls the muscles used for speech certainly supports 
this conclusion.
But the speech functions of the left frontal lobe in-
clude more than programming the movements used to 
speak. Broca’s aphasia is much more than a deficit in pro-
nouncing words. In general, three major speech deficits 
are produced by lesions in and around Broca’s area: agram-
matism, anomia, and articulation difficulties. Although most 
patients with Broca’s aphasia will have all of these deficits 
to some degree, their severity can vary considerably from 
person to person—presumably, because their brain  
lesions differ. To hear the voice of an agrammatic patient  
and one with articulation difficulties, 
Simulate 
voices of aphasia: Broca’s aphasia on MyPsychLab.
Agrammatism refers to a patient’s difficulty in using 
grammatical constructions. This disorder can appear all 
by itself, without any difficulty in pronouncing words 
(Nadeau, 1988). As we saw, people with Broca’s aphasia 
People with Broca’s aphasia can comprehend speech 
much better than they can produce it. In fact, some ob-
servers have said that their comprehension is unim-
paired, but as we will see, this is not quite true. Broca 
(1861) suggested that this form of aphasia is produced 
by a lesion of the frontal association cortex, just anterior 
to the face region of the primary motor cortex. Subse-
quent research proved him to be essentially correct, and 
we now call the region Broca’s area. (See Figure 14.2.)
Lesions that produce Broca’s aphasia are certainly 
centered in the vicinity of Broca’s area. However, dam-
age that is restricted to the cortex of Broca’s area does 
not appear to produce Broca’s aphasia; the damage 
must extend to surrounding regions of the frontal lobe 
and to the underlying subcortical white matter  
(H. Damasio, 1989; Naeser et al., 1989). In addition, there 
is evidence that lesions of the basal ganglia—especially the 
figure 14.1  Assessment of Aphasia
The drawing of the kitchen story is part of the Boston 
Diagnostic Aphasia Test.
figure 14.2  Speech Areas
The figure shows the location of the primary speech areas 
of the brain. (Wernicke’s area will be described later.)
Broca’s
area
Wernicke’s area
x Broca’s area  A region of frontal cortex, located just rostral to 
the base of the left primary motor cortex, that is necessary for 
normal speech production.
x agrammatism  One of the usual symptoms of Broca’s aphasia; 
a difficulty in comprehending or properly employing grammatical 
devices, such as verb endings and word order.

	
Speech Production and Comprehension: Brain Mechanisms  	
483
Functional-imaging studies by Opitz and Friederici 
(2003, 2007) found that Broca’s area was activated when 
people were taught an artificial grammar, which sup-
ports the conclusion that this region is involved in learning 
grammatical rules—especially complex ones. Sakai et al. 
(2002) had subjects read sentences that were correct, 
grammatically incorrect, or semantically incorrect (that 
is, did not make sense). While the subjects were judging 
the grammatical or semantic correctness of the sen-
tences, the investigators applied transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (TMS) to Broca’s area. The parameters of 
stimulation were chosen to activate Broca’s area, not 
disrupt its functioning. The investigators found that the 
stimulation facilitated grammatical judgments but not 
semantic judgments.
The second major speech deficit seen in Broca’s 
aphasia is anomia (“without name”). Anomia refers to a 
word-finding difficulty; because all aphasics omit words 
or use inappropriate ones, anomia is actually a primary 
symptom of all forms of aphasia. However, because the 
speech of Broca’s aphasics lacks fluency, their anomia is 
especially apparent; their facial expression and frequent 
use of sounds such as “uh” make it obvious that they are 
groping for the correct words.
The third major characteristic of Broca’s aphasia is 
difficulty with articulation. Patients mispronounce words, 
rarely use function words. In addition, they rarely use 
grammatical markers such as -ed or auxiliaries such as 
have (as in I have gone). For some reason they do often 
use -ing, perhaps because this ending converts a verb 
into a noun. A study by Saffran, Schwartz, and Marin 
(1980) illustrates this difficulty. The following quota-
tions are from agrammatic patients attempting to de-
scribe pictures:
Picture of a boy being hit in the head by a baseball
The boy is catch . . . the boy is hitch . . . the boy 
is hit the ball. (Saffran, Schwartz, and Marin, 
1980, p. 229)
Picture of a girl giving flowers to her teacher
Girl . . . wants to . . . flowers . . . flowers and 
wants to . . . . The woman . . . wants to . . . . The 
girl wants to . . . the flowers and the woman. 
(Saffran, Schwartz, and Marin, 1980, p. 234)
So far, I have described Broca’s aphasia as a disorder 
in speech production. In an ordinary conversation, Broca’s 
aphasics seem to understand everything that is said to 
them. They appear to be irritated and annoyed by their 
inability to express their thoughts well, and they often 
make gestures to supplement their scanty speech. The 
striking disparity between their speech and their com-
prehension often leads people to assume that their com-
prehension is normal. But it is not. Schwartz, Saffran, 
and Marin (1980) showed Broca’s aphasics pairs of pic-
tures in which agents and objects of the action were re-
versed: for example, a horse kicking a cow and a cow 
kicking a horse, a truck pulling a car and a car pulling a 
truck, and a dancer applauding a clown and a clown ap-
plauding a dancer. As they showed each pair of pictures, 
they read the subject a sentence, for example, The horse 
kicks the cow. The subjects’ task was to point to the ap-
propriate picture, indicating whether they understood the 
grammatical construction of the sentence. (See Figure 14.3.) 
They performed very poorly.
The correct picture in the study by Schwartz and 
her colleagues was specified by a particular aspect of 
grammar: word order. The agrammatism that accom-
panies Broca’s aphasia appears to disrupt patients’ 
ability to use grammatical information, including 
word order, to decode the meaning of a sentence. 
Thus, their deficit in comprehension parallels their 
deficit in production. If they heard a sentence such as 
The man swats the mosquito, they would understand that 
it concerns a man and a mosquito and the action of 
swatting. They would have no trouble figuring out 
who is doing what to whom. But a sentence such as The 
horse kicks the cow does not provide any extra cues; if 
the grammar is not understood, neither is the mean-
ing of the sentence.
figure 14.3  Assessment of Grammatical Ability
This is an example of the stimuli used in the experiment 
by Schwartz, Saffran, and Marin (1980).
x anomia  Difficulty in finding (remembering) the appropriate 
word to describe an object, action, or attribute; one of the 
symptoms of aphasia.

484	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
discovered the apparent role of this region by plotting 
the lesions of patients with and without apraxia of speech 
who had strokes that damaged the same general area of 
the brain. (Apraxia of speech is an impairment in the 
ability to program movements of the tongue, lips, and 
throat that are required to produce the proper sequence 
of speech sounds.) Figure 14.5(a) shows the overlap of 
the lesions of twenty-five patients with apraxia of speech. 
As you can see, a region of 100 percent overlap, shown in 
yellow, falls on the left precentral gyrus of the insula. 
(See Figure 14.5a.) In contrast, none of the lesions of 
nineteen patients who did not show apraxia of speech 
included damage to this region. (See Figure 14.5b.)
At least two functional-imaging studies support 
Dronkers’s conclusion. Kuriki, Mori, and Hirata (1999) 
and Wise et al. (1999) found that pronunciation of 
words caused activation of the left anterior insula. How-
ever, other studies suggest that Broca’s area is also in-
volved in articulation (Nestor et al., 2003; Hillis et al., 
2004). Stewart et al. (2001) used TMS to interfere with 
the activity of neurons in Broca’s area or the adjacent 
area of primary motor cortex, which controls the mus-
cles used for speech. The subjects reported that stimula-
tion of the motor cortex made them feel as though they 
had lost control of their facial muscles. In contrast, stim-
ulation of Broca’s area made them feel as if they were 
unable to “get the word out.”
Most of us have, at one time or other, had difficulty 
getting a word out even though the word was one that 
often altering the sequence of sounds. For example, 
lipstick might be pronounced “likstip.” People with Bro-
ca’s aphasia recognize that their pronunciation is erro-
neous, and they usually try to correct it.
These three deficits are seen in various combina-
tions in different patients, depending on the exact loca-
tion of the lesion and, to a certain extent, on their stage 
of recovery. We can think of these deficits as constitut-
ing a hierarchy. On the lowest, most elementary level is 
control of the sequence of movements of the muscles of 
speech; damage to this ability leads to articulation diffi-
culties. The next higher level is selection of the particu-
lar “programs” for individual words; damage to this abil-
ity leads to anomia. Finally, the highest level is selection 
of grammatical structure, including word order, use of 
function words, and word endings; damage to this abil-
ity leads to agrammatism.
We might expect that the direct control of articula-
tion would involve the face area of the primary motor 
cortex and portions of the basal ganglia, while the selec-
tion of words, word order, and grammatical markers 
would involve Broca’s area and adjacent regions of the 
frontal association cortex. Some studies indicate that dif-
ferent categories of symptoms of Broca’s aphasia do in-
deed involve different brain regions. Dronkers and her 
colleagues (Dronkers, 1996; Baldo et al., 2011) have 
identified a critical location for control of speech articu-
lation: the left precentral gyrus of the insula. The insular 
cortex is located on the lateral wall of the cerebral hemi-
sphere behind the anterior temporal lobe. Normally, this 
region is hidden and can be seen only when the tempo-
ral lobe is dissected away. (See Figure 14.4.) Dronkers 
x apraxia of speech  Impairment in the ability to program 
movements of the tongue, lips, and throat required to produce 
the proper sequence of speech sounds.
figure 14.4  The Insular Cortex
The cortex is normally hidden behind the rostral temporal 
lobe.
Frontal lobe
pulled up
Insular cortex
Temporal lobe
pulled down
Heschl’s
gyrus
figure 14.5  Involvement of the Insular Cortex in 
Speech Articulation
Evidence for involvement is shown by the percentage 
overlap in the lesions of twenty-five patients (a) with 
apraxia of speech and (b) without apraxia of speech. The 
only region common to all lesions that produced apraxia 
of speech was the precentral gyrus of the insular cortex.
(From Dronkers, N. F. Nature, 1996, 384, 159–161. Reprinted with permission.)
100
80–99
60–79
40–59
20–39
1–19
0
(a)
(b)
Percent overlap

	
Speech Production and Comprehension: Brain Mechanisms  	
485
responses. That is, we cannot assume that they do not 
understand what other people say to them just because 
they do not give the proper answer. A commonly used 
test of comprehension assesses their ability to under-
stand questions by pointing to objects on a table in front 
of them. For example, they are asked to “Point to the 
one with ink.” If they point to an object other than the 
pen, they have not understood the request. When tested 
this way, people with severe Wernicke’s aphasia do in-
deed show poor comprehension.
A remarkable fact about people with Wernicke’s 
aphasia is that they often seem unaware of their deficit. 
That is, they do not appear to recognize that their 
speech is faulty, nor do they recognize that they cannot 
understand the speech of others. They do not look puz-
zled when someone tells them something, even though 
they obviously cannot understand what they hear. Per-
haps their comprehension deficit prevents them from 
realizing that what they say and hear makes no sense. 
They still follow social conventions, taking turns in con-
versation with the examiner, even though they do not 
understand what the examiner says and what they say in 
return makes little sense. They remain sensitive to the 
other person’s facial expression and tone of voice and 
begin talking when he or she asks a question and pauses 
for an answer. One patient with Wernicke’s aphasia 
made the following responses when asked to name ten 
common objects:
toothbrush → “stoktery”
cigarette → “cigarette”
pen → “tankt”
knife → “nike”
fork → “fahk”
quarter → “minkt”
pen → “spentee”
matches → “senktr”
key → “seek”
comb → “sahk”
He acted sure of himself and gave no indication 
that he recognized that most of his responses were 
meaningless. The responses that he made were not sim-
ply new words that he had invented; he was asked several 
times to name the objects and gave different responses 
each time (except for cigarette, which he always named 
correctly). To hear the speech of people with Wernicke’s 
aphasia, 
Simulate voices of aphasia: Wernicke’s 
aphasia on MyPsychLab.
we knew well. This phenomenon has been called the 
“tip of the tongue phenomenon,” or TOT. Shafto et al. 
(2007) found that people who often had difficulty think-
ing of the correct word to say but were sure that they 
knew it (that is, often had a TOT experience) showed 
loss of gray matter in the left insular cortex. These find-
ings, too, support the role of this region in articulation.
Speech Comprehension
Comprehension of speech obviously begins in the au-
ditory system, which detects and analyzes sounds. But 
recognizing words is one thing; comprehending them—
understanding their meaning—is another. Recognizing 
a spoken word is a complex perceptual task that relies 
on memories of sequences of sounds. This task appears 
to be accomplished by neural circuits in the superior 
temporal gyrus of the left hemisphere, a region that has 
come to be known as Wernicke’s area. (Refer back to 
Figure 14.2.)
Wernicke’s Aphasia: Description
The primary characteristics of Wernicke’s aphasia are 
poor speech comprehension and production of mean-
ingless speech. Unlike Broca’s aphasia, Wernicke’s 
aphasia is fluent and unlabored; the person does not 
strain to articulate words and does not appear to be 
searching for them. The patient maintains a melodic 
line, with the voice rising and falling normally. When 
you listen to the speech of a person with Wernicke’s 
aphasia, it appears to be grammatical. That is, the per-
son uses function words such as the and but and employs 
complex verb tenses and subordinate clauses. However, 
the person uses few content words, and the words that 
he or she strings together just do not make sense. In the 
extreme, speech deteriorates into a meaningless jumble, 
illustrated by the following quotation:
Examiner: What kind of work did you do before 
you came into the hospital?
Patient: Never, now mista oyge I wanna tell you 
this happened when happened when he rent. 
His—his kell come down here and is—he got 
ren something. It happened. In thesse ropiers 
were with him for hi—is friend—like was. And 
it just happened so I don’t know, he did not 
bring around anything. And he did not pay it. 
And he roden all o these arranjen from the 
pedis on from iss pescid. In these floors now 
and so. He hadn’t had em round here. (Kertesz, 
1981, p. 73)
Because of the speech deficit of people with Wer-
nicke’s aphasia, when we try to assess their ability to 
comprehend speech, we must ask them to use nonverbal 
x Wernicke’s area  A region of auditory association cortex on the 
left temporal lobe of humans, which is important in the compre-
hension of words and the production of meaningful speech.
x Wernicke’s aphasia  A form of aphasia characterized by poor 
speech comprehension and fluent but meaningless speech.

486	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
anterior superior temporal gyrus that was specifically 
activated by intelligible speech. (See Figure 14.7.) Sharp, 
Scott, and Wise (2004) found that deficits in speech 
comprehension were produced by lesions of the supe-
rior temporal lobe that damaged the region that is acti-
vated when people hear intelligible speech. Figure 14.8 
shows a computer-generated depiction of the overlap of 
lesions of patients with brain damage that interfered 
with speech perception. Compare the regions of great-
est overlap, shown in yellow and green, in Figure 14.8 
with the region shown in Figure 14.7.
What is involved in the analysis of speech sounds? 
Just what tasks does the auditory system have to accom-
plish? And what are the differences in the functions of 
the auditory association cortex of the left and right 
hemispheres? Most researchers believe that the left 
hemisphere is primarily involved in judging the timing 
of the components of rapidly changing complex sounds, 
whereas the right hemisphere is primarily involved in 
judging more slowly changing components, including 
melody. Evidence suggests that the most crucial aspect 
of speech sounds is timing, not pitch. We can recognize 
words whether they are conveyed by the low pitch of a 
man or the high pitch of a woman or child. In fact, we 
can understand speech from which almost all tonal in-
formation has been removed, leaving only some noise 
Wernicke’s Aphasia: Analysis
Because the superior temporal gyrus is a region of audi-
tory association cortex, and because a comprehension 
deficit is so prominent in Wernicke’s aphasia, this disor-
der has been characterized as a receptive aphasia. Wer-
nicke suggested that the region that now bears his name 
is the location of memories of the sequences of sounds that 
constitute words. This hypothesis is reasonable; it suggests 
that the auditory association cortex of the superior tem-
poral gyrus recognizes the sounds of words, just as the 
visual association cortex of the inferior temporal gyrus 
recognizes the sight of objects.
But why should damage to an area that is responsi-
ble for the ability to recognize spoken words disrupt 
people’s ability to speak? In fact, it does not; Wernicke’s 
aphasia, like Broca’s aphasia, actually appears to consist 
of several deficits. The abilities that are disrupted in-
clude recognition of spoken words, comprehension of the mean-
ing of words, and the ability to convert thoughts into words. 
Let us consider each of these abilities in turn.
Recognition: Pure Word Deafness.  As I said in the 
introduction to this section, recognizing a word is not the 
same as comprehending it. If you hear a foreign word sev-
eral times, you will learn to recognize it; but unless 
someone tells you what it means, you will not compre-
hend it. Recognition is a perceptual task; comprehen-
sion involves retrieval of additional information from 
memory.
Damage to the left temporal lobe can produce a 
disorder of auditory word recognition, uncontaminated 
by other problems. This syndrome is called pure word 
deafness. (See Figure 14.6.) Although people with pure 
word deafness are not deaf, they cannot understand 
speech. As one patient put it, “I can hear you talking, I 
just can’t understand what you’re saying.” Another said, 
“It’s as if there were a bypass somewhere, and my ears 
were not connected to my voice” (Saffran, Marin, and 
Yeni-Komshian, 1976, p. 211). These patients can recog-
nize nonspeech sounds such as the barking of a dog, the 
sound of a doorbell, and the honking of a horn. Often, 
they can recognize the emotion expressed by the intona-
tion of speech even though they cannot understand 
what is being said. More significantly, their own speech 
is excellent. They can often understand what other peo-
ple are saying by reading their lips. They can also read 
and write, and they sometimes ask people to communi-
cate with them in writing. Clearly, pure word deafness is 
not an inability to comprehend the meaning of words; if 
it were, people with this disorder would not be able to 
read people’s lips or read words written on paper.
Functional-imaging studies confirm that perception 
of speech sounds activates neurons in the auditory as-
sociation cortex of the superior temporal gyrus. For ex-
ample, Scott et al. (2000) identified a region of the left 
x pure word deafness  The ability to hear, to speak, and 
(usually) to read and write without being able to comprehend the 
meaning of speech; caused by damage to Wernicke’s area or 
disruption of auditory input to this region.
figure 14.6  Pure Word Deafness
An MRI scan shows the damage to the superior temporal 
lobe of a patient with pure word deafness (arrow).
(From Stefanatos, G. A., Gershkoff, A., and Madigan, S. Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society, 2005, 11, 456–470. Reprinted with permission.)

	
Speech Production and Comprehension: Brain Mechanisms  	
487
subjects watched people making nonspeech move-
ments with their mouths.
Several investigators have suggested that feedback 
from subvocal articulation (very slight movements of 
the muscles involved in speech that do not actually 
cause obvious movement) facilitate speech recognition 
(Pulvermüller and Fadiga, 2010). For example, a func-
tional imaging study by Pulvermüller et al. (2006) had 
subjects articulate syllables that contained the conso-
nants p or t (for example, pa and ta), which involve 
movements of the lips or tongue. The subjects said the 
syllables aloud, said them to themselves silently, and 
listened to the syllables spoken by someone else. As 
Figure 14.9 shows, in all three conditions, regions of 
the brain involved with lip movements (green) and 
tongue movements (red) were activated. (See Figure 
14.9.) Thus, speaking, watching other people speak, 
thinking about speaking, and listening to speech sounds 
all activate brain regions involved in language, which 
suggests that circuits of mirror neurons play a role in 
speech comprehension.
When we speak, or when we make subtle move-
ments of the muscles involved in speaking, we re-
ceive somatosensory feedback from our tongue and 
the skin around our mouth. Ito, Tiede, and Ostry 
(2009) found that this feedback affects our percep-
tion of speech sounds. The investigators attached 
modulated by the rapid stops and starts that character-
ize human speech sounds. (To hear examples of these 
sounds, 
Simulate speech perception on MyPsychLab.)
Apparently, two types of brain injury can cause pure 
word deafness: disruption of auditory input to the supe-
rior temporal cortex or damage to the superior tempo-
ral cortex itself (Poeppel, 2001; Stefanatos, Gershkoff, 
and Madigan, 2005). Either type of damage disturbs the 
analysis of the sounds of words and hence prevents peo-
ple from recognizing other people’s speech.
As we saw in Chapter 8, our brains contain circuits 
of mirror neurons—neurons activated either when we 
perform an action or see the action performed by 
someone else. Feedback from these neurons may help 
us to understand the intent of the actions of others. 
Although speech recognition is clearly an auditory 
event, research indicates that hearing words automati-
cally engages brain mechanisms that control speech. In 
other words, these mechanisms appear also to contain 
mirror neurons that are activated by the sounds of 
words. For example, Fridriksson et al. (2008) found 
that when people watched (but did not hear) other 
people making speech movements, the temporal (audi-
tory) and frontal (motor) cortical language areas were 
activated. These regions were not activated when the 
figure 14.7  Responses to Speech Sounds
Results of PET scans indicate the regions of the superior 
temporal lobe that respond to speech sounds. Red: 
Regions that responded to phonetic information (normal 
speech sounds or a computerized transformation speech 
that preserved the complexity of the speech sounds but 
rendered it unintelligible). Orange: Region that 
responded to intelligible speech (normal speech sounds 
or a computerized transformation that removed most 
normal frequencies but preserved intelligibility).
(Based on data from Scott et al., 2000.)
Speech sounds
Intelligible speech
figure 14.8  Speech Comprehension
The scan shows the overlap in the lesions of nine patients 
with deficits of speech comprehension. Note the 
similarity of the region of greatest overlap (yellow and 
green) with the region whose damage causes pure word 
deafness (Figure 14.6), and the regions that responded to 
speech sounds (Figure 14.7).
(From Sharp, D. J., Scott, S. K., and Wise, R. J. S. Annals of Neurology, 2004, 56, 
836–846. Reprinted with permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.)
Range of overlap

488	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
Comprehension: Transcortical Sensory Aphasia.  
The other symptoms of Wernicke’s aphasia—failure to 
comprehend the meaning of words and inability to express 
thoughts in meaningful speech—appear to be produced 
by damage that extends beyond Wernicke’s area into the 
region that surrounds the posterior part of the lateral  
two arms of a mechanical device to the skin of their 
subjects, just past the corners of their mouths. The 
device could be made to pull the skin upward or 
downward by the computer controlling the experi-
ment. The subjects listened to computer-generated 
words that varied in ten steps between the sound of 
head to the sound of had. When the subjects heard 
intermediate sounds that were neither head nor had, 
they were more likely to indicate that they heard 
head when their facial skin was stretched upward 
and had when their facial skin was stretched down-
ward. (Say head and had to yourself while paying at-
tention to the movements made by the corners of 
your mouth. You will feel that your mouth widens 
and the corners rise slightly when you say head and 
that your mouth opens slightly, pulling the corners 
down, when you say had.) So, as the results of these 
studies indicate, activity of mirror neurons as well as 
feedback from speech movements affects speech 
perception.
My experience with a patient I met several years ago 
suggests that monitoring of one’s own speech plays an 
important role in the production of accurate and fluent 
speech.
Dr. D. introduced Mr. S., a patient with pure word  
deafness.
“Mr. S., will you tell us how you are feeling?” asked 
Dr. D.
The patient turned his head at the sound of his 
voice and said, “Sorry, I can’t understand you.”
“How are you feeling?” Dr. D. asked in a loud 
voice.
“Oh, I can hear you all right, I just can’t understand 
you. Here,” said Mr. S., handing Dr. D. a pencil and a 
small pad of paper.
Dr. D. took the pencil and paper and wrote some-
thing. He handed them back to Mr. S., who looked at it 
and said, “Fine. I’m just fine.”
“Will you tell us about what you have been doing 
lately?” asked Dr. D. Mr. S. smiled, shook his head, and 
handed the paper and pencil to Dr. D. again.
“Oh sure,” he said after reading the new question, 
and he proceeded to tell us about his garden and his 
other hobbies. “I don’t get much from television unless 
there are a lot of close-ups, where I can read their lips. I 
like to listen to music on the radio, but, of course, the lyr-
ics don’t mean too much to me!” He laughed at his own 
joke, which had probably already seen some mileage.
“You mean that you can read lips?” someone asked.
Mr. S. immediately turned toward the sound of the 
voice and said, “What did you say? Say it slow, so I can 
try to read your lips.” We all laughed, and Mr. S. joined 
us when the question was repeated slowly enough for 
him to decode. Another person tried to ask him a ques-
tion, but apparently his Spanish accent made it impos-
sible for Mr. S. to read his lips.
Suddenly, the phone rang. We all, including Mr. S., 
looked up at the wall where it was hanging. “Someone 
else had better get that,” he said. “I’m not much good 
on the phone.”
After Mr. S. had left the room, someone observed 
that although Mr. S.’s speech was easy to understand, it 
seemed a bit strange. “Yes,” said a speech therapist, 
“he almost sounds like a deaf person who has learned 
to talk but doesn’t get the pronunciation of the words 
just right.”
Dr. D. nodded and played a tape for us. “This 
recording was made a few months after his strokes, ten 
years ago.” We heard the same voice, but this time it 
sounded absolutely normal.
“Oh,” said the speech therapist. “He has lost the 
ability to monitor his own speech, and over the years he 
has forgotten some of the details of how various words 
are pronounced.”
“Exactly,” said Dr. D. “The change has been a 
gradual one.”
figure 14.9  Mirror Neurons and Speech
Brain activation in the primary motor cortex that occurred 
when people said syllables aloud, said syllables to 
themselves silently, or heard someone else saying 
syllables. The two regions marked with yellow circles are 
involved in control of tongue movements (syllables that 
included the sound of t, shown in green) and lip 
movements (syllables that included the sound of p, 
shown in red).
(From Pulvermüller, F., Huss, M., Kherif, F., et al. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2006, 103, 7865–7870. Reprinted with permission.)
Said syllables
to themselves
silently
Said syllables aloud
Heard syllables said

	
Speech Production and Comprehension: Brain Mechanisms  	
489
fissure, near the junction of the temporal, occipital, and 
parietal lobes. For want of a better term, I will refer to this 
region as the posterior language area. (See Figure 14.10.) The 
posterior language area appears to serve as a place for 
interchanging information between the auditory represen-
tation of words and the meanings of these words, stored as 
memories in the rest of the sensory association cortex.
Damage to the posterior language area alone, which 
isolates Wernicke’s area from the rest of the posterior lan-
guage area, produces a disorder known as transcortical 
sensory aphasia. (Look again at Figure 14.10.) The differ-
ence between transcortical sensory aphasia and Wer-
nicke’s aphasia is that patients with transcortical sensory 
aphasia can repeat what other people say to them; therefore, 
they can recognize words. However, they cannot comprehend 
the meaning of what they hear and repeat; nor can they produce 
meaningful speech of their own. How can these people repeat 
what they hear? Because the posterior language area is 
damaged, repetition does not involve this part of the 
brain. Obviously, there must be a direct connection be-
tween Wernicke’s area and Broca’s area that bypasses the 
posterior language area. (Look once more at Figure 14.10.)
figure 14.10  Transcortical Sensory Aphasia and Wernicke’s Aphasia
This schematic shows the location and interconnections of the posterior language area 
and an explanation of its role in transcortical sensory aphasia and Wernicke’s aphasia.
Broca’s
area
Primary
auditory cortex
Wernicke’s aphasia is caused by
damage to both regions; patients
can neither understand the meanings
of words nor repeat them
Transcortical sensory aphasia is caused by
damage to the posterior language area;
patients cannot understand the meanings
of words but can repeat them
Posterior
language
area
A direct connection between Wernicke’s
area and Broca’s area enables patients with
transcortical sensory aphasia to repeat words
that they cannot understand
x transcortical sensory aphasia  A speech disorder in which 
a person has difficulty comprehending speech and producing 
meaningful spontaneous speech but can repeat speech; 
caused by damage to the region of the brain posterior to 
Wernicke’s area.
repetition was not parrotlike; she did not imitate accents dif-
ferent from her own, and if someone made a grammatical 
error while saying something to her, she sometimes 
repeated the sentence correctly, without the error. She 
could also recite poems if someone started them. For 
example, when an examiner said, “Roses are red, violets are 
blue,” she continued with “Sugar is sweet and so are you.” 
She could sing and would do so when someone started 
singing a song she knew. She even learned new songs from 
the radio while in the hospital. Remember, though, that she 
gave no signs of understanding anything she heard or said. 
This disorder, transcortical sensory aphasia, along with pure 
word deafness, clearly confirms the conclusion that recog-
nizing spoken words and comprehending them are different 
processes and involve different brain mechanisms 
(Geschwind, Quadfasel, and Segarra, 1968).
A woman sustained extensive brain damage from carbon 
monoxide produced by a faulty water heater. She spent 
several years in the hospital before she died, without ever 
saying anything meaningful on her own. She did not follow 
verbal commands or otherwise give signs of understanding 
them. However, she often repeated what was said to her. 
For example, if an examiner said “Please raise your right 
hand,” she would reply, “Please raise your right hand.” The 
In conclusion, transcortical sensory aphasia can be 
seen as Wernicke’s aphasia without a repetition deficit. 
To put it another way, the symptoms of Wernicke’s 
aphasia consist of those of pure word deafness plus 
those of transcortical sensory aphasia. As I tell my stu-
dents, WA = TSA + PWD. By simple algebra, TSA = WA – 
PWD, and so on. (Refer again to Figure 14.10.)

490	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
meaning, I find that the concept of a dictionary serves as 
a useful analogy. Dictionaries contain entries (the words) 
and definitions (the meanings of the words). In the 
brain we have at least two types of entries: auditory and 
visual. That is, we can look up a word according to how 
it sounds or how it looks (in writing). Let us consider just 
one type of entry: the sound of a word. (I will discuss 
reading and writing later in this chapter.) We hear a  
familiar word and understand its meaning. How do we 
do so?
First, we must recognize the sequence of sounds 
that constitute the word: We find the auditory entry for 
the word in our “dictionary.” As we saw, this entry ap-
pears in Wernicke’s area. Next, the memories that con-
stitute the meaning of the word must be activated. Pre-
sumably, Wernicke’s area is connected—through the 
posterior language area—with the neural circuits that 
contain these memories. (See Figure 14.11.)
Speech conveys more than simple words denoting 
objects or actions. It also conveys abstract concepts, 
some of them quite subtle. Studies of brain-damaged 
patients (Brownell et al., 1983, 1990) suggest that com-
prehension of the more subtle, figurative aspects of 
speech involves the right hemisphere in particular—for 
example, understanding the meaning behind proverbs 
such as “People who live in glass houses shouldn’t throw 
stones” or the moral of stories such as the one about the 
race between the tortoise and the hare.
Functional-imaging studies confirm these observa-
tions. Nichelli et al. (1995) found that judging the moral 
What Is Meaning?  As we have seen, Wernicke’s area 
is involved in the analysis of speech sounds and thus in 
the recognition of words. Damage to the posterior lan-
guage area does not disrupt people’s ability to recog-
nize words, but it does disrupt their ability to understand 
words or to produce meaningful speech of their own. 
But what, exactly, do we mean by the word meaning? 
And what types of brain mechanisms are involved?
Words refer to objects, actions, or relationships in 
the world. Thus, the meaning of a word is defined by 
particular memories associated with it. For example, 
knowing the meaning of the word tree means being able 
to imagine the physical characteristics of trees: what 
they look like, what the wind sounds like blowing 
through their leaves, what the bark feels like, and so on. 
It also means knowing facts about trees: about their 
roots, buds, flowers, nuts, and wood and the chlorophyll 
in their leaves. Action words such as throw involve mem-
ories of seeing someone throwing something and also 
involve imagining what it feels like to throw something 
yourself. These memories are stored not in the primary 
speech areas but in other parts of the brain, especially 
regions of the association cortex. Different categories of 
memories may be stored in particular regions of the 
brain, but they are somehow tied together, so hearing 
the word tree or throw activates all of them. (As we saw in 
Chapter 13, the hippocampal formation is involved in 
this process of tying related memories together.)
In thinking about the brain’s verbal mechanisms in-
volved in recognizing words and comprehending their 
figure 14.11  The “Dictionary” in the Brain
Wernicke’s area contains the auditory entries of words; the meanings are contained as 
memories in the sensory association areas. Black arrows represent comprehension of 
words—the activation of memories that correspond to a word’s meaning. Red arrows 
represent translation of thoughts or perceptions into words.
Broca’s area
(speech production)
Primary
auditory
cortex
Wernicke’s area
(word recognition)
Posterior language area
(interface between Wernicke’s area
and perceptions and memories)
Meanings
of words
Pe
rc
ep
tio
ns
 a
nd
 m
em
ori
es
Pe
rc
ep
tio
ns 
an
d m
em
ori
es

	
Speech Production and Comprehension: Brain Mechanisms  	
491
very poor repetition. For example, the spontaneous 
speech of patient L. B. (observed by Margolin and 
Walker, 1981) was excellent; he made very few errors 
and had no difficulty naming objects. But let us see how 
patient L. B. performed when he was asked to repeat 
words. To hear this person’s voice, 
Simulate voices 
of aphasia: conduction aphasia on MyPsychLab.
Examiner: bicycle
Patient: bicycle
Examiner: hippopotamus
Patient: hippopotamus
Examiner: blaynge
Patient: I didn’t get it.
Examiner: Okay, some of these won’t be real 
words, they’ll just be sounds. Blaynge.
Patient: I’m not . . .
Examiner: blanch
Patient: blanch
Examiner: north
Patient: north
Examiner: rilld
Patient: Nope, I can’t say.
You will notice that the patient can repeat indi-
vidual words (all nouns, in this case) but utterly fails to 
of Aesop’s fables (in contrast to judging more superfi-
cial aspects of the stories) also activated regions of the 
right hemisphere. Sotillo et al. (2005) found that a task 
that required comprehension of metaphors such as 
“green lung of the city” (that is, a park) activated the 
right superior temporal cortex. (See Figure 14.12.)
Pobric et al. (2008) found that a temporary disrup-
tion of the right superior temporal cortex by means of 
TMS impaired people’s ability to understand novel met-
aphors, such as a “conscience storm.” The stimulation 
had no effect on the subjects’ ability to understand con-
ventional metaphors, such as “sweet voice,” that they 
have undoubtedly already heard or literal expressions 
such as “snow storm.” (Expressions such as “sweet voice” 
are so common that many people do not realize that 
they are metaphorical. Sugar or honey are sweet, but a 
voice cannot be tasted.)
Repetition: Conduction Aphasia.  As we saw earlier 
in this section, the fact that people with transcortical 
sensory aphasia can repeat what they hear suggests that 
there is a direct connection between Wernicke’s area 
and Broca’s area—and there is: the arcuate fasciculus 
(“arch-shaped bundle”). This bundle of axons is found 
in the human brain but is absent or much smaller in the 
brains of nonhuman primates (Rilling et al., 2008). The 
arcuate fasciculus appears to convey information about 
the sounds of words but not their meanings. The best evi-
dence for this conclusion comes from a syndrome known 
as conduction aphasia, which is produced by damage to 
the inferior parietal lobe that extends into the subcorti-
cal white matter and damages the arcuate fasciculus 
(Damasio and Damasio, 1980). (See Figure 14.13.)
Conduction aphasia is characterized by meaningful, 
fluent speech and relatively good comprehension but 
figure 14.12  Evaluating Metaphors
These images of neural activity were produced  
by evaluating the meaning of metaphors.
(From Sotillo, M., Carretié, L., Hinojosa, J. A., Tapia, M., Mercado, F., López-
Martín, S., and Albert, J. Neuroscience Letters, 2005, 373, 5–9. Copyright © 2005, 
with permission from Elsevier.)
Caudal
Rostral
L
R
x arcuate fasciculus  A bundle of axons that connects Wernicke’s 
area with Broca’s area; damage causes conduction aphasia.
x conduction aphasia  An aphasia characterized by inability to 
repeat words that are heard but the ability to speak normally and 
comprehend the speech of others.
figure 14.13  Conduction Aphasia
MRI scans show the subcortical damage responsible for  
a case of conduction aphasia. This lesion damaged the 
arcuate fasciculus, a fiber bundle connecting Wernicke’s 
area and Broca’s area.
(From Arnett, P. A., Rao, S. M., Hussain, M., Swanson, S. J., and Hammeke,  
T. A. Neurology, 1996, 47, 576–578. Reprinted with permission.)
R
L

492	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
related to that meaning. (The patient in the second ex-
ample presumably imagined the sight of an automobile 
leaking fuel onto the pavement.) They are then able to 
describe that image, just as they would put their own 
thoughts into words. Of course, the words they choose 
might not be the same as the ones used by the person 
who spoke to them. (See Figure 14.14.)
A study by Catani, Jones, and ffytche (2005) pro-
vides the first anatomical evidence for the existence of 
the two pathways between Wernicke’s area and Broca’s 
area that I presented in Figure 14.14. The investigators 
used DTI to trace the branches of the arcuate fasciculus 
in the human brain. They found one deep pathway that 
directly connects these two regions and a shallower 
pathway that consists of two segments. The anterior seg-
ment connects Broca’s area with the inferior parietal 
cortex, and the posterior segment connects Wernicke’s 
area with the inferior parietal cortex. Damage to the 
direct pathway would be expected to produce conduc-
tion aphasia, whereas damage to the indirect pathway 
would be expected to spare the ability to repeat speech 
but would impair comprehension. (See Figure 14.15.)
The symptoms of conduction aphasia suggest that 
the connection between Wernicke’s area and Broca’s 
area plays an important role in short-term memory of 
words and speech sounds that have just been heard. 
Presumably, rehearsal of such information can be ac-
complished by “talking to ourselves” inside our head 
without actually having to say anything aloud. Imagining 
ourselves saying the word activates the region of Broca’s 
area, whereas imagining that we are hearing it activates 
the auditory association area of the temporal lobe. 
repeat nonwords. And, as you can hear in the anima-
tion, he can repeat a meaningful three-word phrase but 
not three unrelated words. People with conduction 
aphasia can repeat speech sounds that they hear only if 
these sounds have meaning.
Sometimes, when a person with conduction aphasia 
is asked to repeat a word, he or she says a word with the 
same meaning—or at least one that is related. For ex-
ample, if the examiner says house, the patient may say 
home. If the examiner says chair, the patient may say sit. 
One patient made the following response when asked to 
repeat an entire sentence:
Examiner: The auto’s leaking gas tank soiled the 
roadway.
Patient: The car’s tank leaked and made a mess 
on the street.
The symptoms that are seen in transcortical sensory 
aphasia and conduction aphasia lead to the conclusion 
that there are pathways connecting the speech mecha-
nisms of the temporal lobe with those of the frontal 
lobe. The direct pathway through the arcuate fasciculus 
simply conveys speech sounds from Wernicke’s area to 
Broca’s area. We use this pathway to repeat unfamiliar 
words—for example, when we are learning a foreign 
language or a new word in our own language or when 
we are trying to repeat a nonword such as blaynge. The 
second pathway, between the posterior language area 
and Broca’s area, is indirect and is based on the meaning 
of words, not on the sounds they make. When patients 
with conduction aphasia hear a word or a sentence, the 
meaning of what they hear evokes some sort of image 
figure 14.14  A Hypothetical Explanation of Conduction Aphasia
A lesion that damages the arcuate fasciculus disrupts the transmission of auditory 
information, but not information related to meaning, to the frontal lobe.
Pe
rc
ep
tio
ns
 a
nd
 m
em
ori
es
Pe
rc
ep
tio
ns 
an
d m
em
ori
es
Meanings
of words
This connection enables patients
with conduction aphasia to express
their thoughts in words
Broca’s area
(speech
production)
Damage to the arcuate
fasciculus disrupts
repetition of speech
sounds; causes
conduction aphasia

	
Speech Production and Comprehension: Brain Mechanisms  	
493
picture shown earlier, in Figure 14.1. Her pauses, which 
are marked with three dots, indicate word-finding diffi-
culties. In some cases, when she could not find a word, 
she supplied a definition instead (a form of circumlocu-
tion) or went off on a new track. I have added the words 
in brackets that I think she intended to use. To hear this 
person’s voice, 
Simulate voices of aphasia: anomic 
aphasia on MyPsychLab.
Examiner: Tell us about that picture.
Patient: It’s a woman who has two children, a 
son and a daughter, and her son is to get into 
the . . . cupboard in the kitchen to get out [take] 
some . . . cookies out of the [cookie jar] . . . that 
she possibly had made, and consequently he’s 
slipping [falling] . . . the wrong direction [back-
ward] . . . on the . . . what he’s standing on 
[stool], heading to the . . . the cupboard [floor] 
and if he falls backwards he could have some 
problems [get hurt], because that [the stool] is off 
balance.
Anomia has been described as a partial amnesia for 
words. It can be produced by lesions in either the ante-
rior or posterior regions of the brain, but only posterior 
lesions produce a fluent anomia. The most likely loca-
tion of lesions that produce anomia without the other 
symptoms of aphasia, such as comprehension deficits, 
agrammatism, or difficulties in articulation, is the left 
temporal or parietal lobe, usually sparing Wernicke’s 
area. In the case of the woman described above, the 
damage included the left middle and inferior temporal 
gyri, which includes an important region of the visual 
association cortex. Wernicke’s area was not damaged.
When my colleagues and I were studying the anomic 
patient, I was struck by the fact that she seemed to have 
more difficulty finding nouns than other types of words. 
I informally tested her ability to name actions by asking 
her what people shown in a series of pictures were do-
ing. She made almost no errors in finding verbs. For 
example, although she could not say what a boy was 
holding in his hand, she had no trouble saying that he 
was throwing it. Similarly, she knew that a girl was climbing 
something but could not tell me the name of what she 
was climbing (a fence). In addition, she had no trouble 
finding nonvisual adjectives; for example, she could say 
that lemons tasted sour, that ice was cold, and that a cat’s 
fur felt soft.
For several years I thought that our patient was 
unique. But other researchers have reported similar pat-
terns of deficits. For example, Semenza and Zettin 
These two regions, connected by means of the arcuate 
fasciculus (which contains axons traveling in both direc-
tions), circulate information back and forth, keeping 
the short-term memory alive. Baddeley (1993) refers to 
this circuit as the phonological loop.
Aziz-Zadeh et al. (2005) obtained evidence that we 
do use Broca’s area when we talk to ourselves. The inves-
tigators applied TMS to Broca’s area while people were 
silently counting the number of syllables in words pre-
sented on a screen. The parameters of stimulation that 
the investigators used disrupts overt (actual) speech. 
They found that it disrupted covert speech as well; the 
subjects took longer to count the syllables when the 
TMS was on.
Memory of Words: Anomic Aphasia
As I have already noted, anomia, in one form or other, 
is a hallmark of aphasia. However, one category of apha-
sia consists of almost pure anomia, the other symptoms 
being inconsequential. Speech of patients with anomic 
aphasia is fluent and grammatical, and their compre-
hension is excellent, but they have difficulty finding the 
appropriate words. They often employ circumlocutions 
(literally, “speaking in a roundabout way”) to get around 
missing words. Anomic aphasia is different from Wer-
nicke’s aphasia. People with anomic aphasia can under-
stand what others say, and what these people say makes 
perfect sense, even if they often choose roundabout 
ways to say it.
The following quotation is from a patient whom 
some colleagues and I studied (Margolin, Marcel, and 
Carlson, 1985). We asked her to describe the kitchen 
figure 14.15  Components of the Arcuate 
Fasciculus
A computer-generated reconstruction of the components 
of the arcuate fasciculus was obtained through diffusion 
tensor MRI.
(From Catani, M., Jones, D. K., and ffytche, D. H. Annals of Neurology, 2005, 57, 
8–16. Reprinted with permission.)
To Broca’s
area
To inferior
parietal lobe
To Wernicke’s area
Posterior
segment
Long 
segment
Anterior
segment
x circumlocution  A strategy by which people with anomia find 
alternative ways to say something when they are unable to think of 
the most appropriate word.

494	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
flow of information concerning perceptions and memo-
ries from the sensory and motor association cortex to 
the posterior language area to Broca’s area. This model 
is certainly an oversimplification, but it is a useful start-
ing point in conceptualizing basic mental processes. For 
example, thinking in words probably involves two-way 
communication between the speech areas and sur-
rounding association cortex (and regions such as the 
hippocampus and medial temporal lobe, of course).
Aphasia in Deaf People
So far, I have restricted my discussion to brain mecha-
nisms of spoken and written language. But communica-
tion among members of the Deaf community involves 
another medium: sign language. Sign language is ex-
pressed manually, by movements of the hands. Sign lan-
guage is not English; nor is it French, Spanish, or Chinese. 
The most common sign language in North America is 
ASL—American Sign Language. ASL is a full-fledged 
language, having signs for nouns, verbs, adjectives, ad-
verbs, and all the other parts of speech contained in oral 
languages. People can converse rapidly and efficiently by 
means of sign language, can tell jokes, and can even 
make puns based on the similarity between signs. They 
can also use their language ability to think in words.
Some researchers believe that in the history of our 
species, sign language preceded spoken language—
that our ancestors began using gestures to communi-
cate before they switched to speech. As I mentioned 
earlier in this chapter, mirror neurons become active 
when we see or perform particular grasping, holding, 
or manipulating movements. Some of these neurons 
are found in Broca’s area. Presumably, these neurons 
play an important role in learning to mimic other peo-
ple’s hand movements. Indeed, they might have been 
involved in the development of hand gestures used for 
communication in our ancestors, and they undoubt-
edly are used by deaf people when they communicate 
by sign language. A functional-imaging study by Iaco-
boni et al. (1999) found that Broca’s area was activated 
when people observed and imitated finger movements. 
(See Figure 14.17.)
Several studies have found a linkage between speech 
and hand movements, which supports the suggestion 
that the spoken language of present-day humans evolved 
from hand gestures. For example, Gentilucci (2003) 
had subjects speak the syllables ba or ga while they were 
watching him grasp objects of different sizes. When  
the experimenter grasped a large object, the subjects 
opened their mouths more and said the syllable more 
loudly than when he grasped a small one. These results 
suggest that the region of the brain that controls grasp-
ing is also involved in controlling speech movements. 
(See Figure 14.18.)
(1989) and Manning and Campbell (1992) described 
patients who had difficulty naming objects but not ac-
tions. Several studies have found that anomia for verbs 
(more correctly called averbia) is caused by damage to 
the frontal cortex, in and around Broca’s area (Damasio 
and Tranel, 1993; Daniele et al., 1994; Bak et al., 2001). 
If you think about it, that makes sense. The frontal lobes 
are devoted to planning, organizing, and executing ac-
tions, so it should not surprise us that they are involved 
in the task of remembering the names of actions.
Several functional-imaging studies have confirmed 
the importance of Broca’s area and the region sur-
rounding it in the production of verbs. For example, 
Hauk, Johnsrued, and Pulvermüller (2004) had sub-
jects read verbs that related to movements of different 
parts of the body. For example, bite, slap, and kick in-
volve movements of the face, arm, and leg, respectively. 
The investigators found that when the subjects read a 
verb, they saw activation in the regions of the motor 
cortex that controlled the relevant part of the body. 
(See Figure 14.16.) A similar study by Buccino et al. 
(2005) found that hearing sentences that involved hand 
movements (for example, He turned the key) activated the 
hand region of the motor cortex and that hearing 
sentences that involved foot movements (for example, 
He stepped on the grass) activated the foot region. Presum-
ably, thinking about particular actions activated regions 
that control these actions.
The picture I have drawn so far suggests that com-
prehension of speech includes a flow of information 
from Wernicke’s area to the posterior language area to 
various regions of sensory and motor association cortex, 
which contain memories that provide meanings to 
words. Production of spontaneous speech involves the 
figure 14.16  Verbs and Movements
The figure shows the relative activation of regions of the 
motor cortex that control movements of the face, arm, 
and leg when people read verbs that described 
movements of these regions, such as bite, slap, and kick.
(From Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., and Pulvermüller, F. Neuron, 2004, 41, 301–307. 
Reprinted with permission of Elsevier.)
Leg words
Arm words
Face words
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Face
Arm
Leg
Region of motor cortex
Change in activation
0

	
Speech Production and Comprehension: Brain Mechanisms  	
495
and memory. However, all the cases of deaf people with 
aphasia for signs that have been reported in the litera-
ture so far have involved lesions of the left hemisphere, 
and functional imaging studies show that tasks that in-
volve language activate the same regions of the left 
hemisphere in hearing and deaf people (MacSweeney, 
et al., 2008a). As you might imagine, when a hearing 
person is asked to look at a pair of drawings and say 
whether the names of the items they show rhyme, func-
tional imaging shows increased activation in the region 
of Broca’s area because the person “says” the two words 
subvocally. And if we ask deaf people who are able to 
talk to perform this task, the same region is activated 
(MacSweeney et al., 2008b). (See Figure 14.19.)
We saw earlier that the right hemisphere contrib-
utes to the more subtle, figurative aspects of speech in 
hearing people. The same is true for deaf signers. 
Hickok et al. (1999) described the case of two deaf 
signers who had damage to the right hemisphere. Both 
showed problems with discourse using sign language: 
One had trouble maintaining a coherent topic, and 
the other had difficulty with subtle uses of spatial fea-
tures. A functional imaging study by Newman et al. 
(2010) found that, when deaf people observed sign 
language that included the use of narrative devices 
such as facial expressions or movements of the head, 
eyes, and body, the inferior frontal cortex and superior 
The grammar of ASL is based on its visual, spatial 
nature. For example, if a person makes the sign for John 
in one place and later makes the sign for Mary in an-
other place, she can place her hand in the John location 
and move it toward the Mary location while making the 
sign for love. As you undoubtedly figured out for your-
self, she is saying, “John loves Mary.” Signers can also 
modify the meaning of signs through facial expressions 
or the speed and vigor with which they make a sign. 
Thus, many of the prepositions, adjectives, and adverbs 
found in spoken languages do not require specific words 
in ASL. The fact that signed languages are based on 
three-dimensional hand and arm movements accompa-
nied by facial expressions means that their grammars are 
very different from those of spoken languages. There-
fore, a word-for-word translation from a spoken language 
to a signed language (or vice versa) is impossible.
The fact that the grammar of ASL is spatial suggests 
that aphasic disorders in deaf people who use sign lan-
guage might be caused by lesions of the right hemi-
sphere, which is primarily involved in spatial perception 
figure 14.17  Mirror Neurons in Broca’s Area
PET scans show a region of the inferior left frontal lobe 
that was activated when a person saw a finger movement 
or imitated it. Top: Horizontal section. Bottom: Lateral 
view of left hemisphere.
(From Iacoboni, M., Woods, R. P., Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Mazziotta, J. C., and 
Rizzolatti, G. Science, 1999, 286, 2526–2528. Copyright © 1999 by the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted with permission.)
figure 14.18  Links Between Hand and Mouth
The graphs show lip opening and voice amplitude of 
subjects repeating syllables while watching someone 
grasping small and large objects.
(Adapted from Gentilucci, M. European Journal of Neuroscience, 2003, 17, 
179–184.)
Small
Small
Large
Large
Object size
10
25
40
30
34
38
Maximal lip opening (mm)
Relative peak voice amplitude

496	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
and has a melodic line. Even when the speech of a per-
son with severe Wernicke’s aphasia makes no sense, the 
prosody sounds normal. As Goodglass and Kaplan (1972) 
note, a person with Wernicke’s aphasia may “sound like 
a normal speaker at a distance, because of his fluency 
and normal melodic contour of his speech.” (Up close, 
of course, we hear the speech clearly enough to realize 
that it is meaningless.) In contrast, just as the lesions 
that produce Broca’s aphasia destroy grammar, they 
also severely disrupt prosody. In patients with Broca’s 
aphasia, articulation is so labored and words are uttered 
so slowly that there is little opportunity for the patient to 
demonstrate any rhythmic elements; because of the rel-
ative lack of function words, there is little variation in 
stress or pitch of voice.
Evidence from studies of normal people and pa-
tients with brain lesions suggests that prosody is a special 
function of the right hemisphere. This function is un-
doubtedly related to the more general role of this hemi-
sphere in musical skills and the expression and recogni-
tion of emotions: Production of prosody is rather like 
singing, and prosody often serves as a vehicle for convey-
ing emotion.
Weintraub, Mesulam, and Kramer (1981) presented 
subjects with two written sentences and asked a question 
about them. For example, they presented the following 
pair:
The man walked to the grocery store.
The woman rode to the shoe store.
The subjects were instructed to answer questions by 
reading one of the sentences. Try this one yourself. 
Read the question below and then read aloud the sen-
tence (above) that answers it.
Who walked to the grocery store, the man or 
the woman?
The question asserts that someone walked to the 
grocery store but asks who that person was. When an-
swering a question like this, people normally stress the 
requested item of information; in this case they say, 
“The man walked to the grocery store.” However, Wein-
traub and her colleagues found that although patients 
with right-hemisphere brain damage chose the correct 
sentence, they either failed to stress a word or stressed 
the wrong one. Thus, the right hemisphere plays a role 
in production as well as perception of prosody.
In a functional-imaging study by Meyer et al. 
(2002), subjects heard normal sentences or sentences 
temporal cortex of the right hemisphere were activated 
in addition to the expected language regions of the left 
hemisphere.
Prosody: Rhythm, Tone,  
and Emphasis in Speech
When we speak, we do not merely utter words. Our 
speech has a regular rhythm and cadence; we give 
some words stress (that is, we pronounce them louder), 
and we vary the pitch of our voice to indicate phrasing 
and to distinguish between assertions and questions. 
In addition, we can impart information about our 
emotional state through the rhythm, emphasis, and 
tone of our speech. These rhythmic, emphatic, and 
melodic aspects of speech are referred to as prosody. 
The importance of these aspects of speech is illus-
trated by our use of punctuation symbols to indicate 
some elements of prosody when we write. For exam-
ple, a comma indicates a short pause; a period indi-
cates a longer one with an accompanying fall in the 
pitch of the voice; a question mark indicates a pause 
and a rise in the pitch of the voice; an exclamation 
mark indicates that the words are articulated with spe-
cial emphasis; and so on.
The prosody of people with fluent aphasias, caused 
by posterior lesions, sounds normal. Their speech is 
rhythmical, with pauses after phrases and sentences, 
figure 14.19  Brain Activation During a Rhyming Task
The same language-related regions of the brain are 
activated by deaf and hearing people when they decide 
whether two written words rhyme.
(From MacSweeney, M., Waters, D., Brammer, M.J., et al. NeuroImage, 2008, 40, 
1369–1379. Reprinted by permission.)
Deaf people
Hearing people
x prosody  The use of changes in intonation and emphasis to 
convey meaning in speech besides that specified by the particular 
words; an important means of communication of emotion.

	
Speech Production and Comprehension: Brain Mechanisms  	
497
the difficulty—or even inability—to recognize people’s 
faces. She realized that her disorder could be an audi-
tory form of this disorder. Testing showed that her intel-
ligence was above average and that she received normal 
or above normal scores on a variety of perceptual tasks, 
including face recognition, speech perception, recog-
nition of environmental sounds, and perception of 
music. Structural MRI showed no evidence of brain 
abnormalities, but there certainly must be some subtle 
differences in brain organization to account for her  
disability.
Most cases of phonagnosia are caused by brain dam-
age. Recognition of a particular voice is independent of 
the recognition of words and their meanings: Some 
people have lost the ability to understand words but can 
still recognize voices, while others display the opposite 
deficits (Belin, Fecteau, and Bédard, 2004). So far, all 
cases of acquired phonagnosia (that is phonagnosia 
caused by brain damage) show damage in the right 
hemisphere, usually in the parietal lobe or the anterior 
superior temporal cortex. Functional imaging studies 
have implicated the right anterior superior temporal 
cortex in voice recognition. For example, von Kriegstein 
et al. (2003) found that this region was activated by a 
task that required subjects to recognize particular voices 
but not particular words.
Stuttering
Stuttering is a speech disorder characterized by fre-
quent pauses, prolongations of sounds, or repetitions 
of sounds, syllables, or words that disrupt the normal 
flow of speech. Stuttering, which appears to be influ-
enced by genetic factors, affects approximately 1 percent 
of the population and is three times more prevalent in 
men than in women (Brown et al., 2005; Fisher, 2010). 
Stuttering seldom occurs when a person says a single 
word or is asked to read a list of words; it most often 
occurs at the beginning of a sentence, especially if the 
planned sentence is long or grammatically complex. 
This fact suggests that stuttering is a disorder of “selec-
tion, initiation, and execution of motor sequences nec-
essary for fluent speech production” (Watkins et al., 
2008, p. 50). Perhaps a person who stutters needs  
more time to plan the movements necessary for an  
utterance.
Stuttering is not a result of abnormalities in the 
neural circuits that contain the motor programs for 
speech. For example, stuttering is reduced or elimi-
nated when a person reads aloud with another speaker, 
sings, or reads in cadence with a rhythmic stimulus. 
The problem appears to lie more in the neural mecha-
nisms that are involved in planning and initiation of 
speech. A meta-analysis of functional-imaging studies 
by Brown et al. (2005) found that people who stutter 
that contained only the prosodic elements of speech 
with the meaningful sounds filtered out. As you can see 
in Figure 14.20; the meaningful components of speech 
primarily activated the left hemisphere (blue and green 
regions), whereas the prosodic components primarily 
activated the right hemisphere (orange and yellow re-
gions). (See Figure 14.20.)
Recognition of People’s Voices
As we have seen so far, the words contained in speech 
convey information about events, ideas, and other forms 
of meaning—information that can be conveyed just as 
well in writing. The prosody of speech can convey infor-
mation about the speaker’s emotional state or things the 
speaker wants to stress. Finally, speech can convey infor-
mation completely independent of the meaning of the 
words: the identity of the speaker, his or her gender, 
and hints about his or her age.
People learn at an early age to recognize the voices 
of particular individuals. Even newborn infants can rec-
ognize the voices of their parents, which they appar-
ently learned while they were still in their mother’s 
uterus (Ockleford et al., 1988). Some people with local-
ized brain damage have great difficulty recognizing 
voices—a disorder known as phonagnosia. The first re-
corded case of developmental phonagnosia (that is, 
phonagnosia not caused by brain damage) was reported 
by Garrido et al. (2009). KH, a 60-year-old management 
consultant, has all her life had great difficulty recogniz-
ing people by their voices. KH read an article in a popu-
lar scientific magazine that described prosopagnosia,  
figure 14.20  Listening to Normal Speech or Its 
Prosodic Components
Functional MRI scans were made while subjects listened 
to normal speech (blue and green regions) or the 
prosodic elements of speech with the meaningful 
components filtered out (orange and yellow regions).
(From Meyer, M., Alter, K., Friederici, A. D., Lohmann, G., and von Cramon, D. Y. 
Human Brain Mapping, 2002, 17, 73–88. Reprinted with permission.)
Prosodic speech
Normal speech
Left hemisphere
Right hemisphere

498	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
temporal cortex and inferior parietal cortex that are 
involved in integrating the planning of speech with au-
ditory feedback from one’s own voice.
Neumann et al. (2005) provide further evidence 
that the apparently abnormal auditory feedback in 
stutterers is reflected in decreased activation of their 
temporal cortex. The authors used functional MRI 
(fMRI) to measure the regional brain activation of 
stutterers reading sentences aloud during two ses-
sions, one before and one after a successful twelve-
week course of fluency-shaping therapy. Figure 14.22 
shows that, after the therapy, the activation of the 
temporal lobe—a region that Brown et al. (2005) 
found to show decreased activation—was increased. 
(See Figure 14.22.)
tend to show (relative to fluent speakers) excessive ac-
tivation of Broca’s area and the insula (regions involved 
in articulation), the supplementary motor area, and 
the vermis of the cerebellum and an absence of activa-
tion in auditory regions of the temporal lobe. Figure 14.21 
compares regional brain activity of fluent speakers and 
people who stutter. Areas shaded in orange indicate 
regions that are more highly activated in the brains of 
stutterers; areas shaded in blue indicate regions that 
are more highly activated in the brains of fluent speak-
ers. (The only region in the latter category is in the 
temporal lobe. See Figure 14.21.) The authors suggest 
that the problem may be caused by faulty auditory 
feedback from sounds of the stutterer’s own speech, 
shown by the lack of activity in the temporal lobe. 
They note that a magnetoencepholagraphic study by 
Salmelin et al. (2000) found disruptions in the nor-
mal timing of activation of brain regions involved in 
speech production.
Evidence in support of this suggestion includes 
the fact that delayed auditory feedback interferes 
with the speech of most fluent speakers but actually 
facilitates the speech of many people who stutter 
(Foundas et al., 2004a). Delayed auditory feedback is a 
procedure in which a person wearing headphones 
tries to speak normally while hearing his or her own 
voice, which has been electronically delayed, usually 
by 50–200 msec. (In fact, portable devices are com-
mercially available that include a microphone, head-
phones, and an electronic device that provides the 
delay.) Certainly, if there were simply a problem with 
the control of articulation in people who stutter, de-
layed auditory feedback would not be expected to 
have any effect on their fluency.
Watkins et al. (2008) used diffusion tensor imaging 
and found decreases in the white matter beneath the 
ventral premotor cortex of people who stuttered. They 
suggested that the axons in this white matter connect 
the ventral premotor cortex with regions of the superior 
figure 14.21  Stuttering and the Brain
Computer-generated images show data from a meta-analysis of functional-imaging 
studies of fluent speakers (blue regions) and people who stutter (orange regions), taken 
while they were speaking.
(From Brown, S., Ingham, R. J., Ingham, J. C., Laird, A. R., and Fox, P. T. Human Brain Mapping, 2005, 25, 105–117. 
Reprinted with permission.)
Vermis
Inferior frontal
cortex
Superior temporal
cortex
Inferior parietal
cortex
Primary motor
cortex
Supplementary 
motor area
figure 14.22  Effects of Therapy for Stuttering
A functional MRI scan shows regions of the superior 
temporal lobe that showed increased activity one year 
after a successful course of therapy for stuttering.
(From Neumann, K., Preibisch, C., Euler, H. A., von Gudenberg, A. W., 
Lanfermann, H., Gall, V., and Giraud, A.-L. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 2005,  
30, 23–39. Reprinted with permission.)

	
Speech Production and Comprehension: Brain Mechanisms  	
499
Section Summary
Speech Production and Comprehension: Brain Mechanisms
Two regions of the brain are especially important in 
understanding and producing speech. Broca’s area, in 
the left frontal lobe just rostral to the region of the 
primary motor cortex that controls the muscles of 
speech, is involved with speech production. This 
region contains memories of the sequences of muscu-
lar movements that produce words, each of which is 
connected with its auditory counterpart in the poste-
rior part of the brain. Broca’s aphasia—which is 
caused by damage to Broca’s area, adjacent regions 
of the frontal cortex, and underlying white matter—
consists of varying degrees of agrammatism, anomia, 
and articulation difficulties.
Wernicke’s area, in the posterior superior tempo-
ral lobe, is involved with speech perception. The 
region just adjacent to Wernicke’s area, which I have 
called the posterior language area, is necessary for 
speech comprehension and the translation of 
thoughts into words. Presumably, Wernicke’s area 
contains memories of the sounds of words, each of 
which is connected through the posterior language 
area with circuits that contain memories about the 
properties of the things the words denote and with 
circuits that are responsible for pronouncing the 
words. Damage restricted to Wernicke’s area causes 
pure word deafness—loss of the ability to understand 
speech but intact speech production, reading, and 
writing. The left hemisphere is involved in analysis of 
rapid changes in sounds, which is consistent with its 
role in the analysis of speech sounds, which are char-
acterized by such changes. Wernicke’s aphasia, 
caused by damage to Wernicke’s area and the poste-
rior language area, consists of poor speech compre-
hension, poor repetition, and production of fluent, 
meaningless speech. Transcortical sensory aphasia, 
caused by damage to the posterior speech area, con-
sists of poor speech comprehension and production, 
but the patients can repeat what they hear. Thus, the 
symptoms of Wernicke’s aphasia consist of those of 
transcortical sensory aphasia plus those of pure word 
deafness. (WA = TSA + PWD.) Feedback from mirror 
neurons that are activated when people hear the 
speech of other people may facilitate speech recogni-
tion. The right hemisphere plays a role in the more 
subtle, figurative aspects of speech.
The fact that people with transcortical sensory apha-
sia can repeat words that they cannot understand sug-
gests that there is a direct connection between 
Wernicke’s area and Broca’s area. Indeed, there is: the 
arcuate fasciculus. Damage to this bundle of axons pro-
duces conduction aphasia: disruption of the ability to 
repeat exactly what was heard without disruption of the 
ability to comprehend or produce meaningful speech. A 
parallel pathway, consisting of an anterior and a posterior 
bundle that connect in the inferior parietal cortex, may be 
responsible for the ability of people with pure conduction 
aphasia to understand and paraphrase what they hear.
The meanings of words are our memories of 
objects, actions, and other concepts associated with 
them. These meanings are memories and are stored in 
the association cortex, not in the speech areas them-
selves. Anomic aphasia, caused by damage to the 
temporal or parietal lobes, consists of difficulty in word 
finding, particularly in naming objects. Brain damage 
can also disrupt the “definitions” as well as the 
“entries” in the mental dictionary; damage to specific 
regions of the association cortex effectively erases 
some categories of the meanings of words. Damage 
to Broca’s area and surrounding regions disrupts the 
ability to name actions—to think of appropriate verbs.
The left hemisphere plays the more important 
role in the language abilities of deaf people who use 
sign language, just as it is in people who communi-
cate acoustically. Gestural language may have been 
the precursor to vocal speech; mirror neurons in 
Broca’s area are activated by hand movements.
Prosody includes changes in intonation, rhythm, 
and stress that add meaning, especially emotional 
meaning, to the sentences that we speak. The neural 
mechanisms that control the prosodic elements of 
speech appear to be in the right hemisphere.
Stuttering appears to be caused by abnormalities 
in neural circuits that are involved in feedback and 
planning and initiating speech, not in the circuits that 
contain the motor programs for articulation. Functional 
imaging indicates deficient auditory feedback pro-
duced by the stutterer’s own voice. Delayed auditory 
feedback, which impairs the speech of most fluent 
speakers, often facilitates the speech of stutterers.
(continued on next page)

500	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
Because so many terms and symptoms were 
described in this section, I have provided a table that 
summarizes them. (See Table 14.1.)
 Thought Questions
1.	Suppose that you were asked to determine the 
abilities and deficits of people with aphasia. 
What tasks would you include in your examina-
tion to test for the presence of particular  
deficits?
2.	 What are the thoughts of a person with severe 
Wernicke’s aphasia like? These people produce 
speech having very little meaning. Can you think  
of any ways in which you could test these people 
to find out whether their thoughts were any more 
coherent than their words?
aMay be better than spontaneous speech.
table 14.1  Aphasic Syndromes Produced by Brain Damage
Disorder
Areas of Lesion
Spontaneous 
Speech
Comprehension
Repetition
Naming
Wernicke’s aphasia 
 
 
Posterior portion of 
superior temporal gyrus 
(Wernicke’s area) and  
posterior language area
Fluent 
 
 
Poor 
 
 
Poor 
 
 
Poor 
 
 
Pure word deafness 
 
Wernicke’s area or its  
connection with primary 
auditory cortex
Fluent 
 
Poor 
 
Poor 
 
Good 
 
Broca’s aphasia 
 
Frontal cortex rostral to 
base of primary motor  
cortex (Broca’s area)
Nonfluent 
 
Good 
 
Poora 
 
Poor 
 
Conduction  
aphasia 
White matter beneath pari-
etal lobe superior to lateral 
fissure (arcuate fasciculus)
Fluent 
 
Good 
 
Poor 
 
Good 
 
Anomic aphasia 
Various parts of parietal and 
temporal lobes
Fluent 
Good 
Good 
Poor 
Transcortical  
sensory aphasia
Posterior language area 
Fluent 
Poor 
Good 
Poor 
Disorders of Reading  
and Writing
Reading and writing are closely related to listening and 
talking; thus, oral and written language abilities have 
many brain mechanisms in common. This section dis-
cusses the neural basis of reading and writing disorders. 
As you will see, the study of these disorders has provided 
us with some useful and interesting information.
Relation to Aphasia
The reading and writing skills of people with aphasia almost 
always resemble their speaking and comprehending abilities. 
For example, patients with Wernicke’s aphasia have as 
much difficulty reading and writing as they do speaking 
and understanding speech. Patients with Broca’s aphasia 
comprehend what they read about as well as they can un-
derstand speech, but their reading aloud is poor, of 
course. If their speech is agrammatical, so is their writing; 
and if they fail to comprehend grammar when listening to 
speech, they also fail to do so when reading. Patients with 
conduction aphasia generally have some difficulty read-
ing; when they read aloud, they often make semantic 
paraphasias (saying synonyms for some of the words they 
read), just as they do when attempting to repeat what they 
hear. Depending on the location of the lesion, some pa-
tients with transcortical sensory aphasia may read aloud 
accurately but fail to comprehend what they read.

	
Disorders of Reading and Writing 	
501
the visual field is transmitted to the right striate cortex 
(primary visual cortex) and then to regions of right vi-
sual association cortex. From there the information 
crosses the posterior corpus callosum and is transmit-
ted to a region of the left visual association cortex 
known as the visual word-form area (VWFA), where it is 
analyzed further. (I will have more to say about the 
VWFA later.) The information is then transmitted to 
speech mechanisms located in the left frontal lobe. 
Thus, the person can read the words aloud. (Look 
again at Figure 14.24a.)
The second diagram shows Dejerine’s patient. No-
tice how the additional lesion of the corpus callosum 
prevents visual information concerning written text from 
Pure Alexia
Dejerine (1892) described a remarkable syndrome, 
which we now call pure alexia, or sometimes pure word 
blindness or alexia without agraphia. His patient had a  
lesion in the visual cortex of the left occipital lobe and 
the posterior end of the corpus callosum. The patient 
could still write, although he had lost the ability to read. 
In fact, if he was shown some of his own writing, he 
could not read it.
x pure alexia  Loss of the ability to read without loss of the 
ability to write; produced by brain damage.
Several years ago, some colleagues and I studied a man 
with pure alexia who discovered his ability to write in an 
interesting way. A few months after he sustained a head 
injury that caused his brain damage, he and his wife 
were watching a service person repair their washing 
machine. The patient wanted to say something privately 
to his wife, so he picked up a pad of paper and jotted a 
note. As he was handing it to her, they suddenly real-
ized with amazement that although he could not read, 
he was able to write! His wife brought the note to their 
neurologist, who asked the patient to read it. Although 
he remembered the gist of the message, he could not 
read the words. Unfortunately, I do not have a copy of 
that note, but Figure 14.23 shows the writing of another 
person with pure alexia. (See Figure 14.23.)
figure 14.23  Letter from a Person with Pure Alexia
This letter was written to Dr. Elizabeth Warrington by a 
patient with pure alexia. The letter reads as follows: “Dear 
Dr. Warrington, Thank you for your letter of September 
the 16th. I shall be pleased to be at your office between 
10–10:30 am on Friday 17th october. I still find it very 
odd to be able to write this letter but not to be able to 
read it back a few minutes later. I much appreciate the 
opportunity to see you. Yours sincerely, Harry X.
(From McCarthy, R. A., and Warrington, E. K. Cognitive Neuropsychology: A 
Clinical Introduction. San Diego: Academic Press, 1990. Reprinted with permission.)
Although patients with pure alexia cannot read, 
they can recognize words that are spelled aloud to them; 
therefore, they have not lost their memories of the spell-
ings of words. Pure alexia is obviously a perceptual dis-
order; it is similar to pure word deafness, except that the 
patient has difficulty with visual input, not auditory in-
put. The disorder is caused by lesions that prevent visual 
information from reaching the visual association cortex 
of the left hemisphere (Damasio and Damasio, 1983, 
1986; Molko et al., 2002). Figure 14.24 explains why 
Dejerine’s original patient could not read. The first dia-
gram shows the pathway that visual information would 
take if a person had damage only to the left primary visual 
cortex. In this case the person’s right visual field would be 
blind; he or she would see nothing to the right of the 
fixation point. But people with this disorder can read. 
Their only problem is that they must look to the right of 
each word so that they can see all of it, which means that 
they read somewhat more slowly than someone with full 
vision. (See Figure 14.24a.)
Let us trace the flow of visual information for a 
person with this brain damage that enables that person 
to read words aloud. Information from the left side of 

502	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
reaching the VWFA in the left hemisphere. Because this 
brain region is essential for the ability to recognize words, 
the patient cannot read. (See Figure 14.24b.)
Mao-Draayer and Panitch (2004) reported the case 
of a man with multiple sclerosis who displayed the 
symptoms of pure alexia after sustaining a lesion that 
damaged both the subcortical white matter of the left 
occipital lobe and the posterior corpus callosum. As 
you can see in Figure 14.25, the lesions are in precisely 
the locations that Dejerine predicted would cause this 
syndrome, except that the white matter that serves the 
left primary visual cortex is damaged, not the cortex it-
self. (See Figure 14.25.)
I must note that the diagrams shown in Figure 14.24 
are as simple and schematic as possible. They illustrate 
only the pathway involved in seeing a word and pro-
nouncing it, and they ignore neural structures that 
would be involved in understanding its meaning. As we 
will see later in this chapter, evidence from patients with 
brain lesions indicates that seeing and pronouncing 
words can take place independently of understanding 
figure 14.24  Pure Alexia
In this schematic, red arrows indicate the flow of information that has been interrupted 
by brain damage. (a) The route followed by information as a person with damage to 
the left primary visual cortex reads aloud. (b) Additional damage to the posterior 
corpus callosum interrupts the flow of information and produces pure alexia.
Damage to left primary visual cortex
causes blindness in right visual field
Broca's area
Wernicke's
area
Lateral
geniculate
nucleus
Information
from left
visual field
Visual word-form area 
(VWFA) receives
information from left 
visual field
through corpus
callosum
Left primary
visual cortex
is destroyed
Damage to posterior corpus
callosum prevents information
from posterior right hemisphere
from reaching left hemisphere
(a)
(b)
figure 14.25  Pure Alexia in a Patient 
with Multiple Sclerosis
The lesions correspond to those shown in Figure 14.24 
(b), except that the white matter that serves the left 
primary visual cortex is damaged, not the cortex itself.
(From Mao-Draayer, Y., and Panitch, H. Multiple Sclerosis, 2004, 10, 705–707. 
Reprinted with permission.)
Damage to posterior
corpus callosum
Damage to white matter that
serves the left visual cortex

	
Disorders of Reading and Writing 	
503
Figure 14.26 illustrates some elements of the read-
ing processes. The diagram is an oversimplification of 
a very complex process, but it helps to organize some 
of the facts that investigators have obtained. It consid-
ers only reading and pronouncing single words, not 
understanding the meaning of text. When we see a  
familiar word, we normally recognize it as a whole and 
pronounce it. If we see an unfamiliar word or a pro-
nounceable nonword, we must try to read it phoneti-
cally. (See Figure 14.26.)
Investigators have reported several types of ac-
quired dyslexias, and I will describe three of them 
in this section: surface dyslexia, phonological dys-
lexia, and direct dyslexia. Surface dyslexia is a defi-
cit in whole-word reading. The term surface reflects 
the fact that people with this disorder make errors 
related to the visual appearance of the words and to 
pronunciation rules, not to the meaning of the 
words, which is metaphorically “deeper” than the 
appearance.
them. Thus, although the diagrams are simplified, they 
are not unreasonable, given what we know about the 
neural components of the reading process.
You will recall that writing is not the only form of 
visible language; deaf people can communicate by 
means of sign language just as well as hearing people 
can communicate by means of spoken language. 
Hickok et al. (1995) reported on a case of “sign 
blindness” caused by damage similar to that which 
causes pure alexia. The patient, a right-handed deaf 
woman, sustained a stroke that damaged her left oc-
cipital lobe and the posterior corpus callosum. The 
lesion did not impair her ability to sign in coherent 
sentences, but she could no longer understand other 
people’s sign language, and she lost her ability to 
read. She had some ability to comprehend single 
signs (corresponding to single words), but she could 
not comprehend signed sentences.
Toward an Understanding  
of Reading
Reading involves at least two different processes: direct 
recognition of the word as a whole and sounding it out 
letter by letter. When we see a familiar word, we nor-
mally recognize it and pronounce it—a process known 
as whole-word reading. (With very long words we might 
instead perceive segments of several letters each.) The 
second method, which we use for unfamiliar words, 
requires recognition of individual letters and knowl-
edge of the sounds they make. This process is known as 
phonetic reading.
Evidence for our ability to sound out words is easy to 
obtain. In fact, you can prove to yourself that phonetic 
reading exists by trying to read the following words:
glab trisk chint
Well, as you could see, they are not really words, but 
I doubt that you had trouble pronouncing them. Obvi-
ously, you did not recognize them, because you probably 
never saw them before. Therefore, you had to use what 
you know about the sounds that are represented by par-
ticular letters (or small groups of letters, such as ch) to 
figure out how to pronounce the words.
The best evidence that proves that people can read 
words without sounding them out, using the whole-
word method, comes from studies of patients with ac-
quired dyslexias. Dyslexia means “faulty reading.” Ac-
quired dyslexias are those caused by damage to the 
brains of people who already know how to read. In 
contrast, developmental dyslexias refer to reading diffi-
culties that become apparent when children are learn-
ing to read. Developmental dyslexias, which appear to 
involve anomalies in brain circuitry, are discussed in a 
later section.
figure 14.26  Model of the Reading Process
In this simplified model, whole-word reading is used  
for most familiar words; phonetic reading is used for 
unfamiliar words and for nonwords such as glab, trisk,  
or chint.
Sight of word
Whole-word recognition
Letter recognition
Phonetic coding
(sounds of letters)
Whole-word
reading
Phonetic reading
Control of speech
Saying word aloud
x whole-word reading  Reading by recognizing a word as a 
whole; “sight reading.”
x phonetic reading  Reading by decoding the phonetic 
significance of letter strings; “sound reading.”
x surface dyslexia  A reading disorder in which a person can 
read words phonetically but has difficulty reading irregularly 
spelled words by the whole-word method.

504	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
words (Beauvois and Dérouesné, 1979; Dérouesné and 
Beauvois, 1979). (In this context, phonology—loosely 
translated as “laws of sound”—refers to the relationship 
between letters and the sounds they represent.) People 
with phonological dyslexia may be excellent readers if 
they had already acquired a good reading vocabulary 
before their brain damage occurred.
Phonological dyslexia provides further evidence 
that whole-word reading and phonological reading in-
volve different brain mechanisms. Phonological read-
ing, which is the only way we can read nonwords or 
words we have not yet learned, entails some sort of letter- 
to-sound decoding. Obviously, phonological reading of 
English requires more than decoding of the sounds pro-
duced by single letters, because, for example, some 
sounds are transcribed as two-letter sequences (such as 
th or sh) and the addition of the letter e to the end of a 
word lengthens an internal vowel (can becomes cane). 
(See Figure 14.28.)
The Japanese language provides a particularly  
interesting distinction between phonetic and whole-
word reading. The Japanese language makes use  
of two kinds of written symbols. Kanji symbols are 
pictographs, adopted from the Chinese language (al-
though they are pronounced as Japanese words). 
Because patients with surface dyslexia have diffi-
culty recognizing words as a whole, they are obliged 
to sound them out. Thus, they can easily read words 
with regular spelling, such as hand, table, or chin. 
However, they have difficulty reading words with ir-
regular spelling, such as sew, pint, and yacht. In fact, 
they may read these words as sue, pinnt, and yatchet. 
They have no difficulty reading pronounceable non-
words, such as glab, trisk, and chint. Because people 
with surface dyslexia cannot recognize whole words 
by their appearance, they must, in effect, listen to 
their own pronunciation to understand what they are 
reading. If they read the word pint and pronounce it 
pinnt, they will say that it is not an English word 
(which it is not, pronounced that way). If the word is 
one member of a homophone, it will be impossible 
for them to understand it unless it is read in the con-
text of a sentence. For example, if you hear the single 
word “pair” without additional information, you can-
not know whether the speaker is referring to pair, 
pear, or pare. Thus, a patient with surface dyslexia 
who reads the word pair might say, “. . . it could be 
two of a kind, apples and . . . or what you do with 
your fingernails” (Gurd and Marshall, 1993, p. 594). 
(See Figure 14.27.)
The symptoms of phonological dyslexia are oppo-
site those of surface dyslexia: People with this disorder 
can read by the whole-word method but cannot sound 
words out. Thus, they can read words that they are al-
ready familiar with but have great difficulty figuring out 
how to read unfamiliar words or pronounceable non-
figure 14.27  Surface Dyslexia
In this hypothetical example, whole-word reading is 
damaged; only phonetic reading remains.
Sight of word
Letter recognition
Phonetic coding
(sounds of letters)
Control of speech
Saying word aloud
Phonetic reading
Whole-word
reading is
damaged
Whole-word recognition
x phonological dyslexia  A reading disorder in which a person 
can read familiar words but has difficulty reading unfamiliar words 
or pronounceable nonwords.
figure 14.28  Phonological Dyslexia
In this hypothetical example, phonetic reading is 
damaged; only whole-word reading remains.
Letter recognition
Whole-word recognition
Control of speech
Saying word aloud
Phonetic reading
is damaged
Sight of word
Phonetic coding
(sounds of letters)

	
Disorders of Reading and Writing 	
505
chapter, feedback from the inferior frontal cortex 
plays a role in perception of spoken words.) Once 
words have been identified—by either means—their 
meaning must be accessed, which means that the two 
pathways converge on regions of the brain involved in 
recognition of word meaning, grammatical structure, 
and semantics. (See Figure 14.29.)
In fact, the neural circuits involved in written and 
auditory information must also eventually converge, 
because both must have access to the same linguistic 
and semantic information that identify words and their 
meaning. An interesting study by Marinkovic et al. 
(2003) used magnetoencephalography to trace re-
gional brain activation as people heard or read indi-
vidual words. As Figure 14.30 (left) shows, neural acti-
vation responsible for the analysis of a spoken word 
begins in the auditory cortex of the temporal lobe and 
Thus, they represent concepts by means of visual sym-
bols but do not provide a guide to their pronuncia-
tion. Reading words expressed in kanji symbols 
is analogous, then, to whole-word reading. Kana sym-
bols are phonetic representations of syllables; thus, 
they encode acoustical information. These symbols 
are used primarily to represent foreign words or  
Japanese words that the average reader would be un-
likely to recognize if they were represented by their 
kanji symbols. Reading words expressed in kana sym-
bols is obviously phonetic.
Studies of Japanese people with localized brain 
damage have shown that the reading of kana and kanji 
symbols involves different brain mechanisms (Iwata, 
1984; Sakurai et al., 1994; Sakurai, Ichikawa, and Mannen, 
2001). Difficulty reading kanji symbols is a form of sur-
face dyslexia, whereas difficulty reading kana symbols is 
a form of phonological dyslexia. What regions are in-
volved in these two kinds of reading?
Evidence from lesion and functional-imaging stud-
ies with readers of English, Chinese, and Japanese sug-
gest that the process of whole-word reading follows the 
ventral stream of the visual system to a region, the fusi-
form gyrus, located on the base of the temporal lobe. 
For example, functional-imaging studies by Thuy et al. 
(2004) and Liu et al. (2008) found that the reading of 
kanji words or Chinese characters (whole-word read-
ing) activated the left fusiform gyrus, a region of the 
cerebral cortex located at the base of the temporal 
lobe. This region has come to be known as the visual 
word-form area or VWFA (Dehaene, 2009). As we saw 
in Chapter 6, part of the fusiform gyrus is also involved 
in the perception of faces and other shapes that re-
quire expertise to distinguish—and, certainly, recog-
nizing whole words or kanji symbols requires exper-
tise. The location of the neural circuitry responsible 
for phonological reading is less certain. Many investi-
gators believe that it involves the region of the cerebral 
cortex that surrounds the junction of the inferior pari-
etal lobe and the superior temporal lobe (the tempo-
roparietal cortex) and then follows a fiber bundle 
from this region to the inferior frontal cortex, which 
includes Broca’s area (Sakurai et al., 2000; Jobard, 
Crivello, and Tzourio-Mazoyer, 2003; Thuy et al., 2004; 
Tan et al., 2005). However, damage restricted to the 
cortex of the VWFA—without damage to underlying 
white matter—produces pure alexia (Beversdorf et al., 
1997). Thus, although phonological reading may in-
volve the temporoparietal cortex, the VWFA appears 
to play an essential role in both forms of reading. The 
fact that phonological reading involves Broca’s area 
suggests that it may actually involve articulation—that 
we sound out words not so much by “hearing” them in 
our heads as by feeling ourselves pronounce them si-
lently to ourselves. (As we saw in the first part of this 
x visual word-form area (VWFA)  A region of the fusiform gyrus 
on the base of the temporal lobe that plays a critical role in 
whole-word recognition.
figure 14.29  Phonological and Whole-Word Reading
(a) Phonological reading. (b) Whole-word reading. VWFA = 
visual word-form area of the fusiform cortex.
Inferior frontal
cortex
Phonological
reading
Temporoparietal
cortex
(a)
(b)
Visual word-form area:
whole-word reading

506	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
pictograms to represent individual words, but he aban-
doned that attempt when its complexity became obvi-
ous. He then analyzed the sounds of his language and 
selected eighty-five symbols—from English and Greek 
letters he found in books and some additional ones that 
he invented. He did not know the sounds that English 
and Greek letters represented, so the sounds he assigned 
to them bore no relationship to those of the languages 
spreads to the auditory association cortex on the supe-
rior temporal lobe (including Wernicke’s area) and 
then to the inferior frontal cortex (including Broca’s 
area). The neural activation responsible for the analy-
sis of a printed word (Figure 14.30 right) begins in the 
visual cortex and spreads to the base of the temporal 
lobe (including the VWFA in the fusiform gyrus) and 
then to the inferior frontal cortex. The temporopari-
etal cortex receives little activation, presumably be-
cause the subjects were fluent readers who did not 
need to sound out the common words they were asked 
to read. (See Figure 14.30.)
Let’s consider the role of the VWFA. Obviously, 
some parts of the visual association cortex must be in-
volved in perceiving written words. You will recall from 
Chapter 6 that visual agnosia is a perceptual deficit in 
which people with bilateral damage to the visual association 
cortex cannot recognize objects by sight. However, peo-
ple with visual agnosia can still read, which means that 
the perceptual analysis of objects and words involves at 
least some different brain mechanisms. This fact is both 
interesting and puzzling. Certainly, the ability to read 
cannot have shaped the evolution of the human brain, 
because the invention of writing is only a few thousand 
years old, and, until very recently, the vast majority of 
the world’s population was illiterate. Thus, reading and 
object recognition use brain mechanisms that undoubt-
edly existed long before the invention of writing. How-
ever, just as experience seeing faces affects the develop-
ment of the fusiform face area in the right hemisphere, 
experience learning to read words affects the develop-
ment of the neural circuitry in the visual word-form 
area—which, probably not coincidentally, is found in 
the fusiform cortex of the left hemisphere. A functional 
imaging study by Brem et al. (2010) scanned the brains 
of young children (mean age 6.4 years) who had not yet 
learned to read. Initially, the sight of printed words acti-
vated the ventral posterior occipitotemporal region bi-
laterally. After 3–4 hours of teaching the associations of 
written letters and their sounds, the sight of words acti-
vated the left hemisphere. Clearly, learning to read 
affects the connections of the neural system involved in 
recognizing letters and words.
At least two written languages were invented by spe-
cific individuals. Hangul, the written form of the Korean 
language, was invented by King Sejong (and his schol-
ars) in the fourteenth century. The characters of the 
Hangul alphabet are designed to look like the shapes 
the mouth makes when they are pronounced. In the 
early nineteenth century, Sequoyah, a Cherokee living 
in what is now the state of North Carolina, recognized 
the value of the “talking leaves” that European settlers 
used to record information and send messages to each 
other. He spent twelve years developing a written  
version of his language. At first, he tried to develop  
figure 14.30  Hearing and Reading Words
Progression of regional activity was measured by 
magnetoencephalography after hearing or reading a word.
(From Marinkovic, K., Dhond, R. P., Dale, A. M., Glessner, M., Carr, V., and 
Halgren, E. Neuron, 2003, 38, 487–497. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.)
Auditory
Visual
55 ms
100 ms
170 ms
170 ms
250-270
230-250
300-340
390-450
390-450
550-620
550-620
300-340

	
Disorders of Reading and Writing 	
507
Functional imaging showed that some brain regions 
were activated by all of the visual stimuli, including letter­
like symbols, some were activated by letters but not sym-
bols, and so on, up to regions that were activated by real 
words. The most selective region included the left ante-
rior fusiform cortex (the VWFA), which was activated 
only by actual words. In fact, as Figure 14.33 shows, the 
scans revealed a posterior-to-anterior gradient of selec-
tivity, from symbol to whole word, along the base of the 
left occipital and temporal lobes. A second, smaller, 
gradient was seen in Broca’s area. Presumably, this gra-
dient represented phonetic reading—decoding of the 
sounds represented by the stimuli that the subjects 
viewed. Note that very little activity was produced by letter­
like symbols (shown in red) in Broca’s area. This makes 
sense, because there is no way to pronounce these sym-
bols. (See Figure 14.33.)
they came from. Within a few months of the introduc-
tion of Sequoyah’s alphabet, thousands of Cherokees 
learned to read and write.
The fusiform face area has the ability to quickly 
recognize unique configurations of people’s eyes, noses, 
lips, and other features of their faces even when the dif-
ferences between two people’s faces are very similar. For 
example, parents and close friends of identical twins can 
see at a glance which twin they are looking at. Similarly, 
our VWFA can recognize a word even if it closely re-
sembles another one. (See Figure 14.31.) It can also 
quickly recognize words written in different typestyles, 
fonts, or CASES. This means that the VWFA can recog-
nize whole words with different shapes; certainly, chair 
and CHAIR do not look the same. It takes an experi-
enced reader the same amount of time to read equally 
familiar three-letter words and six-letter words (Nazir 
et al., 1998), which means that the whole-word reading 
process does not have to identify the letters one at a 
time, just as the face-recognition process in the right 
fusiform cortex does not have to identify each feature of 
a face individually before the face is recognized. Instead, 
we recognize several letters and their locations relative 
to each other.
A functional-imaging study by Vinckier et al. (2007) 
investigated the means by which the brain recognizes 
whole words. First, I need to provide some definitions. A 
bigram is a sequence of two letters (bi, “two”; gram, “some-
thing written”). Frequent bigrams are two-letter sequences 
that are often encountered in a particular language. For 
example, the bigram SH often occurs in English. In con-
trast, LQ is an infrequent bigram. Quadrigrams are strings 
of four letters and can be classified as frequent or infre-
quent. Now let’s go to the study. Vinckier and his col-
leagues had adult readers look at the following stimuli: 
(1) strings of false fonts (nonsensical letterlike symbols), 
(2) strings of infrequent letters, (3) strings that con-
tained only infrequent bigrams, (4) strings that con-
tained frequent bigrams, (5) strings that contained fre-
quent quadrigrams, and (6) real words. (See Figure 14.32 
for examples of these stimuli.)
figure 14.31  Subtle Differences in Written Words
Unless you can read Arabic, Hindi, or Mandarin, you will 
probably have to examine these words carefully to find 
the small differences. However, as a reader of English, 
you will immediately recognize the words car and ear.
(Adapted from Devlin, J. T., Jamison, H. L., Gonnerman, L. M., and Matthews,  
P. M. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2006, 18, 911–922.)
English
Arabic
Hindi
Mandarin
cars
ears
pomegranate time/era
today
come
man
sky
figure 14.32  Stimuli Used in a Test of Word 
Recognition
These examples of stimuli were used in the experiment 
by Vinckier et al. (2007). Mouton is the French word for 
sheep. (The experiment took place in France.)
Infrequent 
letters
Frequent 
letters
Frequent 
bigrams
Frequent 
quadrigrams
False
font
Words
JZWYWK QOADTQ QUMBSS
AVONIL
MOUTON
Types of stimuli
Examples
figure 14.33  Word Recognition in the VWFA
The scans show regions of the brain that selectively 
responded to letterlike symbols, infrequent letters, 
frequent letters, bigrams, quadrigrams, and words. This 
range is indicated by colors that range from red to violet. 
Response gradients were seen in the VWFA (visual word-
form area) and in Broca’s area.
(From Vinckier, F., Dehaene, S., Jobert, A., Dubus, J. P., Sigman, M., and Cohen, 
L. Neuron, 2007, 55, 143–156. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.)

508	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
Cultural inventions such as reading and math-
ematics are too recent to have influenced the 
human genome. Therefore, they must be ac-
quired through the recycling of neuronal net-
works evolved for other purposes, but whose 
initial properties are sufficiently similar to the 
target function and which possess enough plas-
ticity, particularly during childhood, for their 
functionality to be partially converted to this 
novel task. (p. 1837)
Szwed et al. (2009) note that the most important 
cues to object recognition (which is the primary task of 
the visual system) are those that remain relatively con-
stant even when we view objects from different angles. 
The most reliable of these cues are the ways that lines 
meet at vertices, forming junctions with particular 
shapes, such as L, T, and X. (I think you can see where 
this is going.) Szwed and his colleagues presented in-
complete drawings of objects and letters that were miss-
ing their vertices (junctions of lines) or portions of the 
midsegments (lines between these junctions). Figure 14.35 
shows a drawing and a word with the vertices missing. 
Can you figure out what they are? (See Figure 14.35.) 
Now turn the page and look at the same drawing and 
word with its midsegments missing instead. I think you 
will find them easier to recognize. (See Figure 14.37.)
I found it easier to recognize the drawing and word 
with the intact vertices (as I suspect you did)—and so 
did the subjects in the study by Szwed et al.
Many studies have found that damage to the VWFA 
produces surface dyslexia—that is, impairment of whole-
word reading. A study by Gaillard et al. (2006) com-
bined fMRI and lesion evidence from a single subject 
that provides evidence that the left fusiform cortex does, 
indeed, contain this region. A patient with a severe sei-
zure disorder became a candidate for surgery aimed at 
removal of a seizure focus. Before the surgery was per-
formed, the patient viewed printed words and pictures 
of faces, houses, and tools while his brain was being 
scanned. He was warned that the seizure focus was  
located in a region that played a critical role in reading,  
but his symptoms were so severe that he elected to undergo 
the surgery. As expected, the surgery produced a deficit 
in whole-word reading. A combination of structural and 
functional imaging revealed that the lesion—a very 
small one—was located in the fusiform gyrus, the loca-
tion of the VWFA. (See Figure 14.34.)
What did the region of the visual association cortex 
that we now know as the VWFA do before people in-
vented written language? (For that matter, what does 
this region do in people in present times who are illiter-
ate?) As Dehaene et al. (2010) note:
figure 14.34  Effects of a VWFA Lesion
The scans show responses of brain regions to houses, 
words, faces, and tools before and after surgical removal 
of a small region of the VWFA. Note that the response to 
words (dark blue) is lost, but responses to faces, houses, 
and tools remains. The lesion is indicated by the green 
arrowheads.
(From Gaillard, R., Naccache, L., Pinel, P., Clémenceau, S., Volle, E., Hasboun, D., 
Dupont, S., Baulac, M., Dehaene, S., Adam, C., and Cohen, L. Neuron, 2006, 50, 
191–204. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.)
Houses
Words
Faces
Tools
Lesion
Before surgery
After surgery
L
R
R
L
figure 14.35  Object and Word Recognition 
After Vertices Have Been Eliminated
(Adapted from Szwed, M., Cohen, L, Qiao, E., and Dehaene, S. Vision Research, 
2009, 49, 718–725.)

	
Disorders of Reading and Writing 	
509
to communicate verbally; his speech was meaningless, 
and he was unable to comprehend what other people 
said to him. However, he could read words with which 
he was already familiar. He could not read pronounce-
able nonwords; therefore, he had lost the ability to read 
phonetically. His comprehension deficit seemed com-
plete; when the investigators presented him with a word 
and several pictures, one of which corresponded to the 
word, he read the word correctly but had no idea what 
picture went with it. Gerhand’s patient showed a similar 
pattern of deficits except that she was able to read pho-
netically: She could sound out pronounceable non-
words. These findings indicate that the brain regions 
responsible for phonetic reading and whole-word read-
ing are each directly connected with brain regions re-
sponsible for speech.
Developmental Dyslexias
Some children have great difficulty learning to read 
and never become fluent readers, even though they are 
otherwise intelligent. Specific language learning disor-
ders, called developmental dyslexias, tend to occur in 
families, a finding that suggests a genetic (and hence 
biological) component. The concordance rate of 
monozygotic twins ranges from 84 percent to 100 per-
cent and that of dizygotic twins ranges from 20 percent 
to 35 percent (Démonet, Taylor, and Chaix, 2004). 
Linkage and association studies suggest that the chro-
mosomes 3, 6, and 15 may contain genes responsible 
for different components of this disorder (Kang and 
Drayna, 2011).
As we saw earlier, the fact that written language 
is a recent invention means that natural selection 
could not have given us brain mechanisms whose 
only role is to interpret written language. Therefore, 
we should not expect that developmental dyslexia 
involves only deficits in reading. Indeed, researchers 
have found a variety of language deficits that do not 
directly involve reading. One common deficit is de-
ficient phonological awareness. That is, people with 
developmental dyslexia have difficulty blending or 
rearranging the sounds of words that they hear 
(Eden and Zeffiro, 1998). For example, they have 
difficulty recognizing that if we remove the first 
sound from “cat,” we are left with the word “at.” 
They also have difficulty distinguishing the order of 
Changizi et al. (2006) analyzed the configurations 
of letters and symbols used in a large number of former 
and present writing systems from all over the world. 
They found that these characters seem to have been 
chosen by the cultures that invented them to match 
those found in objects in nature’s scenes—and they all 
involve junctions of lines. Early forms of writing used 
actual pictures, but the pictures became simplified and 
eventually turned into simple lines or intersecting lines 
and curves. Even complex symbols such as Chinese 
characters consist of intersecting brush strokes. Figure 
14.36 shows a few of the ways that different types of in-
tersections of two line segments can be transformed 
into letters found in various writing systems. (See Figure 
14.36.) Presumably, the region of the brain that be-
comes the VWFA through the process of learning to 
read originally evolved to recognize objects by learning 
the configuration of lines (straight and curved) and 
their junctions. Our ancestors invented forms of writing 
that use symbols that are distinguished by these charac-
teristics, and a portion of the fusiform gyrus became 
“recycled” (as Dehaene et al. phrased it) into the VWFA.
As I mentioned earlier in this chapter, recognizing 
a spoken word is different from understanding it. For 
example, patients with transcortical sensory aphasia 
can repeat what is said to them even though they show 
no signs of understanding what they hear or say. The 
same is true for reading. Direct dyslexia resembles 
transcortical sensory aphasia, except that the words in 
question are written, not spoken (Schwartz, Marin, and 
Saffran, 1979; Lytton and Brust, 1989; Gerhand, 2001). 
Patients with direct dyslexia are able to read aloud even 
though they cannot understand the words they are saying. Af-
ter sustaining a stroke that damaged his left frontal and 
temporal lobes, Lytton and Brust’s patient lost the ability 
figure 14.36  Examples of Ways That Different 
Types of Intersections of Two Line Segments Can 
Be Transformed into Letters Found in Various 
Writing Systems
(Adapted from Changizi, M. A., Zhang, Q., Ye, H., and Shimojo, S. American 
Naturalist, 2006, 167, E117–E139.)
etc.
etc.
etc.
x direct dyslexia  A language disorder caused by brain damage 
in which the person can read words aloud without understanding 
them.
x developmental dyslexia  A reading difficulty in a person of 
normal intelligence and perceptual ability; of genetic origin or 
caused by prenatal or perinatal factors.

510	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
different patterns of brain activation in the two groups. 
A child’s reading skill was positively correlated with ac-
tivation of the left VWFA. Hoeft et al. (2007) found that 
dyslexics showed decreased activation in the left tempo-
roparietal cortex (dorsal to the region identified by 
Shaywitz et al.) and in the VWFA. They also saw hyper­
activation of the left inferior frontal cortex, including  
Broca’s area. Presumably, the activation of Broca’s area 
reflected an effort to decode the phonology of the in-
complete information being received from the poorly 
functioning regions of the more posterior brain re-
gions involved in reading.
Most languages—including English—contain many 
irregular words. For example, consider cough, rough, 
bough, and through. Because there is no phonetic 
rule that describes how these words are to be pro-
nounced, readers of English are obliged to memo-
rize them. In fact, the forty sounds that distinguish 
English words can be spelled in up to 1120 different 
ways. In contrast, Italian is much more regular; this 
language contains twenty-five different sounds that 
can be spelled in only thirty-three combinations of 
letters (Helmuth, 2001). Paulesu et al. (2001) found 
that developmental dyslexia is rare among people 
who speak Italian and is much more common among 
speakers of English and French (another language 
with many irregular words). Paulesu and his col-
leagues identified college students with a history of 
dyslexia from Italy, France, and Great Britain. The 
Italian dyslexics were much harder to find, and their 
disorders were much less severe than those of their 
English-speaking and French-speaking counter-
parts. However, functional imaging revealed that 
when all three groups were asked to read, their 
scans all showed the same pattern of activation: a 
decrease in the activity of the left occipitotemporal 
cortex—the same general region that Shaywitz et al. 
(2002) identified.
Paulesu and his colleagues (2001) concluded 
that the brain anomalies that cause dyslexia are simi-
lar in the three countries they studied but that the 
regularity of Italian spelling made it much easier for 
potential dyslexics in Italy to learn to read. By the 
way, other “dyslexia-friendly” languages include 
Spanish, Finnish, Czech, and Japanese. One of the 
authors of this study, Chris D. Frith, cites the case of 
an Australian boy who lived in Japan. He learned to 
read Japanese normally but was dyslexic in English 
(Recer, 2001). If the spelling of words in the English 
language were regularized (for example, frend in-
stead of friend, frate instead of freight, coff instead of 
cough), many children who develop dyslexia under 
the present system would develop into much better 
readers. Somehow, I don’t foresee that happening in 
the near future.
sequences of sounds (Helenius, Uutela, and Hari, 
1999). Problems such as these might be expected to 
impair the ability to read phonetically. Dyslexic chil-
dren also tend to have great difficulty in writing: 
They make spelling errors, they show poor spatial 
arrangements of letters, they omit letters, and their 
writing tends to have weak grammatical develop-
ment (Habib, 2000).
Developmental dyslexia is a heterogeneous and 
complex trait; therefore, it undoubtedly has more 
than one cause. However, most studies that have 
closely examined the nature of the impairments seen 
in people with developmental dyslexia have found 
phonological impairments to be most common. For 
example, a study of sixteen dyslexics by Ramus et al. 
(2003) found that all had phonological deficits. Ten 
of the people also had auditory deficits, four also had 
a motor deficit, and two also had a visual deficit. 
These deficits—especially auditory deficits—aggra-
vated the people’s difficulty in reading but did not 
appear to be primarily responsible for the difficulty. 
Five of the people had only phonological deficits, and 
these deficits were sufficient to interfere with their 
ability to read.
Some evidence has been obtained from functional-
imaging studies that suggest that the brains of dyslexics 
process written information differently than do the 
brains of proficient readers. For example, Shaywitz et 
al. (2002) had seventy dyslexic children and seventy-
four nondyslexic children read words and pronounce-
able nonwords. The researchers found significantly  
figure 14.37  Object and Word Recognition After 
Midsegments of Lines Have Been Eliminated
(Adapted from Szwed, M., Cohen, L, Qiao, E., and Dehaene, S. Vision Research, 
2009, 49, 718–725.)

	
Disorders of Reading and Writing 	
511
heavily on the skills that are learned earlier. For exam-
ple, to write most words, we must be able to “sound 
them out in our heads,” that is, to hear them and to ar-
ticulate them subvocally. If you want to demonstrate this 
to yourself, try to write a long word such as antidisestab-
lishmentarianism from memory and see whether you can 
do it without saying the word to yourself. If you recite a 
poem or sing a song to yourself under your breath at the 
same time, you will see that the writing comes to a halt.
A second way of writing involves transcribing an im-
age of what a particular word looks like—copying a vi-
sual mental image. Have you ever looked off into the 
distance to picture a word so that you could remember 
how to spell it? Some people are not very good at pho-
nological spelling and have to write some words down to 
see whether they look correct. This method obviously 
involves visual memories, not acoustical ones.
A third way of writing involves memorization of let-
ter sequences. We learn these sequences the way we 
learn poems or the lyrics to a song. For example, many 
Americans learned to spell Mississippi with a singsong 
chant that goes like this: M-i-s-s-i-s-s-i-p-p-i, emphasizing 
the boldfaced letters. (Similarly, most speakers of Eng-
lish say the alphabet with the rhythm of a nursery song 
that is commonly used to teach it.) This method involves 
memorizing sequences of letter names, not translating 
sounds into the corresponding letters.
Toward an Understanding  
of Writing
Writing depends on knowledge of the words that are to 
be written, along with the proper grammatical structure 
of the sentences they are to form. Therefore, if a pa-
tient is unable to express himself or herself by speech, 
we should not be surprised to see a writing disturbance 
(dysgraphia) as well. In addition, most cases of dyslexia 
are accompanied by dysgraphia.
One type of writing disorder involves difficulties in 
motor control—in directing the movements of a pen or 
pencil to form letters and words. Investigators have re-
ported surprisingly specific types of writing disorders that 
fall into this category. For example, some patients can 
write numbers but not letters, some can write uppercase 
letters but not lowercase letters, some can write consonants 
but not vowels, some can write cursively but cannot print 
uppercase letters, and others can write letters normally but 
have difficulty placing them in an orderly fashion on the 
page (Cubelli, 1991; Alexander et al., 1992; Margolin and 
Goodman-Schulman, 1992; Silveri, 1996).
Many regions of the brain are involved in writing. For 
example, damage that produces various forms of aphasia 
will produce impairments in writing that are similar to 
those seen in speech. Organization of the motor aspects 
of writing involves the dorsal parietal lobe and the premotor 
cortex. These regions (and the primary motor cortex,  
of course) become activated when people engage in writ-
ing, and damage to these regions impairs writing (Otsuki 
et al., 1999; Katanoda, Yoshikawa, and Sugishita, 2001; 
Menon and Desmond, 2001). A functional-imaging study 
by Rijntjes et al. (1999) had people sign their names with 
either their index finger or their big toe. In both cases, 
doing so activated the premotor cortex that controlled 
movements of the hand. This finding suggests that when 
we learn to make a complex series of movements, the 
relevant information is stored in regions of the motor  
association cortex that control the part of the body that is 
being used but that this information can be used to con-
trol similar movements in other parts of the body.  
Longcamp et al. (2005) found that simply looking at al-
phabetical characters activated the premotor cortex: on 
the left side in right-handed people and on the right side 
in left-handed people. (See Figure 14.38.)
A more basic type of writing disorder involves prob-
lems in the ability to spell words, as opposed to prob-
lems with making accurate movements of the fingers. I 
will devote the rest of this section to this type of disor-
der. Like reading, writing (or, more specifically, spell-
ing) involves more than one method. The first method 
is related to audition. When children acquire language 
skills, they first learn to recognize the sounds of words, 
then learn to say them, then learn to read, and then 
learn to write. Undoubtedly, reading and writing depend 
figure 14.38  Writing and the Ventral Premotor 
Cortex
Subjects viewing letters activated the ventral premotor 
cortex in the hemisphere used for writing: the left 
hemisphere in right-handed subjects (yellow) and the 
right hemisphere in left-handed subjects (red).
(From Longcamp, M., Anton, J.-L., Roth, M., and Velay, J.-L. Neuropsychologia, 
2005, 43, 1801–1809. Reprinted with permission.)

512	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
writing of irregularly spelled English words or kanji 
symbols (Nakamura et al., 2000; Rapcsak and Beeson, 
2004). This region appears to be involved not in the 
motor aspects of writing but in knowledge of how ir-
regular words are spelled or what strokes make up a 
kanji character.
Figure 14.39 shows the brain damage that causes pho-
nological and orthographic dysgraphia. (See Figure 14.39.)
The third method of spelling depends on a per-
son’s having memorized sequences of letters that 
spell particular words. Cipolotti and Warrington 
(1996) reported the case of a patient who lacked this 
ability. The patient sustained a left hemisphere stroke 
that severely disrupted his ability to spell words orally 
and impaired his ability to recognize words that the 
examiners would spell aloud. Presumably, his ability 
to spell written words depended on the first two meth-
ods of writing: auditory and visual. The examiners 
noted that when they spelled out words to him, he 
would make writing movements with hand on top of 
his knee. When they asked him to clasp his hands to-
gether so that he could not make these writing move-
ments, his ability to recognize four-letter words being 
spelled aloud dropped from 66 percent to 14 percent. 
It appears that he was using feedback from hand 
Finally, the fourth way of writing involves motor mem-
ories. We undoubtedly memorize motor sequences for very 
familiar words, such as our own names. Most of us need not 
sound out our names to ourselves when we write our signa-
ture, nor need we say the sequence of letters to ourselves, 
nor need we imagine what our signature looks like.
Writing normally involves holding a pen or pencil 
and moving its point across a piece of paper. But we can 
create visual records with the keys of a typewriter or a 
computer. The first three methods of writing (sounding 
out the letters of a word, visualizing it, or reciting a 
memorized sequence of letters) apply as well to typing 
as they do to writing. However, the movements that we 
make with our hands and fingers are different when we 
write or type. Skilled typists learn automatic sequences 
of movements that produce frequently used words, but 
these are different from the movements we would make 
when we write these words. Otsuki et al. (2002) reported 
the case of a man who lost the ability to type after a 
stroke that damaged the ventral left frontal lobe. His 
ability to speak and understand speech, his ability to 
read, and his ability to write were not affected, and he 
showed no other obvious motor impairments besides his 
dystypia, as the investigators named it.
Neurological evidence supports at least the first 
three of these speculations. Brain damage can impair 
the first of these methods: phonetic writing. This deficit 
is called phonological dysgraphia (Shallice, 1981). (Dys-
graphia refers to a writing deficit, just as dyslexia refers to 
a reading deficit.) People with this disorder are unable 
to sound out words and write them phonetically. Thus, 
they cannot write unfamiliar words or pronounceable 
nonwords, such as the ones I presented in the section 
on reading. They can, however, visually imagine familiar 
words and then write them.
Phonological dysgraphia appears to be caused by 
damage to regions of the brain involved in phonological 
processing and articulation. Damage to Broca’s area, 
the ventral precentral gyrus, and the insula cause this 
disorder, and phonological spelling tasks activate these 
regions (Omura et al., 2004; Henry et al., 2007).
Orthographic dysgraphia is just the opposite of 
phonological dysgraphia: It is a disorder of visually 
based writing. People with orthographic dysgraphia 
can only sound words out; thus, they can spell regular 
words such as care or tree, and they can write pro-
nounceable nonsense words. However, they have dif-
ficulty spelling irregular words such as half or busy 
(Beauvois and Dérouesné, 1981); they may write haff 
or bizzy. Orthographic dysgraphia (impaired phono-
logical writing), like surface dyslexia, is caused by 
damage to the VWFA on the base of the temporal lobe 
(Henry et al., 2007).
Both lesions studies and functional-imaging stud-
ies implicate the posterior inferior temporal cortex in 
x phonological dysgraphia  A writing disorder in which the 
person cannot sound out words and write them phonetically.
x orthographic dysgraphia  A writing disorder in which the person 
can spell regularly spelled words but not irregularly spelled ones.
figure 14.39  Phonological Dysgraphia 
and Orthographic Dysgraphia
The scans show the overlap in the lesions of (a) thirteen 
patients with phonological dysgraphia and (b) eight 
patients with orthographic dysgraphia. The highest 
degree of overlap is indicated in red, and the lowest 
degree is indicated in purple.
(From Henry, M. L., Beeson, P. M., Stark, A. J., and Rapcsak, S. Z. Brain and 
Language, 2007, 100, 44–52. Reprinted with permission.)
(a)
(b)
R
L
R
L

	
Disorders of Reading and Writing 	
513
Section Summary
Disorders of Reading and Writing
Brain damage can produce reading and writing disor-
ders. With few exceptions, aphasias are accompanied 
by writing deficits that parallel the speech production 
deficits and by reading deficits that parallel the 
speech comprehension deficits. Pure alexia is caused 
by lesions that produce blindness in the right visual 
field and that destroy fibers of the posterior corpus 
callosum.
Research in the past few decades has discov-
ered that acquired reading disorders (dyslexias) can 
fall into one of several categories, and the study of 
these disorders has provided neuropsychologists 
and cognitive psychologists with thought-provoking 
information that has helped them to understand 
the brain mechanisms involved in reading. Analysis 
of written words appears to begin in the left poste-
rior inferior temporal cortex. Phonological informa-
tion is then analyzed by the temporoparietal cortex 
and Broca’s area, whereas word-form information  
is analyzed by the visual word-form area, located  
in the fusiform cortex. Surface dyslexia is a loss  
of whole-word reading ability. Phonological dys-
lexia is loss of the ability to read phonetically. 
Reading of kana (phonetic) and kanji (pictographic) 
symbols by Japanese people is equivalent to pho-
netic and whole-word reading, and damage to  
different parts of the brain interfere with these two 
forms of reading.
Direct dyslexia is analogous to transcortical sen-
sory aphasia; the patients can read words aloud but 
cannot understand what they are reading. Some can 
read both real words and pronounceable nonwords, 
so both phonetic and whole-word reading can be 
preserved.
Brain damage can disrupt writing ability by 
impairing people’s ability to form letters—or even 
specific types of letters, such as uppercase or lower-
case letters or vowels. The dorsal parietal cortex 
appears to be the most critical region for knowl-
edge of the movements that produce letters. Other 
deficits involve the ability to spell words. We nor-
mally use at least four different strategies to spell 
words: phonetic (sounding the word out), visual 
(remembering how it looks on paper), sequential 
(recalling memorized sequences of letters), and 
motor (recalling memorized hand movements in 
writing very familiar words). Two types of dysgraphia—
phonological and orthographic—represent difficul-
ties in implementing phonetic and visual strategies, 
respectively. The existence of these two disorders 
indicates that several different brain mechanisms are 
involved in the process of writing. One case of  
dystypia—a specific deficit in the ability to type 
without other reading or writing disorders—has 
been reported. In addition, some patients have a 
deficit parallel to direct dyslexia: They can write 
words they can no longer understand.
Developmental dyslexia is a hereditary condition 
that may involve abnormal development of parts of 
the brain that play a role in language. Most develop-
mental dyslexics have difficulty with phonological  
processing—of spoken words as well as written ones. 
Functional-imaging studies report decreased activation 
of a region of the left occipitotemporal and temporo-
parietal cortex and hyperactivation of Broca’s area may 
be involved in developmental dyslexia. Children who 
learn to read languages that have writing with regular 
correspondence between spelling and pronunciation 
movements to recognize the words he was “writing” 
on his knee.
As we saw in the section on reading, some patients 
(those with direct dyslexia) can read aloud without be-
ing able to understand what they are reading. Similarly, 
some patients can write words that are dictated to them 
even though they cannot understand these words 
(Roeltgen, Rothi, and Heilman, 1986; Lesser, 1989). 
Of course, they cannot communicate by means of writing 
because they cannot translate their thoughts into words. 
(In fact, because most of these patients have sustained 
extensive brain damage, their thought processes them-
selves are severely disturbed.) Some of these patients can 
even spell pronounceable nonwords, which indicates that 
their ability to spell phonetically is intact. Roeltgen et al. 
(1986) referred to this disorder as semantic agraphia, but 
perhaps the term direct dysgraphia would be more appro-
priate because of the parallel with direct dyslexia.

514	
Chapter 14  Human Communication
table 14.2  Reading and Writing Disorders Produced by Brain Damage
Reading Disorder
Whole-Word Reading
Phonetic Reading
Remarks
Pure alexia
Poor
Poor
Can write
Surface dyslexia
Poor
Good
 
Phonological dyslexia
Good
Poor
 
Direct dyslexia
Good
Good
Cannot comprehend words
Writing disorder
Whole-word writing
Phonetic writing
 
Phonological dysgraphia
Good
Poor
 
Orthographic dysgraphia
Poor
Good
 
1.  Describe the use of subjects with brain damage in 
the study of language and explain the concept of  
lateralization.
2.  Describe Broca’s aphasia and the three major speech 
deficits that result from damage to Broca’s area: 
agrammatism, anomia, and articulation difficulties.
3.  Describe the symptoms of Wernicke’s aphasia, pure 
word deafness, and transcortical sensory aphasia; 
explain how they are related; and describe the brain 
damage that causes these disorders.
4.  Describe the symptoms of conduction aphasia and 
anomic aphasia, including aphasia in deaf people, 
and the brain damage that causes these disorders.
5.  Describe research on the use of prosody in communi-
cation and the neural basis of stuttering.
Review Questions
   6.  Describe pure alexia and explain why this disorder 
is caused by damage to two specific parts of the 
brain.
    7.  Describe whole-word and phonetic reading and  
discuss the categories of acquired dyslexias.
   8.  Discuss research on the role of what we now call 
the VWFA before reading and writing were 
invented.
    9.  Describe research on the neurological basis of 
developmental dyslexias.
10.  Explain the relation between speaking and writing 
and describe the symptoms of phonological dys-
graphia, orthographic dysgraphia, and semantic 
(direct) dysgraphia.
(such as Italian) are much less likely to become dys-
lexic than are those who learn to read languages with 
irregular spelling (such as English or French). A better 
understanding of the components of reading and writ-
ing may help us to develop effective teaching meth-
ods that will permit people with dyslexia to take 
advantage of the abilities that they do have.
Table 14.2 summarizes the disorders that were 
described in this section.
 Thought Question
Suppose someone close to you suffered a head 
injury that caused phonological dyslexia. What 
would you do to try to help this person read bet-
ter? (It would probably be best to build on the per-
son’s remaining abilities.) Suppose this person 
needed to learn to read some words that he or she 
had never seen before. How would you help the 
person to do so?
Study and Review on MyPsychLab

	
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab	
515
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Lateralization and Language 
Unlike many abilities, language cannot be modeled in non-human species. Our 
knowledge of the brain regions involved in language has been obtained from 
human subjects. In the case of language, brain regions are distinguished based 
on function rather than on neuroanatomical differences. Language, like many 
cortical functions, is lateralized. The Lateralization and Language module of the 
virtual brain shows the brain regions involved in language. In this module it is 
clear that many of the brain regions involved in language are only present in the 
left hemisphere.

516	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
Neurological Disorders
Outline
15
 Tumors
 Seizure Disorders
 Cerebrovascular Accidents
 Traumatic Brain Injury
Section Summary
 Disorders of Development
Toxic Chemicals
Inherited Metabolic Disorders
Down Syndrome
Section Summary
 Degenerative Disorders
Transmissible Spongiform 
Encephalopathies
Parkinson’s Disease
Huntington’s Disease
Alzheimer’s Disease
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
Multiple Sclerosis
Korsakoff’s Syndrome
Section Summary
 Disorders Caused  
by Infectious Diseases
Section Summary
chapter

A
lthough the brain is the most protected organ, 
many pathological processes can damage it or dis-
rupt its functioning. Because much of what we 
have learned about the functions of the human brain has 
been gained by studying people with brain damage, you 
have already encountered many neurological disorders in 
this book: movement disorders, such as Parkinson’s dis-
ease; perceptual disorders, such as visual agnosia and 
blindness caused by damage to the visual system; language 
disorders, such as aphasia, alexia, and agraphia; and mem-
ory disorders, such as Korsakoff’s syndrome. This chapter 
describes the major categories of the neuropathological 
conditions that the brain can sustain—tumors, seizure 
disorders, cerebrovascular accidents, disorders of develop-
ment, degenerative disorders, and disorders caused by 
infectious diseases—and discusses the behavioral effects 
of these conditions and their treatments.
Tumors
A tumor is a mass of cells whose growth is uncontrolled 
and that serves no useful function. Some are malignant, 
or cancerous, and others are benign (“harmless”). The 
major distinction between malignancy and benignancy is 
whether the tumor is encapsulated: whether there is a dis-
tinct border between the mass of tumor cells and the 
surrounding tissue. If there is such a border, the tumor is 
benign; the surgeon can cut it out, and it will not regrow. 
However, if the tumor grows by infiltrating the surround-
ing tissue, there will be no clear-cut border between the 
tumor and normal tissue. If the surgeon removes the tu-
mor, some cells may be missed, and these cells will pro-
duce a new tumor. In addition, malignant tumors often 
give rise to metastases. A metastasizing tumor will shed 
cells, which then travel through the bloodstream, lodge 
in capillaries, and serve as seeds for the growth of new 
tumors in different locations in the body.
Mrs. R., a divorced, fifty-year-old elementary school teacher, 
was sitting in her car, waiting for a traffic light to change. 
Suddenly, her right foot began to shake. Afraid that she 
would inadvertently press the accelerator and lurch forward 
into the intersection, she quickly grabbed the shift lever and 
switched the transmission into neutral. Now her lower leg 
was shaking, then her upper leg as well. With horrified 
fascination she felt her body, then her arm, begin to shake in 
rhythm with her leg. The shaking slowed and finally stopped. 
By this time the light had changed to green, and the cars 
behind her began honking at her. She missed that green 
light, but by the time the light changed again, she had 
recovered enough to put the car in gear and drive home.
Mrs. R. was frightened by her experience and tried in 
vain to think what she might have done to cause it. The 
next evening, some close friends visited her apartment for 
dinner. She found it hard to concentrate on their conversa-
tion and thought of telling them about her spell, but she 
finally decided not to bring up the matter. After dinner, 
while she was clearing the dishes off the table, her right 
foot began shaking again. This time she was standing up, 
and the contractions—much more violent than before—
caused her to fall. Her friends, seated in the living room, 
heard the noise and came running to see what had 
happened. They saw Mrs. R. lying on the floor, her legs 
and arms held out stiffly before her, vibrating uncontrolla-
bly. Her head was thrown back and she seemed not to 
hear their anxious questions. The convulsion soon ceased; 
less than a minute later, Mrs. R. regained consciousness 
but seemed dazed and confused.
Mrs. R. was brought by ambulance to a hospital. After 
learning about her first spell and hearing her friends 
describe the convulsion, the emergency room physician 
immediately called a neurologist, who ordered a CT scan. 
The scan showed a small, circular white spot right where 
the neurologist expected it, between the frontal lobes, 
above the corpus callosum. Two days later, a neurosurgeon 
removed a small benign tumor, and Mrs. R. made an 
uneventful recovery.
When my colleagues and I met Mrs. R., we saw a 
pleasant, intelligent woman, much relieved to know that 
her type of brain tumor rarely produces brain damage if  
it is removed in time. Indeed, although we tested her 
carefully, we found no signs of intellectual impairment.
x tumor  A mass of cells whose growth is uncontrolled and that 
serves no useful function.
x malignant tumor  A cancerous (literally, “harm-producing”) 
tumor; lacks a distinct border and may metastasize.
x benign tumor (bee nine)  A noncancerous (literally, “harm-
less”) tumor; has a distinct border and cannot metastasize.
x metastasis (meh tass ta sis)  The process by which cells break 
off of a tumor, travel through the vascular system, and grow 
elsewhere in the body.

518	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
Evidence indicates that the malignancy of brain tu­
mors is caused by a rare subpopulations of cells (Hadji­
panayis and Van Meir, 2009). Malignant gliomas contain 
tumor initiating cells, which originate from transforma­
tions of neural stem cells. These cells rapidly proliferate 
and give rise to a glioma. Because they are more resis­
tant to chemotherapy and radiation than most tumor 
cells, the survival rate from these tumors is very low.
Tumors damage brain tissue by two means: compres­
sion and infiltration. Obviously, any tumor growing in 
the brain, malignant or benign, can produce neurologi­
cal symptoms and threaten the patient’s life. Even a be­
nign tumor occupies space and thus pushes against the 
brain. The compression can directly destroy brain tissue, 
or it can do so indirectly by blocking the flow of cerebro­
spinal fluid and causing hydrocephalus. Even worse are 
malignant tumors, which cause both compression and 
infiltration. As a malignant tumor grows, it invades the 
surrounding region and destroys cells in its path. Figure 
15.1 illustrates the compressive effect of a large non­
malignant tumor. As you can see, the tumor has displaced 
the lateral and third ventricles. (See Figure 15.1.)
Tumors do not arise from nerve cells, which are not 
capable of dividing. Instead, they arise from other cells 
found in the brain or from metastases originating else­
where in the body. The most common types are listed in 
Table 15.1. (See Table 15.1.) The most serious types of 
tumors are metastases and the gliomas (derived from 
various types of glial cells), which are usually very malig­
nant and fast growing. Figure 15.2 and Figure 15.3 
show gliomas located in the basal ganglia and the pons, 
respectively. (See Figures 15.2 and 15.3.) Figure 15.4 
shows an ependymoma in the lateral ventricles. (See 
Figure 15.4.) Some tumors are sensitive to radiation and 
can be destroyed by a beam of radiation focused on 
them. Usually, a neurosurgeon first removes as much of 
the tumor as possible, and then the remaining cells are 
targeted by the radiation.
figure 15.1  Meningioma
The photograph shows a slice of a human brain, showing 
how a large nonmalignant tumor (a meningioma) has 
displaced the right side of the brain toward the left. (The 
dashed line indicates the location of the midline.) The 
right lateral ventricle is almost completely occluded.
(Courtesy of A. D’Agostino, Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon.)
Left lateral
ventricle
Tumor
table 15.1  Types of Brain Tumors
Gliomas
Glioblastoma multiformae (poorly differentiated glial cells)
Astrocytoma (astrocytes)
Ependymoma (ependymal cells that line ventricles)
Medulloblastoma (cells in roof of fourth ventricle)
Oligodendrocytoma (oligodendrocytes)
Meningioma (cells of the meninges)
Pituitary adenoma (hormone-secreting cells of the 
pituitary gland)
Neurinoma (Schwann cells or cells of connective tissue 
covering cranial nerves)
Metastatic carcinoma (depends on nature of primary 
tumor)
Angioma (cells of blood vessels)
Pinealoma (cells of pineal gland)
figure 15.2  Glioma
The photograph shows a slice of a human brain, showing 
a large glioma located in the basal ganglia, which has 
invaded both the left and right lateral ventricles.
(Courtesy of A. D’Agostino, Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon.)

	
Seizure Disorders	
519
tumor near the top of the primary motor cortex. In-
deed, she had a meningioma, an encapsulated, benign 
tumor consisting of cells that constitute the dura mater 
or arachnoid membrane. Such tumors tend to originate 
either in the part of the dura mater that is found be-
tween the two cerebral hemispheres or along the tento-
rium, the sheet of dura mater that lies between the oc-
cipital lobes and the cerebellum. (See Figure 15.5.)
Seizure Disorders
Because of negative connotations that were acquired in 
the past, some physicians prefer not to use the term epi-
lepsy. Instead, they use the phrase seizure disorder to 
refer to a condition that has many causes. Seizure disor-
ders constitute the second most important category of 
neurological disorders, following stroke. At present, ap-
proximately 2.5 million people in the United States have 
a seizure disorder. A seizure is a period of sudden, exces-
sive activity of cerebral neurons. Sometimes, if neurons 
that make up the motor system are involved, a seizure 
can cause a convulsion, which is wild, uncontrollable 
activity of the muscles. But not all seizures cause convul-
sions; in fact, most do not. In ancient religious traditions, 
In 2009, the U.S. Federal Drug Administration ap-
proved a drug that inhibits angiogenesis, the growth of 
new blood vessels. Because a rapidly growing tumors re-
quires an increased blood supply, its cells secrete vascu-
lar endothelial growth factor, a chemical that induces 
local angiogenesis. The new drug, bevacizumab, binds 
with and deactivates the growth factor which retards the 
growth of a glioma. Unfortunately, the drug increases 
survival by only a few months, so more effective drugs—
such as one that binds with proteins found specifically 
on tumor initiating cells—will be needed to completely 
destroy these tumors (Bredel, 2009; Chamberlain, 2011).
The chapter prologue described a woman whose 
sudden onset of seizures suggested the presence of a 
figure 15.3  Pontine Glioma
The photograph shows a midsagittal view of a human brain, 
showing a glioma located in the dorsal pons (arrowhead).
(Courtesy of A. D’Agostino, Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon.)
figure 15.4  Ependymoma
The photograph shows a slice of a human brain, showing 
an ependymoma of the left lateral ventricle (arrowhead).
(Courtesy of A. D’Agostino, Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon.)
figure 15.5  Meningioma
The CT scan of a brain shows the presence of a 
meningioma (round white spot indicated by the arrow).
(Courtesy of J. McA. Jones, Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon.)
x glioma (glee oh mah)  A cancerous brain tumor composed of 
one of several types of glial cells.
x tumor initiating cell  Cells that originate from transformations 
of neural stem cells, rapidly proliferate, and give rise to a glioma.
x meningioma (men in jee oh ma)  A benign brain tumor 
composed of the cells that constitute the meninges.
x seizure disorder  The preferred term for epilepsy.
x convulsion  A violent sequence of uncontrollable muscular 
movements caused by a seizure.

520	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
in mood or perhaps a few sudden jerks of muscular ac-
tivity upon awakening. (Almost everyone sometimes ex-
periences these jolts while falling asleep.) A few seconds 
before the seizure occurs, the person often experiences 
an aura, which is presumably caused by excitation of 
neurons surrounding a seizure focus. This excitation 
has effects similar to those that would be produced by 
electrical stimulation of the region. Obviously, the na-
ture of an aura varies according to the location of the 
focus. For example, because structures in the temporal 
lobe are involved in the control of emotional behaviors, 
seizures that originate from a focus located there often 
begin with feelings of fear and dread or, occasionally, 
euphoria.
seizures were considered to be God’s punishment or the 
work of demons. However, as early as the fifth century 
B.C.E., Hippocrates noted that head injuries to soldiers 
and gladiators sometimes led to seizures like the ones he 
saw in his patients, which suggested that seizures had a 
physical cause (Hoppe, 2006).
Table 15.2 presents a summary of the most impor-
tant categories of seizure disorders. Two distinctions are 
important: partial versus generalized seizures and simple 
versus complex ones. Partial seizures have a definite focus, 
or source of irritation: typically, either a scarred region 
caused by an old injury or a developmental abnormality 
such as a malformed blood vessel. The neurons that 
become involved in the seizure are restricted to a small 
part of the brain. Generalized seizures are widespread, 
involving most of the brain. In many cases they grow 
from a focus, but in some cases their origin is not discov-
ered. Simple and complex seizures are two categories of 
partial seizures. Simple partial seizures often cause 
changes in consciousness but do not cause loss of con-
sciousness. In contrast, because of their particular loca-
tion and severity, complex partial seizures lead to loss of 
consciousness. (See Table 15.2.)
The most severe form of seizure is often referred to 
as grand mal. This seizure is generalized, and because it 
includes the motor systems of the brain, it is accompa-
nied by convulsions. Often, before having a grand mal 
seizure, a person has warning symptoms, such as changes 
table 15.2 
The Classification of Seizure Disorders
I.	 Generalized seizures (with no apparent local onset)
	
A.	 Tonic-clonic (grand mal)
	
B.	 Absence (petit mal)
	
C.	 Atonic (loss of muscle tone; temporary paralysis)
II.	 Partial seizures (starting from a focus)
	
A.	 Simple (no major change in consciousness)
	
1.	 Localized motor seizure
	
2.	 Motor seizure, with progression of movements as seizure spreads along the primary motor cortex
	
3.	 Sensory (somatosensory, visual, auditory, olfactory, vestibular)
	
4.	 Psychic (forced thinking, fear, anger, etc.)
	
5.	 Autonomic (e. g., sweating, salivating, etc.)
	
B.	 Complex (with altered consciousness)
	
	
Includes 1–5, as above
III.	Partial seizures (simple or complex) evolving to generalized cortical seizure: Starts as IIA or IIB, then becomes a grand 
mal seizure
x partial seizure  A seizure that begins at a focus and remains 
localized, not generalizing to the rest of the brain.
x generalized seizure  A seizure that involves most of the brain, 
as contrasted with a partial seizure, which remains localized.
x simple partial seizure  A partial seizure, starting from a focus and 
remaining localized, that does not produce loss of consciousness.
x complex partial seizure  A partial seizure, starting from a focus 
and remaining localized, that produces loss of consciousness.
x grand mal seizure  A generalized, tonic-clonic seizure, which 
results in a convulsion.
x aura  A sensation that precedes a seizure; its exact nature 
depends on the location of the seizure focus.

	
Seizure Disorders	
521
usually do not notice their attacks. Because absence 
seizures can occur up to several hundred times each 
day, they can disrupt a child’s performance in school. 
Unfortunately, many of these children are considered 
to be inattentive and unmotivated unless the disorder 
is diagnosed.
Seizures can have serious consequences: They can 
cause brain damage. Approximately 50 percent of pa-
tients with seizure disorders show evidence of damage to 
the hippocampus. The amount of damage is correlated 
with the number and severity of seizures the patient has 
had. Significant hippocampal damage can be caused by a 
single episode of status epilepticus, a condition in which 
the patient undergoes a series of seizures without regain-
ing consciousness. The damage appears to be caused by 
an excessive release of glutamate during the seizure 
(Thompson et al., 1996).
The beginning of a grand mal seizure is called the 
tonic phase. All the patient’s muscles contract forcefully. 
The arms are rigidly outstretched, and the person may 
make an involuntary cry as the tense muscles force air out 
of the lungs. (At this point the patient is completely un-
conscious.) The patient holds a rigid posture for about 
fifteen seconds, and then the clonic phase begins. (Clonic 
means “agitated.”) The muscles begin trembling, then 
start jerking convulsively—quickly at first, then more and 
more slowly. Meanwhile, the eyes roll, the patient’s face 
is contorted with violent grimaces, and the tongue may 
be bitten. Intense activity of the autonomic nervous sys-
tem manifests itself in sweating and salivation. After 
about thirty seconds, the patient’s muscles relax; only 
then does breathing begin again. The patient falls into a 
stuporous, unresponsive sleep, which lasts for about fif-
teen minutes. After that the patient may awaken briefly 
but usually falls back into an exhausted sleep that may 
last for a few hours.
Other types of seizures are far less dramatic. Partial 
seizures involve relatively small portions of the brain. 
The symptoms can include sensory changes, motor ac-
tivity, or both. For example, a simple partial seizure that 
begins in or near the motor cortex can involve jerking 
movements that begin in one place and spread through-
out the body as the excitation spreads along the precen-
tral gyrus. In the case described at the beginning of the 
chapter I described such a progression, caused by a sei-
zure triggered by a meningioma. The tumor was press-
ing against the “foot” region of the left primary motor 
cortex. When the seizure began, it involved the foot; 
and as it spread, it began involving the other parts of the 
body. (See Figure 15.6.) Mrs. R.’s first spell was a simple 
partial seizure, but her second one—much more se-
vere—would be classed as a complex partial seizure, 
because she lost consciousness. A seizure that begins in 
the occipital lobe may produce visual symptoms such as 
spots of color, flashes of light, or temporary blindness; 
one originating in the parietal lobe can evoke somato-
sensations, such as feelings of pins and needles or heat 
and cold. Seizures in the temporal lobes may cause hal-
lucinations that include old memories; presumably, 
neural circuits involved in these memories are activated 
by the spreading excitation. Depending on the location 
and extent of the seizure, the patient may or may not 
lose consciousness.
Children are especially susceptible to seizure disor-
ders. Many of them do not have grand mal episodes 
but instead have very brief seizures that are referred to 
as spells of absence. During an absence seizure, which 
is a generalized seizure disorder, they stop what they are 
doing and stare off into the distance for a few seconds, 
often blinking their eyes repeatedly. (These spells are 
also sometimes referred to as petit mal seizures.) Dur-
ing this time the children are unresponsive, and they 
figure 15.6  Primary Motor Cortex and Seizures
Mrs. R.’s seizure began in the foot region of the primary 
motor cortex, and as the seizure spread, more and more 
parts of her body became involved.
Leg
Trunk
Arm
Fingers
Eyes
Face
Lips
Tongue
Seizure spreads
this way
Foot
Primary motor
cortex
x tonic phase  The first phase of a grand mal seizure, in which all 
of the patient’s skeletal muscles are contracted.
x clonic phase  The phase of a grand mal seizure in which the 
patient shows rhythmic jerking movements.
x absence  A type of seizure disorder often seen in children; 
characterized by periods of inattention, which are not subsequently 
remembered; also called petit mal seizure.
x status epilepticus  A condition in which a patient undergoes a 
series of seizures without regaining consciousness.

522	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
The answer is provided by looking at what happens 
in the brain not during seizures but between them. The 
seizure focus, usually a region of scar tissue, irritates the 
brain tissue surrounding it, causing increased neural 
activity that tends to spread to adjacent regions. Be-
tween seizures this increased excitatory activity is held in 
check by a compensatory increase in inhibitory activity. 
That is, inhibitory neurons in the region surrounding 
the seizure focus become more active. (This phenome-
non is known as interictal inhibition; ictus means “stroke” 
in Latin.) A seizure occurs when the excitation over-
comes the inhibition.
The problem is that the compensatory inhibition 
does more than hold the excitation in check; it also sup-
presses the normal functions of a rather large region of 
brain tissue surrounding the seizure focus. Thus, even 
though the focus may be small, its effects are felt over a 
much larger area even between seizures. Removing the 
seizure focus and some surrounding brain tissue elimi-
nates the source of the irritation and makes the com-
pensatory inhibition unnecessary. Freed from interictal 
inhibition, the brain tissue located near the site of the 
former seizure focus can now function normally, and 
the patient’s neuropsychological abilities will show an 
improvement.
Cerebrovascular Accidents
You have already learned about the effects of cerebrovas-
cular accidents, or strokes, in earlier chapters. For ex-
ample, we saw that strokes can produce impairments in 
perception, emotional recognition and expression, 
memory, and language. This section will describe only 
their causes and treatments.
The incidence of strokes in the United States is ap-
proximately 750,000 per year. The likelihood of having 
a stroke is related to age; the probability doubles each 
decade after forty-five years of age and reaches 1–2 per-
cent per year by age seventy-five. The two major types of 
strokes are hemorrhagic and ischemic. Hemorrhagic strokes 
are caused by bleeding within the brain, usually from a 
malformed blood vessel or from one that has been weak-
ened by high blood pressure. The blood that seeps out 
of the defective blood vessel accumulates within the 
brain, putting pressure on the surrounding brain tissue 
and damaging it. Ischemic strokes—those that plug up 
a blood vessel and obstruct the flow of blood—can be 
Seizures have many causes. The most common 
cause is scarring, which may be produced by an injury, a 
stroke, a developmental abnormality, or the irritating 
effect of a growing tumor. For injuries the development 
of seizures may take a considerable amount of time. 
Often, a person who receives a head injury from an au-
tomobile accident will not start having seizures until 
several months later.
Various drugs and infections that cause a high fever 
can also produce seizures. High fevers are most common 
in children, and approximately 3 percent of children 
under the age of five years sustain seizures associated 
with fevers (Berkovic et al., 2006). In addition, seizures 
are commonly seen in alcohol or barbiturate addicts who 
suddenly stop taking the drug; the sudden release from 
the inhibiting effects of the alcohol or barbiturate leaves 
the brain in a hyperexcitable condition. In fact, this con-
dition is a medical emergency because it can be fatal.
Genetic factors contribute to the incidence of sei-
zure disorders (Berkovic et al., 2006). Nearly all of the 
genes that have been identified as playing a role in sei-
zure disorders control the production of ion channels, 
which is not surprising, considering the fact that ion 
channels control the excitability of the neural mem-
brane and are responsible for the propagation of action 
potentials. However, most seizure disorders are caused 
by nongenetic factors. In the past, many cases were con-
sidered to be idiopathic (of unknown causes, or literally 
“one’s own suffering”). However, the development of 
MRIs with more and more resolution and sensitivity has 
meant that small brain abnormalities responsible for 
triggering seizures are more likely to be seen.
Seizure disorders are treated with anticonvulsant 
drugs, many of which work by increasing the effective-
ness of inhibitory synapses. Most disorders respond well 
enough that the patient can lead a normal life. In a few 
instances, drugs provide little or no help. Sometimes, 
seizure foci remain so irritable that, despite drug treat-
ment, brain surgery is required, as we saw in the open-
ing case of Chapter 3. The surgeon removes the region 
of the brain surrounding the focus (usually located in 
the medial temporal lobe). Most patients recover well, 
with their seizures eliminated or greatly reduced in fre-
quency. Mrs. R.’s treatment, described in the opening 
case of this chapter, was a different matter; in her case 
the removal of a meningioma eliminated the source of 
the irritation and ended her seizures. No healthy brain 
tissue was removed.
Because seizure surgery often involves the removal 
of a substantial amount of brain tissue (usually from one 
of the temporal lobes), we might expect it to cause be-
havioral deficits. But in most cases the reverse is true; 
people’s performance on tests of neuropsychological 
functioning usually improves. How can the removal of 
brain tissue improve a person’s performance?
x hemorrhagic stroke  A cerebrovascular accident caused by the 
rupture of a cerebral blood vessel.
x ischemic stroke  A cerebrovascular accident caused by 
occlusion of a blood vessel and interruption of the blood supply to 
a region of the brain.

	
Cerebrovascular Accidents	
523
broke away from a bacterial infection, antibiotics will be 
given to suppress the infection.
What, exactly, causes the death of neurons when the 
blood supply to a region of the brain is interrupted? We 
might expect that the neurons simply starve to death 
because they lose their supply of glucose and of oxygen 
to metabolize it. However, research indicates that the im-
mediate cause of neuron death is the presence of exces-
sive amounts of glutamate. In other words, the damage 
produced by loss of blood flow to a region of the brain is 
actually an excitotoxic lesion, just like one produced in a 
laboratory animal by the injection of a chemical such as 
kainic acid. (See Koroshetz and Moskowitz, 1996, for a 
review.)
When the blood supply to a region of the brain  
is interrupted, the oxygen and glucose in that region 
are quickly depleted. As a consequence, the sodium- 
potassium transporters, which regulate the balance of ions 
inside and outside the cell, stop functioning. Neural 
membranes become depolarized, which causes the re-
lease of glutamate. The activation of glutamate recep-
tors further increases the inflow of sodium ions and 
causes cells to absorb excessive amounts of calcium 
through NMDA channels. The presence of excessive 
amounts of sodium and calcium within cells is toxic. 
The intracellular sodium causes the cells to absorb water 
and swell. The inflammation attracts microglia and acti-
vates them, causing them to become phagocytic. The 
caused by thrombi or emboli. (Loss of blood flow to a 
region is called ischemia, from the Greek ischein, “to hold 
back,” and haima, “blood.”) A thrombus is a blood clot 
that forms in blood vessels, especially in places where 
their walls are already damaged. Sometimes, thrombi 
become so large that blood cannot flow through the ves-
sel, causing a stroke. People who are susceptible to the 
formation of thrombi are often advised to take a drug 
such as aspirin, which helps to prevent clot formation. 
An embolus is a piece of material that forms in one part 
of the vascular system, breaks off, and is carried through 
the bloodstream until it reaches an artery too small to 
pass through. It lodges there, damming the flow of blood 
through the rest of the vascular tree (the “branches” and 
“twigs” arising from the artery). Emboli can consist of a 
variety of materials, including bacterial debris from an 
infection in the lining of the heart or pieces broken off 
from a blood clot. As we will see in a later section, emboli 
can introduce a bacterial infection into the brain. (See 
Figure 15.7.)
Strokes produce permanent brain damage, but, de-
pending on the size of the affected blood vessel, the 
amount of damage can vary from negligible to massive. 
If a hemorrhagic stroke is caused by high blood pres-
sure, medication is given to reduce it. If one is caused by 
weak and malformed blood vessels, brain surgery may be 
used to seal off the faulty vessels to prevent another hem-
orrhage. If a thrombus was responsible for the stroke 
and if the patient reaches an appropriately equipped and 
staffed stroke-treatment center soon enough, attempts 
will be made to dissolve or physically remove the blood 
clot. (I will describe these attempts later.) Even if imme-
diate treatment is not available, the patient will receive 
anticoagulant drugs to make the blood less likely to clot, 
reducing the likelihood of another stroke. If an embolus 
x thrombus  A blood clot that forms within a blood vessel, which 
may occlude it.
x embolus (emm bo lus)  A piece of matter (such as a blood clot, 
fat, or bacterial debris) that dislodges from its site of origin and 
occludes an artery; in the brain an embolus can lead to a stroke.
figure 15.7  Strokes
(a) Formation of thrombi and emboli. (b) An intracerebral hemorrhage.
Atherosclerotic
plaque
Beginning of
thrombus
Thrombus 
occludes
artery
Embolus breaks
off of thrombus,
occludes smaller
artery
Small arteries rupturing
Intracerebral hemorrhage
causing a compressive effect
(b)
(a)

524	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
Occlusions of larger cerebral blood vessels can also 
be removed by mechanical means (Frendl and Csiba, 
2011). Two types of medical devices have been devel-
oped. Both types are inserted into a cerebral blood ves-
sel and extended until they reach the obstruction. One 
type of device works like a corkscrew, grabbing the ob-
struction so that the surgeon can pull it out. The other 
type of device works by suction: Once the tip of the de-
vice touches the obstruction, a vacuum is applied, and 
the surgeon pulls out the clot. The disadvantages of 
these approaches is that some clots are difficult to reach, 
and attempts at mechanical removal can cause perfora-
tion of the blood vessel. Trials of these procedures sug-
gest that use of a suction device is more likely to pro-
duce clinical improvement and less likely to cause 
intracerebral bleeding.
How can strokes be prevented? Risk factors that can 
be reduced by medication or changes in lifestyle include 
high blood pressure, cigarette smoking, diabetes, and 
high blood levels of cholesterol. The actions we can take 
to reduce these risk factors are well known, so I need not 
describe them here. Atherosclerosis, a process in which 
the linings of arteries develop a layer of plaque, which 
consists of deposits of cholesterol, fats, calcium, and cel-
lular waste products, is a precursor to heart attacks 
(myocardial infarction) and ischemic stroke, caused by 
clots that form around atherosclerotic plaques in cere-
bral and cardiac blood vessels.
phagocytic microglia begin destroying injured cells. In-
flammation also attracts white blood cells, which can ad-
here to the walls of capillaries near the ischemic region 
and obstruct them. The presence of excessive amounts 
of calcium in the cells activates a variety of calcium- 
dependent enzymes, many of which destroy molecules 
that are vital for normal cell functioning. Finally, dam-
aged mitochondria produce free radicals—molecules 
with unpaired electrons that act as powerful oxidizing 
agents. Free radicals are extremely toxic; they destroy 
nucleic acids, proteins, and fatty acids.
Researchers have sought ways to minimize the 
amount of brain damage caused by strokes. One ap-
proach has been to administer drugs that dissolve blood 
clots in an attempt to reestablish circulation to an isch-
emic brain region. This approach has met with some 
success. Administration of a clot-dissolving drug called 
tPA (tissue plasminogen activator) after the onset of a 
stroke has clear benefits, but only if it is given within 
three hours (NINDS, 1995). tPA is an enzyme that 
causes the dissolution of fibrin, a protein involved in clot 
formation.
More recent research indicates that although tPA 
helps to dissolve blood clots and restore cerebral circula-
tion, it also has toxic effects in the central nervous sys-
tem. Both tPA and plasmin are potentially neurotoxic if 
they are able to cross the blood–brain barrier and reach 
the interstitial fluid. Evidence suggests that in cases of 
severe stroke, in which the blood–brain barrier is dam-
aged, tPA increases excitotoxicity, further damages the 
blood–brain barrier, and may even cause cerebral hem-
orrhage (Benchenane et al., 2004; Klaur et al., 2004; 
Medcalf, 2011). In cases in which tPA quickly restores 
blood flow, the blood–brain barrier is less likely to be 
damaged, and the enzyme will remain in the vascular 
system, where it will do no harm.
As you undoubtedly know, vampire bats live on the 
blood of other warm-blooded animals. They make a 
small incision in a sleeping animal’s skin with their 
sharp teeth and lap up the blood with their tongues. 
One compound in their saliva acts as a local anesthetic 
and keeps the animal from awakening. Another com-
pound (and this is the one we are interested in) acts as 
an anticoagulant, preventing the blood from clotting. 
The name of this enzyme is Desmodus rotundus plasmino-
gen activator (DSPA), otherwise known as desmoteplase. 
(Desmodus rotundus is the Latin name for the vampire 
bat.) Research with laboratory animals indicate that 
unlike tPA, desmoteplase causes no excitotoxic injury  
when injected directly into the brain (Reddrop et al., 
2005). A phase II placebo-controlled, double-blind clin-
ical trial of desmoteplase (Hacke et al., 2005) found that 
desmoteplase restored blood flow and reduced clinical 
symptoms in a majority of patients if given up to nine 
hours after the occurrence of a stroke. (See Figure 15.8.)
x free radical  A molecule with unpaired electrons; acts as a 
powerful oxidizing agent; toxic to cells.
figure 15.8  Desmoteplase in Treatment of Strokes
The graph shows the effects of desmoteplase and a 
placebo on restoration of cerebral blood flow to affected 
area (reperfusion) and favorable clinical outcome.
(Based on data from Hacke et al., 2005.)
0
20
40
60
80
Responder rate (percent)
Placebo
Reperfusion
Favorable clinical
outcome
Desmoteplase
62.5 µg/kg
90 µg/kg
125 µg/kg

	
Cerebrovascular Accidents	
525
stent consists of a mesh tube made of springy metal col-
lapsed inside a catheter—a flexible plastic tube. The 
surgeon cuts open a large artery in the groin and passes 
the catheter through large arteries up to the neck until 
the stent reaches the occlusion in the carotid artery. 
When the catheter is retracted, the stent expands, open-
ing the narrowed artery.
Before the carotid stent received unconditional ap-
proval, a careful study funded by the U.S. government 
randomly assigned patients whose condition made them 
good candidates for the stent to one of two groups: ag-
gressive medical management plus stent or aggressive 
medical management alone. Based on the successful use 
of stents to open cardiac arteries, the investigators ex-
pected that the study would demonstrate the success of 
the carotid stent. Unfortunately, the patients who re-
ceived the stent had an increased number of strokes and 
their death rate was higher. (See Figure 15.10.)
Figure 15.10 is the only one in this book that illus-
trates results that fail to show beneficial effects of treat-
ment for a disorder involving the nervous system. In the 
previous edition of this book I described the process of 
stenting in more detail and wrote that investigators had 
hopes that this recently developed surgical treatment 
would be safer and more effective than carotid endarter-
ectomy. Rather than simply omit mention of this proce-
dure in this edition, I have described the randomized 
study and presented the graph of the results to empha-
size the importance of scientific research in evaluating 
treatment of medical disorders. Surgeons and hospitals 
were getting ready to make carotid stenting a standard 
procedure for narrowing of the carotid artery, at a cost of 
Atherosclerotic plaques often form in the internal 
carotid artery—the artery that supplies most of the 
blood flow to the cerebral hemispheres. These plaques 
can cause severe narrowing of the interior of the artery, 
greatly increasing the risk of a massive stroke. This nar-
rowing can be visualized in an angiogram, produced by 
injecting a radiopaque dye into the blood and examin-
ing the artery with a computerized X-ray machine. (See 
Figure 15.9.) If the narrowing is severe, a carotid endarter-
ectomy can be performed. The surgeon makes an inci-
sion in the neck that exposes the carotid artery, inserts 
a shunt in the artery, cuts the artery open, removes the 
plaque, and sews the artery back again (and the neck 
too, of course). Endarterectomy has been shown to re-
duce the risk of stroke by 50 percent in people under 
seventy-five years of age.
Another surgical treatment involves the placement 
of a stent in a seriously narrowed carotid artery (Yadav et 
al., 2004). An arterial stent is an implantable device 
made of a metal mesh that is used to expand and hold 
open a partially occluded artery. These devices were first 
developed for treatment of arteries that serve the heart 
and later modified for use in the carotid artery. The 
figure 15.9  Atherosclerotic Plaque
An angiogram shows an obstruction in the internal 
carotid artery caused by an atherosclerotic plaque.
(From Stapf, C., and Mohr, J. P. Annual Review of Medicine, 2002, 53, 453–475. 
Reprinted with permission.)
Common
carotid
artery
External
carotid
artery
Internal
carotid
artery
(to brain)
Obstruction
in internal
carotid
artery
figure 15.10  Effects of Carotid Stents
The graph shows that the rate of strokes and deaths in 
the fifteen months after insertion of a carotid stent was 
higher than that of patients who received medical 
management alone.
(Based on data of Chimowitz et al., 2011.)
20
10
15
5
0
0
3
6
9
New strokes or death (percent)
Months
Medical management +
stent
Medical management
12
15

526	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
A study by Liepert et al. (2000) found that con-
straint-induced movement therapy caused changes in 
the connections of the primary motor cortex. The inves-
tigators used transcranial magnetic stimulation to map 
the area of the contralateral motor cortex that was in-
volved in control of the impaired arm before and after 
treatment. Besides improving the patients’ use of the 
impaired arm, the treatment caused an expansion of 
this region—apparently, into adjacent areas of the mo-
tor cortex—that was still present when the patients were 
tested six months later.
You will recall from Chapter 8 that mirror neurons 
in the parietal lobe and ventral premotor cortex be-
come active when a person performs an action or sees 
someone else performing it. Ertelt et al. (2007) enrolled 
chronic stroke patients in a course of therapy that com-
bined repetitive practice of hand and arm movements 
used in daily life with the watching of videos of actors 
performing the same movements. The patients’ motor 
functions showed long-term improvement relative to 
those of patients in a control group who performed the 
exercises but watched videos of sequences of geometric 
symbols. Moreover, functional imaging showed in-
creased activity in brain regions involved in movement, 
including the ventral premotor cortex and the supple-
mentary motor area.
In some cases of brain damage or spinal cord dam-
age, patients are unable to perform useful limb move-
ments, even after intensive therapy. In such cases, inves-
tigators have attempted to devise brain–computer 
interfaces that permit the patient to control electronic 
and mechanical devices to perform useful actions. De-
velopers of such interfaces have implanted arrays of mi-
croelectrodes directly into the patient’s motor cortex 
and have applied surface electrodes to measure changes 
in EEG activity transmitted through the skull and scalp. 
These devices, while still experimental, permit patients 
to move prosthetic hands, perform actions with multi-
jointed robotic arms, and move the cursor of a com-
puter display and operate the computer (Wolpaw and 
McFarland, 2004; Hochberg et al., 2006).
Traumatic Brain Injury
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a serious health prob-
lem (Chen and D’Esposito, 2010). In the United States 
alone, approximately 1.4 million people are treated and 
released from an emergency department, 270,000 peo-
ple are hospitalized, and 52,000 people die from TBI. 
Undoubtedly, many other people receive brain injuries 
but not a diagnosis. Almost a third of deaths caused by 
injury involve TBI. Traumatic brain injury can be caused 
by a projectile or a fall against a sharp object that frac-
tures the skull, causing the brain to be wounded by the 
at least $20,000 and, as we now know, increased mortal-
ity. No matter how plausible and reasonable a treatment 
appears, only scientific research can confirm its value.
What can be done after a stroke has occurred, as-
suming that intervention with clot dissolution or re-
moval was unsuccessful or unavailable? The major strat-
egies involve administration of drugs that block factors 
present in the brain that inhibit axonal growth, activat-
ing the brain’s intrinsic neural growth factors, and re-
ducing edema and inflammation. For example, animal 
studies have shown that administration of antibodies 
against NogoA, a myelin protein that inhibits the branch-
ing and growth of axons, can increase recovery from 
brain damage, and administration of inosine, a naturally 
occurring chemical, activates a protein that also encour-
ages axon growth (Benowitz and Carmichael, 2010). 
And depending on the location of the brain damage, 
people who have strokes will receive physical therapy 
and perhaps speech therapy to help them recover from 
their disability. Several studies have shown that exercise 
and sensory stimulation can facilitate recovery from the 
effects of brain damage (Cotman, Berchtold, and Chris-
tie, 2007). For example, Taub et al. (2006) studied pa-
tients with strokes that impaired their ability to use one 
arm and hand. The researchers put the unaffected arm in 
a sling for fourteen days and gave the patients training 
sessions during which the patients were forced to use 
the impaired arm. A placebo group received cognitive, 
relaxation, and physical fitness exercises for the same 
amount of time. This procedure (which is called  
constraint-induced movement therapy) produced long-term 
improvement in the patients’ ability to use the affected 
arm. (See Figure 15.11.)
figure 15.11  Constraint-Induced Movement 
Therapy
The graph shows the effects of constraint-induced (CI) 
therapy and placebo therapy on use of a limb whose 
movement was impaired by a stroke.
(Based on data from Taub et al., 2006.)
CI therapy
Placebo control
Intervention
Follow-up
2
3
5
7
9
10
1
2
3
4
Days
Weeks
3
Month
2
Year
Pre
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
0
Real world arm use

	
Traumatic Brain Injury	
527
seizure disorders, traumatic brain injury can be followed 
several months later by a chronic seizure disorder. Peo-
ple who are most likely to sustain TBI include combat 
veterans, people who participate in sports such as box-
ing or American football, and motorcyclists and skiers 
who do not wear helmets.
Even mild cases of TBI can greatly increase a per-
son’s risk of sustaining deficits that are not immediately 
obvious but that manifest themselves as the person ages. 
For example, the likelihood of Alzheimer’s disease is 
much higher in a person who has received blows to the 
head earlier in life. Besides causing obvious physical 
trauma to the brain, TBI results in increased levels of 
adenosine and glutamate in the traumatized brain tis-
sue. The increased glutamate converts the adenosine 
from its normal role as an anti-inflammatory agent to an 
agent that promotes inflammation, which causes further 
damage. Treatment with a drug that inhibits the release 
of glutamate can prevent this switch in the role of extra-
cellular adenosine (Dai et al., 2010).
Treatment of the long-term behavioral and cogni-
tive effects of TBI involves the same strategies as those 
employed in the treatment of brain damage caused by 
cerebrovascular accidents.
object or a piece of the broken skull. Closed-head inju-
ries do not involve penetration of the brain, but these 
injuries can also cause severe injury or death.
Penetrating brain injuries (also called open-head 
injuries) obviously cause damage to the portion of the 
brain that is damaged by the object or the bone. In ad-
dition, damage to blood vessels can deprive parts of the 
brain of their normal blood supply, and the accumula-
tion of blood within the brain can cause further damage 
by exerting pressure within the brain. Closed-head in-
jury—for example, caused by a blow with a blunt object 
against the right side of a person’s forehead—will bruise 
the right frontal lobe as it comes into violent contact 
with the inside of the skull. (This blow to the brain is 
known as the coup.) The brain will then recoil in the op-
posite direction and smash against the left posterior re-
gion of the skull. (This blow is known as the contrecoup.) 
In many cases, the contrecoup can produce more dam-
age than the coup.
Closed-head injury can damage more than the cere-
bral cortex at the point of the coup and contrecoup. 
Bundles of axons can be torn and twisted, blood vessels 
can be ruptured, and cerebrospinal fluid can distort the 
walls of the ventricles. And as we saw in the section on 
Section Summary
Tumors, Seizure Disorders, Cerebrovascular Accidents, and Traumatic 
Brain Injury
Neurological disorders have many causes. Because 
we have learned much about the functions of the 
human brain from studying the behavior of people 
with various neurological disorders, you have already 
learned about many of them in previous chapters of 
this book. Brain tumors are caused by the uncon-
trolled growth of various types of cells other than 
neurons. They can be benign or malignant. Benign 
tumors are encapsulated and thus have a distinct bor-
der; when one is surgically removed, the surgeon has 
a good chance of getting all of it. Tumors produce 
brain damage by compression and, in the case of 
malignant tumors, infiltration. Malignant gliomas con-
tain tumor initiating cells, derived from neural stem 
cells, which are resistant to chemotherapy and radia-
tion. Bevacizumab, a drug that inhibits the formation 
of blood vessels by malignant tumors, slightly retards 
the growth of these tumors.
Seizures are periodic episodes of abnormal elec-
trical activity of the brain. Partial seizures are localized, 
beginning with a focus—usually, some scar tissue 
caused by previous damage or a tumor. When they 
begin, they often produce an aura, consisting of par-
ticular sensations or changes in mood. Simple partial 
seizures do not produce profound changes in con-
sciousness; complex partial seizures do. Generalized 
seizures may or may not originate at a single focus, 
but they involve most of the brain. Some seizures 
involve motor activity; the most serious are the grand 
mal convulsions that accompany generalized seizures. 
The convulsions are caused by involvement of the 
brain’s motor systems; the patient first shows a tonic 
phase, consisting of a few seconds of rigidity, and 
then a clonic phase, consisting of rhythmic jerking. 
Absence seizures, also called petit mal seizures, are 
common in children. These generalized seizures are 
characterized by periods of inattention and temporary 
loss of awareness. Seizures produced by abstinence 
after prolonged heavy intake of alcohol appear to  
(continued on next page)

528	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
In addition to the toxins produced by viruses, vari-
ous drugs can adversely affect fetal development. For 
example, mental retardation can be caused by the inges-
tion of alcohol during pregnancy, especially during the 
third to fourth week (Sulik, 2005). Babies born to alco-
holic women are typically smaller than average and de-
velop more slowly. Many of them exhibit fetal alcohol 
syndrome, which is characterized by abnormal facial 
development and deficient brain development (Riley, 
Infante, and Warren, 2011). Figure 15.12 shows photo-
graphs of the faces of a child with fetal alcohol syn-
drome, of a mouse fetus whose mother was fed alcohol 
during pregnancy, and of a normal mouse fetus. As you 
can see, alcohol produces similar abnormalities in the 
offspring of both species. The facial abnormalities are 
Disorders of Development
As you will see in this section, brain development can be 
affected adversely by the presence of toxic chemicals 
during pregnancy and by genetic abnormalities, both 
hereditary and nonhereditary. In some instances the 
result is mental retardation.
Toxic Chemicals
A common cause of mental retardation is the presence 
of toxins that impair fetal development during preg-
nancy. For example, if a woman contracts rubella (Ger-
man measles) early in pregnancy, the toxic chemicals 
released by the virus interfere with the chemical signals 
that control normal development of the brain. Most 
women who receive good health care will be immunized 
for rubella to prevent them from contracting it during 
pregnancy.
be produced by a sudden release from inhibition. 
Seizures are treated with anticonvulsant drugs and, in 
the case of intractable seizure disorders caused by an 
abnormal focus, seizure surgery, which usually 
involves the medial temporal lobe.
Cerebrovascular accidents damage parts of the 
brain through rupture of a blood vessel or occlusion 
(obstruction) of a blood vessel by a thrombus or 
embolus. A thrombus is a blood clot that forms within 
a blood vessel. An embolus is a piece of debris that is 
carried through the bloodstream and lodges in an 
artery. Emboli can arise from infections within the 
chambers of the heart or can consist of pieces of 
thrombi. The lack of blood flow appears to damage 
neurons primarily by stimulating a massive release of 
glutamate, which causes inflammation, phagocytosis 
by activated microglia, the production of free radicals, 
and activation of calcium-dependent enzymes. The 
best current treatment for stroke is administration of a 
drug that dissolves clots. Tissue plasminogen activa-
tor (tPA) must be given within three hours of the 
onset of the stroke and in some cases appears to 
cause brain damage on its own. Desmoteplase, an 
enzyme secreted in the saliva of vampire bats, is 
effective up to nine hours after a stroke and does not 
appear to cause damage. Procedures are being 
developed to remove blood clots mechanically from 
obstructed cerebral blood vessels. Carotid endarter-
ectomy or insertion of a carotid stent can reduce the 
likelihood of a stroke in people with atherosclerotic 
plaque that obstruct the carotid arteries. After a 
stroke has occurred, drug treatments are being devel-
oped to reduce damage after a stroke and encourage 
regrowth of brain tissue. Physical therapy can facili-
tate recovery and minimize a patient’s deficits. 
Constraint-induced movement therapy has been 
shown to be especially useful in restoring useful 
movement of limbs following unilateral damage to 
the motor cortex. Movement therapy combined with 
watching the movements being performed has ben-
eficial effects, perhaps because of stimulation of the 
mirror neuron system.
Traumatic brain injury is a serious health prob-
lem. The damage caused by closed-head injuries is 
usually less obvious than that caused by penetrat-
ing brain injuries, but both can cause substantial 
deficits. Even mild cases of TBI can increase a per-
son’s risk of sustaining deficits later in life and 
increase the likelihood of Alzheimer’s disease. Drug 
treatments are being developed to reduce the 
symptoms of TBI.
 Thought Question
If a contestant in a boxing match manages to hit the 
other person’s head hard enough to cause him to fall 
to the ground, unconscious, he wins the match. 
Having read about the effects of traumatic brain 
injury, what do you think about these contests?
x fetal alcohol syndrome  A birth defect caused by ingestion of 
alcohol by a pregnant woman; includes characteristic facial 
anomalies and faulty brain development.

	
Disorders of Development	
529
depend on enzymes, which are responsible for con-
structing or breaking down particular chemical com-
pounds. Enzymes are proteins and therefore are pro-
duced by mechanisms involving the chromosomes, 
which contain the recipes for their synthesis. “Errors of 
metabolism” refer to genetic abnormalities in which the 
recipe for a particular enzyme is in error, so the enzyme 
cannot be synthesized. If the enzyme is a critical one, 
the results can be very serious.
There are at least a hundred different inherited 
metabolic disorders that can affect the development of 
the brain. The most common and best-known is called 
phenylketonuria (PKU). This disease is caused by an 
inherited lack of an enzyme that converts phenylala-
nine (an amino acid) into tyrosine (another amino 
acid). Excessive amounts of phenylalanine in the blood 
interfere with the myelinization of neurons in the cen-
tral nervous system. Much of the myelinization of the 
cerebral hemispheres takes place after birth. Thus, 
when an infant born with PKU receives foods contain-
ing phenylalanine, the amino acid accumulates, and 
the brain fails to develop normally. The result is severe 
mental retardation, with an average IQ of approxi-
mately 20 by six years of age.
relatively unimportant, of course. Much more serious 
are the abnormalities in the development of the brain. 
(See Figure 15.12.)
Research suggests that alcohol disrupts normal 
brain development by interfering with a neural adhesion 
protein—a protein that helps to guide the growth of 
neurons in the developing brain (Braun, 1996;  
Abrevalo et al., 2008). Prenatal exposure to alcohol even 
appears to have direct effects on neural plasticity. 
Sutherland, McDonald, and Savage (1997) found that the 
offspring of female rats that are given moderate amounts 
of alcohol during pregnancy showed smaller amounts  
of long-term potentiation (described in Chapter 12). 
Finally, fetal alcohol exposure adversely alters the devel-
opment of neuronal stem cells and progenitor cells 
(Vangipuram and Lyman, 2010).
A woman need not be an alcoholic to impair the 
development of her offspring; some investigators be-
lieve that fetal alcohol syndrome can be caused by a 
single alcoholic binge during a critical period of fetal 
development. Now that we recognize the dangers of this 
syndrome, pregnant women are advised to abstain from 
alcohol (and from other drugs not specifically pre-
scribed by their physicians) while their bodies are en-
gaged in the task of sustaining the development of an-
other human being.
Inherited Metabolic Disorders
Several inherited “errors of metabolism” can cause brain 
damage or impair brain development. Normal function-
ing of cells requires intricate interactions among count-
less biochemical systems. As you know, these systems 
Figure 15.12  Facial Malformations in Fetal Alcohol Syndrome
The photographs show a child with fetal alcohol syndrome, along with magnified views 
of mouse fetuses. (a) Mouse fetus whose mother received alcohol during pregnancy.  
(b) Normal mouse fetus.
(Photographs courtesy of Katherine K. Sulik.)
Narrow forehead
Short palpebral
fissures
Small nose
Long upper lip
with deficient
philtrum
(a)
(b)
x neural adhesion protein  A protein that plays a role in brain 
development; helps to guide the growth of neurons.
x phenylketonuria (PKU) (fee nul kee ta new ree uh)  A hereditary 
disorder caused by the absence of an enzyme that converts the 
amino acid phenylalanine to tyrosine; the accumulation of phenyl-
alanine causes brain damage unless a special diet is implemented 
soon after birth.

530	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
they accumulate. The lysosomes get larger and larger, 
the cells get larger and larger, and eventually the brain 
begins to swell and become damaged.
Researchers investigating hereditary errors of me-
tabolism hope to prevent or treat these disorders in 
several ways. Some will be treated like PKU or galactose-
mia, by avoiding a constituent of the diet that cannot be 
tolerated. Others, such as pyridoxine dependency, will 
be treated by administering a substance that the body 
requires. Still others may be cured some day by the tech-
niques of genetic engineering. Researchers hope to de-
velop genetically modified viruses that will insert into 
infants’ cells the genetic information needed to pro-
duce the enzymes that the cells lack, leaving the rest of 
the cells’ functions intact.
Down Syndrome
Down syndrome is a congenital disorder that results in 
abnormal development of the brain, producing mental 
retardation in varying degrees. Congenital does not neces-
sarily mean hereditary; it simply refers to a disorder that 
one is born with. Down syndrome is caused not by the 
inheritance of a faulty gene but by the possession of an 
extra twenty-first chromosome. In fact, a small portion of 
the twenty-first chromosome, which includes approxi-
mately 300 genes, contains the critical region (Beli-
chenko et al., 2010). The syndrome is closely associated 
with the mother’s age; in most cases, something goes 
wrong with some of her ova, resulting in the presence of 
two (rather than one) twenty-first chromosomes. When 
fertilization occurs, the addition of the father’s twenty-
first chromosome makes three, rather than two. The ex-
tra chromosome presumably causes biochemical changes 
that impair normal brain development. The develop-
ment of amniocentesis, a procedure whereby some fluid is 
withdrawn from a pregnant woman’s uterus through a 
hypodermic syringe, has allowed physicians to identify 
fetal cells with chromosomal abnormalities and thus to 
determine whether the fetus carries Down syndrome.
Down syndrome, described in 1866 by John Lang-
don Down, occurs in approximately 1 out of 700 births. 
Fortunately, PKU can be treated by putting the in-
fant on a low-phenylalanine diet. The diet keeps the 
blood level of phenylalanine low, and myelinization of 
the central nervous system takes place normally. Once 
myelinization is complete, the dietary restraints can be 
relaxed somewhat, because a high level of phenylala-
nine no longer threatens brain development. During 
prenatal development a fetus is protected by its moth-
er’s normal metabolism, which removes the phenylala-
nine from its circulation. However, if the mother has 
PKU, she must follow a strict diet during pregnancy or 
her infant will be born with brain damage. If she eats a 
normal diet, rich in phenylalanine, the high blood level 
of this compound will not damage her brain, but it will 
damage that of her fetus.
Diagnosing PKU immediately after birth is impera-
tive so that the infant’s brain is never exposed to high 
levels of phenylalanine. Consequently, many govern-
ments have passed laws that mandate a PKU test for all 
newborn babies. The test is inexpensive and accurate, 
and it has prevented many cases of mental retardation.
Other genetic errors of metabolism can be treated 
in similar fashion. For example, untreated pyridoxine 
dependency results in damage to cerebral white matter, 
to the thalamus, and to the cerebellum. It is treated by 
large doses of vitamin B6. Another error of metabolism, 
galactosemia, is an inability to metabolize galactose, a 
sugar found in milk. If it is not treated, it, too, causes 
damage to cerebral white matter and to the cerebellum. 
The treatment is use of a milk substitute that does not 
contain galactose. (Galactosemia should not be con-
fused with lactose intolerance, which is caused by an insuf-
ficient production of lactase, the digestive enzyme that 
breaks down lactose. Lactose intolerance leads to diges-
tive disturbance, not brain damage.)
Some other inherited metabolic disorders cannot 
yet be treated successfully. For example, Tay-Sachs 
disease, which occurs mainly in children of Eastern Euro-
pean Jewish descent, causes the brain to swell and dam-
age itself against the inside of the skull and against the 
folds of the dura mater that encase it. The neurological 
symptoms begin by four months of age and include an 
exaggerated startle response to sounds, listlessness, irrita-
bility, spasticity, seizures, dementia, and finally death.
Tay-Sachs disease is one of several metabolic “stor-
age” disorders. All cells contain sacs of material encased 
in membrane, called lysosomes (“dissolving bodies”). 
These sacs constitute the cell’s rubbish-removal system; 
they contain enzymes that break down waste substances 
that cells produce in the course of their normal activi-
ties. The broken-down waste products are then recycled 
(used by the cells again) or excreted. Metabolic storage 
disorders are genetic errors of metabolism in which one 
or more vital enzymes are missing. Particular kinds of 
waste products cannot be destroyed by the lysosomes, so 
x pyridoxine dependency (peer i dox een)  A metabolic 
disorder in which an infant requires larger-than-normal amounts  
of pyridoxine (vitamin B6) to avoid neurological symptoms.
x galactosemia (ga lak tow see mee uh)  An inherited metabolic 
disorder in which galactose (milk sugar) cannot easily be metabolized.
x Tay-Sachs disease  A heritable, fatal, metabolic storage 
disorder; lack of enzymes in lysosomes causes accumulation of 
waste product and swelling of cells of the brain.
x Down syndrome  A disorder caused by the presence of an 
extra twenty-first chromosome, characterized by moderate to 
severe mental retardation and often by physical abnormalities.

	
Degenerative Disorders	
531
small, and the superior temporal gyrus (the location of 
Wernicke’s area) is thin. After age thirty the brain devel-
ops abnormal microscopic structures and begins to de-
generate. Because this degeneration resembles that of 
Alzheimer’s disease, it will be discussed in the next sec-
tion. If efforts to develop effective therapies for Al-
zheimer’s disease are successful, they might also be use-
ful in preventing the degeneration seen in the brains of 
people with Down syndrome.
An experienced observer can recognize people with this 
disorder: They have round heads; thick, protruding 
tongues that tend to keep the mouth open much of the 
time; stubby hands; short stature; low-set ears; and some-
what slanting eyelids. They are slow to learn to talk, but 
most do talk by five years of age. The brain of a person 
with Down syndrome is approximately 10 percent lighter 
than that of a normal person, the convolutions (gyri and 
sulci) are simpler and smaller, the frontal lobes are 
Section Summary
Disorders of Development
Developmental disorders can result in brain damage 
serious enough to cause mental retardation. During 
pregnancy the fetus is especially sensitive to toxins, 
such as alcohol or chemicals produced by some 
viruses. Several inherited metabolic disorders can also 
impair brain development. For example, phenylketon-
uria is caused by the lack of an enzyme that converts 
phenylalanine into tyrosine. Brain damage can be 
averted by feeding the infant a diet low in phenylala-
nine, so early diagnosis is essential. Other inherited 
metabolic disorders include pyridoxine dependency, 
which can be treated by vitamin B6, and galactose-
mia, which can be treated with a diet that does not 
contain milk sugar. Storage disorders, such as Tay-
Sachs disease, are caused by the inability of cells to 
destroy waste products within the lysosomes, which 
causes the cells to swell and eventually die. So far, 
these disorders cannot be treated. Down syndrome is 
produced by the presence of an extra twenty-first 
chromosome. The brain development of people with 
Down syndrome is abnormal, and after age thirty their 
brains develop features similar to those of people 
with Alzheimer’s disease. A study with an animal 
model of Down syndrome suggests that administra-
tion of GABA antagonists might be useful.
 Thought Question
Suppose that you were in charge of a governmental 
or charitable agency that had a lot of money to 
spend on research. What kinds of approaches do you 
think would be the most effective in preventing 
developmental disorders caused by behavior (for 
example, fetal alcohol syndrome), and by genetic 
factors?
Degenerative Disorders
Many disease processes cause degeneration of the cells 
of the brain. Some of these conditions injure particu-
lar kinds of cells, a fact that provides the hope that 
research will uncover the causes of the damage and 
find a way to halt it and prevent it from occurring in 
other people.
Transmissible Spongiform  
Encephalopathies
The outbreak of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE, 
or “mad cow disease”) in Great Britain in the late 1980s 
and early 1990s brought a peculiar form of brain disease 
to public attention. BSE is a transmissible spongiform  
encephalopathy (TSE)—a fatal contagious brain disease 
(“encephalopathy”) whose degenerative process gives the 
brain a spongelike (or Swiss cheese–like) appearance.  
Besides BSE, these diseases include Creutzfeldt-Jakob dis-
ease, fatal familial insomnia, and kuru, which affect  
humans, and scrapie, which primarily affects sheep. Al-
though scrapie cannot be transmitted to humans, BSE 
can, and it produces a variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. 
(See Figure 15.13.)
Unlike other transmissible diseases, TSEs are caused 
not by microorganisms but by simple proteins, which 
x transmissible spongiform encephalopathy  A contagious brain 
disease whose degenerative process gives the brain a spongelike 
appearance; caused by accumulation of misfolded prion protein.

532	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
sporadic—and the genetic and sporadic forms can be 
transmitted to others. The most common form of trans-
mission of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans is 
through transplantation of tissues such as dura mater or 
corneas, harvested from cadavers of people who were 
infected with a prion disease. One form of human prion 
protein disease, kuru, was transmitted through canni-
balism: Out of respect for their recently departed rela-
tives, members of a South Pacific tribe ate their brains 
and sometimes thus contracted the disease. This prac-
tice has since been abandoned (Gajdusek, 1977).
Whatever role normal PrPc plays, it does not seem 
to be essential for the life of a cell. Bueler et al. (1993) 
found that the cells of mice with a targeted mutation of 
the prion protein gene produced absolutely no prion 
protein and did not develop mouse scrapie when they 
were inoculated with the misfolded prions that cause 
this disease. Normal mice inoculated with these prions 
died within six months.
A study by Steele et al. (2006) suggests that normal 
prion protein plays a role in neural development and 
differentiation in fetuses and neurogenesis in adults. 
The investigators produced a genetically engineered 
strain of mice that produced increased amounts of PrPc 
and found increased numbers of proliferating cells in 
the subventricular zone and more neurons in the den-
tate gyrus, compared with normal mice.
Some investigators (for example, Bailey, Kandel, 
and Si, 2004) have suggested that a prionlike mechanism 
could play a role in the establishment and maintenance 
of long-term memories. Long-term memories can last 
for decades, and prion proteins, which are resistant to 
the destructive effects of enzymes, might maintain synap-
tic changes for long periods of time. Criado et al. (2005) 
found that mice with a targeted mutation against the 
PRNP gene showed deficits in a spatial learning task and 
in establishment of long-term potentiation in the den-
tate gyrus. Papassotiropoulos et al. (2005) found that 
people with a particular allele of the prion protein gene 
remembered 17 percent more information twenty-four 
hours after a word list–learning task than did people 
with a different allele. (Both alleles are considered nor-
mal and are not associated with a prion protein disease.)
Mallucci et al. (2003) created a genetically modified 
mouse strain whose neurons produced an enzyme at 
twelve weeks of age that destroyed normal prion pro-
tein. When the animals were a few weeks of age, the 
have been called prions, or “protein infectious agents” 
(Prusiner, 1982). Prion proteins are found primarily in 
the membrane of neurons, where they are believed to 
play a role in synaptic function and in preservation of 
the myelin sheath (Popko, 2010). Prion proteins are 
resistant to proteolytic enzymes—enzymes that are able 
to destroy proteins by breaking the peptide bonds that 
hold a protein’s amino acids together. Prion proteins 
are also resistant to levels of heat that denature normal 
proteins, which explains why cooking meat from cattle 
with BSE does not destroy the infectious agent. The se-
quence of amino acids of normal prion protein (PrPc) 
and infectious prion (PrPSc) are identical. How, then, 
can two proteins with the same amino acid sequences 
have such different effects? The answer is that the func-
tions of proteins are determined largely by their three-
dimensional shapes. The only difference between PrPc 
and PrPSc is the way the protein is folded. Once mis-
folded PrPSc is introduced into a cell, it causes normal 
PrPc to become misfolded too, and the process of this 
transformation ultimately kills them. (See Miller, 2009, 
for a review.)
A familial form of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is trans-
mitted as a dominant trait, caused by a mutation of the 
PRNP gene located on the short arm of chromosome 20, 
which codes for the human prion protein gene. How-
ever, most cases of this disease are sporadic. That is, they 
occur in people without a family history of prion protein 
disease. Prion protein diseases are unique not only be-
cause they can be transmitted by means of a simple 
protein but also because they can also be genetic or 
x prion (pree on)  A protein that can exist in two forms that 
differ only in their three-dimensional shape; accumulation of 
misfolded prion protein is responsible for transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies.
sporadic disease  A disease that occurs rarely and is not 
obviously caused by heredity or an infectious agent.
figure 15.13  Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy 
and Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease
The graph shows the number of cases of BSE in cattle 
and variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob (vCJD) disease in humans 
in Great Britain between 1988 and March 31, 2008.
(Data from OIE–World Organisation for Animal Health and the CJD Surveillance Unit.)
0
2000
1996
1992
2004
1988
10000
20000
30000
40000
110
100
40
50
60
70
80
90
30
BSE cases
vCJD deaths
Total deaths
Number of BSE cases
Mid 2008
Year

	
Degenerative Disorders	
533
Apoptosis can be triggered either externally, by a chem-
ical signal telling the cell that it is no longer needed (for 
example, during development), or internally, by evi-
dence that biochemical processes in the cell have be-
come disrupted so that the cell is no longer functioning 
properly. Perhaps the accumulation of misfolded, ab-
normal proteins provides such a signal. Apoptosis in-
volves production of “killer enzymes” called caspases. 
Mallucci et al. (2003) suggest that inactivation of cas-
pase-12, the enzyme that appears to be responsible for 
the death of neurons infected with PrPSc, may provide a 
treatment that could arrest the progress of transmissible 
spongiform encephalopathies. Let’s hope they are right.
Parkinson’s Disease
An important degenerative neurological disorder, Par-
kinson’s disease, is caused by degeneration of the nigro­
striatal system—the dopamine-secreting neurons of the 
substantia nigra that send axons to the basal ganglia. 
Parkinson’s disease is seen in approximately 1 percent of 
people over sixty-five years of age. The primary symptoms 
of Parkinson’s disease are muscular rigidity, slowness of 
movement, a resting tremor, and postural instability. For 
example, once a person with Parkinson’s disease is 
seated, he or she finds it difficult to rise. Once the person 
experimenters infected them with misfolded mouse 
scrapie prions. Soon thereafter, the animals began to 
develop spongy holes in their brains, indicating that 
they were infected with mouse scrapie. Then, at twelve 
weeks, the enzyme became active and started destroying 
normal PrPc. Although analysis showed that glial cells in 
the brain still contained misfolded PrPSc, the disease 
process stopped. Neurons stopped making normal PrPc, 
which could no longer be converted into PrPSc, so the 
mice went on to live normal lives. The disease process 
continued to progress in mice without the special en-
zyme, and these animals soon died. The authors con-
cluded that the process of conversion of PrPc to PrPSc 
is what kills cells. The mere presence of PrPSc in the 
brain (found in nonneuronal cells) does not cause the 
disease. Figure 15.14 shows the development of spongi-
form degeneration and its disappearance after the PrPc-
destroying enzyme became active at twelve weeks of age. 
(See Figure 15.14.)
How might misfolded prion protein kill neurons? 
As we will see later in this chapter, the brains of people 
with several other degenerative diseases, including Par-
kinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, frontotemporal 
dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and Hunting-
ton’s disease, also contain aggregations of misfolded 
proteins (Miller, 2009; Lee et al., 2010). We will also see 
that although these misfolded proteins are not prions, 
the disease process can be transmitted to the brains of 
other animals by inoculating them with the proteins. As 
we saw in Chapter 3, cells contain the means by which 
they can commit suicide—a process known as apoptosis. 
figure 15.14  Experimental Treatment of a Prion Protein Infection
Neural death was prevented and early spongiosis was reversed in scrapie-infected mice 
after a genetically engineered enzyme began to destroy PrPc at twelve weeks of age. 
Arrows point to degenerating neurons in mice without the prion-destroying enzyme. 
Spongiosis is seen as holes in the brain tissue.
(From Mallucci, G., Dickinson, A., Linehan, J., et al. Science, 2003, 302, 871–874. Copyright 2003 by the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted with permission.)
8 weeks
12 weeks
26 weeks
48 weeks
Time after Infection with Scrapies Prion
Normal 
mice
Mice
with prion-
destroying
enzyme
x caspase  A “killer enzyme” that plays a role in apoptosis, or 
programmed cell death.

534	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
which is normally found in the presynaptic terminals and 
is thought to be involved in synaptic transmission in do-
paminergic neurons (Moore et al., 2005). The mutation 
produces what is known as a toxic gain of function be-
cause it produces a protein that results in effects that are 
toxic to the cell. Mutations that cause toxic gain of func-
tion are normally dominant because the toxic substance 
is produced whether one or both members of the pair of 
chromosomes contains the mutated gene. Abnormal 
-synuclein becomes misfolded and forms aggregations, 
especially in dopaminergic neurons (Goedert, 2001). 
The dense core of Lewy bodies consists primarily of these 
aggregations, along with neurofilaments and synaptic 
vesicle proteins.
Another hereditary form of Parkinson’s disease is 
caused by mutation of a gene on chromosome 6 that 
produces a gene that has been named parkin (Kitada et al., 
1998). This mutation causes a loss of function, which 
makes it a recessive disorder. If a person carries a mu-
tated parkin gene on only one chromosome, the normal 
allele on the other chromosome can produce a suffi-
cient amount of normal parkin for normal cellular func-
tioning, and the person will not develop Parkinson’s 
disease. Normal parkin plays a role in ferrying defective 
or misfolded proteins to the proteasomes—organelles 
responsible for destroying these proteins (Moore et al., 
2005). This mutation permits high levels of defective 
protein to accumulate in dopaminergic neurons and 
ultimately damage them. Figure 15.16 illustrates the 
role of parkin in the action of proteasomes. Parkin as-
sists in the tagging of abnormal or misfolded proteins 
with numerous molecules of ubiquitin, a small, compact 
globular protein. Ubiquitination (as this process is 
called) targets the abnormal proteins for destruction by 
begins walking, he or she has difficulty stopping. Thus, a 
person with Parkinson’s disease cannot easily pace back 
and forth across a room. Reaching for an object can be 
accurate, but the movement usually begins only after a 
considerable delay. Writing is slow and labored, and as it 
progresses, the letters get smaller and smaller. Postural 
movements are impaired. A normal person who is 
bumped while standing will quickly move to restore bal-
ance—for example, by taking a step in the direction of 
the impending fall or by reaching out with the arms to 
grasp onto a piece of furniture. However, a person with 
Parkinson’s disease fails to do so and simply falls. A per-
son with this disorder is even unlikely to put out his or 
her arms to break the fall. As we saw in Chapter 8, the 
motor deficits of patients with Parkinson’s disease can be 
described as a deficiency of automatic, habitual responses 
caused by damage to the basal ganglia.
Parkinson’s disease also produces a resting tremor—
vibratory movements of the arms and hands that dimin-
ish somewhat when the individual makes purposeful 
movements. The tremor is accompanied by rigidity; the 
joints appear stiff. However, the tremor and rigidity are 
not the cause of the slow movements. In fact, some pa-
tients with Parkinson’s disease show extreme slowness of 
movements but little or no tremor.
Examination of the brains of patients who had Par-
kinson’s disease shows, of course, the near-disappearance 
of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons. Many surviving 
dopaminergic neurons show Lewy bodies, abnormal cir-
cular structures found within the cytoplasm. Lewy bodies 
have a dense protein core, surrounded by a halo of radi-
ating fibers (Forno, 1996). (See Figure 15.15.) Although 
most cases of Parkinson’s disease do not appear to have 
genetic origins, researchers have discovered that the mu-
tation of a particular gene located on chromosome 4 will 
produce this disorder (Polymeropoulos et al., 1996). 
This gene produces a protein known as -synuclein, 
figure 15.15  Lewy Bodies
A photomicrograph of the substantia nigra of a patient 
with Parkinson’s disease shows a Lewy body, indicated by 
the arrow.
(Photograph courtesy of Dr. Don Born, University of Washington.)
x Lewy body  Abnormal circular structures with a dense core 
consisting of a-synuclein protein; found in the cytoplasm of 
nigrostriatal neurons in people with Parkinson’s disease.
x a-synuclein  A protein normally found in the presynaptic 
membrane, where it is apparently involved in synaptic plasticity. 
Abnormal accumulations are apparently the cause of neural 
degeneration in Parkinson’s disease.
x toxic gain of function  Said of a genetic disorder caused by a 
dominant mutation that involves a faulty gene that produces a 
protein with toxic effects.
x parkin  A protein that plays a role in ferrying defective or 
misfolded proteins to the proteasomes; mutated parkin is a cause 
of familial Parkinson’s disease.
x loss of function  Said of a genetic disorder caused by a 
recessive gene that fails to produce a protein that is necessary for 
good health.
x proteasome  An organelle responsible for destroying defective 
or degraded proteins within the cell.
x ubiquitin  A protein that attaches itself to faulty or misfolded 
proteins and thus targets them for destruction by proteasomes.

	
Degenerative Disorders	
535
can other unidentified toxins. All of these chemicals 
inhibit mitochondrial functions, which leads to the ag-
gregation of misfolded -synuclein, especially in dopa-
minergic neurons. These accumulated proteins eventu-
ally kill the cells (Dawson and Dawson, 2003).
The brain contains two major systems of dopaminer-
gic neurons: the nigrostriatal system (whose damage 
causes Parkinson’s disease), and the mesolimbic/meso-
cortical system, which consists of dopaminergic neurons 
in the ventral tegmental area that innervate the nucleus 
accumbens and the prefrontal cortex. Parkinson’s dis-
ease damages only the nigrostriatal system, so there must 
be an important difference between the dopaminergic 
neurons in these two systems. Mosharov et al. (2009) 
suggest that the critical difference is that calcium chan-
nels are involved in regulating the spontaneous activity 
of DA cells in the nigrostriatal system and sodium chan-
nels are involved in regulating the activity of those in the 
mesolimbic/mesocortical system. Research with rodent 
models of Parkinson’s disease suggests that the presence 
of -synuclein, elevated intracellular calcium ions, and 
elevated levels of intracellular dopamine combine to kill 
these cells. Interference with any of these three factors 
prevents damage to these cells. Because DA neurons of 
the mesolimbic/mesocortical system do not contain  
elevated levels of calcium ions, they are spared.
As we saw in Chapter 4, the standard treatment for 
Parkinson’s disease is l-DOPA, the precursor of dopa-
mine. An increased level of l-DOPA in the brain causes 
a patient’s remaining dopaminergic neurons to pro-
duce and secrete more dopamine and, for a time, allevi-
ates the symptoms of the disease. But this compensation 
does not work indefinitely; eventually, the number of 
nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons declines to such a 
low level that the symptoms become worse. And the  
l-DOPA activates DA neurons in the mesolimbic/meso-
cortical system and produces side effects such as halluci-
nations and delusions.
Another drug, deprenyl, is often given to patients 
with Parkinson’s disease, usually in conjunction with  
l-DOPA. As we saw in Chapter 4, several people acquired 
the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease after taking an il-
licit drug contaminated with MPTP. Subsequent studies  
with laboratory animals revealed that the toxic effects of 
this drug could be prevented by administration of de-
prenyl, a drug that inhibits the activity of the enzyme 
MAO-B. The original rationale for administering depre-
nyl to patients with Parkinson’s disease was that it might 
prevent unknown toxins from producing further dam-
age to dopaminergic neurons. Many studies (for exam-
ple, Mizuno et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2011) confirm that 
administration of deprenyl slows the progression of Par-
kinson’s disease, especially if deprenyl therapy begins 
soon after the onset of the disease. However, the bene-
fits of deprenyl and other inhibitors of MAO-B appear 
the proteasomes, which break them down into their 
constituent amino acids. Defective parkin fails to ubiqui-
nate abnormal proteins, and they accumulate in the 
cell, eventually killing it. For some reason, dopaminer-
gic neurons are especially sensitive to this accumulation. 
(See Figure 15.16.)
The overwhelming majority of the cases of Parkin-
son’s disease (approximately 95 percent) are sporadic. 
That is, they occur in people without a family history of 
Parkinson’s disease. What, then, triggers the accumula-
tion of -synuclein and the destruction of dopaminergic 
neurons? Research suggests that Parkinson’s disease 
may be caused by toxins present in the environment, by 
faulty metabolism, or by unrecognized infectious disor-
ders. For example, the insecticides rotenone and para-
quat can cause Parkinson’s disease, and, presumably, so 
figure 15.16  The Role of Parkin in Parkinson’s 
Disease
Parkin is involved in the destruction of abnormal or 
misfolded proteins by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. If 
parkin is defective because of a mutation, abnormal or 
misfolded proteins cannot be destroyed, so they 
accumulate in the cell. If a-synuclein is defective because 
of a mutation, parkin is unable to tag it with ubiquitin, 
and it accumulates in the cell.
Misfolded
protein
Parkin attaches
molecules of
ubiquitin to
misfolded protein,
targeting it for
destruction by the
proteasome
Proteasome breaks
misfolded protein into its
constituent amino acids
Amino
acids
Ubiquitin
molecules

536	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
led to an increase in its popularity. The principal output 
of the basal ganglia comes from the internal division of 
the globus pallidus (GPi). (The caudate nucleus, puta-
men, and globus pallidus are the three major compo-
nents of the basal ganglia.) This output, which is directed 
through the subthalamic nucleus (STN) to the motor 
cortex, is inhibitory. Furthermore, a decrease in the ac-
tivity of the dopaminergic input to the caudate nucleus 
and putamen causes an increase in the activity of the GPi. 
Thus, damage to the GPi might be expected to relieve 
the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. (See Figure 15.17.)
In the 1950s, Leksell and his colleagues performed 
pallidotomies (surgical destruction of the internal divi-
sion of the globus pallidus) in patients with severe Par-
kinson’s disease (Svennilson et al., 1960; Laitinen, Ber-
genheim, and Hariz, 1992). The surgery often reduced 
the rigidity and enhanced the patient’s ability to move. 
Unfortunately, the surgery occasionally made the pa-
tient’s symptoms worse and sometimes resulted in partial 
blindness. (The optic tract is located next to the GPi.)
With the development of l-DOPA therapy in the 
late 1960s, pallidotomies were abandoned. However, it 
eventually became evident that l-DOPA worked for a 
limited time and that the symptoms of Parkinson’s dis-
ease would eventually return. For that reason, in the 
1990s, neurosurgeons again began experimenting with 
pallidotomies, first with laboratory animals and then 
with humans (Graybiel, 1996; Lai et al., 2000). This 
time, they used MRI scans to find the location of the GPi 
and then inserted an electrode into the target region. 
The surgeon would then pass radiofrequency current to 
heat and destroy the brain tissue. The results of this 
procedure were so promising that several neurological 
teams began promoting its use in the treatment of rela-
tively young patients whose symptoms no longer re-
spond to l-DOPA.
Neurosurgeons have also targeted the STN in pa-
tients with advanced Parkinson’s disease. As Figure 15.17 
shows, the subthalamic nucleus has an excitatory effect 
on the GPi; therefore, damage to the subthalamic nu-
cleus decreases the activity of this region and removes 
some of the inhibition on motor output. (Look again at 
Figure 15.17.) This surgery brings depressed motor activ-
ity back to normal (Guridi and Obeso, 2001).
You will recall from Chapter 5 that researchers have 
developed optogenetic methods that enable them to stim-
ulate or inhibit specific types of neurons in specific loca-
tions of the brain. Kravitz et al. (2010) used a genetically 
engineered virus to insert light-sensitive proteins in the 
to be reduction in symptoms. The drugs do not appear 
to retard the degeneration of dopaminergic neurons 
(Williams, 2010).
What are the effects of the loss of dopaminergic 
neurons on normal brain functioning? Functional-imag-
ing studies have shown that akinesia (difficulty in initiat-
ing movements) was associated with decreased activa-
tion of the supplementary motor area and that tremors 
are associated with abnormalities of a neural system in-
volving the pons, midbrain, cerebellum, and thalamus 
(Buhmann et al., 2003; Grafton, 2004).
Neurosurgeons have been developing three stereo-
taxic procedures designed to alleviate the symptoms of 
Parkinson’s disease that no longer respond to treatment 
with l-DOPA. The first one, transplantation of fetal tis-
sue, attempts to reestablish the secretion of dopamine 
in the neostriatum. The tissue is obtained from the sub-
stantia nigra of aborted human fetuses and implanted 
into the caudate nucleus and putamen by means of ste-
reotaxically guided needles. As we saw in Chapter 5, 
PET scans have shown that dopaminergic fetal cells are 
able to grow in their new host and secrete dopamine, 
reducing the patient’s symptoms—at least, initially.
In a study of thirty-two patients with fetal tissue 
transplants, Freed (2002) found that those whose symp-
toms had previously responded to l-DOPA were most 
likely to benefit from the surgery. Presumably, these 
patients had a sufficient number of basal ganglia neu-
rons with receptors that could be stimulated by the do-
pamine secreted by either the medication or the trans-
planted tissue. Unfortunately, many transplant patients 
later developed severe, persistent dyskinesias—troublesome 
and often painful involuntary movements. As a result, 
fetal transplants of dopaminergic fetal cells are no longer 
recommended (Olanow et al., 2003).
Further examination of the fate of fetal transplants 
has shown that although the transplanted cells can sur-
vive and form connections with neurons in the recipi-
ent’s tissue, these cells eventually develop deposits of 
-synuclein. Studies with animal models of Parkinson’s 
disease show that misfolded -synuclein is transferred 
from the recipient’s own neurons to the grafted neu-
rons (Kordower et al., 2011). As many investigators have 
noted, misfolded proteins responsible for several neuro-
degenerative diseases, including Parkinson’s disease, 
can be transferred from cell to cell in the brain where 
they induce further protein misfolding, just like prion 
proteins (Lee et al., 2011). It appears that adding 
healthy cells to the basal ganglia of patients with Parkin-
son’s disease will ultimately fail unless a way is found to 
stop the process that results in the deposition of mis-
folded -synuclein.
Another therapeutic procedure has a long history, 
but only recently have technological developments in 
imaging methods and electrophysiological techniques 
x internal division of the globus pallidus (GPi)  A division of the 
globus pallidus that provides inhibitory input to the motor cortex 
via the thalamus; sometimes stereotaxically lesioned to treat the 
symptoms of Parkinson’s disease.

	
Degenerative Disorders	
537
direct pathway in mice with lesions of the nigrostriatal 
system, who displayed the symptoms of Parkinson’s dis-
ease. When they stimulated this pathway, which inhibits 
the GPi, the parkinsonian symptoms disappeared. This 
experiment clearly and elegantly demonstrates that—at 
least in this mouse model—the motor symptoms of Par-
kinson’s disease are produced by a shift of balance in favor 
of the indirect pathway. These findings explain why surgi-
cal lesions targeted at the GPi can reduce these symptoms.
The third stereotaxic procedure aimed at relieving 
the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease involves implanting 
electrodes in the STN or the GPi and attaching a device 
neurons of the striatum that receive inputs from axons of 
dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra. They used 
two different procedures that enabled them to stimulate 
neurons that contained either dopamine D1 receptors 
(part of the direct pathway of the cortical-basal ganglia 
loop) or dopamine D2 receptors (part of the indirect 
pathway). As Figure 15.17 shows, activation of the direct 
pathway inhibits the GPi and activation of the indirect 
pathway excites the GPi. (Look again at Figure 15.17.) They 
found that activation of the indirect pathway, which ex-
cites the GPi, caused the mice to display the motor symp-
toms seen in Parkinson’s disease. They also activated the 
figure 15.17  Connections of the Basal Ganglia
This schematic shows the major connections of the basal ganglia and associated 
structures. Excitatory connections are shown as black lines; inhibitory connections are 
shown as red lines. Many connections, such as the inputs to the substantia nigra, are 
omitted for clarity. Two regions that have been targets of stereotaxic surgery for 
Parkinson’s disease—the internal division of the globus pallidus and the subthalamic 
nucleus—are outlined in gray. Damage to these regions reduces inhibitory input to the 
thalamus and facilitates movement. Deep brain stimulation of these regions produces 
similar effects.
VA/VL thalamus
Subthalamic nucleus
To motor nuclei
in the brain stem
(ventromedial
system)
Globus pallidus,
external
Globus pallidus,
internal
Caudate nucleus
and putamen
Excited by direct pathway;
inhibited by indirect pathway
Premotor
cortex
Supplementary
motor area
Primary motor
cortex
Primary somatosensory
cortex
Direct
pathway
Presupplementary
motor area
Hyperdirect
pathway
Indirect
pathway
Indirect
pathway
Substantia nigra
Excitatory effect
on D1 receptors
Dopaminergic
axons
Inhibitory effect
on D2 receptors

538	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
inserted inhibitory light-sensitive protein into the right 
subthalamic nucleus and found that inhibition of neu-
rons in this nucleus had no effect on the motor symp-
toms, which suggests that DBS does not exert its benefi-
cial effects by simply inhibiting neurons of the STN. 
Next, they inserted excitatory light-sensitive protein in 
the right STN and found that excitation of neurons in 
this nucleus did not affect motor symptoms, so DBS does 
not reduce parkinsonian motor symptoms through exci-
tation of the STN, either. Next, the investigators inserted 
excitatory light-sensitive protein in the axons of neurons 
entering the STN. This time, excitation of these axons 
did suppress the parkinsonian motor symptoms. These 
results suggest that DBS exerts its therapeutic effects not 
through simple excitation or inhibition of neurons in 
the STN but by causing undoubtedly more complex 
changes in the firing of particular neurons in the STN 
by activating axons that enter this structure.
Researchers have been attempting to develop strate-
gies of gene therapy to treat the symptoms of Parkin-
son’s disease. Kaplitt et al. (2007) introduced a geneti-
cally modified virus into the subthalamic nucleus of 
patients with Parkinson’s disease that delivered a gene 
for GAD, the enzyme responsible for the biosynthesis  
of the major inhibitory neurotransmitter, GABA. The 
production of GAD turned some of the excitatory,  
glutamate-producing neurons in the subthalamic nu-
cleus into inhibitory, GABA-producing neurons. As a 
result, the activity of the GPi decreased, the activity of 
the supplementary motor area increased, and the symp-
toms of the patients improved. A larger double-blind 
clinical trial confirmed the efficacy and safety of this 
procedure (LeWitt et al., 2011). (See Figure 15.19.)
Huntington’s Disease
Another basal ganglia disease, Huntington’s disease, is 
caused by degeneration of the caudate nucleus and pu-
tamen. Whereas Parkinson’s disease causes a poverty of 
movements, Huntington’s disease causes uncontrollable 
ones, especially jerky limb movements. The movements 
of Huntington’s disease look like fragments of purpose-
ful movements but occur involuntarily. This disease is 
progressive, includes cognitive and emotional changes, 
and eventually causes death, usually within ten to fifteen 
years after the symptoms begin.
that permits the patient to electrically stimulate the 
brain through the electrodes. (See Figure 15.18.) Accord-
ing to some studies, deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the 
subthalamic nucleus is as effective as brain lesions in 
suppressing tremors and has fewer adverse side effects 
(Esselink et al., 2009). In addition, a three-year follow-
up study found no evidence of cognitive deterioration 
in patients who received implants for deep brain stimu-
lation (Funkiewiez et al., 2004). Notably, DBS treats only 
the motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, not the af-
fective and cognitive symptoms such as depression and 
dementia.
The fact that either lesions or stimulation alleviates 
tremors suggests that deep brain stimulation has an in-
hibitory effect on STN neurons, but an optogenetic 
study by Gradinaru et al. (2009) indicates that the effects 
of DBS are more complex than that. Gradinaru and her 
colleagues produced unilateral motor symptoms of Par-
kinson’s disease in mice by damaging the nigrostriatal 
dopamine system on the right side of the brain. They 
figure 15.18  Deep Brain Stimulation
Electrodes are implanted in the patient’s brain, and wires 
are run under the skin to stimulation devices implanted 
near the collarbone.
(Illustration used with permission by Medtronic, Inc.)
x deep brain stimulation (DBS)  A surgical procedure that 
involves implanting electrodes in a particular region of the brain 
and attaching a device that permits the electrical stimulation of 
that region through the electrodes.
x Huntington’s disease  An inherited disorder that causes 
degeneration of the basal ganglia; characterized by progressively 
more severe uncontrollable jerking movements, writhing move-
ments, dementia, and finally death.

	
Degenerative Disorders	
539
ubiquitin-protease system, which activates caspase, one 
of the enzymes involved in apoptosis (Hague, Klaffke, 
and Bandmann, 2005).
Normal Htt is found in cells throughout the body, 
but it occurs in especially high levels in neurons and in 
cells of the testes. It is found in the cytoplasm, where it 
associates with microtubules, vesicular membrane, and 
synaptic proteins, which suggests that a plays a role in 
vesicular transport, release of neurotransmitter, and re-
cycling of vesicular membrane (Levine, Capeda, and 
André, 2010). A targeted mutation against the Htt gene 
is fatal, causing death of the fetus early in development 
(Nasir et al., 1995), so the huntingtin protein plays an 
essential role in development.
Researchers have debated the role played by the ac-
cumulations of misfolded Htt in the nucleus (known as 
inclusion bodies) in development of the disease. These in-
clusions could cause neural degeneration, they could have 
a protective role, or they could play no role at all. Studies 
by Arrasate and her colleagues (Arrasate et al., 2004; Miller 
et al., 2010) strongly suggests that inclusion bodies actually 
protect neurons. The investigators prepared tissue cul-
tures from rat striatal neurons that they infected with 
genes that expressed fragments of abnormal Htt. Some of 
the neurons that produced the mutant Htt formed inclu-
sion bodies; others did not. The investigators used a  
The symptoms of Huntington’s disease usually be-
gin in the person’s thirties and forties but can some-
times begin in the early twenties. The first signs of neu-
ral degeneration occur in the putamen, in a specific 
group of inhibitory neurons: GABAergic medium spiny 
neurons. Damage to these neurons removes some in-
hibitory control exerted on the premotor and supple-
mentary motor areas of the frontal cortex. Loss of this 
control leads to involuntary movements. As the disease 
progresses, neural degeneration is seen in many other 
regions of the brain, including the cerebral cortex.
Huntington’s disease is a hereditary disorder, caused 
by a dominant gene on chromosome 4. In fact, the gene 
has been located, and its defect has been identified as a 
repeated sequence of bases that code for the amino acid 
glutamine (Collaborative Research Group, 1993). This 
repeated sequence causes the gene product—a protein 
called huntingtin (Htt)—to contain an elongated stretch 
of glutamine. Abnormal Htt becomes misfolded and 
forms aggregations that accumulate in the nucleus. Lon-
ger stretches of glutamine are associated with patients 
whose symptoms began at a younger age, a finding that 
indicates that this abnormal portion of the huntingtin 
molecule is responsible for the disease. These facts sug-
gest that the mutation causes the disease through a toxic 
gain of function—that abnormal Htt causes harm. In 
fact, the cause of death of neurons in Huntington’s dis-
ease is apoptosis (cell “suicide”). Li et al. (2000) found 
that HD mice lived longer if they were given a caspase 
inhibitor, which suppresses apoptosis. Abnormal Htt 
may trigger apoptosis by impairing the function of the  
figure 15.19  Gene Therapy of Parkinson’s Disease
The gene for GAD, the enzyme responsible for biosynthesis of GABA, was delivered  
to cells in the subthalamic nucleus of patients with Parkinson’s disease by means of a 
genetically modified virus. Functional MRI scans show (a) decreased activation of the 
subthalamic nucleus and (b) increased activation of the supplementary motor area.  
(c) Relationship between changes in the activation of the supplementary motor area 
and symptoms of Parkinson’s disease.
(From Kaplitt, M. G., Feigin, A., Tang, C., et al. Lancet, 2007, 369, 2097–2105. Reprinted with permission.)
Thalamus
SMA
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
40
Symptoms
–1.0
–0.5
0
0.5
Change in metabolic activity
SMA
(a)
(b)
(c)
x huntingtin (Htt)  A protein that may serve to facilitate the 
production and transport of brain-derived neurotrophic factor. 
Abnormal huntingtin is the cause of Huntington’s disease.

540	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
brain disorder. A common form of dementia is called  
Alzheimer’s disease, which occurs in approximately 10 per-
cent of the population above the age of sixty-five and al-
most 50 percent of people older than eighty-five years. It 
is characterized by progressive loss of memory and other 
mental functions. At first, people may have difficulty re-
membering appointments and sometimes fail to think of 
words or other people’s names. As time passes, they show 
increasing confusion and increasing difficulty with tasks 
such as balancing a checkbook. The memory deficit most 
critically involves recent events, and thus it resembles the 
anterograde amnesia of Korsakoff’s syndrome. If people 
with Alzheimer’s disease venture outside alone, they are 
likely to get lost. They eventually become bedridden, then 
become completely helpless, and finally succumb (Terry 
and Davies, 1980).
Alzheimer’s disease produces severe degeneration 
of the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, neocortex (espe-
cially the association cortex of the frontal and temporal 
lobes), nucleus basalis, locus coeruleus, and raphe nu-
clei. Figure 15.21 shows photographs of the brain of a 
patient with Alzheimer’s disease and of a normal brain. 
You can see how much wider the sulci are in the patient’s 
brain, especially in the frontal and temporal lobes, indi-
cating substantial loss of cortical tissue. (See Figure 15.21.)
Earlier, I mentioned that the brains of patients with 
Down syndrome usually develop abnormal structures 
that are also seen in patients with Alzheimer’s disease: 
amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. Amyloid plaques 
are extracellular deposits that consist of a dense core of 
a protein known as b-amyloid, surrounded by degener-
ating axons and dendrites, along with activated microg-
lia and reactive astrocytes, cells that are involved in  
destruction of damaged cells. Eventually, the phagocytic 
glial cells destroy the degenerating axons and dendrites, 
leaving only a core of b-amyloid (usually referred to  
as Ab).
Neurofibrillary tangles consist of dying neurons that 
contain intracellular accumulations of twisted filaments 
robotic microscope to see what happened to the cells over 
a period of almost ten days. They found that the inclusion 
bodies appeared to have a protective function. Neurons 
that contained inclusion bodies had lower levels of mutant 
Htt elsewhere in the cell, and these neurons lived longer 
than those without these accumulations. (See Figure 15.20.)
At present there is no treatment for Huntington’s 
disease. However, Southwell, Ko, and Patterson (2009) 
prepared a special type of antibody that acts intracellu-
larly (an intrabody) called Happ1. This antibody targets 
a portion of the huntingtin protein. Tests with five dif-
ferent experimental models of Huntington’s disease in 
mice found that insertion of the Happ1 gene into the 
animals’ brains suppressed production of mutant Htt 
and improved the animal’s disease symptoms. Another 
approach by DiFiglia and her colleagues (DiFiglia et al., 
2007; Pfister et al., 2009) involves injection of small in-
terfering RNAs (siRNA) into the striatum that blocked 
the transcription of the Htt genes—and hence the pro-
duction of mutant Htt—in this region. The treatment 
decreased the size of inclusion bodies in striatal neu-
rons, prolonged the life of the striatal neurons, and re-
duced the animals’ motor symptoms.
Alzheimer’s Disease
Several neurological disorders result in dementia, a dete-
rioration of intellectual abilities resulting from an organic 
figure 15.20  Infection with Abnormal Huntingtin
The photomicrograph shows two neurons that have been 
infected with genes that express fragments of abnormal 
huntingtin. The lower neuron shows an inclusion body 
(lorange), and the upper one does not. Arrasate et al. 
(2004) found that neurons with inclusion bodies survived 
longer than those without inclusion bodies. Blue ovals are 
the nuclei of uninfected neurons.
(Photo courtesy of Steven Finkbeiner, Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease 
and the University of California, San Francisco.)
x dementia (da men sha)  A loss of cognitive abilities such as 
memory, perception, verbal ability, and judgment; common causes 
are multiple strokes and Alzheimer’s disease.
x Alzheimer’s disease  A degenerative brain disorder of 
unknown origin; causes progressive memory loss, motor deficits, 
and eventual death.
x amyloid plaque (amm i loyd)  An extracellular deposit 
containing a dense core of b-amyloid protein surrounded by 
degenerating axons and dendrites and activated microglia and 
reactive astrocytes.
x b-amyloid (Ab)  A protein found in excessive amounts in the 
brains of patients with Alzheimer’s disease.
x neurofibrillary tangle (new row fib ri lair y)  A dying neuron 
containing intracellular accumulations of abnormally phosphorylated 
tau-protein filaments that formerly served as the cell’s internal 
skeleton.

	
Degenerative Disorders	
541
chain of approximately 700 amino acids. APP is then cut 
apart in two places by enzymes known as secretases to 
produce A. The first, b-secretase, cuts the “tail” off of 
an APP molecule. The second, g-secretase (gamma-
secretase), cuts the “head” off. The result is a molecule 
of A that contains either forty or forty-two amino acids. 
(See Figure 15.23.)
The location of the second cut of the APP molecule 
by g-secretase determines which form is produced. In 
normal brains, 90–95 percent of the A molecules are of 
the short form; the other 5–10 percent are of the long 
form. In patients with Alzheimer’s disease the propor-
tion of long A rises to as much as 40 percent of the 
total. High concentrations of the long form have a ten-
dency to fold themselves improperly and form aggrega-
tions, which have toxic effects on the cell. (As we saw 
earlier in this chapter, abnormally folded prions and a-
synuclein proteins form aggregations that cause brain 
degeneration.) Small amounts of long A can easily be 
cleared from the brain. The molecules are given a ubiq-
uitin tag that marks them for destruction, and they are 
of hyperphosphorylated tau protein. Normal tau protein 
serves as a component of microtubules, which provide 
the cells’ transport mechanism. During the progression 
of Alzheimer’s disease, excessive amounts of phosphate 
ions become attached to strands of tau protein, thus 
changing its molecular structure. Abnormal filaments 
are seen in the soma and proximal dendrites of pyrami-
dal cells in the cerebral cortex, which disrupt transport 
of substances within the cell, and the cell dies, leaving 
behind a tangle of protein filaments. (See Figure 15.22.)
Formation of amyloid plaques is caused by the pro-
duction of a defective form of A. The production of 
Ay takes several steps. First, a gene encodes the pro-
duction of the b-amyloid precursor protein (APP), a 
figure 15.21  Alzheimer’s Disease
(a) A lateral view of the right side of the brain of a person with Alzheimer’s disease. 
(Rostral is to the right; dorsal is up.) Note that the sulci of the temporal lobe and 
parietal lobe are especially wide, indicating degeneration of the neocortex 
(arrowheads). (b) A lateral view of the right side of a normal brain.
(Photo of diseased brain courtesy of A. D’Agostino, Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon; photo of normal brain  
© Dan McCoy/Rainbow.)
(a)
(b)
x tau protein  A protein that normally serves as a component of 
microtubules, which provide the cell’s transport mechanism and 
cytoskeleton.
x b-amyloid precursor protein (APP)  A protein produced and 
secreted by cells that serves as the precursor for b-amyloid 
protein.
x secretase (see cre tayss)  A class of enzymes that cut the b-amyloid 
precursor protein into smaller fragments, including b-amyloid.
figure 15.22  Microscopic Features of Alzheimer’s 
Disease
The photomicrographs from deceased patients with 
Alzheimer’s disease show (a) an amyloid plaque, filled 
with b-amyloid protein, and (b) neurofibrillary tangles.
(Photos courtesy of D. J. Selkoe, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston.)
(a)
(b)

542	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
a PET scanner. You can see the accumulation of the 
protein in the patient’s cerebral cortex. (See Figure 15.24.) 
The ability to measure the levels of A in the brains of 
Alzheimer’s patients will enable researchers to evaluate 
the effectiveness of potential treatments for the disease. 
When such a treatment is devised, the ability to identify 
the accumulation of A early in the development of the 
disease will make it possible to begin a patient’s treat-
ment before significant degeneration—and the accom-
panying decline in cognitive abilities—has occurred.
Research has shown that at least some forms of Al-
zheimer’s disease run in families and thus appear to be 
hereditary. Because the brains of people with Down 
syndrome (caused by an extra twenty-first chromosome) 
also contain deposits of A, some investigators hypoth-
esized that the twenty-first chromosome may be involved 
in the production of this protein. In fact, St. George-
Hyslop et al. (1987) found that chromosome 21 does 
contains the gene that produces APP.
Since the discovery of the APP gene, several studies 
found specific mutations of this gene that produce  
familial Alzheimer’s disease (Martinez et al., 1993; Farlow 
et al., 1994). In addition, other studies have found nu-
merous mutations of two presenilin genes, found on 
transported to the proteasomes, where they are ren-
dered harmless. However, this system cannot keep up 
with abnormally high levels of production of long A.
Acetylcholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain are 
among the first cells to be affected in Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. A serves as a ligand for the p75 neurotrophic recep-
tor, a receptor that normally responds to stress signals 
and stimulates apoptosis (Sotthibundhu et al., 2008). 
Basal forebrain ACh neurons contain high levels of this 
receptors; thus, once the level of long-form A reach a 
sufficiently high lever, these neurons begin to die.
Figure 15.24 shows the abnormal accumulation of 
A in the brain of a person with Alzheimer’s disease. 
Klunk and his colleagues (Klunk et al., 2003; Mathis et al., 
2005) developed PiB, a chemical that binds with A and 
readily crosses the blood–brain barrier. They gave the 
patient and a healthy control subject an injection of a 
radioactive form of PiB and examined their brains with 
figure 15.23  b-Amyloid Protein
The schematic shows the production of b-amyloid protein 
(Ab) from the amyloid precursor protein.
Amyloid
precursor
(APP)
β-secretase
cuts here
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
Cell membrane
Cell membrane
β-amyloid
protein
(Aβ)
γ-secretase
cuts here
figure 15.24  Detection of b-Amyloid Protein
The PET scans show the accumulation of b-amyloid 
protein (Ab) in the brains of a patient with Alzheimer’s 
disease. AD = Alzheimer’s disease, MR = structural 
magnetic resonance image, [C-11]PIB PET = PET scan of 
brains after an injection of a radioactive ligand for Ab.
(Courtesy of William Klunk, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, Pittsburgh, PA.)
MR
MR
[C-11]PIB PET
[C-11]PIB PET
Control
AD
x presenilin (pree sen ill in)  A protein produced by a faulty gene 
that causes b-amyloid precursor protein to be converted to the 
abnormal short form; may be a cause of Alzheimer’s disease.

	
Degenerative Disorders	
543
which causes excitotoxicity because of excessive inflow 
of calcium ions through neural NMDA receptors. They 
also cause synaptic dysfunction and suppress the forma-
tion of long-term potentiation, perhaps because of in-
terference with axonal and dendritic transport.
A study by Buckner et al. (2005) suggests that in-
creases in A—and subsequent degeneration—are first 
seen in regions of the brain that have the highest default 
activity—neural activity that occurs when a person is rest-
ing and not working on a task or solving a problem. 
Figure15.25 shows lateral and medial views of a human 
cerebrum, showing regions of high default activity, de-
position of A, disruption of metabolism, and cortical 
atrophy. (See Figure 15.25.)
Although the studies I have cited indicate that ge-
netically triggered production of abnormal A plays an 
important role in the development of Alzheimer’s disease, 
chromosomes 1 and 14, that also produce Alzheimer’s 
disease. Abnormal APP and presenilin genes all cause 
the defective long form of A to be produced (Hardy, 
1997). The two presenilin proteins, PS1 and PS2, are 
subunits of g-secretase, which is not a simple enzyme but 
consists of a large multiprotein complex (De Strooper, 
2003).
Yet another genetic cause of Alzheimer’s disease is 
a mutation in the gene for apolipoprotein E (ApoE), a 
glycoprotein that transports cholesterol in the blood 
and also plays a role in cellular repair. One allele of the 
apoE gene, known as E4, increases the risk of late-onset 
Alzheimer’s disease, apparently by interfering with the 
removal of the long form of A from the extracellular 
space in the brain (Roses, 1997; Bu, 2010). In contrast, 
the ApoE2 allele may actually protect people from de-
veloping Alzheimer’s disease. (The most common form 
of ApoE is the E3 allele.) Traumatic brain injury is also 
a serious risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. For exam-
ple, examination of the brains of people who have sus-
tained closed head injuries (including injuries that oc-
cur during prize fights) often reveals a widespread 
distribution of amyloid plaques. Risk of Alzheimer’s dis-
ease following traumatic brain injury is especially high 
in people who possess the ApoE4 allele (Bu, 2010). 
Obesity, hypertension, high cholesterol levels, and dia-
betes are also risk factors, and these factors, too, are 
exacerbated by the presence of the ApoE4 allele (Mar-
tins et al., 2006).
As we saw earlier, the brains of Alzheimer’s patients 
contain abnormal forms of two types of proteins: A and 
tau. It appears that excessive amounts of abnormal A, 
but not tau protein, are responsible for the disease. Mu-
tations in the A precursor, APP, produce both forms of 
abnormal proteins and cause the development of both 
amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. However, 
mutations in the gene for tau protein (found on chro-
mosome 17) produce only neurofibrillary tangles. The 
result of these mutations is a disorder known as fronto-
temporal dementia (also known as Pick’s disease), which 
causes degeneration of the frontal and temporal cortex, 
resulting in emotional changes and loss of executive 
functions caused by damage to the prefrontal cortex 
and language disturbance caused by temporal lobe 
damage (Goate, 1998; Goedert and Spillantini, 2000).
It appears that the presence of excessive amounts of 
A in the cytoplasm of cells, not the formation of extra-
cellular amyloid plaques, is the cause of neural degen-
eration (Bossy-Wetzel, Schwarzenbacher, and Lipton, 
2004). Intracellular oligomers of A (aggregations of sev-
eral A molecules) activate microglia, causing an in-
flammatory response that triggers the release of toxic 
cytokines—chemicals produced by the immune system 
that normally destroy infected cells. A oligomers also 
trigger an excessive release of glutamate by glial cells, 
x apolipoprotein E (ApoE) (ay po lye po proh teen)  A glyco-
protein that transports cholesterol in the blood and plays a role in 
cellular repair; presence of the E4 allele of the apoE gene 
increases the risk of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease.
x frontotemporal dementia  A mutation of the gene for tau 
protein that causes degeneration of the frontal and temporal 
cortex and subsequent dementia.
figure 15.25  Default Activity in the Alzheimer Brain
The scans show the relationship between high levels of 
default activity and amyloid deposition, atrophy, and 
disrupted metabolism in the brains of patients with 
Alzheimer’s disease.
(From Buckner, R. L., Snyder, A. Z., Shannon, B. J., et al. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2005, 25, 7709–7717. Copyright 2005 by the Society for Neuroscience.)
Default activity
Cortical atrophy
Disrupted metabolism
Amyloid deposition

544	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
coated stainless-steel wires with minute amounts of mis-
folded A and implanted them in the brains of mice. 
This procedure, too, induced -amyloidosis in the  
recipients—even when the wires had been boiled before 
they were implanted. As we saw, prion proteins retain 
their infective potency even after being heated to the 
boiling point. Apparently, misfolded A retains its abil-
ity to act as a seed that induces misfolding in a recipient 
brain. Fortunately, Eisele and her colleagues found that 
plasma sterilization of the wires blocked the ability of 
the A to trigger the production of misfolded protein, 
so it is unlikely that Alzheimer’s disease could be trans-
mitted by means of surgical instruments.
Currently, the only approved pharmacological treat-
ments for Alzheimer’s disease are acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine) 
and an NMDA receptor antagonist (memantine). Be-
cause acetylcholinergic neurons are among the first to be 
damaged in Alzheimer’s disease and because these neu-
rons play a role in cortical activation and memory, drugs 
that inhibit the destruction of ACh and hence enhance 
its activity have been found to provide a modest increase 
in cognitive activity of patients with this disease. How-
ever, these drugs have no effect on the process of neural 
degeneration and do not prolong patients’ survival. Me-
mantine, a noncompetitive NMDA receptor blocker, ap-
pears to produce a slight improvement in symptoms of 
dementia by retarding excitotoxic destruction of acetyl-
cholinergic neurons caused by the entry of excessive 
amounts of calcium (Rogawski and Wenk, 2003).
Perhaps the most promising approaches to the pre-
vention of Alzheimer’s disease come from immunologi-
cal research with AD mice. Schenk et al. (1999) and 
Bard et al. (2000) attempted to sensitize the immune 
system against A. They injected AD mice with a vaccine 
that, they hoped, would stimulate the immune system to 
destroy A. The treatment worked: The vaccine sup-
pressed the development of amyloid plaques in the 
brains of mice that received the vaccine from an early 
age and halted or even reversed the development of 
plaques in mice that received the vaccine later in life.
A clinical trial with Alzheimer’s patients attempted 
to destroy A by sensitizing the patient’s immune systems 
to the protein (Monsonego and Weiner, 2003). In a 
double-blind study, thirty patients with mild-to-moderate 
Alzheimer’s disease were given injections of a portion of 
the A protein. Twenty of these patients generated anti-
bodies against A, which slowed the course of the dis-
ease, presumably because their immune systems began 
destroying A in their brain and reducing the neural 
destruction caused by the accumulation of this protein. 
Hock et al. (2003) compared the cognitive abilities of the 
patients who generated A antibodies to those who did 
not. As Figure 15.26 shows, antibody production signifi-
cantly reduced cognitive decline. (See Figure 15.26.)
the fact is that most forms of Alzheimer’s disease are 
sporadic, not hereditary. So far, the strongest known 
nongenetic risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease (other 
than age) is traumatic brain injury. Another factor, level 
of education, has also been shown to play an important 
role. The Religious Orders Study, supported by the U.S. 
National Institute on Aging, measures the cognitive per-
formance of older Catholic clergy (priests, nuns, and 
monks) and examines their brains when they die. A re-
port by Bennett et al. (2003) found a positive relation-
ship between increased number of years of formal edu-
cation and cognitive performance, even in people whose 
brains contained significant concentrations of amyloid 
plaques. For example, people who had received some 
postgraduate education had significantly higher cogni-
tive test scores than people with the same concentration 
of amyloid plaques but less formal education. Thus, 
formal education appears to enable a person to main-
tain a higher level of cognitive performance even in the 
face of brain degeneration. Ninety percent of the peo-
ple who are participating in the study received some 
college education. It is possible that if people with much 
less formal education were studied, an even stronger 
relationship between education and resistance to de-
mentia would be seen. Of course, it is possible that vari-
ables such as individual differences in cognitive ability 
affect the likelihood that a person will pursue advanced 
studies, and these differences, by themselves, could play 
an important role. In any case, engaging in vigorous in-
tellectual activity (and adopting a lifestyle that promotes 
good general health) is probably the most important 
thing a person can do to stave off the development of 
dementia.
Billings et al. (2007) performed an experiment with 
AD mice, a strain of genetically modified mice that con-
tain a mutant human gene for APP that leads to the 
development of Alzheimer’s disease. The investigators 
began training the mice early in life on the water maze 
task, described in Chapter 13. The mice were trained at 
three-month intervals between the ages of two and eigh-
teen months. The training delayed the accumulation of 
A and led to a slower decline of the animals’ perfor-
mance. This study lends support to the conclusion that 
intellectual activity (if I can use that term for mice) de-
lays the appearance of Alzheimer’s disease.
Like the transmissible spongiform encephalopa-
thies caused by misfolded prion proteins, the misfolded 
A responsible for Alzheimer’s disease can also be prop-
agated from cell to cell, and from animal to animal. 
Kane et al. (2000) prepared a dilute suspension of ho-
mogenized brain tissue taken from deceased patients 
with Alzheimer’s disease and injected some of the liquid 
in the brains of mice. Three months later, they found 
profuse development of amyloid plaques and vascular 
deposits of A. Even more unsettling, Eisele et al. (2009) 

	
Degenerative Disorders	
545
10–20 percent are caused by a mutation in the gene that 
produces the enzyme superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), found 
on chromosome 21. This mutation causes a toxic gain of 
function that leads to protein misfolding and aggrega-
tion, impaired axonal transport, and mitochondrial dys-
function. It also impairs glutamate reuptake into glial 
cells, which increases extracellular levels of glutamate 
and causes excitotoxicity in motor neurons (Bossy- 
Wetzel, Schwarzenbacher, and Lipton, 2004). And like 
the other degenerative brain disorders that I have de-
scribed that involve misfolded proteins, mutant SOD1 
can be transmitted from cell to cell, as prion proteins do. 
However, there is presently no evidence that the disease 
can be transmitted between individuals (Münch and  
Bertolotti, 2011).
SOD1 normally functions as a detoxifying enzyme 
found in the cytoplasm and mitochondria. It converts 
superoxide radicals to molecular oxygen and hydrogen 
peroxide (Milani et al., 2011). Superoxide radicals are 
naturally present in the cytoplasm but become toxic in 
sufficiently high concentrations.
Many investigators believe that the primary cause of 
sporadic ALS is an abnormality in RNA editing. In most 
cases, proteins are produced by a two-step process: a copy 
of an active gene is transcribed to a strand of messenger 
RNA, which is then translated into a sequence of amino 
acids at a ribosome. However, in some cases, enzymes 
alter mRNA molecules between transcription and trans-
lation so that a different protein is produced. In sporadic 
ALS, faulty editing of mRNA that codes for a particular 
glutamate receptor subunit (GluR2) in motor neurons 
results in the production of glutamate AMPA receptors 
that admit increased amounts of calcium ions into these 
neurons. As a result, the cells die from excitoxicity.
Kawahara et al. (2004) examined the spinal cords 
and brains of five patients who had died of ALS and 
found evidence for deficient RNA editing in spinal cord 
motor neurons of all of them. All of the motor neurons 
from people without ALS showed normal RNA editing. 
Hideyama et al. (2010) prepared a targeted mutation 
against the gene for an enzyme involved in editing RNA 
responsible for the production of the GluR2 subunit and 
used a viral vector to insert this mutated gene into mouse 
motor neurons. The animals showed a decline in motor 
ability characteristic of ALS that was produced by slow 
death of motor neurons in the spinal cord and brain.
The only current pharmacological treatment for 
ALS is riluzole, a drug that reduces glutamate-induced 
excitotoxicity, probably by decreasing the release of glu-
tamate. Clinical trials found that patients treated with 
riluzole lived an average of approximately two months 
One of the patients whose immune system gener-
ated antibodies against A died of a pulmonary embo-
lism (a blood clot in a blood vessel serving the lungs). 
Nicoll et al. (2003) examined this patient’s brain and 
found evidence that the immune system had removed 
A from many regions of the cerebral cortex. Unfortu-
nately, the injections of the A antigen caused an in-
flammatory reaction in the brains of 5 percent of the 
patients, so the clinical trial was terminated. New ap-
proaches to immunotherapy are now being prepared 
that will (we hope) avoid inflammatory reactions (Fu  
et al., 2010).
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a degenerative 
disorder that attacks spinal cord and cranial nerve mo-
tor neurons (Zinman and Cudkowicz, 2011). The inci-
dence of this disease is approximately 5 in 100,000. The 
symptoms include spasticity (increased tension of mus-
cles, causing stiff and awkward movements), exagger-
ated stretch reflexes, progressive weakness and muscu-
lar atrophy, and, finally, paralysis. Death usually occurs 
five to ten years after the onset of the disease as a result 
of failure of respiratory muscles. The muscles that con-
trol eye movements are spared. Cognitive abilities are 
rarely affected.
Ten percent of the cases of ALS are hereditary; the 
other 90 percent are sporadic. Of the hereditary cases, 
figure 15.26  Immunization Against Ab
The graph shows the effect of immunization against Ab 
on the cognitive decline of patients who generated Ab 
antibodies (successfully immunized patients) and those 
who did not (controls).
(Based on data from Hock et al., 2003.)
–8
–6
–4
–2
0
0
4
8
12
Time (months)
Mini Mental Status Examination
(rating of cognitive ability)
Controls
Successfully immunized
patients
x amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)  A degenerative disorder 
that attacks the spinal cord and cranial nerve motor neurons.

546	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
attaches itself to myelin. In addition, people born dur-
ing the late winter and early spring are at higher risk, 
which suggests that infections contracted by a pregnant 
woman (for example, a viral disease contracted during 
the winter) may also increase susceptibility to this dis-
ease. In any event, the process is a long-lived one, lasting 
for many decades.
Only two treatments for multiple sclerosis have 
shown promise (Aktas, Keiseier, and Hartung, 2009). 
The first is interferon , a protein that modulates the re-
sponsiveness of the immune system. Administration of 
interferon  has been shown to reduce the frequency 
and severity of attacks and to slow the progression of 
neurological disabilities in some patients with multiple 
sclerosis (Arnason, 1999). However, the treatment is only 
partially effective. Another partially effective treatment is 
glatiramer acetate (also known as copaxone or copolymer-1). 
Glatiramer acetate is a mixture of synthetic peptides 
composed from random sequences of the amino acids 
tyrosine, glutamate, alanine, and lysine. This compound 
was first produced in an attempt to induce the symptoms 
of multiple sclerosis in laboratory animals, but it turned 
out to actually reduce them. Interferon  and glatiramer 
acetate are effective only for the remitting-relapsing 
form of MS and not the progressive form.
An experimentally induced demyelinating disease 
known as experimental allergic encephalitis (EAE) can be 
produced in laboratory animals by injecting them with 
protein found in myelin. The immune system then be-
comes sensitized to myelin protein and attacks the ani-
mal’s own myelin sheaths. Glatiramer acetate turned 
out to do just the opposite; rather than causing EAE, it 
prevented its occurrence, apparently by stimulating certain 
cells of the immune system to secrete anti-inflammatory 
chemicals such as interleukin 4, which suppress the activ-
ity of immune cells that would otherwise attack the pa-
tient’s myelin (Farina et al., 2005). As you might expect, 
researchers tested glatiramer acetate in people with MS 
and found that the drug reduced the symptoms of pa-
tients who showed the relapsing-remitting form of the 
disease: periodic occurrences of neurological symptoms 
followed by partial remissions. The drug is now ap-
proved for treatment of this disorder. A structural MRI 
study by Sormani et al. (2005) found a reduction of 
20–54 percent in white matter lesions in 95 percent of 
patients treated with glatiramer acetate.
Although interferon  and glatiramer acetate pro-
vide some relief, neither treatment halts the progression 
of MS. One encouraging approach to treatment of MS 
is the transplantation of autologous hemopoietic stem 
cells—transplants of adult stem cells taken from a pa-
tient’s own blood or bone marrow. A clinical trial with 
twenty-one MS patients reported significant improve-
ments in neurological symptoms at the end of thirty-
seven months (Burt et al., 2009).
longer than those who received a placebo (Miller et al., 
2003). Clearly, research to find more effective therapies 
is warranted.
Multiple Sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune demyelinat-
ing disease. At scattered locations within the central 
nervous system, the person’s immune system attacks my-
elin sheaths, leaving behind hard patches of debris 
called sclerotic plaques. (See Figure 15.27.) The normal 
transmission of neural messages through the demyelin-
ated axons is interrupted. Because the damage occurs in 
white matter located throughout the brain and spinal 
cord, a wide variety of neurological disorders are seen.
The symptoms of multiple sclerosis often flare up 
and then decrease, to be followed by another increase 
in symptoms after varying periods of time. In most cases, 
this pattern (remitting-relapsing MS) is followed by progres-
sive MS later in the course of the disease. Progressive MS 
is characterized by a slow, continuous increase in the 
symptoms of the disease.
Multiple sclerosis afflicts women somewhat more 
frequently than men, and the disorder usually occurs in 
people in their late twenties or thirties. People who 
spend their childhood in places far from the equator 
are more likely to come down with the disease than are 
those who live close to the equator. Hence, it is likely 
that some disease contracted during a childhood spent 
in a region in which the virus is prevalent causes the 
person’s immune system to attack his or her own my-
elin. Perhaps a virus weakens the blood–brain barrier, 
allowing myelin protein into the general circulation and 
sensitizing the immune system to it, or perhaps the virus 
figure 15.27  Multiple Sclerosis
In this slice of the brain of a person who had multiple 
sclerosis, the arrowheads point to sclerotic plaques in the 
white matter.
(Courtesy of A. D’Agostino, Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon.)

	
Degenerative Disorders	
547
adequate thiamine with which to metabolize it damages 
the cells, probably because they accumulate pyruvate. 
Hence, standard medical practice is to administer thia-
mine along with intravenous glucose to severely mal-
nourished patients.
As we saw in Chapter 13, the brain damage incurred 
in Korsakoff’s syndrome causes anterograde amnesia. 
Although degeneration is seen in many parts of the 
brain, the damage that characterizes this disorder oc-
curs in the mammillary bodies, located at the base of the 
brain, in the posterior hypothalamus. (See Figure 15.28.)
Because the symptoms of remitting-relapsing MS are 
episodic—new or worsening symptoms followed by par-
tial recovery—patients and their families often attribute 
the changes in the symptoms to whatever has happened 
recently. For example, if the patient has taken a new 
medication or gone on a new diet and the symptoms get 
worse, the patient will blame the symptoms on the medi-
cation or diet. Conversely, if the patient gets better, he 
or she will credit the medication or diet. The best way to 
end exploitation of MS patients by people selling useless 
treatments is to develop genuinely effective therapies.
Korsakoff’s Syndrome
The last degenerative disorder I will discuss, Korsakoff’s 
syndrome, is neither hereditary nor contagious. It is 
caused by environmental factors—usually (but not  
always) involving chronic alcoholism. The disorder actu-
ally results from a thiamine (vitamin B1) deficiency 
caused by the alcoholism (Adams, 1969; Haas, 1988). 
Because alcoholics receive a substantial number of calo-
ries from the alcohol they ingest, they usually eat a poor 
diet, and their vitamin intake is consequently low. Fur-
thermore, alcohol interferes with intestinal absorption 
of thiamine. The ensuing deficiency produces brain 
damage. Thiamine is essential for a step in metabolism: 
the carboxylation of pyruvate, an intermediate product 
in the breakdown of carbohydrates, fats, and amino ac-
ids. Korsakoff’s syndrome sometimes occurs in people 
who have been severely malnourished and have then 
received intravenous infusions of glucose; the sudden 
availability of glucose to the cells of the brain without 
figure 15.28  Korsakoff’s Syndrome
This brain slice shows the degeneration of the mammillary 
bodies in a patient with Korsakoff’s syndrome.
(Courtesy of A. D’Agostino, Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon.)
Section Summary
Degenerative Disorders
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies such as 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, scrapie, and bovine spon-
giform encephalopathy (“mad cow disease”) are 
unique among contagious diseases: They are pro-
duced by a simple protein molecule, not by a virus or 
microbe. The sequence of amino acids of normal 
prion protein (PrPc) and infectious prion protein 
(PrPSc) are identical, but their three-dimensional 
shapes differ in the way that they are folded. 
Somehow, the presence of a misfolded prion protein 
in a neuron causes normal prion proteins to become 
misfolded, and a chain reaction ensues. The transfor-
mation of PrPc into PrPSc kills the cell, apparently by 
triggering apoptosis. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is 
heritable as well as transmissible, but the most com-
mon form is sporadic—of unknown origin. Normal 
prion protein may play a role in neural development 
and neurogenesis, which may in turn affect the estab-
lishment and maintenance of long-term memories.
Parkinson’s disease is caused by degeneration of 
dopamine-secreting neurons of the substantia nigra 
that send axons to the basal ganglia. Study of rare 
hereditary forms of Parkinson’s disease reveals that 
the death of these neurons is caused by the aggrega-
tion of misfolded protein, -synuclein. One mutation 
(continued on next page)

548	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
produces defective -synuclein, and another pro-
duces defective parkin, a protein that assists in the 
tagging of abnormal proteins for destruction by the 
proteasomes. The accumulation of -synuclein can 
also be triggered by some toxins, which suggests that 
nonhereditary forms of the disease may be caused by 
toxic substances present in the environment. 
Treatment of Parkinson’s disease includes administra-
tion of l-DOPA, implantation of fetal dopaminergic 
neurons in the basal ganglia, stereotaxic destruction 
of a portion of the globus pallidus or subthalamic 
nucleus, and implantation of electrodes that enable 
the patient to electrically stimulate the subthalamic 
nucleus. Research with optogenetic methods reveal 
that the beneficial effects of DBS are produced by 
activation of axons that enter the subthalamic 
nucleus. Fetal transplants of dopaminergic neurons 
have turned out to be less successful than they had 
initially appeared to be, probably because the 
-synuclein is transferred to the grafted neurons from 
the recipient’s own neurons. A trial of gene therapy 
designed to reduce excitation in the subthalamic 
nucleus obtained promising results.
Huntington’s disease, an autosomal dominant 
hereditary disorder, produces degeneration of the 
caudate nucleus and putamen. Mutated huntingtin 
misfolds and forms aggregations that accumulate in 
the nucleus of GABAergic neurons in the putamen. 
Although the primary effect of mutated huntingtin is 
gain of toxic function, the disease also appears to 
involve a loss of function; a targeted mutation in mice 
against the Htt gene is fatal. Evidence also suggests 
that inclusion bodies have a protective function and 
that damage is done by mutated huntingtin dispersed 
throughout the cell. Animal studies that target intra-
cellular antibodies against a portion of Htt and that 
transferred small interfering RNA targeted against the 
Htt gene have produced promising results.
Alzheimer’s disease, another degenerative disor-
der, involves much more of the brain; the disease 
process eventually destroys most of the hippocampus 
and cortical gray matter. The brains of affected indi-
viduals contain many amyloid plaques, which contain 
a core of misfolded long-form A protein surrounded 
by degenerating axons and dendrites, and neurofibril-
lary tangles, composed of dying neurons that contain 
intracellular accumulations of twisted filaments of tau 
protein. Hereditary forms of Alzheimer’s disease 
involve defective genes for the amyloid precursor 
protein (APP), for the secretases that cut APP into 
smaller pieces, or for apolipoprotein E (ApoE), a gly-
coprotein involved in transport of cholesterol and the 
repair of cell membranes. A promising treatment is 
vaccination against A, and transcutaneous adminis-
tration of the antigen may provide a way to avoid 
triggering an inflammatory reaction. Temporary 
reduction of symptoms is seen in some patients who 
are treated with anticholinergic drugs or drugs that 
serve as NMDA antagonists. Exercise and intellectual 
stimulation appear to delay the onset of Alzheimer’s 
disease, and obesity, high cholesterol levels, and dia-
betes are significant risk factors.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis is a degenerative 
disorder that attacks motor neurons. Ten percent of 
the cases are hereditary, caused by a mutation of the 
gene for SOD1; the other 90 percent are sporadic. 
The primary cause of sporadic ALS appears to be an 
abnormality in RNA editing, which results in the pro-
duction of AMPA receptor subunits that permit the 
entry of excessive amounts of calcium into the cells. 
The only pharmacological treatment is riluzole, a drug 
that reduces glutamate-induced excitotoxicity. 
Misfolded proteins involved in a variety of degenera-
tive diseases, including -synuclein, Ab, tau protein, 
and SOD1, can transmit infection from cell to cell and 
in some cases from individual to individual in a man-
ner that resembles the transmission of misfolded 
prion protein.
Multiple sclerosis, a demyelinating disease, is 
characterized by periodic attacks of neurological 
symptoms, usually with partial remission between 
attacks (remitting-relapsing MS), followed by progres-
sive MS later in life. The damage appears to be 
caused by the body’s immune system, which attacks 
the protein contained in myelin. Most investigators 
believe that a viral infection early in life somehow 
sensitizes the immune system to myelin protein. The 
only effective treatments for remitting-relapsing MS 
are interferon b and glatiramer acetate, a mixture of 
synthetic peptides that appears to stimulate certain 
immune cells to secrete anti-inflammatory chemicals. 
Experimental transplantation of autologous hemopoi-
etic stem cells shows some promise.
Korsakoff’s syndrome is usually a result of chronic 
alcohol abuse, but it can also be caused by malnutrition 
that results in a thiamine deficiency. The most obvious 
location of brain damage is the mammillary bodies, but 
damage also occurs in many other parts of the brain.

	
Disorders Caused by Infectious Diseases 	
549
within two to seven days of the onset of the symptoms. 
The virus has a special affinity for cells in the cerebellum 
and hippocampus, and damage to the hippocampus 
probably accounts for the emotional changes that are 
seen in the early symptoms.
Fortunately, the incubation period for rabies lasts up 
to several months while the virus climbs through the pe-
ripheral nerves. (If the bite is received in the face or neck, 
the incubation time will be much shorter because the virus 
has a smaller distance to travel before it reaches the brain.) 
During the incubation period a person can receive a vac-
cine that will confer an immunity to the disease; the per-
son’s own immune system will destroy the virus before it 
reaches the brain.
Several infectious diseases cause brain damage even 
though they are not primarily diseases of the central 
nervous system. One such disease is caused by the hu-
man immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the cause of ac-
quired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Records of 
autopsies have revealed that at least 75 percent of people 
who died of AIDS show evidence of brain damage (Levy 
and Bredesen, 1989). Brain damage associated with an 
HIV infection can produce a range of syndromes, from 
mild neurocognitive disorder to HIV-associated demen-
tia (also called AIDS dementia complex, or ADC). Neuropa-
thology caused by HIV infection is characterized by dam-
age to synapses and death of neurons in the hippocampus, 
cerebral cortex, and basal ganglia (Mattson, Haughey, 
and Nath, 2005; Valcour et al., 2011). Aggressive treat-
ment with combination antiretroviral therapy, if started 
soon after the infection is discovered, can prevent or 
minimize damage to the brain. However, active viruses 
can persist in the brain even when they cannot be de-
tected in the blood, so the patients’ cognitive abilities 
and affective state should be carefully monitored. If the 
viral infection is not treated, the brain damage pro-
gresses and leads to a loss of cognitive and motor func-
tions and is the leading cause of cognitive decline in 
people under 40 years of age. At first the patients may 
become forgetful, they may think and reason more 
slowly, and they may have word-finding difficulties (ano-
mia). Eventually, they may become almost mute. Motor 
deficits may begin with tremor and difficulty in making 
complex movement but then may progress so much that 
the patient becomes bedridden (Maj, 1990).
Disorders Caused by  
Infectious Diseases
Several neurological disorders can be caused by infec-
tious diseases, transmitted by bacteria, fungi or other 
parasites, or viruses. The most common are encephalitis 
and meningitis. Encephalitis is an infection that invades 
the entire brain. The most common cause of encephali-
tis is a virus that is transmitted by mosquitoes, which 
pick up the infectious agent from horses, birds, or ro-
dents. The symptoms of acute encephalitis include fe-
ver, irritability, and nausea, often followed by convul-
sions, delirium, and signs of brain damage, such as 
aphasia or paralysis. Unfortunately, there is no specific 
treatment besides supportive care, and between 5 and 
20 percent of the cases are fatal; 20 percent of the survi-
vors show some residual neurological symptoms.
Encephalitis can also be caused by the herpes sim-
plex virus, which is the cause of cold sores (or “fever 
blisters”) that most people develop in and around their 
mouth from time to time. Normally, the viruses live qui-
etly in the trigeminal nerve ganglia nodules on the fifth 
cranial nerve that contain the cell bodies of somatosen-
sory neurons that serve the face. The viruses proliferate 
periodically, traveling down to the ends of nerve fibers, 
where they cause sores to develop in mucous mem-
brane. Unfortunately, they occasionally (but rarely) go 
the other way into the brain. Herpes encephalitis is a 
serious disease; the virus attacks the frontal and tempo-
ral lobes in particular and can severely damage them.
Two other forms of viral encephalitis are probably 
already familiar to you: polio and rabies. Acute anterior 
poliomyelitis (“polio”) is fortunately very rare in devel-
oped countries since the development of vaccines that 
immunize people against the disease. The virus causes 
specific damage to motor neurons of the brain and spi-
nal cord: neurons in the primary motor cortex; in the 
motor nuclei of the thalamus, hypothalamus, and brain 
stem; in the cerebellum; and in the ventral horns of the 
gray matter of the spinal cord. Undoubtedly, these mo-
tor neurons contain some chemical substance that ei-
ther attracts the virus or in some way makes the virus 
become lethal to them.
Rabies is caused by a virus that is passed from the 
saliva of an infected mammal directly into a person’s 
flesh by means of a bite wound. The virus travels through 
peripheral nerves to the central nervous system and 
there causes severe damage. It also travels to peripheral 
organs, such as the salivary glands, which makes it pos-
sible for the virus to find its way to another host. The 
symptoms include a short period of fever and headache, 
followed by anxiety, excessive movement and talking, 
difficulty in swallowing, movement disorders, difficulty 
in speaking, seizures, confusion, and, finally, death 
x encephalitis (en seff a lye tis)  An inflammation of the brain; 
caused by bacteria, viruses, or toxic chemicals.
x herpes simplex virus (her peez)  A virus that normally causes 
cold sores near the lips but that can also cause brain damage.
x acute anterior poliomyelitis (poh lee oh my a lye tis)  A viral 
disease that destroys motor neurons of the brain and spinal cord.
x rabies  A fatal viral disease that causes brain damage; usually 
transmitted through the bite of an infected animal.

550	
Chapter 15  Neurological Disorders
forms of bacterial meningitis do. The usual cause is 
spread of a middle-ear infection into the brain, intro-
duction of an infection into the brain from a head in-
jury, or the presence of emboli that have dislodged 
from a bacterial infection present in the chambers of 
the heart. Such an infection is often caused by unclean 
hypodermic needles; therefore, drug addicts are at par-
ticular risk for meningitis (as well as many other dis-
eases). The inflammation of the meninges can damage 
the brain by interfering with circulation of blood or by 
blocking the flow of cerebrospinal fluid through the 
subarachnoid space, causing hydrocephalus. In addi-
tion, the cranial nerves are susceptible to damage. For-
tunately, bacterial meningitis can usually be treated ef-
fectively with antibiotics. Of course, early diagnosis and 
prompt treatment are essential, because neither antibi-
otics nor any other known treatment can repair a dam-
aged brain.
For several years, researchers have been puzzled by the 
fact that although an HIV infection certainly causes neural 
damage, neurons are not themselves infected by the virus. 
Instead, the viruses live and replicates in the brain’s astro-
cytes. The neuropathology appears to be caused by the 
glycoprotein gp120 envelope that coats the RNA that is re-
sponsible for the AIDS infection. The gp120 binds with 
other proteins that trigger apoptosis—cell suicide (Matt-
son, Haughey, and Nath, 2005; Alirezaei et al., 2007).
Another category of infectious diseases of the brain 
actually involves inflammation of the meninges, the lay-
ers of connective tissue that surround the central nervous 
system. Meningitis can be caused by viruses or bacteria. 
The symptoms of all forms include headache, a stiff neck, 
and, depending on the severity of the disorder, convul-
sions, confusion or loss of consciousness, and sometimes 
death. The stiff neck is one of the most important symp-
toms. Neck movements cause the meninges to stretch; 
because they are inflamed, the stretch causes severe pain. 
Thus, the patient resists having his or her neck moved.
The most common form of viral meningitis usually 
does not cause significant brain damage. However, various 
x meningitis (men in jy tis)  An inflammation of the meninges; 
can be caused by viruses or bacteria.
Section Summary
Disorders Caused by Infectious Diseases
Infectious diseases can damage the brain. 
Encephalitis, usually caused by a virus, affects the 
entire brain. One form is caused by the herpes sim-
plex virus, which infects the trigeminal nerve ganglia 
of most of the population. This virus tends to attack 
the frontal and temporal lobes. The polio virus attacks 
motor neurons in the brain and spinal cord, resulting 
in motor deficits or even paralysis. The rabies virus, 
acquired by an animal bite, travels through peripheral 
nerves and attacks the brain, particularly the cerebellum 
and hippocampus. An HIV infection also produces 
brain damage when the gp120 protein envelope of 
the HIV virus binds with other proteins that trigger 
apoptosis. Aggressive treatment with combination 
antiretroviral therapy can minimize brain damage. 
Meningitis is an infection of the meninges, caused  
by viruses or bacteria. The bacterial form, which is 
usually more serious, is generally caused by an ear 
infection, a head injury, or an embolus from a heart 
infection.

	
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab	
551
1.  Discuss the causes, symptoms, and treatment of brain 
tumors, seizure disorders, cerebrovascular accidents, 
and traumatic brain injury.
2.  Discuss developmental disorders resulting from toxic 
chemicals, inherited metabolic disorders, and Down 
syndrome.
3.  Discuss research on the role of misfolded prion proteins 
in the transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.
4.  Discuss the causes, symptoms, and available treat-
ments for the degeneration of the basal ganglia that 
occurs in Parkinson’s disease and Huntington’s disease.
Review Questions
5.  Discuss the causes, symptoms, and potential treat-
ments for the brain degeneration caused by 
Alzheimer’s disease.
6.  Discuss the causes, symptoms, and available  
treatments of the brain degeneration caused by  
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), multiple sclerosis, 
and Korsakoff’s syndrome.
7.  Discuss the causes, symptoms, and available treat-
ments for encephalitis, HIV-associated dementia, and 
meningitis.
Study and Review on MyPsychLab
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Brain Damage and Neuroplasticity
There is a large number of patients with brain damage resulting from many 
causes, including stroke and traumatic brain injury. Often such patients regain 
some function because other brain regions may be able to compensate for the 
damaged brain regions. The mechanism by which this neuroplasticity occurs is 
only now being elucidated. The Brain Damage and Neuroplasticity module of 
the virtual brain shows some of the brain regions that are the focus of a great of 
research because they show plasticity in the adult, uninjured brain.

552	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
Schizophrenia and the 
Affective Disorders
Outline
 Schizophrenia
Description
Heritability
Pharmacology of Schizophrenia: 
The Dopamine Hypothesis
Schizophrenia as a Neurological 
Disorder
Section Summary
 Major Affective Disorders
Description
Heritability
Season of Birth
Biological Treatments
The Monoamine Hypothesis
Role of the 5-HT Transporter
Role of the Frontal Cortex
Role of Neurogenesis
Role of Circadian Rhythms
Section Summary
16
chapter

	
Larry had become a permanent resident of the state 
hospital. His parents had originally hoped that treatment 
would help him enough that he could live in a halfway 
house with a small group of other young men, but his 
condition was so serious that he required constant supervi-
sion. Larry had severe schizophrenia. The medication he 
was taking helped, but he still exhibited severe psychotic 
symptoms. In addition, he had begun showing signs of a 
neurological disorder that seemed to be getting worse.
Larry had always been a difficult child, shy and socially 
awkward. He had no real friends. During adolescence he 
became even more withdrawn and insisted that his parents 
and older sister keep out of his room. He stopped taking 
meals with the family, and he even bought a small refrig-
erator of his own for his room so that he could keep his 
own food, which he said he preferred to that “pesticide-
contaminated” food his parents ate. His grades in school, 
which were never outstanding, got progressively worse, 
and when he was seventeen years old, he dropped out of 
high school.
Larry’s parents recognized that something was seri-
ously wrong with him. Their family physician suggested 
that Larry see a psychiatrist and gave them the name of a 
colleague that he respected, but Larry flatly refused to go. 
Within a year after he had quit high school, he became 
frankly psychotic. He heard voices talking to him, and 
sometimes his parents could hear him shouting for the 
voices to go away. He was convinced that his parents were 
trying to poison him, and he would eat only factory-sealed 
food that he had opened himself. Although he kept his 
body clean—sometimes he would stand in the shower for 
an hour “purifying” himself—his room became frightfully 
messy. He insisted on keeping old cans and food packages 
because, he said, he needed to compare them with items 
his parents brought from the store to be sure they were 
not counterfeit.
One day, while Larry was in the shower purifying 
himself, his mother cleaned his room. She filled several 
large plastic garbage bags with the cans and packages and 
put them out for the trash collector. As she reentered the 
house, she heard a howling noise from upstairs. Larry had 
emerged from the shower and discovered that his room 
had been cleaned. When he saw his mother coming up the 
stairs, he screamed at her, cursed her savagely, and rushed 
down the stairs toward her. He hit her so hard that she fell 
down the stairs, landing heavily on the floor below. He 
wheeled around, ran up the stairs, and went into his room, 
slamming the door behind him.
An hour later, Larry’s father discovered his wife 
unconscious at the foot of the stairs. She soon recovered 
from the mild concussion she had sustained, but Larry’s 
parents realized that it was time for him to be put in 
custody. Because he had attacked his mother, a judge 
ordered that he be temporarily detained and, as a result 
of a psychiatric evaluation, had him committed to the 
state hospital. The diagnosis was “schizophrenia, para-
noid type.”
In the state hospital, Larry was given Thorazine 
(chlorpromazine), which helped considerably. For the first 
few weeks, he showed some symptoms that are commonly 
seen in Parkinson’s disease—tremors, rigidity, a shuffling 
gait, and lack of facial expression—but these symptoms 
cleared up spontaneously, as his physician had predicted. 
The voices still talked to him occasionally, but less often 
than before, and even then he could ignore them most of 
the time. His suspiciousness decreased, and he was willing 
to eat with the residents in the dining room. But he still 
obviously had paranoid delusions, and the psychiatric staff 
was unwilling to let him leave the hospital. For one thing, he 
refused to take his medication voluntarily. Once, after he 
had suffered a serious relapse, the staff discovered that he 
had only been pretending to swallow his pills and was later 
throwing them away. After that, they made sure that he 
swallowed them.
After several years, Larry began developing more 
serious neurological symptoms. He began pursing his lips 
and making puffing sounds; later, he started grimacing, 
sticking his tongue out, and turning his head sharply to 
the left. The symptoms became so severe that they 
interfered with his ability to eat. His physician prescribed 
an additional drug, which reduced the symptoms 
considerably but did not eliminate them. As he explained 
to Larry’s parents, “His neurological problems are caused 
by the medication that we are using to help with his 
psychiatric symptoms. These problems usually do not 
develop until a patient has taken the medication for 
many years, but Larry appears to be one of the unfortu-
nate exceptions. If we take him off the medication, the 
neurological symptoms will get even worse. We could 
reduce the symptoms by giving him a higher dose of the 
medication, but then the problem would come back 
later, and it would be even worse. All we can do is try to 
treat the symptoms with another drug, as we have been 
doing. We really need a medication that helps treat 
schizophrenia without producing these tragic side 
effects.”

554	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
Schizophrenics have great difficulty arranging their 
thoughts logically and sorting out plausible conclusions 
from absurd ones. In conversation they jump from one 
topic to another as new associations come up. Some-
times, they utter meaningless words or choose words for 
rhyme rather than for meaning. Delusions are beliefs 
that are obviously contrary to fact. Delusions of persecu-
tion are false beliefs that others are plotting and conspir-
ing against oneself. Delusions of grandeur are false beliefs 
in one’s power and importance, such as a conviction that 
one has godlike powers or has special knowledge that no 
one else possesses. Delusions of control are related to de-
lusions of persecution; the person believes (for exam-
ple) that he or she is being controlled by others through 
such means as radar or a tiny radio receiver implanted in 
his or her brain.
The third positive symptom of schizophrenia is 
­hallucinations, perceptions of stimuli that are not actu-
ally present. The most common schizophrenic halluci-
nations are auditory, but they can also involve any of the 
other senses. The typical schizophrenic hallucination 
consists of voices talking to the person. Sometimes, the 
voices order the person to do something; sometimes, 
they scold the person for his or her unworthiness; some-
times, they just utter meaningless phrases. Olfactory 
­hallucinations are also fairly common; often they con-
tribute to the delusion that others are trying to kill the 
person with poison gas. (See Table 16.1.)
In contrast to the positive symptoms, the negative 
symptoms of schizophrenia are known by the absence 
or diminution of normal behaviors: flattened emotional 
response, poverty of speech, lack of initiative and persis-
tence, anhedonia (inability to experience pleasure), and 
social withdrawal. The cognitive symptoms of schizo-
phrenia are closely related to the negative symptoms and 
may be produced by abnormalities in overlapping brain 
regions. These symptoms include difficulty in sustaining 
attention, low psychomotor speed (the ability to rapidly and 
M
ost of the discussion in this book has concen-
trated on the physiology of normal, adaptive 
behavior. The last three chapters summarize 
research on the nature and physiology of syndromes 
characterized by maladaptive behavior: mental disor-
ders and drug abuse. The symptoms of mental disorders 
include deficient or inappropriate social behaviors; il-
logical, incoherent, or obsessional thoughts; inappropri-
ate emotional responses, including depression, mania, 
or anxiety; and delusions and hallucinations. Research 
in recent years indicates that many of these symptoms 
are caused by abnormalities in the brain, both structural 
and biochemical.
This chapter discusses two serious mental disorders: 
schizophrenia and the major affective disorders. Chapter 17 
discusses anxiety disorders, autism, attention deficit disor-
der, and disorders caused by stress. Chapter 18 discusses 
drug abuse.
Schizophrenia
Description
Schizophrenia is a serious mental disorder that afflicts 
approximately 1 percent of the world’s population. Its 
monetary cost to society is enormous; in the United 
States this figure exceeds that of the cost of all cancers 
(Thaker and Carpenter, 2001). Descriptions of symp-
toms in ancient writings indicate that the disorder has 
been around for thousands of years (Jeste et al., 1985). 
The major symptoms of schizophrenia are universal, 
and clinicians have developed criteria for reliably diag-
nosing the disorder in people of a wide variety of cul-
tures (Flaum and Andreasen, 1990). Schizophrenia is 
probably the most misused psychological term in exis-
tence. The word literally means “split mind,” but it does 
not imply a split or multiple personality. People often say 
that they “feel schizophrenic” about an issue when they 
really mean that they have mixed feelings about it. A 
person who sometimes wants to build a cabin in the 
wilderness and live off the land and at other times wants 
to take over the family insurance agency might be unde-
cided, but he or she is not schizophrenic. The man who 
invented the term, Eugen Bleuler (1911/1950), in-
tended it to refer to a break with reality caused by disor-
ganization of the various functions of the mind, such 
that thoughts and feelings no longer worked together 
normally.
Schizophrenia is characterized by three categories 
of symptoms: positive, negative, and cognitive (Mueser 
and McGurk, 2004). Positive symptoms make them-
selves known by their presence. They include thought 
disorders, hallucinations, and delusions. A thought  
disorder—disorganized, irrational thinking—is proba-
bly the most important symptom of schizophrenia. 
x schizophrenia  A serious mental disorder characterized by 
disordered thoughts, delusions, hallucinations, and often bizarre 
behaviors.
x positive symptom  A symptom of schizophrenia evident by its 
presence: delusions, hallucinations, or thought disorders.
x thought disorder  Disorganized, irrational thinking.
x delusion  A belief that is clearly in contradiction to reality.
x hallucination  Perception of a nonexistent object or event.
x negative symptom  A symptom of schizophrenia characterized 
by the absence of behaviors that are normally present: social 
withdrawal, lack of affect, and reduced motivation.
x cognitive symptom  A symptom of schizophrenia that involves 
cognitive deficits, such as difficulty in sustaining attention, deficits 
in learning and memory, poor abstract thinking, and poor problem 
solving.

	
Schizophrenia	
555
nature of the brain abnormalities that are responsible 
for them.
Heritability
One of the strongest pieces of evidence that schizophre-
nia is a biological disorder is that it appears to be heri-
table. Both adoption studies (Kety et al., 1968, 1994) 
and twin studies (Gottesman and Shields, 1982; Tsuang, 
Gilbertson, and Faraone, 1991) indicate that schizo-
phrenia is a heritable trait.
If schizophrenia were a simple trait produced by a 
single gene, we would expect to see this disorder in at 
least 75 percent of the children of two schizophrenic 
parents if the gene were dominant. If it were recessive, 
all children of two schizophrenic parents should be-
come schizophrenic. However, the actual incidence is 
less than 50 percent, which means either that several 
genes are involved or that having a “schizophrenia gene” 
imparts a susceptibility to develop schizophrenia, the dis-
ease itself being triggered by other factors.
If the susceptibility hypothesis is true, then we would 
expect that some people carry a “schizophrenia gene” 
but do not express it; that is, their environment is such 
that schizophrenia is never triggered. One such person 
would be the nonschizophrenic member of a pair of 
monozygotic twins who are discordant for schizophrenia. 
The logical way to test this hypothesis is to examine the 
children of both members of discordant pairs. Gottes-
man and Bertelsen (1989) found that the percentage of 
schizophrenic children was nearly identical for both 
members of such pairs: 16.8 percent for the schizo-
phrenic parents and 17.4 percent for the nonschizo-
phrenic parents. For the dizygotic twins the percentages 
were 17.4 percent and 2.1 percent, respectively. These 
results provide strong evidence for the heritability of 
schizophrenia and also support the conclusion that carry-
ing a “schizophrenia gene” does not mean that a person 
will necessarily become schizophrenic. (See Figure 16.1.)
So far, researchers have not located a single “schizo-
phrenia gene,” although researchers have found many 
genes that appear to increase the likelihood of this disease. 
A review by Crow (2007) notes that evidence for linkage to 
susceptibility for schizophrenia has been reported for 
twenty-one of the twenty-three pairs of chromosomes, but 
many of the findings have not been replicated. So far, no 
single gene has been shown to cause schizophrenia, in the 
way that mutations in the genes for g-secretase or amyloid 
precursor protein apparently produce Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. For example, Walsh et al. (2008) suggest that a large 
number of rare mutations play a role in the development 
of schizophrenia.
One rare mutation involves a gene known as DISC1 
(disrupted in schizophrenia 1). This gene is involved in regu-
lation of embryonic and adult neurogenesis, ­neuronal 
fluently perform movements of the fingers, hands, and 
legs), deficits in learning and memory, poor abstract 
thinking, and poor problem solving. Negative symp-
toms and cognitive symptoms are not specific to schizo-
phrenia; they are seen in many neurological disorders 
that involve brain damage, especially to the frontal 
lobes. As we will see later in this chapter, positive symp-
toms appear to involve excessive activity in some neural 
circuits that include dopamine as a neurotransmitter, 
and negative symptoms and cognitive symptoms appear 
to be caused by developmental or degenerative pro-
cesses that impair the normal functions of some regions 
of the brain. (Look again at Table 16.1.)
The symptoms of schizophrenia typically appear 
gradually and insidiously, over a period of three to five 
years. Negative symptoms are the first to emerge, fol-
lowed by cognitive symptoms. The positive symptoms 
follow several years later. As we will see later, this pro-
gression of symptoms provides some hints about the 
table 16.1  Positive and Negative Symptoms 
of Schizophrenia
Schizophrenic Symptom
Positive
Hallucinations
Thought disorders
Delusions
Persecution
Grandeur
Control
Negative
Flattened emotional response
Poverty of speech
Lack of initiative and persistence
Anhedonia
Social withdrawal
Cognitive
Difficulty in sustaining attention
Low psychomotor speed
Deficits in learning and memory
Poor abstract thinking
Poor problem solving

556	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
in the histone proteins and change their characteristics. 
For example, when methyl groups (–CH3) attach to  
histone proteins, the regions of DNA wound around 
them draws in more tightly, which prevents these re-
gions from being translated into messenger RNA. Thus, 
methylation of histone proteins prevents the expression 
of particular genes. (Other groups of atoms can also 
bind with histone proteins and either inhibit or promote 
gene expression.) Many epigenetic changes are initiated 
by environmental events such as exposure to toxins, and 
some epigenetic changes can be transmitted to off-
spring.
Pharmacology of Schizophrenia:  
The Dopamine Hypothesis
Pharmacological evidence suggests that the positive 
symptoms of schizophrenia are caused by abnormalities 
in DA neurons. The dopamine hypothesis suggests that the 
positive symptoms of schizophrenia are caused by over-
activity of DA synapses.
Effects of Dopamine Agonists  
and Antagonists
Around the middle of the twentieth century, a French 
surgeon named Henri Laborit discovered that a drug 
used to prevent surgical shock seemed also to reduce 
anxiety. A French drug company developed a related 
compound called chlorpromazine, which seemed to be 
even more effective (Snyder, 1974). Chlorpromazine 
was tried on patients with a variety of mental disorders: 
mania, depression, anxiety, neuroses, and schizophre-
nia (Delay and Deniker, 1952a, 1952b). The drug was 
not very effective in treating neuroses or affective psy-
choses, but it had dramatic effects on schizophrenia.
migration during embryonic development, function  
of the postsynaptic density in excitatory neurons, and 
function of mitochondria (Brandon et al., 2009; Kim 
et al., 2009; Park et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2010). Muta-
tions of this gene have been found in some families with 
a high incidence of schizophrenia (Chubb et al., 2008; 
Schumacher et al., 2009). Although the incidence of 
DISC1 mutation is very low, its presence appears to in-
crease the likelihood of schizophrenia by a factor of 50 
(Blackwood et al., 2001). This mutation also appears to 
increase the incidence of other mental disorders, includ-
ing bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, and au-
tism (Kim et al., 2009). I will describe research on the 
role of DISC1 malfunction in an animal model later in 
this chapter.
The effect of paternal age provides further evidence 
that genetic mutations may affect the incidence of schizo-
phrenia (Brown et al., 2002; Sipos et al., 2004). Several 
studies have found that the children of older fathers are 
more likely to develop schizophrenia. Most investigators 
believe that the increased incidence of schizophrenia is 
caused by mutations in the spermatocytes, the cells that 
produce sperms. These cells divide every sixteen days 
after puberty, which means that they have divided ap-
proximately 540 times by age thirty-five. In contrast, 
women’s oocytes divide twenty-three times before the 
time of birth and only once after that. The likelihood of 
a copying error in DNA replication when a cell divides 
increases with the number of cell divisions, and an in-
crease in copying errors may cause an accumulation of 
mutations that are responsible for an increased inci-
dence of schizophrenia.
Several researchers (for example, Tsankova et al., 
2007; Swerdlow, 2011) suggest that epigenetic mecha-
nisms, as well as mutations, may contribute to the devel-
opment of schizophrenia. Epigenetic (“on top of the 
genes”) mechanisms control the expression of genes. 
The long strands of DNA that constitute the chromo-
somes are wound around a series of proteins known as 
histones. Groups of atoms can attach to the amino acids 
figure 16.1  Heredity and Schizophrenia
The diagram outlines evidence that people can have an unexpressed 
“schizophrenia gene.”
Monozygotic twins
(genetically identical)
Dizygotic twins
(on average, 50% genetic similarity)
Schizophrenic
Schizophrenic
Nonschizophrenic
Nonschizophrenic
Percentage of
schizophrenia
in offspring
Nonsignificant difference–
both twins carried gene
Significant difference–
nonschizophrenic twin
seldom carried gene
16.8%
17.4%
17.4%
2.1%
x chlorpromazine  A dopamine receptor blocker; a “first-gener-
ation” antipsychotic drug.

	
Schizophrenia	
557
The discovery of the antipsychotic effects of chlor-
promazine profoundly altered the way in which physi-
cians treated schizophrenic patients and made prolonged 
hospital stays unnecessary for many of them (the pa-
tients, that is). The efficacy of antipsychotic drugs has 
been established in many double-blind studies (Baldes-
sarini, 1977). The drugs actually eliminate, or at least di-
minish, the patients’ positive symptoms. The beneficial 
effects are not just a change in the patient’s attitudes; the 
hallucinations and delusions go away or at least become 
less severe. Since the discovery of chlorpromazine, many 
other drugs have been developed that relieve the positive 
symptoms of schizophrenia. These drugs were found to 
have one property in common: They block D2 and D3 
dopamine receptors (Creese, Burt, and Snyder, 1976; 
Strange, 2008).
Another category of drugs has the opposite effect, 
namely, production of the positive symptoms of schizo-
phrenia. The drugs that can produce these symptoms 
have one known pharmacological effect in common: 
They act as dopamine agonists. These drugs include 
amphetamine, cocaine, and methylphenidate (which 
block the reuptake of dopamine) and l-DOPA (which 
stimulates the synthesis of dopamine). The symptoms 
that these drugs produce can be alleviated with antipsy-
chotic drugs, a result that further strengthens the argument 
that the antipsychotic drugs exert their therapeutic effects 
by blocking dopamine receptors.
How might we explain the apparent link between 
overactivity of dopaminergic synapses and the positive 
symptoms of schizophrenia? As we saw in Chapter 4 and 
Chapter 13, the most important systems of dopaminergic 
neurons begin in two midbrain nuclei: the substantia 
nigra and the ventral tegmental area. Most researchers 
believe that the mesolimbic pathway, which begins in the 
ventral tegmental area and ends in the nucleus accum-
bens and amygdala, is more likely to be involved in the 
positive symptoms of schizophrenia. As we saw in Chapter 
13, the activity of dopaminergic synapses in the mesolim-
bic system appear to be a vital link in the process of rein-
forcement. Drugs that act as agonists at these synapses 
(such as cocaine and amphetamine) strongly reinforce 
behavior; if taken in large doses, they also produce the 
positive symptoms of schizophrenia. Perhaps the two  
effects of the drugs are related. If reinforcement mecha-
nisms were activated at inappropriate times, then inappro-
priate behaviors—including delusional thoughts—might 
be reinforced. At one time or another, all of us have had 
some irrational thoughts, which we normally brush aside 
and forget. But if neural mechanisms of reinforcement 
became active while these thoughts were occurring, we 
would tend to take them more seriously. In time, full-
fledged delusions might develop. Fibiger (1991) suggests 
that paranoid delusions may be caused by increased activ-
ity of the ­dopaminergic input to the amygdala. As we saw 
in Chapter 11, the amygdala is involved with conditioned 
emotional responses elicited by aversive stimuli. The amyg-
dala receives a strong projection from the mesolimbic do-
paminergic system, so Fibiger’s suggestion is certainly 
plausible. In fact, Pinkham et al. (2011) found that schizo-
phrenic people with active paranoia were more likely to 
misidentify a neutral facial expression as one showing  
anger. Schizophrenic people who were not currently exhib-
iting paranoid symptoms identified neutral facial expres-
sions as did control subjects.
The Search for Abnormalities  
in ­Dopamine Transmission in the Brains 
of Schizophrenic Patients
Is there any evidence that dopaminergic activity in the 
brains of schizophrenic patients is indeed abnormal? 
Let’s look at some of the evidence. Studies have found 
evidence that dopaminergic neurons may indeed re-
lease more dopamine (Laruelle et al., 1996; Breier et al., 
1997). A functional-imaging study by Laruelle and his 
colleagues measured the release of dopamine caused by 
an intravenous injection of amphetamine. As we saw in 
Chapter 4, amphetamine stimulates the release of dopa-
mine, apparently by causing the dopamine transporters 
that are present in the terminal buttons to run back-
ward, pumping dopamine out rather than retrieving it 
after it has been released. Of course, this effect inhibits 
the reuptake of dopamine as well. Laruelle and his col-
leagues found that the amphetamine caused the release 
of more dopamine in the striatum of schizophrenic pa-
tients than in normal subjects. They also found that pa-
tients with greater amounts of dopamine release showed 
greater increases in positive symptoms. (See Figure 16.2.)
Another possibility—that the brains of schizo-
phrenic patients contain a greater number of dopamine 
receptors—received much attention for several years. 
Because the earliest antipsychotic drugs appeared to 
work by blocking D2 receptors, the earliest studies 
looked for increases in the numbers of these receptors 
in the brains of schizophrenics. Researchers have per-
formed two types of analyses: postmortem measure-
ments in the brains of deceased schizophrenic patients 
and PET scans after treatment with radioactive ligands 
for dopamine receptors. Reviews of these studies (Kes-
tler, Walker, and Vega, 2001; Stone, Morrison, and 
Pilowsky, 2007) concluded that there might be modest 
increases in the numbers of D2 receptors in the brains of 
schizophrenics but that it seems unlikely that these in-
creases are the primary cause of the disorder.
Consequences of Long-Term Drug 
Treatment of Schizophrenia
The discovery of drugs that reduce or eliminate the 
symptoms of schizophrenia has had a revolutionary ef-
fect on the treatment of this disorder. But for many 

558	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
years, all the drugs commonly used to treat schizophre-
nia caused at least some symptoms resembling those of 
Parkinson’s disease: slowness in movement, lack of facial 
expression, and general weakness. For most patients 
these symptoms were temporary. Unfortunately, a more 
serious side effect occurred in approximately one-third 
of all patients who took the “classic” antipsychotic drugs 
for an extended period.
As a result of taking an antipsychotic medication, 
Larry, the schizophrenic man described at the opening 
of this chapter, developed a neurological disorder called 
tardive dyskinesia. Tardus means “slow,” and dyskinesia 
means “faulty movement”; thus, tardive dyskinesia is a 
late-developing movement disorder. (In Larry’s case it 
actually came rather early.)
Tardive dyskinesia appears to be the opposite of 
Parkinson’s disease. Whereas patients with Parkinson’s 
disease have difficulty moving, patients with tardive dys-
kinesia are unable to stop moving. Indeed, dyskinesia 
commonly occurs when patients with Parkinson’s dis-
ease receive too much l-DOPA. The accepted explana-
tion for tardive dyskinesia has been a phenomenon 
known as supersensitivity—a compensatory mechanism 
in which some types of receptors become more sensi-
tive if they are inhibited for a period of time by a drug 
that blocks them. Presumably, when D2 receptors in the 
caudate nucleus and putamen are chronically blocked 
by an antipsychotic drug, they become supersensitive, 
which in some cases overcompensates for the effects of 
the drug, causing the neurological symptoms to occur.
Fortunately, the wish expressed by Larry’s physi-
cian has come true. Researchers have discovered medi-
cations that treat the symptoms of schizophrenia without 
producing neurological side effects, and it appears that 
tardive dyskinesia has become a thing of the past. Bet-
ter yet, these drugs, the atypical antipsychotic medications, 
reduce both the positive symptoms and negative symp-
toms—even those of many patients who were not  
significantly helped by the older antipsychotic drugs. 
Clozapine, the first of the atypical antipsychotic medi-
cations, has been joined by several others, including 
risperidone, olanzapine, ziprasidone, and aripiprazole. 
To understand how these drugs work, we first need to 
know more about the results of research on the neuro-
pathology of schizophrenia, which brings us to the next 
section.
figure 16.2  Results of the study by Laruelle et al. (1996)
(a) Relative amount of dopamine released in response to amphetamine. (b) Relationship 
between dopamine release and changes in positive symptoms of schizophrenic 
patients.
(Based on data from Laruelle et al., 1996.)
0
50
40
30
20
10
50
40
30
20
10
–8
–4
0
4
8
12
16
0
Controls
Schizophrenics
(a)
(b)
Change in positive symptoms
Dopamine release (percent of baseline)
Dopamine release (percent of baseline)
x tardive dyskinesia  A movement disorder that can occur after 
prolonged treatment with antipsychotic medication, characterized 
by involuntary movements of the face and neck.
x supersensitivity  The increased sensitivity of neurotransmitter 
receptors; caused by damage to the afferent axons or long-term 
blockage of neurotransmitter release.
x clozapine  An atypical antipsychotic drug; blocks D4 receptors 
in the nucleus accumbens.

	
Schizophrenia	
559
Schizophrenia as a Neurological 
Disorder
So far, I have been discussing the physiology of the posi-
tive symptoms of schizophrenia—principally, hallucina-
tions, delusions, and thought disorders. These symptoms 
could very well be related to one of the known functions 
of dopaminergic neurons: reinforcement. But the nega-
tive and cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia are very 
different. Whereas the positive symptoms are unique to 
schizophrenia (and to amphetamine or cocaine psycho-
sis), the negative and cognitive symptoms are similar to 
those produced by brain damage caused by several dif-
ferent means. (In fact, some investigators do not distin-
guish between negative symptoms and cognitive symp-
toms.) Many pieces of evidence suggest that these 
symptoms of schizophrenia are indeed a result of brain 
abnormalities, especially in the prefrontal cortex. There 
appear to be three possibilities: Predisposing factors (ge-
netic, environmental, or both) give rise to (1) abnormali-
ties in both DA transmission and in the prefrontal cor-
tex, (2) abnormalities in DA transmission that cause 
abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex, or (3) abnormali-
ties in the prefrontal cortex that cause abnormalities in 
DA transmission.
Evidence for Brain Abnormalities  
in Schizophrenia
Although schizophrenia has traditionally been labeled a 
psychiatric disorder, most patients with schizophrenia 
exhibit neurological symptoms that suggest the pres-
ence of brain damage—in particular, the symptoms cat-
egorized as negative symptoms and cognitive symptoms. 
Although these symptoms can be caused by a variety of 
neuropathological conditions and hence are not unique 
to schizophrenia, their presence suggests that schizo-
phrenia may be associated with brain damage (or per-
haps abnormal brain development) of some kind.
Many studies have found evidence of loss of brain 
tissue in CT and MRI scans of schizophrenic patients. In 
one of the earliest studies, Weinberger and Wyatt (1982) 
obtained CT scans of eighty chronic schizophrenics and 
sixty-six normal controls of the same mean age (twenty-
nine years). Without knowledge of the patients’ diagno-
ses they measured the area of the lateral ventricles in the 
scan that cut through them at their largest extent, and 
they expressed this area relative to the area of brain tis-
sue in the same scan. The relative ventricle size of the 
schizophrenic patients was more than twice as great as 
that of normal control subjects. (See Figure 16.3.)
The most likely cause of the enlarged ventricles is 
loss of brain tissue; thus, the scans provide evidence that 
chronic schizophrenia is associated with brain abnor-
malities. In fact, Hulshoff-Pol et al. (2002) found that 
although everyone loses some cerebral gray matter as 
they age, the rate of tissue loss is greater in schizo-
phrenic patients. (See Figure 16.4.)
Gutiérrez-Galve et al. (2010) found that both pa-
tients with schizophrenia and their nonschizophrenic 
relatives showed loss of gray matter in the frontal and 
temporal cortex, suggesting that genetic factors affected 
cortical development and increased susceptibility to fac-
tors that cause schizophrenia. Presumably, the non-
schizophrenic relatives did not encounter these factors.
figure 16.3  Relative Ventricular Size in Chronic 
Schizophrenics and Controls
(Based on data from Weinberger and Wyatt, 1982.)
15
20
10
5
Relative ventricular size
Controls
(N = 66)
Chronic schizophrenics
(N = 80)
Mean
Mean
figure 16.4  Cerebral Gray Matter  
and Schizophrenia
The graph shows changes in volume of cerebral gray 
matter with age in normal subjects and people with 
schizophrenia.
(Based on data from Hulshoff-Pol et al., 2002.)
–200
–300
–100
0
100
200
Unstandardized residual 
of gray matter (ml)
20
30
40
50
60
70
Age (years)
Comparison subjects (N = 158)
Schizophrenia patients (N = 159)

560	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
Many studies have investigated the specific locations 
of abnormalities in the brain of schizophrenics; these 
studies are described in a later section of this chapter.
Possible Causes of Brain Abnormalities
As we saw earlier, schizophrenia is a heritable disease, 
but its heritability is less than perfect. Why do fewer than 
half the children of parents with chronic schizophrenia 
become schizophrenic? Perhaps what is inherited is a 
defect that renders people susceptible to some environ-
mental factors that adversely affect brain development 
or cause brain damage later in life. According to this 
hypothesis, having some “schizophrenia genes” makes a 
person more likely to develop schizophrenia if he or she 
is exposed to these factors. In other words, schizophre-
nia is caused by an interaction between genetic and en-
vironmental factors. But as we shall see, the absence of 
“schizophrenia genes” does not guarantee that a person 
will not develop schizophrenia; some cases of schizo-
phrenia occur even in families with no history of schizo-
phrenia or related mental illnesses. Let’s look at the  
evidence concerning environmental factors that increase 
the risk of schizophrenia.
Epidemiological Studies.  Epidemiology is the study 
of the distribution and causes of diseases in popula-
tions. Thus, epidemiological studies examine the rela-
tive frequency of diseases in groups of people in 
different environments and try to correlate the disease 
frequencies with factors that are present in these envi-
ronments. Evidence from these studies indicates that 
the incidence of schizophrenia is related to several envi-
ronmental factors: season of birth, viral epidemics, pop-
ulation density, prenatal malnutrition, maternal stress, 
and substance abuse (Brown and Derkits, 2010; King, 
St-Hilaire, and Heidkamp, 2010). Let’s examine each of 
these factors in turn.
Many studies have shown that people born during 
the late winter and early spring are more likely to de-
velop schizophrenia—a phenomenon known as the sea-
sonality effect. For example, Kendell and Adams (1991) 
studied the month of birth of over 13,000 schizophrenic 
patients born in Scotland between 1914 and 1960. They 
found that disproportionately more patients were born 
in February, March, April, and May. (See Figure 16.5.) 
These results have been confirmed by studies in several 
parts of the Northern Hemisphere (Davies et al., 2003). 
In the Southern Hemisphere some studies have re-
ported that a disproportionate number of schizophrenic 
births take place during late winter and early spring—
during the months of August through December—­
while others have found no effect ­(McGrath and Wel-
ham, 1999).
What factors might be responsible for the seasonal-
ity effect? One possibility is that pregnant women may 
be more likely to contract a viral illness during a critical 
phase of their infants’ development. The brain develop-
ment of the fetus may be adversely affected either by a 
toxin produced by the virus or—more likely—by the 
mother’s antibodies against the virus, which cross the 
placenta barrier and attack cells of the developing fetus. 
As Pallast et al. (1994) note, the winter flu season coin-
cides with the second trimester of pregnancy of babies 
born in late winter and early spring. (As we shall see 
later, evidence suggests that critical aspects of brain de-
velopment occur during the second trimester.) In fact, 
Kendell and Adams (1991) found that the relative num-
ber of schizophrenic births in late winter and early 
spring was especially high if the temperature was lower 
than normal during the previous autumn—a condition 
that keeps people indoors and favors the transmission of 
viral illnesses.
Several studies have found that the seasonality ef-
fect occurs primarily in cities but is rarely found in the 
countryside. In fact, the likelihood of developing schizo-
phrenia is approximately three times higher in people 
who live in the middle of large cities than in those who 
live in rural areas (Eaton, Mortensen, and Frydenberg, 
2000). Because viruses are more readily transmitted in 
regions with high population densities, this finding is 
consistent with the hypothesis that at least one of the 
causes of the seasonality effect is exposure of pregnant 
women to viral illnesses during the second trimester. 
However, Pedersen and Mortensen (2001) found that, 
up to the age of fifteen years, the longer a person lives 
x epidemiology  The study of the distribution and causes of 
diseases in populations.
x seasonality effect  The increased incidence of schizophrenia in 
people born during late winter and early spring.
figure 16.5  The Seasonality Effect
The graph shows the number of schizophrenic births per 
10,000 live births.
(Based on data from Kendell and Adams, 1991.)
34
32
30
28
Sept.
Nov.
Jan.
Mar.
May
July
Number of schizophrenic births
(per 10,000 live births)

	
Schizophrenia	
561
in a city, the more likely it becomes that the person de-
velops schizophrenia. Thus, an urban environment may 
also affect people’s susceptibility to schizophrenia post-
natally as well as prenatally.
If the viral hypothesis is true, then an increased inci-
dence of schizophrenia should be seen in babies born a 
few months after an influenza epidemic, whatever the 
season. Several studies have observed just that (Mednick, 
Machon, and Huttunen, 1990; Sham et al., 1992). A 
study by Brown et al. (2004) examined stored samples of 
blood serum that had been taken during pregnancy 
from mothers of children who later developed schizo-
phrenia. They found elevated levels of interleukin-8, a 
protein secreted by cells of the immune system. The pres-
ence of this chemical indicates the presence of an infec-
tion or other inflammatory process, and supports the 
suggestion that maternal infections during the second 
trimester can increase the incidence of schizophrenia in 
the women’s children. Brown (2006) notes that research 
has found that maternal infection with at least two other 
infections diseases—rubella (German measles) and toxo-
plasmosis—are associated with an increased incidence of 
schizophrenia.
Although cold weather and crowding may contrib-
ute to the seasonality effect by increasing the likelihood 
of infectious illness, another variable may also play a 
role: a vitamin D deficiency. Dealberto (2007) notes that 
Northern European researchers have observed a three-
fold increase in the incidence of schizophrenia in im-
migrants and the children of immigrants—especially in 
dark-skinned people. Vitamin D is a fat-soluble chemical 
that is produced in the skin by the action of ultraviolet 
rays on a chemical derived from cholesterol. People 
whose ancestors lived near the equator, where the sun-
light is intense all year long, have dark skin, while those 
whose ancestors lived in more extreme latitudes (such 
as Northern Europeans) have light skin. The evolution-
ary change of the skin color of Northern Europeans 
from the original dark skin to light skin is an adaptation 
that permitted them to make more vitamin D in condi-
tions of less intense sunlight. When people with dark 
skin move to more northern regions, they and their 
offspring are likely to sustain a vitamin D deficiency be-
cause the pigment in their skin blocks much of the ul-
traviolet radiation. In addition, many people of African 
origin are lactose intolerant and hence drink less milk, 
which is now fortified with vitamin D. Because vitamin D 
plays an important role in brain development, this defi-
ciency may be a risk factor for schizophrenia. These 
considerations suggest that at least some of the increased 
incidence of schizophrenia in city dwellers and those 
who live in cold climates may be attributable to a vita-
min D deficiency. Some investigators have suggested 
that with the increased use of sunscreens, which can re-
duce the production of vitamin D by the skin by up to 
98 percent, people should take daily vitamin D supple-
ments to compensate for the decreased absorption of 
ultraviolet radiation by the skin (Tavera-Mendoza and 
White, 2007).
Another prenatal effect was discovered by Susser 
and his colleagues (Susser and Lin, 1992; Susser et al., 
1996), who found a twofold increase in the incidence of 
schizophrenia in the offspring of women who were preg-
nant during the Hunger Winter, a severe food shortage 
that occurred in the Netherlands when Germany block-
aded the country during World War II. Davis and Bracha 
(1996) suggest that the specific cause of the famine-related 
schizophrenia may have been a thiamine deficiency—
or, more precisely, an abrupt buildup of toxins in the 
brains of the developing fetuses when their mothers sud-
denly began eating a normal diet when the blockade 
ended in May 1945. As we saw in Chapter 14, sudden 
refeeding after a thiamine deficiency can cause brain 
damage. Other studies have shown that underweight 
women are more likely to give birth to babies who later 
develop schizophrenia and that low birth-weight babies 
have a higher incidence of schizophrenia (Kunugi, 
Nanko, and Murray, 2001; Wahlbeck et al., 2001).
A final environmental risk factor for development 
of schizophrenia is maternal substance abuse—particu-
larly smoking. Zammit et al. (2009) studied the effects 
of maternal use of tobacco, cannabis, or alcohol during 
pregnancy and found that tobacco use was associated 
with increased risk. Even paternal tobacco use increased 
this risk, which suggest that secondhand smoke was suf-
ficient to adversely affect fetal development. Excessive 
alcohol intake increased the risk of schizophrenia only 
if the mother drank more than 210 ml of pure alcohol 
per week. Of course, as we saw in Chapter 15, alcohol 
intake during pregnancy puts the fetus at risk for devel-
opment of fetal alcohol syndrome.
Many studies have found an interaction between 
hereditary factors and the environmental factors that I 
have just reviewed (Mittal, Ellman, and Cannon, 2008; 
Brown and Derkits, 2010; Freedman, 2010). For exam-
ple, a person born to a woman who had pyelonephritis 
during pregnancy is twice as likely to develop schizo-
phrenia and four times more likely to do so if he or she 
has a family history of schizophrenia. (Pyelonephritis is 
an infectious disease introduced through the urinary 
tract that is often associated with pregnancy.) By itself, 
maternal depression does not increase the risk of devel-
oping schizophrenia in a woman’s offspring, but the 
likelihood of schizophrenia increases by a factor of four 
in the case of familial genetic risk.
Complications of Pregnancy and Childbirth.  Good 
evidence indicates that obstetric complications can also 
cause schizophrenia. In fact, several studies have found 
that if a schizophrenic person does not have relatives 

562	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
with a schizophrenic disorder, that person is more likely 
to have had a history of complications at or around  
the time of childbirth, and the person is more likely to 
develop the schizophrenic symptoms at an earlier age. 
A meta-analysis of eight studies by Cannon, Jones, and 
Murray (2002) found that the most important factors 
are complications of pregnancy, including diabetes of the 
mother, Rh incompatibility between mother and fetus, 
bleeding, and preeclampsia (also known as toxemia, a 
condition characterized by high blood pressure, edema, 
and protein in the urine); abnormal fetal development, 
including low birth weight, congenital malformations, 
and reduced head circumference; and complications of 
labor and delivery, including emergency Caesarean sec-
tion, atonic (flabby) uterus, and fetal oxygen depriva-
tion. According to Boksa (2004), the most important 
characteristic of complications of labor and delivery is 
interruption of the blood flow or oxygen supply to the 
brain.
A study by Rehn et al. (2004) provided direct evi-
dence that deprivation of an adequate blood supply to 
the uterus and placenta can have harmful effects on 
brain development. The investigators produced 
chronic placental insufficiency in pregnant guinea 
pigs by tying off one uterine artery at midgestation. 
When the offspring of these animals reached adoles-
cence, they showed reduced brain weight and en-
larged cerebral ventricles but no sign of gliosis in the 
brain. As we will see in the next subsection, these 
changes are also seen in the brains of people with 
schizophrenia.
Evidence for Abnormal Brain Development.  Both 
behavioral and anatomical evidence indicates that 
abnormal prenatal development is associated with 
schizophrenia. Let’s first consider behavioral evidence. 
Walker and her colleagues (Walker, Savoie, and Davis, 
1994; Walker, Lewine, and Neumann, 1996) obtained 
home movies from families with a schizophrenic child. 
They had independent observers examine the behavior 
of the children. In comparison with their normal sib-
lings, the children who subsequently became schizo-
phrenic displayed more negative affect in their facial 
expressions and were more likely to show abnormal 
movements. (The ratings were done blind; the observ-
ers did not know which children subsequently became 
schizophrenic.)
A study by Schiffman et al. (2004) confirmed these 
results. In 1972, 265 Danish children, aged 11–13 
years, were videotaped briefly while eating lunch. In 
1991, the investigators examined the medical records 
of these children and determined which of them had 
developed schizophrenia. Raters, who did not know 
the identities of the children, found that the children 
who later developed schizophrenia displayed less  
sociability and deficient psychomotor functioning. 
The results of these studies are consistent with the  
hypothesis that although the symptoms of schizophrenia  
are not seen in childhood, the early brain develop-
ment of children who later become schizophrenic is 
not entirely normal.
Minor physical anomalies, such as a high-steepled 
palate or especially wide-set or narrow-set eyes, have also 
been shown to be associated with the incidence of 
schizophrenia (Schiffman et al., 2002). (See Table 16.2.) 
These differences were first reported in the late nine-
teenth century by Kraepelin, one of the pioneers in 
schizophrenia research. As Schiffman and his colleagues 
note, these anomalies provide evidence of factors that 
have adverse effects on development. They found that 
people with schizophrenic relatives normally have an 
11.9 percent likelihood of developing schizophrenia. 
This likelihood increases to 30.8 percent in people who 
also have minor physical anomalies; thus, the factors 
that produce minor physical anomalies are at least partly 
independent of the genetic factors associated with 
schizophrenia.
As I mentioned earlier, some monozygotic twins are 
discordant for schizophrenia; that is, one of them devel-
ops schizophrenia, and the other does not. Suddath et al. 
(1990) obtained evidence that differences in the struc-
ture of the brain may reflect this discordance. The inves-
tigators examined MRI scans of monozygotic twins who 
table 16.2  Examples of Minor Physical 
Abnormalities Associated with Schizophrenia
Location
Description
Head
Two or more hair whorls
 
Head circumference outside normal range
Eyes
Skin fold at inner corner of eye
 
Wide-set eyes
Ears
Low-seated ears
 
Asymmetrical ears
Mouth
High-steepled palate
 
Furrowed tongue
Hands
Curved fifth finger
 
Single transverse crease in palm
Feet
Third toe longer than second toe
 
Partial webbing of two middle toes
Source: Adapted from Schiffman et al., 2002.

	
Schizophrenia	
563
were discordant for schizophrenia and found that in al-
most every case the twin with schizophrenia had larger 
lateral and third ventricles. In addition, the anterior 
hippocampus was smaller in the schizophrenic twin, 
and the total volume of the gray matter in the left tem-
poral lobe was reduced. Figure 16.6 shows a set of MRI 
scans from a pair of twins; as you can see, the lateral 
ventricles are larger in the brain of the twin with schizo-
phrenia. (See Figure 16.6.) As we will see later, research 
has found that comparison of twins discordant for 
schizophrenia also provides evidence of degeneration in 
specific regions of the cerebral cortex.
In the past, most researchers assumed that discor-
dance for schizophrenia in monozygotic twins must be 
caused by differential exposure to some environmental 
factors after birth. Not only are monozygotic twins ge-
netically identical, but they also share the same intra-
uterine environment. Thus, because all prenatal factors 
should be identical, any differences must be a result of 
factors in the postnatal environment. However, some 
investigators have pointed out that the prenatal environ-
ment of monozygotic twins is not identical. In fact, there 
are two types of monozygotic twins: monochorionic and 
dichorionic. The formation of monozygotic twins occurs 
when the blastocyst (the developing organism) splits in 
two—when it clones itself. If twinning occurs before day 4, 
the two organisms develop independently, each form-
ing its own placenta. (That is, the twins are dichorionic. 
The chorion is the outer layer of the blastocyst, which 
gives rise to the placenta.) If twinning occurs after day 4, 
the two organisms become monochorionic, sharing a sin-
gle placenta. (See Figure 16.7.)
The placenta plays an extremely important role in 
prenatal development. It transports nutrients to the de-
veloping organism from the mother’s circulation and 
transports waste products to her, which she metabolizes 
in her liver or excretes in her urine. It also constitutes 
figure 16.6  MRI Scans of the Brains of Twins 
Discordant for Schizophrenia
The arrows point to the lateral ventricles. (a) Normal twin. 
(b) Twin with schizophrenia.
(Courtesy of D. R. Weinberger, National Institute of Mental Health, Saint 
Elizabeth’s Hospital, Washington, DC.)
(a)
(b)
figure 16.7  Monozygotic Twins
(a) Monochorionic twins, sharing a single placenta. (b) Dichorionic twins, each with its 
own placenta.
(a)
(b)
Placenta
Placenta
Amniotic
sac

564	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
the barrier through which toxins or infectious agents 
must pass if they are to affect fetal development. The 
prenatal environments of monochorionic twins, who 
share a single placenta, are obviously more similar than 
those of dichorionic twins. Thus, we might expect that 
the concordance rates for schizophrenia of monochori-
onic monozygotic twins should be higher than those of 
dichorionic monozygotic twins, and as Davis, Phelps, and 
Bracha (1995) reported, they are. Davis and his col-
leagues examined sets of monozygotic twins who were 
concordant and discordant for schizophrenia. They 
used several indices to estimate whether a given pair was 
monochorionic or dichorionic. (For example, twins 
with mirror images of physical features such as finger-
prints, handedness, birthmarks, or hair swirls are more 
likely to be monochorionic.) The investigators estimated 
that the concordance rate for schizophrenia was 10.7 
percent in the dichorionic twins and 60 percent in the 
monochorionic twins. These results provide strong evi-
dence for an interaction between heredity and environ-
ment during prenatal development.
Although studies have found that people who develop 
schizophrenia show some abnormalities even during 
childhood, the symptoms of schizophrenia itself rarely be-
gin before late adolescence or early adulthood. If schizo-
phrenia does begin during childhood, the symptoms are 
likely to be more severe. Figure 16.8 shows a graph of the 
ages of first signs of mental disorder in males and females 
diagnosed with schizophrenia. (See Figure 16.8.)
In a review of the literature, Woods (1998) notes 
that MRI studies suggest that schizophrenia is not caused 
by a degenerative process, as are Parkinson’s disease, 
Huntington’s disease, and Alzheimer’s disease, in which 
neurons continue to die over a period of years. Instead, 
a sudden, rapid loss of brain volume typically occurs 
during young adulthood, with little evidence for con-
tinuing degeneration. Woods suggests that the disease 
process of schizophrenia begins prenatally and then lies 
dormant until puberty, when some unknown mecha-
nism triggers degeneration of some population of neu-
rons. The brain abnormalities that develop prenatally 
account for the deficits in social behavior and poor aca-
demic performance seen in people who later become 
schizophrenic. Then, sometime after puberty, when 
many developmental changes occur in the brain, more 
serious degeneration occurs, and the symptoms of 
schizophrenia begin to appear.
A study by Thompson et al. (2001) found dramatic 
evidence for loss of cortical gray matter during adoles-
cence in patients with early-onset schizophrenia. The 
investigators used structural MRI procedures to mea-
sure the volume of the gray matter of the cerebral cor-
tex at two-year intervals in schizophrenic patients and 
control subjects. Adolescence is a time when “pruning” 
takes place in the brain, and the MRI scans showed an 
expected loss of cortical gray matter in nonschizo-
phrenic subjects of about 0.5–1.0 percent. However, the 
loss of tissue was approximately twice as large in schizo-
phrenic subjects. The degeneration started in the pari-
etal lobes, and the wave of destruction continued ros-
trally, including the temporal lobes, somatosensory and 
motor cortex, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC). 
A subsequent study from the same laboratory (T. D. 
Cannon et al., 2002) compared the cortical gray matter 
of brains of members of identical twin pairs who were 
discordant for schizophrenia. Identical twins are geneti-
cally identical, so differences in their cortical gray mat-
ter are presumably related to the presence or absence of 
schizophrenia. The investigators found that several re-
gions of the cerebral cortex—especially the dlPFC—was 
reduced in the schizophrenic twins. (I’ll say more about 
this part of the brain in the next subsection.) The colors 
“warmer” than blue in the scans shown in Figure 16.9 
indicate regions where the mean difference between 
the schizophrenic and nonschizophrenic twins was sta-
tistically significant. (See Figure 16.9.)
The evidence I have cited so far suggests that the 
most important cause of schizophrenia is disturbance of 
normal prenatal brain development that, in most cases, 
ultimately manifests itself after puberty. Presumably, ge-
netic factors make some fetuses more sensitive to events 
that can disturb development. In addition, damage 
caused by obstetric complications can lead to develop-
ment of schizophrenia even in the absence of hereditary 
factors. The effect of these factors is reflected in cortical 
development and, perhaps, in altered activity at dopami-
nergic synapses.
figure 16.8  Age at First Sign of Psychotic 
Symptoms in Schizophrenic Patients
(Based on data from Häfner et al., 1993.)
20
10
30
0
Male
Female
Percent of cases
0–11
12–14
15–19
55–59
50–54
45–49
40–44
35–39
30–34
25–29
20–24
Age at onset (years)

	
Schizophrenia	
565
Relationship Between Positive  
and ­Negative Symptoms: Role  
of the ­Prefrontal Cortex
As we saw, schizophrenia has positive, negative, and cog-
nitive symptoms. The positive symptoms may be caused 
by hyperactivity of dopaminergic synapses, and the neg-
ative and cognitive symptoms may be caused by develop-
mental or degenerative changes in the brain. Is there a 
relationship between these categories of schizophrenic 
symptoms? An accumulating amount of evidence sug-
gests that the answer is yes.
The evidence reviewed in the previous subsection 
indicates that schizophrenia is associated with abnor-
malities in many parts of the brain, especially the pre-
frontal cortex. Weinberger (1988) first suggested that 
the negative symptoms of schizophrenia are caused pri-
marily by hypofrontality, decreased activity of the fron-
tal lobes—in particular, of the dlPFC. Many studies have 
shown that schizophrenic patients do poorly on neuro-
psychological tests that are sensitive to prefrontal dam-
age. Figure 16.10 shows composite functional MRI scans 
from a study by MacDonald et al. (2005) of subjects with 
schizophrenia and normal comparison subjects taken 
while the people were performing a task that required 
concentration and focused attention. As you can see, 
the dlPFC was activated in the normal subjects but not 
in the subjects with schizophrenia. (See Figure 16.10.)
What might produce the hypofrontality that so 
many studies have observed? As we saw in the discussion 
of the dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia, dopa-
mine agonists such as cocaine and amphetamine can 
cause positive symptoms of schizophrenia. Two other 
drugs, PCP (phencyclidine, also known as “angel dust”) 
and ketamine (“Special K”), can cause positive, negative, 
and cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia (Adler et al., 
1999; Lahti et al., 2001; Avila et al., 2002). Because PCP 
and ketamine elicit the full range of the symptoms of 
schizophrenia, many researchers believe that studying 
the physiological and behavioral effects of these drugs 
will help to solve the puzzle of schizophrenia.
The negative and cognitive symptoms produced by 
ketamine and PCP are apparently caused by a decrease 
in the metabolic activity of the frontal lobes. Jentsch et al. 
(1997) administered PCP to monkeys twice a day for two 
weeks. Then, one week later, they tested the animals on 
a task that involves reaching around a barrier for a piece 
of food, which is performed poorly by monkeys with  
lesions of the prefrontal cortex. Normal monkeys per-
formed well, but those that had been treated with PCP 
showed a severe deficit. (See Figure 16.11.)
As you might recall from Chapter 4, PCP is an indi-
rect antagonist of NMDA-receptors. (So is ketamine.) By 
figure 16.9  Cortical Gray Matter in Monozygotic 
Twins Discordant for Schizophrenia
The scans show regions of the cerebral cortex that were 
smaller in the brains of the schizophrenic people 
compared with their normal twins, which indicates 
regions affected by the disorder. Colors “warmer” than 
blue indicate regions where mean difference between the 
two groups of twins was statistically significant.
(From Cannon, T. D., Thompson, P. M., van Erp, T. G., et al. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2002, 99, 3228–3233.)
x hypofrontality  Decreased activity of the prefrontal cortex; believed 
to be responsible for the negative symptoms of schizophrenia.
figure 16.10  Hypofrontality in Schizophrenia
The images show composite functional MRI scans of 
subjects with schizophrenia and normal comparison 
subjects taken while the people were performing a task 
that required concentration and focused attention. The 
schizophrenic subjects show deficient activation of the 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (hypofrontality).
(From MacDonald, A. W., Carter, C. S., Kerns, J. G., Ursu, S., Barch, D. M., 
Holmes, A. J., Stenger, V. A., and Cohen, J. D. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
2005, 162, 475–484. Reprinted with permission from the American Journal of 
Psychiatry. Copyright © 2005 American Psychiatric Association.)
Dorsal
prefrontal
cortex
Normal subjects
Schizophrenic patients

566	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
inhibiting the activity of NMDA receptors, PCP suppresses 
the activity of several regions of the brain—most notably, 
the dlPFC. These drugs also decrease the level of dopa-
mine utilization in this region (Elsworth et al., 2008), 
possibly as a result of the inhibitory effect on NMDA re-
ceptors. The hypoactivity of NMDA and dopamine recep-
tors appears to play an important role in the production 
of negative and cognitive symptoms: Suppression of these 
receptors causes hypofrontality, which appears to be the 
primary cause of these two categories of symptoms.
We also saw that the atypical antipsychotic drug 
clozapine alleviates the positive, negative, and cognitive 
symptoms of schizophrenia. It also reduces the psychotic 
symptoms that are triggered in humans by ketamine 
(Malhotra et al., 1997). (Because PCP has toxic effects, 
it is not normally used in studies with human subjects.) 
In a study with monkeys, Youngren et al. (1999) found 
that injection of clozapine, which causes a decrease in the 
release of dopamine by the mesolimbic system, which 
apparently reduces the positive symptoms, also causes 
an increase in the release of dopamine in the prefrontal 
cortex, which apparently reduces the negative and cog-
nitive symptoms.
I mentioned earlier that a mutation of the DISC1 
gene is a known genetic cause of schizophrenia. Niwa et al. 
(2010) infused a small interfering RNA (siRNA) that 
targeted the DISC1 gene into progenitor cells of the 
ventricular zone of fetal mice. (You will recall from 
Chapter 3 that these progenitor cells give rise to the 
brain’s neurons.) The procedure suppressed DISC1 ex-
pression in pyramidal neurons of the prefrontal cortex 
during the last week of fetal development. At first, these 
neurons appeared normal, but at around the time of 
puberty, abnormalities were seen in the physiological 
characteristics of pyramidal neurons in the prefrontal 
cortex and in the structure of their dendritic spines. 
Abnormalities also began appearing in the mesocortical 
dopaminergic system that projects to the prefrontal cor-
tex, which resulted in a lower level of dopamine in this 
region. While these changes were occurring, behavioral 
abnormalities resembling those of schizophrenia began 
to emerge. These findings suggest that abnormalities in 
the pyramidal neurons of the prefrontal cortex consti-
tute the primary cause of the process that leads to 
schizophrenia. (See Figure 16.12.)
The findings of another study supports a different 
hypothesis—that abnormalities in the striatal dopami-
nergic system may constitute the primary cause of the 
process that leads to schizophrenia. Lewis, Hashimoto, 
and Volk (2005) reviewed evidence that the hypofrontal-
ity seen in people with schizophrenia appear to be a result 
figure 16.11  Chronic PCP Treatment  
and Perseveration
The graphs show the effects of two weeks of PCP 
treatment on the performance by monkeys on a task that 
requires reaching around a barrier. An increased number 
of reaches toward the barrier is an indication of 
perseveration of an incorrect response.
(Based on data from Jentsch et al., 1997.)
50
60
70
80
90
100
0.75
0.50
0.25
0
PCP
Normal
Treatment
Treatment
Barrier reaches (reaches/trial)
Percent success
figure 16.12  Role of DISC1 in the Development of Schizophrenia
Niwa et al. (2010) infused a siRNA that prevented the expression of DISC1 in 
progenitor cells in the ventricular zone of fetal mice. Although neurons in the prefrontal 
cortex appeared normal after birth, they developed abnormalities in dendritic spines of 
these neurons after puberty that led to behavioral abnormalities resembling those of 
schizophrenia. In humans, the symptoms of schizophrenia usually emerge after puberty.
Progenitor cells in
ventricular zone of
fetal mice
Neurons appear
normal
Abnormalities in
structure of
dendritic spines
Behavioral abnormalities
DISC1 expression silenced
siRNA for DISC1
Prefrontal cortex
Infusion
After birth
After puberty

	
Schizophrenia	
567
of deficits in inhibitory GABAergic transmission in the 
dlPFC that disrupts normal electrical rhythms generated 
in this region. Li et al. (2011) used a genetically modi-
fied viral vector to insert genes in the striatum of mice 
(including both the dorsal striatum and the nucleus ac-
cumbens) that increased the production of D2 dopa-
mine receptors there. As in the study by Niwa and her 
colleagues, this procedure caused the development of 
behavioral deficits characteristic of schizophrenia, in-
cluding abnormal activity of the dlPFC, caused by a 
deficit in inhibitory GABAergic transmission in this re-
gion. (See Figure 16.13.)
The research findings presented in this subsection 
explain why the “classic” antipsychotic drugs fail to re-
duce negative and cognitive symptoms: One of the 
causes of these symptoms is decreased activation of do-
pamine receptors in the prefrontal cortex, and drugs 
that block dopamine receptors would, if anything, make 
these symptoms worse. What is different about the 
newer atypical antipsychotic drugs that enables them to 
reduce all three categories of schizophrenic symptoms?
The atypical antipsychotic drugs seem to do the im-
possible: They increase dopaminergic activity in the pre-
frontal cortex and reduce it in the mesolimbic system. 
Let’s examine the action of a so-called third generation 
antipsychotic drug, aripiprazole (Winans, 2003; Lieber-
man, 2004). Aripiprazole acts as a partial agonist at dopa-
mine receptors. A partial agonist is a drug that has a very 
high affinity for a particular receptor but activates that 
receptor less than the normal ligand does. This means 
that in a patient with schizophrenia, aripiprazole serves as 
an antagonist in the mesolimbic system, where too much 
dopamine is present, but serves as an agonist in regions 
such as the prefrontal cortex, where too little dopamine 
is present. Hence, this action appears to account for the 
ability of aripiprazole to reduce all three categories of 
schizophrenic symptoms. (See Figure 16.14.)
figure 16.13  Role of Dopamine D2 Receptors in the Development of Schizophrenia
Li et al. (2011) used a viral vector to increase expression of dopamine D2 receptors in  
the striatum of mice. As a result, GABAergic transmission decreased in the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex, and the abnormal neural activity there led to behavioral deficits 
characteristic of schizophrenia.
Viral vector containing
dopamine D2 receptors
Increased expression of
dopamine D2 receptors
Behavioral abnormalities
characteristic of schizophrenia
Striatum of mice
(includes nucleus 
accumbens)
Abnormal
neural activity
Deficit in GABAergic 
transmission
Infusion
Dorsolateral PFC
x partial agonist  A drug that has a very high affinity for a particular 
receptor but activates that receptor less than the normal ligand does; 
serves as an agonist in regions of low concentration of the normal 
ligand and as an antagonist in regions of high concentrations.
figure 16.14  Effects of a Partial Agonist
The diagram explains the differential effects of a partial 
agonist in regions of high and low concentrations of the 
normal ligand. Numbers beneath each receptor indicate the 
degree of opening of the ion channel: 1.0 = fully open,  
0.5 = partially open, 0.0 = fully closed. Partial agonists decrease 
the mean opening when the extracellular concentration of the 
neurotransmitter is high and increase it when the extracellular 
concentration of the neurotransmitter is low.
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
Mean opening = 1.0
Mean opening = 0.6
Mean opening = 0.2
Mean opening = 0.5
High concentration of
neurotransmitter
Partial agonist displaces
neurotransmitter
Low concentration of
neurotransmitter
Partial agonist binds with
receptors
Molecule of partial agonist
Molecule of neurotransmitter

568	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
Before I conclude this section, I want to mention 
an interesting sidelight that might have some relevance 
to the causes of schizophrenia. As we saw, ketamine and 
PCP have similar effects. Ketamine is used as an anes-
thetic for children and animals. It is not often used  
as an anesthetic in adult humans because it produces 
episodes of psychosis when the person awakens after 
the surgery. Ketamine does not have this effect in pre-
pubertal children, and administration of PCP does  
not damage the brains of rats until the animals reach 
puberty (Marshall and Longnecker, 1990; Stone, Mor-
rison, and Pilowsky, 2007). No one knows why ketamine 
(and probably PCP) produces psychotic behavior only 
in adults; perhaps the explanation is related to the fact 
that the symptoms of schizophrenia also emerge after 
puberty. (Whatever developmental changes occur after 
puberty that make the brain susceptible to the psy-
chotic effects of NMDA antagonists may also be related 
to the emergence of symptoms of schizophrenia at this 
time.)
Farber et al. (1995) found that large doses of an-
other indirect NMDA antagonist, MK-801, produced 
brain abnormalities in adult rats but not in prepubertal 
rats. Between the age of puberty and full adulthood, the 
animals’ brains became more and more sensitive to the 
effects of the drug. These findings provide further sup-
port for the hypothesis that developmental changes that 
begin around the time of puberty may play a role in the 
development of schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia is a puzzling and serious disorder, 
which has stimulated many ingenious hypotheses and 
much research. Some hypotheses have been proved wrong; 
others have not yet been adequately tested. Possibly, future 
research will find that all of these hypotheses (including 
the ones I have discussed) are incorrect or that one that I 
have not mentioned is correct. However, I am impressed 
with recent research, and I believe that we have real hope 
of finding the causes of schizophrenia in the near future. 
With the discovery of the causes we can hope for the dis-
covery of methods of prevention and not just treatment.
that the positive symptoms of schizophrenia are 
caused by hyperactivity of dopaminergic synapses in 
the mesolimbic system, which targets the nucleus 
accumbens and amygdala. The involvement of dopa-
mine in reinforcement could plausibly explain the 
positive effects of schizophrenia; inappropriately rein-
forced thoughts could persist and become delusions. 
There is no evidence that an abnormally large amount 
of dopamine is released under resting conditions, but 
PET studies indicate that the administration of 
amphetamine causes a larger release of dopamine in 
the brains of schizophrenics. Evidence indicates that 
the brains of schizophrenic patients may contain 
slightly increased numbers of D2 dopamine receptors, 
but this increase does not appear to play a primary 
role in the incidence of schizophrenia.
The fact that the negative and cognitive symp-
toms of schizophrenia are not alleviated by “classical” 
antipsychotic drugs poses an unsolved problem for the 
dopamine hypothesis. In addition, these drugs cause 
parkinsonian side effects (usually temporary) and often, 
in patients who receive long-term treatment, tardive 
dyskinesia. Atypical antipsychotic drugs, including clo-
zapine, risperidone, olanzapine, ­ziprasidone, and 
Section Summary
Schizophrenia
Researchers have made considerable progress in the 
past few years in their study of the physiology of men-
tal disorders, but many puzzles still remain. 
Schizophrenia consists of positive, negative, and cog-
nitive symptoms, the first involving the presence of 
unusual behavior and the latter two involving the 
absence or deficiency of normal behavior. Because 
schizophrenia is strongly heritable, it must have a bio-
logical basis. Evidence indicates that not all cases are 
caused by heredity, and many people who appear to 
carry “schizophrenia genes” do not become schizo-
phrenic. Recent evidence suggests that paternal age is 
a factor in schizophrenia, presumably because of the 
increased likelihood of mutations in the chromosomes 
of cells that produce sperms. A large variety of rare 
mutations or epigenetic factors may predispose peo-
ple to schizophrenia, and some investigators suspect 
that some of the genes that affect susceptibility to 
schizophrenia are involved in the production of non-
coding RNA, which plays important regulatory roles.
The dopamine hypothesis, which was inspired by 
the findings that dopamine antagonists alleviate the 
positive symptoms of schizophrenia and that dopa-
mine agonists increase or even produce them, states 

	
Schizophrenia	
569
Long-term administration of PCP to monkeys disrupts 
their performance of a reaching task that requires the 
prefrontal cortex. Furthermore, the disruption is 
related to the decrease in prefrontal dopaminergic 
activity caused by the drug. Evidence suggests that 
hypofrontality causes an increase in the activity of 
dopaminergic neurons in the mesolimbic system, thus 
producing the positive symptoms of schizophrenia. 
Connections between the prefrontal cortex and the 
ventral tegmental area appear to be responsible for 
this phenomenon. Clozapine reduces hypofrontality, 
increases monkeys’ performance on the reaching task, 
and decreases the release of dopamine in the ventral 
tegmental area—and decreases both the positive and 
negative symptoms of schizophrenia. An even newer 
“third generation” antipsychotic drug, aripiprazole, 
serves as a partial agonist for dopamine receptors, 
increasing activation of DA receptors in regions that 
contain little dopamine (such as the prefrontal cortex) 
and decreasing activation of DA receptors in regions 
that contain excessive amounts of dopamine (such as 
the nucleus accumbens).
PCP and ketamine act as indirect antagonists for 
NMDA receptors. Glycine, d-serine, and sarcosine, 
which serve as NMDA receptor agonists, reduce the 
negative symptoms of schizophrenia, providing fur-
ther support for the PCP model of this disorder. 
Ketamine causes psychotic reactions in adults but not 
children. Similarly, PCP causes brain abnormalities in 
adult, but not juvenile, rats. These disparities may be 
related to the apparent changes in the brain that are 
responsible for the emergence of the symptoms of 
schizophrenia after puberty.
 Thought Question
Suppose that a young schizophrenic woman insists on 
living in the streets and refuses to take antipsychotic 
medication. She is severely disturbed; she is under-
nourished and often takes intravenous drugs, which 
expose her to the risk of AIDS. Her parents have tried 
to get her to seek help, but she believes that they are 
plotting against her. Suppose further that we can pre-
dict with 90 percent accuracy that she will die within a 
few years. She is not violent, and she has never talked 
about committing suicide, so we cannot prove that 
her behavior constitutes an immediate threat to her-
self or to others. Should her parents be able to force 
her to receive treatment, or does she have an abso-
lute right to be left alone, even if she is mentally ill?
aripiprazole, are much less likely to produce parkinso-
nian side effects and apparently do not produce tar-
dive dyskinesia. In addition, these drugs reduce posi-
tive symptoms as well as negative ones, and they 
reduce the symptoms of some patients who are not 
helped by traditional antipsychotic medication.
MRI scans and the presence of signs of neurolog-
ical impairments indicate the presence of brain abnor-
malities in schizophrenic patients. Studies of the epi-
demiology of schizophrenia indicate that season of 
birth, viral epidemics during pregnancy, a cold cli-
mate, increased population density, and prenatal mal-
nutrition all contribute to the occurrence of schizo-
phrenia. The most sensitive period appears to occur 
during the second trimester of pregnancy. A vitamin 
D deficiency, caused by insufficient exposure to sun-
light or insufficient intake of the vitamin itself, may at 
least partly account for the effects of season of birth, 
population density, a cold climate, and maternal 
nutrition. Obstetric complications also increase the 
risk of schizophrenia, even in people who have no 
family history of the disorder. In addition, movies of 
young children who became schizophrenic indicate 
the early presence of abnormalities in movements 
and facial expressions. More evidence is provided by 
the presence of an increased size of the third and lat-
eral ventricles and a decreased size of the hippocam-
pus in the schizophrenic member of monozygotic 
twins who are discordant for schizophrenia. The 
increased concordance rate of monochorionic mono-
zygotic twins provides further evidence that heredi-
tary and prenatal environmental factors may interact.
The symptoms of schizophrenia often emerge 
soon after puberty, when the brain is undergoing 
important maturational changes. Some investigators 
believe that the disease process of schizophrenia 
begins prenatally, lies dormant until puberty, and 
then causes a period of neural degeneration that 
causes the symptoms to appear.
The negative symptoms of schizophrenia appear to 
be a result of hypofrontality (decreased activity of the 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex), which may be caused by 
a decreased release of dopamine in this region. 
Schizophrenic patients do poorly on tasks that require 
activity of the prefrontal cortex, and functional-imaging 
studies indicate that the prefrontal cortex is hypoactive 
when the patients attempt to perform these tasks.
The drugs PCP and ketamine mimic both the 
positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia. 

570	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
Major Affective Disorders
Affect, as a noun, refers to feelings or emotions. Just as the 
primary symptom of schizophrenia is disordered thoughts, 
the major affective disorders (also called mood disorders) 
are characterized by disordered feelings.
Description
Feelings and emotions are essential parts of human 
existence; they represent our evaluation of the events in 
our lives. In a very real sense, feelings and emotions are 
what human life is all about. The emotional state of 
most of us reflects what is happening to us: Our feelings 
are tied to events in the real world and are usually the 
result of reasonable assessments of the importance 
these events have for our lives. But for some people, 
affect becomes divorced from reality. These people 
have feelings of extreme elation (mania) or despair (de-
pression) that are not justified by events in their lives. For 
example, depression that accompanies the loss of a 
loved one is normal, but depression that becomes a way 
of life—and will not respond to the sympathetic effort 
of friends and relatives or even to psychotherapy—is 
pathological. Depression has a prevalence of approxi-
mately 3 percent in men and 7 percent in women, 
which makes it the fourth leading cause of disability 
(Kessler et al., 2003).
There are two principal types of major affective 
disorders. The first type is characterized by alternating 
periods of mania and depression—a condition called 
bipolar disorder. This disorder afflicts men and women 
in approximately equal numbers. Episodes of mania 
can last a few days or several months, but they usually 
take a few weeks to run their course. Bipolar disorder 
is often severe, disabling, and treatment-resistant 
(Chen, Henter, and Manji, 2010). The episodes of de-
pression that follow generally last three times as long as 
the mania. The second type is major depressive disorder 
(MDD), characterized by depression without mania. 
This depression may be continuous and unremitting 
or, more typically, may come in episodes. Mania with-
out periods of depression sometimes occurs, but it is 
rare.
Severely depressed people usually feel extremely 
unworthy and have strong feelings of guilt. The affective 
disorders are dangerous; a person who suffers from a 
major affective disorder runs a considerable risk of 
death by suicide. According to Chen and Dilsaver 
(1996), 15.9 percent of people with MDD and 29.2 per-
cent of people with bipolar disorder attempt to commit 
suicide. Schneider, Muller, and Philipp (2001) found 
that the rate of death by unnatural causes (not all sui-
cides are diagnosed as such) for people with affective 
disorders was 28.8 times higher than expected for people 
of the same age in the general population. Depressed 
people have very little energy, and they move and talk 
slowly, sometimes becoming almost torpid. At other 
times, they may pace around restlessly and aimlessly. 
They may cry a lot. They are unable to experience plea-
sure and lose their appetite for food and sex. Their sleep 
is disturbed; they usually have difficulty falling asleep 
and awaken early and find it difficult to get to sleep 
again. Even their body functions become depressed; 
they often become constipated, and secretion of saliva 
decreases.
[A psychiatrist] asked me if I was suicidal, and I 
reluctantly told him yes. I did not particular-
ize—since there seemed no need to—did not 
tell him that in truth many of the artifacts of my 
house had become potential devices for my 
own destruction: the attic rafters (and an out-
side maple or two) a means to hang myself, the 
garage a place to inhale carbon monoxide, the 
bathtub a vessel to receive the flow from my 
opened arteries. The kitchen knives in their 
drawers had but one purpose for me. Death by 
heart attack seemed particularly inviting, ab-
solving me as it would of active responsibility, 
and I had toyed with the idea of self-induced 
pneumonia—a long frigid, shirt-sleeved hike 
through the rainy woods. Nor had I overlooked 
an ostensible accident . . . by walking in front of 
a truck on the highway nearby. . . . Such hid-
eous fantasies, which cause well people to shud-
der, are to the deeply depressed mind what 
lascivious daydreams are to persons of robust 
sexuality. (Styron, 1990, pp. 52–53)
Episodes of mania are characterized by a sense of 
euphoria that does not seem to be justified by circum-
stances. The diagnosis of mania is partly a matter of de-
gree; one would not call exuberance and a zest for life 
pathological. People with mania usually exhibit nonstop 
speech and motor activity. They flit from topic to topic 
and often have delusions, but they lack the severe disor-
ganization that is seen in schizophrenia. They are usu-
ally full of their own importance and often become an-
gry or defensive if they are contradicted. Frequently, 
they go for long periods without sleep, working furiously 
on projects that are often unrealistic. (Sometimes, their 
work is fruitful; George Frideric Handel wrote Messiah, 
one of the masterpieces of choral music, during one of 
his periods of mania.)
x bipolar disorder  A serious mood disorder characterized by 
cyclical periods of mania and depression.
x major depressive disorder (MDD)  A serious mood disorder 
that consists of unremitting depression or periods of depression 
that do not alternate with periods of mania.

	
Major Affective Disorders	
571
Heritability
Evidence indicates that a tendency to develop an affec-
tive disorder is a heritable characteristic. (See Hamet 
and Tremblay, 2005, for a review.) For example, Rosen-
thal (1971) found that close relatives of people who 
suffer from affective psychoses are ten times more likely 
to develop these disorders than are people without af-
flicted relatives. Gershon et al. (1976) found that if one 
member of a set of monozygotic twins was afflicted with 
an affective disorder, the likelihood that the other twin 
was similarly afflicted was 69 percent. In contrast, the 
concordance rate for dizygotic twins was only 13 per-
cent. The heritability of the affective disorders implies 
that they have a physiological basis.
Genetic studies have found evidence that genes on 
several chromosomes may be implicated in the develop-
ment of the affective disorders, but the findings of most 
of the earlier linkage studies have not been replicated 
(Hamet and Tremblay, 2005). A review of genome-wide 
association studies (Terracciano et al., 2010) found that 
the RORA gene, involved in control of circadian rhythms, 
had the strongest association with the occurrence of 
major depressive disorder. Evidence suggested that an-
other gene, GRM8, which codes for the production of a 
metabolic glutamate receptor, may also be involved. Mc-
Grath et al. (2009) found that RORB, another clock 
gene, was associated with rapid cycling bipolar disorder 
seen in children. As we will see later in this chapter, 
disturbances in sleep and circadian rhythms may play a 
role in the development of affective disorders.
Season of Birth
As we saw in the discussion of schizophrenia earlier in 
this chapter, season of birth plays a significant role in 
the incidence of that disease. In particular, people born 
in late winter and early spring are more likely to develop 
schizophrenia than people born at other times. One 
suggested explanation for this phenomenon is the fact 
that the second trimester of pregnancy—a critical time 
of fetal development—coincides with winter flu season. 
A seasonality effect—but a different one—is seen in the 
incidence of major depression. Döme et al. (2010) ex-
amined the season of birth of 80,000 people who com-
mitted suicide in Hungary in the 1930s, early to mid-
1940s, and 1969. (Hungary has one of the highest rates 
of suicide in the world.) The incidence of suicide was 
significantly higher for those born in summer, with a 
peak in July. (See Figure 16.15.) So far, there is no expla-
nation for this phenomenon.
Biological Treatments
There are several established and experimental biologi-
cal treatments for major depressive disorder: ­monoamine 
oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, drugs that inhibit the reup-
take of norepinephrine or serotonin or interfere with 
NMDA receptors, electroconvulsive therapy, transcra-
nial magnetic stimulation, deep brain stimulation, vagus 
nerve stimulation, bright-light therapy (phototherapy), 
and sleep deprivation. (Phototherapy and sleep depriva-
tion are discussed in a later section of this chapter.) Bi-
polar disorder can be treated by lithium and some anti-
convulsant drugs. The fact that these disorders often 
respond to biological treatment provides additional evi-
dence that they have a physiological basis. Furthermore, 
the fact that lithium is effective in treating bipolar affec-
tive disorder but not major depressive disorder suggests 
that there is a fundamental difference between these 
two illnesses (Soares and Gershon, 1998).
Before the 1950s there was no effective drug treat-
ment for depression. In the late 1940s clinicians noticed 
that some drugs used for treating tuberculosis seemed 
to elevate the patient’s mood. Researchers subsequently 
found that a derivative of these drugs, iproniazid, re-
duced symptoms of psychotic depression (Crane, 1957). 
Iproniazid inhibits the activity of MAO, which destroys 
excess monoamine transmitter substances within termi-
nal buttons. Thus, the drug increases the release of do-
pamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin. Other MAO 
inhibitors were soon discovered. Unfortunately, MAO 
inhibitors can have harmful side effects, so they must be 
used with caution.
Fortunately, another class of antidepressant drugs 
was soon discovered that did not have these side effects: 
the tricyclic antidepressants. These drugs were found to 
inhibit the reuptake of 5-HT and norepinephrine by 
terminal buttons. By retarding reuptake, the drugs keep 
figure 16.15  Suicide and Season of Birth
Incidence of suicide as a function of month of birth in 
80,000 people who committed suicide in Hungary in the 
mid-twentieth century.
(Based on data of Döme et al., 2010.)
May
July
Sep.
Nov.
Month of birth
–10
–5
0
5
10
Difference from the
 mean (percent)
Jan.
Mar.
x tricyclic antidepressant  A class of drugs used to treat 
depression; inhibits the reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin 
but also affects other neurotransmitters; named for the molecular 
structure.

572	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
the neurotransmitter in contact with the postsynaptic 
receptors, thus prolonging the postsynaptic potentials. 
Thus, both the MAO inhibitors and the tricyclic antide-
pressant drugs are monoaminergic agonists.
Since the discovery of the tricyclic antidepressants, 
other drugs have been discovered that have similar ef-
fects. The most important of these are the specific sero-
tonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI), whose action is de-
scribed by their name. These drugs—for example, 
fluoxetine (Prozac), citalopram (Celexa), and parox-
etine (Paxil)—are widely prescribed for their antide-
pressant properties and for their ability to reduce the 
symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder and social 
phobia (described in Chapter 17). Another class of anti-
depressant drugs has been developed, the serotonin and 
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI), which also 
do what their name indicates. These include milnacip-
ran, duloxetine, and venlafaxine, with relative effects on 
5-HT and noradrenergic transporters of 1:1, 1:10, and 
1:30, respectively (Stahl et al., 2005). SSRIs and SNRIs 
have fewer nonspecific actions, and therefore fewer side 
effects, than the tricyclic antidepressants.
Another biological treatment for depression has an 
interesting history. Early in the twentieth century, a phy-
sician named von Meduna noted that psychotic patients 
who were also subject to epileptic seizures showed im-
provement immediately after each attack. He reasoned 
that the violent storm of neural activity in the brain that 
constitutes an epileptic seizure somehow improved the 
patients’ mental condition. He developed a way to pro-
duce seizures by administering a drug, but the proce-
dure was dangerous to the patient. In 1937, Ugo Cerletti, 
an Italian psychiatrist, developed a less dangerous 
method for producing seizures (Cerletti and Bini, 1938). 
He had previously learned that the local slaughterhouse 
applied a jolt of electricity to animals’ heads to stun 
them before killing them. The electricity appeared to 
produce a seizure that resembled an epileptic attack. He 
decided to attempt to use electricity to induce a seizure 
more safely.
Cerletti tried the procedure on dogs and found that 
an electrical shock to the skull did produce a seizure 
and that the animals recovered with no apparent ill ef-
fects. He then used the procedure on humans and 
found it to be safer than the chemical treatment that 
was previously used. As a result of Cerletti’s experiments, 
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) became a common 
treatment for mental illness. Before a person receives 
ECT, he or she is anesthetized and is given a drug simi-
lar to curare, which paralyzes the muscles, preventing 
injuries that might be produced by a convulsion. (Of 
course, the patient is attached to a respirator until the 
effects of this drug wear off.) Electrodes are placed on 
the patient’s scalp (most often to the non-speech-domi-
nant hemisphere, to avoid damaging verbal memories), 
and a jolt of electricity triggers a seizure. Usually, a pa-
tient receives three treatments per week until maximum 
improvement is seen, which usually involves six to twelve 
treatments. The effectiveness of ECT has been estab-
lished by placebo studies, in which some patients are 
anesthetized but not given shocks (Weiner and Krystal, 
1994). Although ECT was originally used for a variety of 
disorders, including schizophrenia, we now know that 
its usefulness is limited to treatment of mania and de-
pression. (See Figure 16.16.)
Antidepressant drug treatment has some adverse 
side effects, including nausea, anxiety, sexual dysfunc-
tion, and weight gain. However, the major problem is 
that, in a substantial percentage of patients, the drug 
fails to relieve their depression. Between 20 and 40 per-
cent of patients with major depressive disorder do not 
show a significant response to initial treatment with an 
antidepressant drug. When patients do not respond, 
physicians will try different drugs. Some of these patients 
do eventually respond, but others do not and exhibit 
treatment-resistant depression. The reason that the list 
x specific serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)  An antidepres-
sant drug that specifically inhibits the reuptake of serotonin 
without affecting the reuptake of other neurotransmitters.
x norepinephrine and serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SNRI)  An 
antidepressant drug that specifically inhibits the reuptake of 
norepinephrine and serotonin without affecting the reuptake of 
other neurotransmitters.
x electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)  A brief electrical shock, 
applied to the head, that results in an electrical seizure; used 
therapeutically to alleviate severe depression.
x treatment-resistant depression  A major depressive disorder 
whose symptoms are not relieved after trials of several different 
treatments.
figure 16.16  A Patient Being Prepared for 
Electroconvulsive Therapy.
(Photo Researchers, Inc.)

	
Major Affective Disorders	
573
of biological treatments presented in the first paragraph 
of this section is so long is because no single treatment 
works for all patients—and for some patients, no treat-
ment works at all. The existence of so many patients with 
treatment-resistant depression has motivated research-
ers to try to develop ways to alleviate the symptoms of 
patients who continue to suffer.
Even when depressed patients respond to treatment 
with antidepressant drugs, they do not do so immedi-
ately; improvement in symptoms is not usually seen be-
fore two to three weeks of drug treatment. In contrast, 
the effects of ECT are more rapid. A few seizures induced 
by ECT can often snap a person out of a deep depression 
within a few days. Remission of symptoms is greater than 
50 percent, but relapse is a common problem 
(Holtzheimer and Mayberg, 2011). Although prolonged 
and excessive use of ECT causes brain damage, resulting 
in long-lasting impairments in memory (Squire, 1974), 
the judicious use of ECT during the interim period be-
fore antidepressant drugs become effective has undoubt-
edly saved the lives of some suicidal patients.
How does ECT exert its antidepressant effect? It has 
been known for a long time that seizures have an anti-
convulsant effect: ECT decreases brain activity and raises 
the seizure threshold of the brain, making it less likely 
for another seizure to occur (Sackeim et al., 1983;  
Nobler et al., 2001). The changes associated with this 
effect may be responsible for reducing the symptoms of 
depression. However, evidence concerning nature of 
the antidepressant effects of ECT is still inconclusive 
(Bolwig, 2011).
Researchers have investigated another procedure 
designed to provide some of the benefits of ECT without 
introducing the risk of cognitive impairments or mem-
ory loss. As we saw in Chapter 5, transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (TMS) is accomplished by applying a strong 
localized magnetic field into the brain by passing an 
electrical current through a coil of wire placed on the 
scalp. The magnetic field induces an electrical current 
in the brain. Several studies suggested that TMS applied 
to the prefrontal cortex reduces the symptoms of de-
pression without producing any apparent negative side 
effects (Padberg and Moller, 2003; Fitzgerald, 2004; 
Kito, Hasegawa, and Koga, 2011). Most studies show a 
response rate of less than 30 percent, and long-term re-
lapse rates appear to be similar to those seen with ECT 
(Holtzheimer and Mayberg, 2011).
As we saw in Chapter 15, direct electrical stimula-
tion of the brain of the subthalamic nucleus provides 
significant relief of the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease. 
Preliminary research also suggests that deep brain stim-
ulation (DBS) may also be a useful therapy for treat-
ment-resistant depression (Mayberg et al., 2005; Lozano 
et al., 2008). Mayberg and her colleagues implanted 
electrodes just below the subgenual anterior cingulate 
cortex (subgenual ACC), a region of the medial pre-
frontal cortex. If you look at a sagittal view of the corpus 
callosum, you will see that the front of this structure 
looks like a bent knee—genu, in Latin. The subgenual 
ACC is located below the “knee” at the front of the cor-
pus callosum. Response to the stimulation began soon, 
and it increased with time. One month after surgery, 35 
percent of the patients showed an improvement in 
symptoms, and 10 percent showed a complete remis-
sion. Six months after surgery, 60 percent showed im-
provement, and 35 percent showed remission.
Deep brain stimulation has also been directed to-
ward the nucleus accumbens. You will recall from Chap-
ter 13 that the release of dopamine in this region plays 
a critical role in reinforcement and the response to 
pleasurable stimuli. In fact, animals will press a lever 
that causes stimulation of this region. Because depres-
sion is characterized by sadness, apathy, and loss of plea-
sure, this region appeared to be a logical target for DBS. 
Bewernick et al. (2010) found that DBS of the nucleus 
accumbens did indeed reduce the symptoms of depres-
sion in 50 percent of treatment-resistant patients who 
had previously shown no response to pharmacological 
treatment, psychotherapy, or ECT.
Another experimental treatment for depression, 
electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve, shows some 
promise of reducing the symptoms of depression 
(Groves and Brown, 2005). Vagus nerve stimulation pro-
vides an indirect form of brain stimulation. It is painless 
and does not elicit seizures—in fact, the procedure was 
originally developed as a treatment to prevent seizures in 
patients with seizure disorders. The stimulation is ac-
complished by means of an implanted device similar to 
the one used for deep brain stimulation, except that the 
stimulating electrodes are attached to the vagus nerve. 
Approximately 80 percent of the axons in the vagus 
nerve are afferent, so electrical stimulation of the vagus 
nerve activates several regions of the brain stem. A re-
view of the literature by Daban et al. (2008) concluded 
that the procedure showed promise in treatment of  
patients with treatment-resistant depression but that fur-
ther double-blind clinical trials are needed to confirm 
its efficacy.
As I mentioned earlier, most antidepressant drugs 
currently in use act as noradrenergic or serotonergic ago-
nists by inhibiting the reuptake of these neurotrans­
mitters. Evidence shows that an NMDA antagonist, 
ketamine, may alleviate the symptoms of treatment- 
x subgenual anterior cingulate cortex (subgenual ACC)  A 
region of the medial prefrontal cortex located below the “knee” at 
the front of the corpus callosum; plays a role in the symptoms of 
depression.

574	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
resistant depression. Research with laboratory animals 
found that injections of ketamine reduced behaviors 
similar to those seen in depressed humans, and imaging 
studies with humans suggested that depressed patients 
showed increased brain levels of glutamate, which sug-
gests that interference with glutamatergic transmission 
might have therapeutic effects (Yilmaz et al., 2002; Sana-
cora et al., 2004). Zarate et al. (2006) administered injec-
tions of ketamine or placebo to patients with treatment-
resistant depression. In less than two hours after the 
ketamine injections, 71 percent of the patients showed 
an improvement in their symptoms, and 29 percent 
showed a remission of their symptoms. This positive re-
sponse persisted for at least one week. (See Figure 16.17.)
Along with ECS, ketamine is a very effective but 
short-term treatment for severe depression. Like ECS, 
the best use of ketamine may be to reduce the likeli-
hood of suicide in severely depressed patients until  
another, slower-acting treatment can take effect. Unfor-
tunately, by definition, people with treatment-resistant 
depression have not responded to other treatments, 
You will recall from the discussion of schizophrenia 
earlier in this chapter that chronic administration of 
ketamine or PCP, another NMDA antagonist, produces 
the symptoms of schizophrenia. Clearly, depression 
cannot be treated with long-term administration of 
large doses of ketamine, but in a test of safety of re-
peated doses of ketamine, ann het Rot et al. (2010) 
found that administration of six infusions of a moder-
ate dose over a period of twelve days produced a strong 
antidepressant effect with only mild or transient side 
effects. The beneficial effects lasted an average of nine-
teen days, with one patient free of symptoms for over 
three months.
The therapeutic effect of lithium, the drug used to 
treat bipolar affective disorders, is very rapid. This drug, 
which is administered in the form of lithium carbonate, 
is most effective in treating the manic phase of a bipolar 
affective disorder; once the mania is eliminated, depres-
sion usually does not follow (Gerbino, Oleshansky, and 
Gershon, 1978; Soares and Gershon, 1998). Some clini-
cians and investigators have referred to lithium as psy-
chiatry’s wonder drug: It does not suppress normal feel-
ings of emotions, but it leaves patients able to feel and 
express joy and sadness in response to events in their 
lives. Similarly, it does not impair intellectual processes; 
many patients have received the drug continuously for 
years without any apparent ill effects (Fieve, 1979). Be-
tween 70 and 80 percent of patients with bipolar disor-
der show a positive response to lithium within a week or 
two (Price and Heninger, 1994).
Lithium does have adverse side effects. The thera-
peutic index (the difference between an effective dose 
and an overdose) is low. Side effects include hand trem-
ors, weight gain, excessive urine production, and thirst. 
Toxic doses produce nausea, diarrhea, motor incoordi-
nation, confusion, and coma. Because of the low thera-
peutic index, patients’ blood levels of lithium must be 
tested regularly to be certain that they do not receive an 
overdose. Unfortunately, some patients are not able to 
tolerate the side effects of lithium, and even more un-
fortunately, lithium is by far the most effective treatment 
for bipolar disorder.
Researchers have found that lithium has many phys-
iological effects, but they have not yet discovered the 
pharmacological effects of lithium that are responsible 
for its ability to eliminate mania (Phiel and Klein, 2001). 
Some researchers suggest that the drug stabilizes the 
population of certain classes of neurotransmitter recep-
tors in the brain (especially serotonin receptors), thus 
preventing wide shifts in neural sensitivity (Jope et al., 
1996). Others have shown that lithium may increase the 
production of neuroprotective proteins that help to pre-
vent cell death (Manji, Moore, and Chen, 2001). In fact, 
Moore et al. (2000) found that four weeks of lithium 
treatment for bipolar disorder increased the volume of 
cerebral gray matter in the patients’ brains, a finding 
that suggests that lithium facilitates neural or glial 
growth. We saw earlier in this chapter that schizophre-
nia can be caused by a mutation of the DISC1 gene, 
which is normally involved in neurogenesis, neuronal 
migration, function of the postsynaptic density in excitatory 
figure 16.17  Treatment of Depression with 
Ketamine
The graph shows the effects of ketamine on symptoms of 
depression.
(Based on data from Zarate et al., 2006.)
Ketamine
Placebo
20
40
60
80
100
40
80
110
230
Days
1
2
3
7
Minutes
Percentage of patients with at least a 
50 percent decrease in depressive symptoms
Time after injection
x lithium  A chemical element; lithium carbonate is used to treat 
bipolar disorder.

	
Major Affective Disorders	
575
neurons, and mitochondrial function. Research indi-
cates that the lithium has an effect on the function of 
DISC1 in the postsynaptic density. Mutation of DISC1 
increases the likelihood of bipolar disorder as well as 
schizophrenia, and lithium appears to compensate for 
the adverse effects of this mutation (Brandon et al., 
2009; Flores et al., 2011).
The Monoamine Hypothesis
The fact that depression can be treated with MAO in-
hibitors and drugs that inhibit the reuptake of mono-
amines suggested the monoamine hypothesis: Depres-
sion is caused by insufficient activity of monoaminergic 
neurons. Because the symptoms of depression are not 
relieved by potent dopamine agonists such as amphet-
amine or cocaine, most investigators have focused their 
research efforts on the other two monoamines: norepi-
nephrine and serotonin.
As we saw earlier in this chapter, the dopamine hy-
pothesis of schizophrenia was suggested by the fact that 
dopamine agonists can produce the symptoms of schizo-
phrenia and dopamine antagonists can reduce them. 
Similarly, the monoamine hypothesis of depression was 
suggested by the fact that monoamine antagonists can 
produce the symptoms of depression and monoamine 
agonists can reduce them. As you will recall from Chap-
ter 4, the drug reserpine blocks the activity of transporters 
that fill synaptic vesicles in monoaminergic terminals 
with the neurotransmitter. Reserpine was previously 
used to lower blood pressure by blocking the release of 
norepinephrine in muscles in the walls of blood vessels, 
which causes these muscles to relax. However, reserpine 
has a serious side effect: By interfering with the release 
of serotonin and norepinephrine in the brain, it can 
cause depression. In fact, in the early years of its use as 
a hypotensive agent, up to 15 percent of the people who 
received it became depressed (Sachar and Baron, 1979). 
As we can see, a monoamine antagonist produces the 
symptoms of depression, and monoamine agonists alle-
viate them.
Delgado et al. (1990) developed an ingenious ap-
proach to study of the role of serotonin in depression: 
the tryptophan depletion procedure. They studied de-
pressed patients who were receiving antidepressant 
medication and were currently feeling well. For one day 
they had the patients follow a low-tryptophan diet (for 
example, salad, corn, cream cheese, and a gelatin des-
sert). Then the next day, the patients drank an amino 
acid “cocktail” that contained no tryptophan. The up-
take of amino acids through the blood–brain barrier is 
accomplished by amino acid transporters. Because the 
patients’ blood level of tryptophan was very low and that 
of the other amino acids was high, very little tryptophan 
found its way into the brain, and the level of tryptophan 
in the brain fell drastically. As you will recall, tryptophan 
is the precursor of 5-HT, or serotonin. Thus, the treat-
ment lowered the level of serotonin in the brain.
Delgado and his colleagues found that the trypto-
phan depletion caused most of the patients to relapse 
back into depression. Then, when they began eating a 
normal diet again, they recovered. These results strongly 
suggest that the therapeutic effect of at least some anti-
depressant drugs depends on the availability of sero-
tonin in the brain. Subsequent studies have confirmed 
these results. These studies also indicate that tryptophan 
depletion has little or no effect on the mood of healthy 
subjects, but it does lower the mood of people with a 
personal history or family history of affective disorders 
(Young and Leyton, 2002; Neumeister et al., 2004).
Most investigators believe that the simple mono-
amine hypothesis—that depression is caused by low lev-
els of norepinephrine or serotonin—is just that: too 
simple. The effects of tryptophan depletion certainly 
suggest that serotonin plays a role in depression, but 
depletion causes depression only in people with a per-
sonal or family history of depression. An acute decrease 
in serotonergic activity in healthy people with no family 
history of depression has no effect on mood. Thus, there 
appear to be physiological differences in the brains of 
the vulnerable people. Also, although SSRIs and SNRIs 
increase the level of 5-HT or norepinephrine in the 
brain very rapidly, the drugs do not relieve the symp-
toms of depression until they have been taken for sev-
eral weeks. This fact suggests that something other than 
a simple increase in monoaminergic activity is responsi-
ble for the normalization of mood. Many investigators 
believe that the increased extracellular levels of mono-
amines produced by administration of antidepressant 
drugs begin a chain of events that eventually produce 
changes in the brain that are ultimately responsible for 
antidepressant effect. The nature of this chain of events 
is still unknown.
Role of the 5-HT Transporter
Several studies have accumulated evidence that impli-
cates the serotonin transporter in depression. A portion 
of the gene—the promoter region—for the 5-HT transporter 
(5-HTT) comes in two forms, short and long. A longitudi-
nal study by Caspi et al. (2003) followed 847 people over 
a period of more than twenty years, starting at three years 
x monoamine hypothesis  A hypothesis that states that 
depression is caused by a low level of activity of one or more 
monoaminergic synapses.
x tryptophan depletion procedure  A procedure involving a 
low-tryptophan diet and a tryptophan-free amino acid “cocktail” 
that lowers brain tryptophan and consequently decreases the 
synthesis of 5-HT.

576	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
of age, and recorded the occurrence of stressful events in 
their lives, including abuse during childhood, romantic 
disasters, bereavements, illnesses, and job crises. The in-
vestigators found that the probability of major depression 
and suicidality increased with the number of stressful life 
events the people had experienced. Moreover, the in-
crease was much greater for people with one or two cop-
ies of the short alleles for the 5-HTT promoter. This study 
showed evidence of an interaction between environment 
and genetics. (See Figure 16.18.)
The results of many other studies suggested that the 
5-HTT promoter played an important role in the devel-
opment of depression. For example, Rausch et al. (2002) 
found that depressed people with two long alleles for 
this gene were more likely to respond to treatment with 
an antidepressant drug than were those with one or two 
short alleles. In fact, people with two long alleles were 
even more likely to respond to the placebo. A study by 
Lee et al. (2004) found that depressed people with two 
long alleles who were treated with antidepressant drugs 
had a much better long-term outcome (up to three 
years) than did people with one or two short alleles. 
Neumeister et al. (2002) found that tryptophan deple-
tion was more likely to produce symptoms of depression 
in people with one or two short alleles.
Unfortunately, several meta-analyses of the studies in-
vestigating a possible role of the 5-HTT promoter in de-
pression have concluded that, although some studies have 
found positive effects, when the results of all published 
studies are combined, no significant effects emerged 
(Risch et al., 2009; Taylor, Sen, and Bhagwagar, 2010; 
Vovoamo et al., 2010). Until further research shows other-
wise, it appears that a role of the 5-HTT promoter in de-
pression is unproven.
Role of the Frontal Cortex
Mayberg and her colleagues (Mayberg et al., 2005; May-
berg, 2009; Holtzheimer and Mayberg, 2011) suggest 
that the frontal cortex plays a critical role in develop-
ment of depression. In particular, they hypothesize that 
the subgenual ACC serves as an important focal point in 
a network of brain regions that are involved in the regu-
lation of mood and that a decrease in the activity of this 
region is consistently seen after successful antidepres-
sant treatment.
As we saw earlier, deep brain stimulation targeted at 
the subgenual ACC has been found to provide relief of 
depressive symptoms. In fact, a reliable finding in neuro-
imaging studies of depressed patients is hyperactivity of 
this region, along with decreased activity in other regions 
of the frontal cortex, including the dorsolateral PFC, the 
ventrolateral PFC, the ventromedial PFC, and the orbito-
frontal cortex (Mayberg, 2009). Studies have shown that 
a variety of successful antidepressant treatments reliably 
decrease the activity of the subgenual ACC and, usually, 
increase the activity of other regions of the frontal cortex.
Figure 16.19 shows functional imaging scans of pa-
tients with treatment-resistant depression taken before 
deep brain stimulation of the subgenual ACC (a), after 
figure 16.18  Stressful Life Events, 5-HTT, and Depression
The graph shows the probability of major depression and suicide ideation or attempts 
as a function of number of previous stressful life events of people with two long alleles 
(L/L), one short allele (S/L), or two short alleles (S/S) of the promoter region of the 5-HT 
transporter gene.
(Based on data from Caspi et al., 2003.)
0
1
2
3
4
0
.10
.20
.30
.40
.50
Probability of major
depression episode
S/S
S/L
L/L
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
Number of stressful life events
Number of stressful life events
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
Probability of suicide
ideation/attempt
S/S
S/L
L/L
(b)

	
Major Affective Disorders	
577
three months of DBS (b), and after six months of DBS 
(c). Increases are shown in red, and decreases are shown 
in blue. As you can see, the subgenual ACC initially was 
hyperactive, but after DBS successfully reduced symp-
toms of depression, this region decreased its activity. 
The responses are redrawn from the scans published in 
Mayberg et al. (2005) on a drawing of a midsagittal view 
of the brain. Changes in activity that were seen in more 
lateral regions of the prefrontal cortex are not shown. 
(See Figure 16.19.)
Figure 16.20 shows the results of functional imaging 
scans of the medial frontal region of depressed patients 
who were successfully treated with a variety of treat-
ments, including DBS, transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(TMS) of the prefrontal cortex, ECT, vagus nerve stimu-
lation (VNS), and administration of an SSRI, an SNRI, 
and a placebo. Successful treatment led to decreased 
activity in the subgenual ACC. As in Figure 16.19, in-
creases in activity after successful treatment are shown in 
red; decreases are shown in blue. (See Figure 16.20.)
Why does successful treatment of the symptoms of 
depression appear to be linked to decreased activity in 
the subgenual ACC and increased activity in regions of 
the prefrontal cortex? As we just saw, the subgenual 
ACC is reciprocally connected with several regions of 
the prefrontal cortex. It is also connected with the amyg-
dala, hippocampus, and nucleus accumbens. As we saw 
in Chapter 11, the prefrontal cortex plays an important 
role in inhibition of the amygdala, which is involved in 
the acquisition and expression of negative emotional 
responses such as fear. Thus, successful treatment of the 
symptoms of depression, which decreases the activity of 
the subgenual ACC, may result in decreased activity of 
the amygdala through direct connections between these 
two structures and through indirect connections via the 
prefrontal cortex. The precise role of the subgenual 
ACC will be elucidated only through further research.
Role of Neurogenesis
As we saw in Chapter 3 and Chapter 13, neurogenesis 
can take place in the dentate gyrus—a region of the hip-
pocampal formation—in the adult brain. Several studies 
with laboratory animals have shown that stressful experi-
ences that produce the symptoms of depression suppress 
hippocampal neurogenesis, and the administration of 
antidepressant treatments, including MAO inhibitors, 
tricyclic antidepressants, SSRIs, ECT, and lithium, in-
creases neurogenesis. In addition, the delay in the action 
of antidepressant treatments is about the same length as 
the time it takes for newborn neurons to mature. More-
over, if neurogenesis is suppressed by a low-level dose of 
X-radiation, antidepressant drugs lose their effective-
ness. (See Samuels and Hen, 2011, for a review.)
There is currently no way to measure the rate of 
neurogenesis in the human brain. So far, all the ­evidence 
figure 16.19  Effects of Deep Brain Stimulation of the Subgenual ACC
Mayberg et al. (2005) implanted stimulating electrodes in the subgenual ACC of 
patients with treatment-resistant depression. The figure shows functional imaging scans 
of the patients (a) before DBS, (b) after three months of DBS, and (c) after six months of 
DBS. Increased activity is shown in red; decreased activity is shown in blue. The 
subgenual ACC initially showed increased activity, which decreased during the course 
of stimulation, and also reduced the symptoms of depression.
(From Mayberg, H. S., Lozano, A. M., Voon, V., et al. Neuron, 2005, 45, 651–660. Reprinted with permission.)
Anterior
cingulate cortex
Subgenual ACC
Subgenual ACC
Medial frontal
cortex
Medial frontal
cortex
Orbitofrontal
cortex
Anterior cingulate
cortex
(a)
(b)
(c)

578	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
about human neurogenesis has been by extrapolation 
from studies with laboratory animals. However, a study 
by Pereira et al. (2007) used an MRI procedure that 
permitted them to estimate the blood volume of particu-
lar regions of the hippocampal formation in both mice 
and humans. They found that exercise (running wheels 
for the mice, an aerobic exercise regimen for humans) 
increased the blood volume of the dentate gyrus—the 
region where neurogenesis takes place—in both spe-
cies. (As we will see in the next section of this chapter, 
exercise is an effective treatment for depression.) Histo-
logical procedures verified that increased neurogenesis 
in the mouse brain correlated with the increased blood 
volume, which strongly supports the conclusion that the 
exercise induces neurogenesis in the human brain, as 
well. (See Figure 16.21.)
Role of Circadian Rhythms
One of the most prominent symptoms of depression is 
disordered sleep. The sleep of people with depression 
tends to be shallow; slow-wave delta sleep (stages 3 and 4) 
is reduced, and stage 1 is increased. Sleep is fragmented; 
people tend to awaken frequently, especially toward the 
morning. In addition, REM sleep occurs earlier, the first 
half of the night contains a higher proportion of REM 
periods, and REM sleep contains an increased number 
of rapid eye movements (Kupfer, 1976; Vogel et al., 
1980). (See Figure 16.22.)
Evidence also suggests that up to 90 percent of peo-
ple who experience an episode of depression report 
changes in their patterns of sleep and usually have dif-
ficulty initiating and maintaining a good night’s sleep 
(Wulff et al., 2010). In addition, persistent insomnia in 
a person with a history of depressive episodes increases 
the risk of relapsing into another one, and sleep disrup-
tion, experienced by new mothers, increases the risk of 
post-partum depression (Posmontier, 2008).
Rem Sleep Deprivation
One of the most effective antidepressant treatments is 
sleep deprivation, either total or selective. Selective de-
privation of REM sleep, accomplished by monitoring 
people’s EEG and awakening them whenever they show 
figure 16.20  Decreased Activation of the Subgenual ACC After a Variety  
of Successful Treatments for Depression
The figure shows a standard drawing of an anterior midsagittal view of the human brain 
with tracings of regions of increased (red) or decreased (blue) activation seen in 
functional imaging studies of brain responses to successful treatment for the symptoms 
of depression. Treatment with (a) DBS, (b) TMS, (c) VNS, (d) SSRI, (e) SNRI, (f) placebo.
[Tracings of brain activity from (a) Mayberg et al. (2005), (b) Kito et al. (2011), (c) Pardo et al. (2008), (d) Mayberg et al. 
(2002), (e) Kennedy et al. (2007), (f) Mayberg et al. (2002).]
(a) DBS
(b) TMS
(c) VNS
(d) SSRI
(e) SNRI
(f) Placebo

	
Major Affective Disorders	
579
signs of REM sleep, alleviates depression (Vogel et al., 
1975; Vogel et al., 1990). The therapeutic effect, like that 
of the antidepressant medications, occurs slowly, over the 
course of several weeks. Some patients show long-term 
improvement even after the deprivation is discontinued; 
thus, it is a practical as well as an effective treatment. In 
addition, regardless of their specific pharmacological  
effects, other treatments for depression suppress REM 
sleep, delaying its onset and decreasing its duration 
(Scherschlicht et al., 1982; Vogel et al., 1990; Grunhaus  
et al., 1997; Thase, 2000). These facts suggest that REM 
sleep and mood might somehow be causally related. 
These results suggest that an important effect of successful 
antidepressant treatment may be to suppress REM sleep, 
and the changes in mood may be a result of this suppres-
sion. However, at least one antidepressant drug has been 
shown in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study not to 
suppress REM sleep (Mayers and Baldwin, 2005). Thus, 
suppression of REM sleep cannot be the only way in which 
antidepressant drugs work.
Slow-Wave Sleep Deprivation
Another form of selective sleep deprivation, slow-wave 
sleep deprivation (SWS deprivation) effectively reduces 
depressive symptoms in some patients. A trial study by 
Landsness et al. (2011) had people with major depres-
sive disorder sleep in a laboratory equipped with EEG 
monitoring equipment. Whenever slow waves appeared 
in a person’s EEG, the investigators presented sounds 
that suppressed the slow waves without waking the per-
son up. The results were promising: Self-rated symptoms 
of depression decreased in most of the patients. (See 
Figure 16.23.) Although the investigators did not directly 
figure 16.21  Exercise and Neurogenesis
The scans show the effect of a program of aerobic 
exercise on the blood volume of regions of the human 
hippocampal formation. This measure serves as an 
indirect measure of neurogenesis. (a) Subregions of the 
hippocampus. EC = entorhinal cortex, DG = dentate 
gyrus, SUB = subiculum. (b) Regional blood volume. 
“Hotter” colors indicate increased blood volume.
(From Pereira, A. C., Huddleston, D. E., Brickman, A. M., et al. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2007, 104, 5638–5643. Reprinted with permission.)
(a)
(b)
EC
DG
CA1
SUB
figure 16.22  Sleep and Depression
The diagram illustrates patterns of the stages of sleep of a 
normal subject and of a patient with major depression. 
Note the reduced sleep latency, reduced REM latency, 
reduction in slow-wave sleep (stages 3 and 4), and general 
fragmentation of sleep (arrows) in the depressed patient.
(From Gillin, J. C., and Borbély, A. A. Trends in Neurosciences, 1985, 8, 537–542. 
Reprinted with permission.)
1
1
2
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Normal Subject
Depressed Patient
REM
period
REM
latency
Time (h)
Sleep
latency
figure 16.23  Slow-Wave Sleep Deprivation
The diagram shows self ratings of depressive symptoms of 
patients with major depressive disorder before and after a 
night’s sleep during which EEG slow-waves were 
suppressed with an acoustic stimulus. Each line indicates the 
ratings of a single subject. Arrows indicate group medians.
(Based on data from Landsness et al., 2001.)
28
24
20
16
12
8
Self ratings of depressive symptoms
Before SWS
deprivation
After SWS
deprivation

580	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
Why do only some people profit from sleep depriva-
tion? This question has not yet been answered, but sev-
eral studies have shown that it is possible to predict who 
will profit and who will not (Riemann, Wiegand, and 
Berger, 1991; Haug, 1992; Wirz-Justice and Van den 
Hoofdakker, 1999). In general, depressed patients whose 
mood remains stable will probably not benefit from sleep 
depression, whereas those whose mood fluctuates prob-
ably will. The patients who are most likely to respond are 
those who feel depressed in the morning but then gradu-
ally feel better as the day progresses. In these people, 
sleep deprivation appears to prevent the depressogenic 
effects of sleep from taking place and simply permits the 
trend to continue. If you examine Figure 16.24, you can 
see that the responders were already feeling better by the 
end of the day. This improvement continued through 
the sleepless night and during the following day. The 
next night they were permitted to sleep normally, and 
their depression was back the following morning. As Wu 
and Bunney note, these data are consistent with the hy-
pothesis that sleep produces a substance with a depres-
sogenic effect. (Look again at Figure 16.24.)
Although total sleep deprivation is not a practical 
method for treating depression (it is obviously impos-
sible to keep people awake indefinitely), several studies 
suggest that partial sleep deprivation can hasten the 
beneficial effects of antidepressant drugs. For example, 
Leibenluft et al. (1993) found that depriving treatment-
resistant patients of sleep either early or late in the 
night facilitated treatment with antidepressant medica-
tion. Some investigators have found that intermittent to-
tal sleep deprivation (say, twice a week for four weeks) 
can have beneficial results (Papadimitriou et al., 1993).
Role of Zeitgebers
Yet another phenomenon relates depression to sleep 
and waking—or, more specifically, to the mechanisms 
that are responsible for circadian rhythms. Some people 
become depressed during the winter season, when days 
are short and nights are long (Rosenthal et al., 1984). 
The symptoms of this form of depression, called sea-
sonal affective disorder (SAD), are somewhat different 
from those of major depression; both forms include 
lethargy and sleep disturbances, but seasonal depression 
includes a craving for carbohydrates and an accompany-
ing weight gain. (As you will recall, people with major 
depression tend to lose their appetite.)
SAD, like MDD and bipolar disorder, appears to 
have a genetic basis. In a study of 6,439 adult twins, Mad-
den et al. (1996) found that SAD ran in families, and 
they estimated that at least 29 percent of the variance in 
manipulate REM sleep, SWS deprivation also affected 
the percentage of total sleep time spent in REM sleep. 
In fact, decreases in REM sleep were positively corre-
lated with decreases in ratings of depressive symptoms. 
Thus, it is possible that the beneficial results of SWS 
deprivation were actually produced by suppression of 
REM sleep. However, REM sleep deprivation usually 
produces a therapeutic effect over the course of several 
weeks, and the benefits in this study occurred after just 
one night of SWS deprivation. This promising approach 
appears to deserve further study.
Total Sleep Deprivation
Total sleep deprivation also has an antidepressant  
effect. Unlike specific deprivation of REM sleep, which 
takes several weeks to reduce depression, total sleep  
deprivation produces immediate effects (Wu and Bunney,  
1990). Typically, the depression is lifted by the sleep 
deprivation but returns the next day, after a normal 
night’s sleep. In fact, ketamine treatment and total sleep 
deprivation are the only treatments that produce an im-
mediate (but transient) effect. Wu and Bunney suggest 
that, during sleep, the brain produces a chemical that 
has a depressogenic effect in susceptible people. During 
waking, this substance is gradually metabolized and 
hence inactivated. Some of the evidence for this hypoth-
esis is presented in Figure 16.24. The data are taken 
from eight different studies (cited by Wu and Bunney, 
1990) and show self-ratings of depression of people who 
did and did not respond to sleep deprivation. Total 
sleep deprivation improves the mood of patients with 
major depression approximately two-thirds of the time. 
(See Figure 16.24.)
figure 16.24  Antidepressant Effects of Sleep 
Deprivation
The graph shows the mean mood rating of responding 
and nonresponding patients deprived of one night’s 
sleep as a function of the time of day.
(Based on data from Wu and Bunney, 1990.)
90
60
80
70
9
1
5
9
1
5
9
1
5
9
9
1
Normal
Depressed
Mood Rating
Night of sleep
deprivation
Recovery
night sleep
Nonresponders
Responders
A.M. P.M.
P.M.
A.M.
A.M.
Hours
x seasonal affective disorder (SAD)  A mood disorder charac-
terized by depression, lethargy, sleep disturbances, and craving 
for carbohydrates during the winter season when days are short.

	
Major Affective Disorders	
581
of the hypothalamus. Light serves as a zeitgeber; that is, it 
synchronizes the activity of the biological clock to the 
day–night cycle. One possibility is that people with SAD 
require a stronger-than-normal zeitgeber to reset their 
biological clock. According to Lewy et al. (2006), SAD is 
caused by a mismatch between cycles of sleep and cycles 
of melatonin secretion. Normally, secretion of melato-
nin begins in the evening, before people go to sleep. In 
fact, the time between the onset of melatonin secretion 
and the midpoint of sleep (halfway between falling 
asleep and waking up in the morning) is approximately 
six hours. People with SAD most often show a phase delay 
between cycles of melatonin and sleep; that is, the time 
interval between the onset of melatonin secretion and 
the midpoint of sleep is more than six hours. Exposure 
to bright light in the morning or administration of mel-
atonin late in the afternoon (or, preferably, both treat-
ments) advances the circadian cycle controlled by the 
biological clock in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. (These 
cycles were discussed in Chapter 9.) Those people with 
SAD who show a phase advance in their cycles can best be 
treated with exposure to bright light in the evening and 
administration of melatonin in the morning. (See Figure 
16.26.) By the way, phototherapy has been found to help 
patients with major depressive disorder, especially in 
conjunction with administration of antidepressant drugs 
(Terman, 2007).
seasonal mood disorders could be attributed to genetic 
factors. One of the genetic factors that contribute to 
susceptibility to SAD is a particular allele of the gene 
responsible for the production of melanopsin, the reti-
nal photopigment that detects the presence of light and 
synchronizes circadian rhythms (Wulff et al., 2010).
González and Aston-Jones (2006; 2008) found that 
rats that spent six weeks in total darkness exhibited be-
havioral symptoms of depression in an animal model of 
this disorder. In addition, the investigators found in-
creased apoptosis (programmed cell death) in norad-
renergic neurons of the locus coeruleus, dopaminergic 
neurons of the ventral tegmental area, and serotonergic 
neurons of the raphe nuclei. In addition, they observed 
fewer NE, DA, and 5-HT terminals in the prefrontal 
cortex. (You will recall from Chapter 9 that these mono-
aminergic regions play an important role in sleep and 
waking.) Administration of desipramine, an antidepres-
sant drug, decreased both the behavioral and anatomi-
cal signs of depression. Perhaps, the authors note, the 
anatomical changes they observed are responsible for 
the depressant effects of prolonged exposure to limited 
amounts of light. (See Figure 16.25.)
SAD can be treated by phototherapy: exposing peo-
ple to bright light for several hours a day (Rosenthal et 
al., 1985; Stinson and Thompson, 1990). As you will re-
call, circadian rhythms of sleep and wakefulness are 
controlled by the activity of the suprachiasmatic nucleus 
figure 16.25  Effects of Living in Total Darkness 
on Monoaminergic Systems
Rats that spent 6 weeks in total darkness showed 
apoptosis (cell death) in the NE neurons of the locus 
coeruleus, DA neurons of the ventral tegmental area, and 
5-HT neurons of the raphe nuclei. The graph shows the 
number of terminal buttons in the prefrontal cortex from 
neurons in each of these areas after the 6-week period.
[Based on data from Gonzalez and Aston-Jones (2006, 2008).]
2
0
6
8
4
Mean number of terminals/um2
Type of terminal button
DA
NE
5-HT
Normal light–dark cycle
Total darkness
x phototherapy  Treatment of seasonal affective disorder by 
daily exposure to bright light.
figure 16.26  Cycles of Sleep and Melatonin 
Secretion
Normally, melatonin secretion begins in the evening, 
approximately six hours before the midpoint of sleep. 
Most people with seasonal affective disorder begin 
secreting melatonin earlier, showing a phase delay 
between cycles of melatonin and sleep. A few people 
with this disorder show a phase advance, with melatonin 
secretion beginning at a later time.
(Based on data from Lewy et al., 2006.)
6 hr
Sleep (8 hr)
Midpoint
of sleep
Melatonin
Onset of melatonin
secretion
Time

582	
Chapter 16  Schizophrenia and the Affective Disorders
Section Summary
Major Affective Disorders
The major affective disorders include bipolar disorder, 
with its cyclical episodes of mania and depression, 
and major depressive disorder. Heritability studies 
suggest that genetic anomalies are at least partly 
responsible for these disorders. MDD has been 
treated by several established or experimental bio-
logical treatments: MAO inhibitors, drugs that block 
the reuptake of norepinephrine and serotonin (tricy-
clic antidepressants, SSRIs, and SNRIs), ECT, TMS, 
deep brain stimulation, vagus nerve stimulation, and 
sleep deprivation. Bipolar disorder can be successfully 
treated by lithium salts and anticonvulsant drugs. 
Lithium appears to stabilize neural transmission, espe-
cially in serotonin-secreting neurons. It also appears 
to protect neurons from damage and perhaps facili-
tate their repair.
The therapeutic effect of noradrenergic and sero-
tonergic agonists and the depressant effect of reser-
pine, a monoaminergic antagonist, suggested the 
monoamine hypothesis of depression: that depression 
is caused by insufficient activity of monoaminergic 
neurons. Depletion of tryptophan (the precursor of 
5-HT) in the brain causes a recurrence of depressive 
symptoms in depressed patients who are in remission, 
which lends further support to the conclusion that 
5-HT plays a role in mood. However, although SSRIs 
have an immediate effect on serotonergic transmis-
sion in the brain, they do not relieve the symptoms of 
depression for several weeks, so the simple mono-
amine hypothesis appears not to be correct.
Functional-imaging studies found increased  
activity in the amygdala and decreased activity in the 
subgenual ACC. Stressful life experiences increase 
the likelihood of depression in people with one or 
two short alleles of the 5-HT transporter promoter 
gene, and a better response to antidepressant treat-
ment is seen in depressed people with two long 
alleles. Structural and functional-imaging studies have 
found a decrease in the volume of the amygdala and 
subgenual ACC and evidence for a weakened nega-
tive feedback loop from the amygdala to the subgen-
ual ACC to the dorsal ACC back to the amygdala. 
Presumably, these changes occur because increased 
serotonergic activity associated with the presence of 
short alleles for the 5-HTT promoter affects prenatal 
brain development. Stressful experiences suppress 
hippocampal neurogenesis, and antidepressant treat-
ments increase it. In addition, the effects of antide-
pressant treatments are abolished by suppression of 
neurogenesis.
Sleep disturbances are characteristic of affective 
disorders. In fact, total sleep deprivation rapidly (but 
temporarily) reduces depression in many people, and 
selective deprivation of REM sleep does so slowly 
(but more lastingly). In addition, almost all effective 
antidepressant treatments suppress REM sleep. A 
specific form of depression, seasonal affective disor-
der, can be treated by exposure to bright light. 
Clearly, the mood disorders are somehow linked to 
biological rhythms.
 Thought Question
A television commentator, talking in particular about 
the suicide of a young pop star and in general about 
unhappy youth, asked with exasperation, “What 
would all these young people be doing if they had 
real problems like a Depression, World War II, or 
Vietnam?” People with severe depression often try to 
hide their pain because they fear that others will scoff 
at them and say that they have nothing to feel 
unhappy about. If depression is caused by abnormal 
brain functioning, are these remarks justified? How 
would you feel if you were severely depressed and 
people close to you berated you for feeling so sad 
and told you to snap out of it and quit feeling sorry 
for yourself? Do you think the expression of attitudes 
like this would decrease the likelihood of a depressed 
person committing suicide?
Phototherapy is safe and effective treatment for 
SAD. According to a study by Wirz-Justice et al. (1996), 
a special apparatus is not even needed. The authors 
found that a one-hour walk outside each morning re-
duced the symptoms of SAD. They noted that even on 
an overcast winter day, the early morning sky provides 
considerably more illumination than normal indoor 
artificial lighting, so a walk outside increases a per-
son’s exposure to light. The exercise helps, too. Many 
studies (for example, Dunn et al., 2005) have shown 
that a program of exercise improves the symptoms of 
depression.

	
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab	
583
5.  Discuss the relationship between the prefrontal cor-
tex in the positive and negative symptoms of schizo-
phrenia.
6.  Describe the two major affective disorders, the heritabil-
ity of these diseases, and their physiological treatments.
7.  Summarize the monoamine hypothesis of depression, 
evidence for brain abnormalities, and evidence con-
cerning the role of the subgenual ACC in depression.
8.  Explain the role of circadian and seasonal rhythms in 
affective disorders: the effects of REM sleep depriva-
tion, slow-wave sleep deprivation, total sleep depri-
vation, and seasonal affective disorder.
1.  Describe the symptoms of schizophrenia and discuss 
the evidence that some forms of schizophrenia are 
heritable.
2.  Discuss drugs that alleviate or produce the positive 
symptoms of schizophrenia; discuss research into the 
nature of a possible dopamine abnormality in the 
brains of schizophrenics.
3.  Discuss evidence based on population studies that 
the negative symptoms of schizophrenia may result 
from brain damage.
4.  Discuss direct evidence that schizophrenia is associ-
ated with brain damage.
Review Questions
Study and Review on MyPsychLab
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 The Nervous System 
Schizophrenia is arguably the psychopathology for which the neural bases have 
been best characterized. Many neural systems appear to be disrupted in patients 
with schizophrenia. Hypoactivity in the frontal cortex appears to be a cause of 
many of the symptoms of schizophrenia. The Nervous System module of the 
virtual brain shows this brain region.

584	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
Anxiety Disorders, Autistic 
Disorder, Attention-Deficit/
Hyperactivity Disorder, and 
Stress Disorders
Outline
17
 Anxiety Disorders
Panic Disorder, Generalized 
Anxiety Disorder, and Social 
Anxiety Disorder
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Section Summary
 Autistic Disorder
Description
Possible Causes
Section Summary
 Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity 
Disorder
Description
Possible Causes
Section Summary
 Stress Disorders
Physiology of the Stress 
Response
Health Effects of  
Long-Term Stress
Effects of Stress on the Brain
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Psychoneuroimmunology
Section Summary
chapter

In 1935 the report of an experiment with a chimpanzee 
triggered events whose repercussions are still being felt 
today. Jacobsen, Wolfe, and Jackson (1935) tested some 
chimpanzees on a behavioral task that requires the animal 
to remain quiet and remember the location of food that the 
experimenter has placed behind a screen. One animal, 
Becky, displayed a violent emotional reaction whenever she 
made an error while performing this task. “[When] the 
experimenter lowered . . . the opaque door to exclude the 
animal’s view of the cups, she immediately flew into a 
temper tantrum, rolled on the floor, defecated, and 
urinated. After a few such reactions during the training 
period, the animal would make no further responses.” After 
the chimpanzee’s frontal lobes were removed, she became 
a model of good comportment. The chimpanzee “offered 
its usual friendly greeting, and eagerly ran from its living 
quarters to the transfer cage, and in turn went properly to 
the experimental cage. . . . If the animal made a mistake, it 
showed no evidence of emotional disturbance but quietly 
awaited the loading of the cups for the next trial” (Jacobsen, 
Wolfe, and Jackson, 1935, pp. 9–10).
These findings were reported at a scientific meeting in 
1935, which was attended by Egas Moniz, a Portuguese 
neuropsychiatrist. He heard the report by Jacobsen and his 
colleagues and also one by Brickner (1936), which indi-
cated that radical removal of the frontal lobes in a human 
patient (performed because of a tumor) did not appear to 
produce intellectual impairment; therefore, people could 
presumably get along without their frontal lobes. These 
two reports suggested to Moniz that “if frontal-lobe 
removal . . . eliminates frustrational behavior, why would it 
not be feasible to relieve anxiety states in man by surgical 
means?” (Fulton, 1949, pp. 63–64). In fact, Moniz per-
suaded a neurosurgeon to do so, and approximately one 
hundred operations were eventually performed under his 
supervision. (In 1949, Moniz received the Nobel Prize for 
the development of this procedure.)
I wrote that the repercussions of the 1935 meeting are 
still being felt today. Since that time, tens of thousands of 
people have received prefrontal lobotomies, primarily to 
reduce symptoms of emotional distress, and many of these 
people are still alive. At first, the medical community 
welcomed the procedure because it provided their patients 
with relief from emotional anguish. Only after many years 
were careful studies performed on the side effects of the 
procedure. These studies showed that although patients 
did perform well on standard tests of intellectual ability, 
they showed serious changes in personality, becoming 
irresponsible and childish. They also lost the ability to carry 
out plans, and most were unemployable. And although 
pathological emotional reactions were eliminated, so were 
normal ones. Because of these findings and because of the 
discovery of drugs and therapeutic methods that relieve 
the patients’ symptoms without producing such drastic 
side effects, neurosurgeons eventually abandoned the 
prefrontal lobotomy procedure (Valenstein, 1986).
I should point out that the prefrontal lobotomies that 
were performed under Moniz’s supervision, and by the 
neurosurgeons who followed, were not as drastic as the 
surgery performed by Jacobsen and his colleagues on 
Becky, the chimpanzee. In fact, no brain tissue was 
removed. Instead, the surgeons introduced various kinds of 
cutting devices into the frontal lobes and severed white 
matter (bundles of axons). One rather gruesome procedure 
did not even require an operating room; it could be 
performed in a physician’s office. A transorbital leucotome, 
shaped like an ice pick, was introduced into the brain by 
passing it beneath the upper eyelid until the point reached 
the orbital bone above the eye. The instrument was hit 
with a mallet, driving it through the bone into the brain. 
The end was then swept back and forth so that it cut 
through the white matter. The patient often left the office 
within an hour.
Many physicians objected to the “ice pick” proce-
dure because it was done blind (that is, the surgeon 
could not see just where the blade of the leucotome was 
located) and because it produced more damage than was 
necessary. Also, the fact that it was so easy and left no 
external signs other than a pair of black eyes may have 
tempted its practitioners to perform it too casually. In 
fact, at least 2,500 patients underwent this form of 
surgery (Valenstein, 1986).
What we know today about the effects of prefrontal 
lobotomy—whether done transorbitally or by more 
conventional means—tells us that such radical surgery 
should never have been performed. For too long the 
harmful side effects were ignored. As we will see later in 
this chapter, neurosurgeons developed a much restricted 
version of this surgery to treat intractable obsessive-com-
pulsive disorder that reduced the symptoms without 
producing such harmful side effects. With the development 
of deep brain stimulation, which does not produce 
irreversible damage, even these procedures are rarely 
performed nowadays.

586	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
Panic attacks include many physical symptoms, such 
as shortness of breath, clammy sweat, irregularities in 
heartbeat, dizziness, faintness, and feelings of unreality. 
The victim of a panic attack often feels that he or she is 
going to die and often seeks help in a hospital emer-
gency room. Between panic attacks many people with 
panic disorder suffer from anticipatory anxiety—the 
fear that another panic attack will strike them. This an-
ticipatory anxiety often leads to the development of a 
serious phobic disorder: agoraphobia (agora means “open 
space”). Agoraphobia can be severely disabling; some 
people with this disorder have stayed inside their homes 
for years, afraid to venture outside where they might 
have a panic attack in public.
The primary characteristics of generalized anxiety 
disorder are excessive anxiety and worry, difficulty in 
controlling these symptoms, and clinically significant 
signs of distress and disruption of their lives. The preva-
lence of generalized anxiety disorder is approximately  
3 percent, and the incidence is approximately two times 
greater in women than in men.
Social anxiety disorder (also called social phobia) is a 
persistent, excessive fear of being exposed to the scru-
tiny of other people that leads to avoidance of social 
situations in which the person is called on to perform 
(such as speaking or performing in public). If such situ-
ations are unavoidable, the person experiences intense 
anxiety and distress. The prevalence of social anxiety 
disorder, which is equally likely in men and women, is 
approximately 5 percent.
Possible Causes
Family studies and twin studies indicate that panic disor-
der, generalized anxiety disorder, and social anxiety dis-
order all have a hereditary component (Hettema, Neale, 
and Kendler, 2001; Merikangas and Low, 2005). Panic 
attacks can be triggered in people with a history of panic 
N
ot too many years ago, the first three topics dis-
cussed in this chapter—the anxiety disorders, 
autism, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disor-
der—would not have been covered in a book concerned 
with the physiology of behavior. (The importance of 
physiology to the fourth topic, stress, has long been rec-
ognized.) The anxiety disorders, autism, and attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder were believed to be 
learned, primarily from parents who did a bad job raising 
their children. Although there was always at least some 
support for the suggestion that serious psychoses such as 
schizophrenia had a biological basis, other mental disor-
ders were almost universally believed to be psychogenic 
in origin—that is, produced by “psychological” factors.
The tide has turned (or the pendulum has swung 
back, if you prefer that metaphor). Certainly, a person’s 
family environment, social class, economic status, and 
similar factors affect the likelihood that he or she will 
develop a mental disorder and may help or hinder re-
covery. But physiological factors, including inherited 
ones and those that adversely affect development or 
damage the brain, play an important role too.
Anxiety Disorders
As we saw in Chapter 16, the affective disorders are char-
acterized by unrealistic extremes of emotion: depres-
sion or elation (mania). The anxiety disorders are char-
acterized by unrealistic, unfounded fear and anxiety. 
With a lifetime prevalence of approximately 28 percent, 
anxiety disorders are the most common psychiatric dis-
orders. In addition, anxiety disorders contribute to the 
occurrence of depressive and substance abuse disorders 
(Tye et al., 2011). This section describes three of the 
anxiety disorders that appear to have biological causes: 
panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and social 
anxiety disorder. Although obsessive-compulsive disor-
der has traditionally been classified as an anxiety disor-
der, it has different symptoms from the other three dis-
orders and involves different brain regions, so it is 
discussed separately.
Panic Disorder, Generalized Anxiety 
Disorder, and Social Anxiety Disorder
Description
People with panic disorder suffer from episodic attacks 
of acute anxiety—periods of acute and unremitting ter-
ror that grip them for variable lengths of time, from a 
few seconds to a few hours. The prevalence of this disor-
der is approximately 3–5 percent (Schumacher et al., 
2011). Women appear to be approximately twice as 
likely as men to suffer from panic disorder.
x anxiety disorder  A psychological disorder characterized by 
tension, overactivity of the autonomic nervous system, expectation 
of an impending disaster, and continuous vigilance for danger.
x panic disorder  A disorder characterized by episodic periods of 
symptoms such as shortness of breath, irregularities in heartbeat, 
and other autonomic symptoms, accompanied by intense fear.
x anticipatory anxiety  A fear of having a panic attack; may lead 
to the development of agoraphobia.
x agoraphobia  A fear of being away from home or other 
protected places.
x generalized anxiety disorder  A disorder characterized by 
excessive anxiety and worry serious enough to cause disruption of 
a person’s life.
x social anxiety disorder  A disorder characterized by excessive 
fear of being exposed to the scrutiny of other people that leads to 
avoidance of social situations in which the person is called on to 
perform.

	
Anxiety Disorders	
587
increased activation of the amygdala and the insular 
cortex, both of which correlated positively with stu-
dents’ anxiety measures.
Tye et al. (2011) found that optogenetic stimulation 
of the terminals of neurons of the basolateral nucleus of 
the amygdala that formed synapses with neurons in the 
central nucleus caused an immediate termination of 
anxious behavior of mice. Conversely, optogenetic inhi-
bition of these same terminals induced anxious behav-
iors. Optogenetic methods, described in Chapter 5, 
hold the promise of discovery of the neural circuits in-
volved in the development and control of anxiety.
Treatment
Anxiety disorders are sometimes treated with benzodiaz-
epines. As we just saw, increased activity of the amygdala 
is a common feature of the anxiety disorders. The amyg-
dala contains a high concentration of GABAA receptors, 
which are the target of the benzodiazepines. Paulus et al. 
(2005) found that administration of a benzodiazepine 
(lorazepam) decreased the activation of both the 
amygdala and the insula of subjects looking at emo-
tional faces. Administration of flumazenil, a benzodiaz-
epine antagonist (having an action opposite that of the 
benzodiazepine tranquilizers), produces panic in pa-
tients with panic disorder but not in control subjects 
(Nutt et al., 1990).
Benzodiazepines are often used for emergency 
medical treatment for anxiety disorders because the 
therapeutic effects of these drugs have a rapid onset. 
However, they are less satisfactory for long-term treat-
ment. They cause sedation, they induce tolerance and 
withdrawal symptoms, and they have a potential for 
abuse. For these reasons, researchers have been seek-
ing other drugs to treat anxiety disorders. Benzodiaz-
epines exert their effects by interacting with GABAA 
receptors via an unknown binding site. Chemicals that 
activate one of the known binding sites on this recep-
tor, the neurosteroid binding site, enhance the activity 
of the GABAA receptor. During anxiety attacks, the 
synthesis of neurosteroids—and hence the activity of 
the GABAA receptor—is suppressed. A recently devel-
oped drug, XBD173, enhances the synthesis of neuros-
teroids and hence increases the activity of the GABAA 
receptor. Tests with human patients have shown that 
the drug reduces panic and does not produce seda-
tion or withdrawal symptoms after seven days of treat-
ment (Nothdurfter et al., 2011). Thus, this drug ap-
pears to be a promising candidate for treatment of 
anxiety disorders.
As we saw in Chapter 16, serotonin appears to play a 
role in depression. Much evidence suggests that serotonin 
plays a role in anxiety disorders too. Even though the 
symptoms of the anxiety disorders discussed in this subsec-
tion are very different from those of obsessive-compulsive 
disorder by a variety of treatments that activate the auto-
nomic nervous system, such as injections of lactic acid  
(a by-product of muscular activity), yohimbine (an 2 ad-
renoreceptor antagonist), or doxapram (a drug used by 
anesthesiologists to increase breathing rate) or breathing 
air containing an elevated amount of carbon dioxide 
(Stein and Uhde, 1995). Lactic acid and carbon dioxide 
both increase heart rate and rate of respiration, just as 
exercise does; yohimbine has direct pharmacological 
effects on the nervous system.
Genetic investigations indicate that variations in the 
gene that encodes production the BDNF protein may 
play a role in anxiety disorders. BDNF (brain-derived neu-
rotrophic factor) regulates neuronal survival and differen-
tiation during development, plays a role in long-term 
potentiation and memory, and is associated with anxiety 
and depression (Yu et al., 2009). A particular allele of 
the BDNF gene (Val66Met) impairs extinction of condi-
tioned fear memory in both humans and mice, and re-
sults in atypical activity of frontal cortex–amygdala cir-
cuitry. This allele does not normally occur in mice, but 
it can be inserted into their genome. Soliman et al. 
(2010) found that the presence of the Val66Met allele 
altered the circuitry of the vmPFC and impaired the 
extinction of a conditioned fear response in both mice 
and humans. In addition, the presence of this allele de-
creased the activity of the vmPFC during extinction.
Functional-imaging studies suggest that the amyg-
dala and the cingulate, prefrontal, and insular cortices 
are involved in anxiety disorders. Fischer et al. (1998) 
witnessed an unexpected panic attack in a subject 
while her regional cerebral blood flow was being mea-
sured by a PET scanner. They observed decreased activ-
ity in the right orbitofrontal cortex and anterior cingu-
late cortex. Pfleiderer et al. (2007) also observed a 
panic attack in a subject undergoing fMRI scanning 
and saw increased activity in the amygdala. Phan et al. 
(2005) found that people with social anxiety disorder 
showed increases in the activation of the amygdala 
when they looked at pictures of faces with angry, dis-
gusted, or fearful expressions. In addition, the activa-
tion of the amygdala was positively correlated with the 
severity of the people’s symptoms. Monk et al. (2008) 
found that adolescents with generalized anxiety disor-
der showed increased activation of the amygdala and 
decreased activation of the ventrolateral prefrontal 
cortex while looking at angry faces. They also found 
evidence that activation of the ventromedial prefrontal 
cortex (vmPFC) suppressed amygdala activation in 
healthy control subjects but not in those with anxiety 
disorder. (As you will recall from Chapter 11, the 
vmPFC plays a critical role in extinction and inhibition 
of fear and anxiety.) Stein et al. (2007) found that col-
lege students with a high level of anxiety (but without 
a diagnosis of one of the anxiety disorders) showed 

588	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Description
As the name implies, people with an obsessive-compulsive 
disorder (OCD) suffer from obsessions—thoughts that 
will not leave them—and compulsions—behaviors that 
disorder (described in the next subsection), specific sero-
tonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which serve as potent 
serotonin agonists (such as fluoxetine), have become the 
first-line medications for treating all of these disorders—
preferably in combination with cognitive behavior ther-
apy (Asnis et al., 2001; Ressler and Mayberg, 2007). Figure 
17.1 shows the effect of fluvoxamine, an SSRI, on the 
number of panic attacks in patients with panic disorder. 
(See Figure 17.1.)
As we also saw in Chapter 16, administration of in-
direct agonists of the NMDA receptor that attach to the 
glycine binding site have been used experimentally to 
successfully treat the symptoms of schizophrenia. Pre-
liminary research suggests that the same may be true for 
anxiety disorder. Several studies have successfully used 
d-cycloserine (DCS) in conjunction with cognitive be-
havior therapy to treat patients with anxiety disorder. 
For example, studies have shown that DCS facilitates 
treatment of acrophobia (fear of heights), social anxiety 
disorder, and panic disorder. (See Figure 17.2.)
In the treatment of anxiety disorders, cognitive be-
havior therapy often uses procedures that desensitize 
patients to the objects of situations they fear. For exam-
ple, Ressler et al. (2004) used a computer program to 
expose their patients to a virtual glass elevator, gradually 
bringing them higher and higher from the ground. This 
procedure appears to work by extinguishing a condi-
tioned emotional response. In fact, a study by Walker 
et al. (2002) found that injections of d-cycloserine facili-
tated the extinction of a conditioned emotional re-
sponse (CER) in rats. The drug had no effect on perfor-
mance of a CER unless it was administered along with 
extinction training. Injections of the drug by itself had 
no effect. Presumably, d-cycloserine exerts its therapeu-
tic effect by augmenting the ability of cognitive behavior 
therapy to extinguish fear responses.
figure 17.1  Fluvoxamine and Panic Disorder
The graph shows the effects of fluvoxamine (an SSRI) on 
the severity of panic disorder.
(Based on data from Asnis et al., 2001.)
0
0
2
4
6
8
Fluvoxamine
Placebo
0.3
0.9
1.2
1.5
0.6
Average panic attacks per week
Weeks
figure 17.2  d-Cycloserine and Anxiety Disorders
The graphs show the effects of d-cycloserine (DCS) and 
placebo in conjunction with cognitive behavior therapy 
on the symptoms of acrophobia (fear of heights), social 
phobia, and panic disorder.
[Based on data from Ressler et al., 2004 (acrophobia), Guastella et al., 2010b 
(social phobia), and Otto et al., 2010 (panic disorder).]
0
14
19
–10
–20
–30
–40
–50
1
2
3
4
9
Reduction in fear
Height of virtual floor
Placebo
DCS
Placebo
1
2
3
4
5
50
60
70
80
Social anxiety score
Sessions
4
8
0
12
16
Panic disorder score
DCS
Placebo
DCS
Pretreatment
Posttreatment
One-month 
follow-up
Acrophobia
Social anxiety
Panic disorder
x obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)  A mental disorder 
characterized by obsessions and compulsions.
x obsession  An unwanted thought or idea with which a person 
is preoccupied.
x compulsion  The feeling that one is obliged to perform a 
behavior, even if one prefers not to do so.

	
Anxiety Disorders	
589
basins, using precisely the same motions each 
time. As he does this, he repeats the same phrase, 
occasionally tapping his right finger on his ear-
lobe. Through your interpreter, you ask him 
what he is doing. He replies that there are dan-
gerous polluting substances in the ground, . . . 
[and that] he must purify himself or something 
terrible will happen. He seems eager to tell you 
about his concerns. (p. 211)
Why is the man acting this way? Is he a priest follow-
ing a sacred ritual, or does he have obsessive-compulsive 
disorder? Without knowing more about the spiritual rit-
uals followed by the man’s culture, we cannot say. Fiske 
and Haslam compared the features of OCD and other 
psychological disorders in descriptions of rituals, work, 
or other activities in fifty-two cultures. They found that 
the features of OCD were found in rituals in these cul-
tures. The features of other psychological disorders were 
much less common. On the whole, the evidence suggests 
that the symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder rep-
resent an exaggeration of natural human tendencies.
Zhong and Liljenquist (2006) found that even well-
educated people in an industrialized country (students 
at Northwestern University, in the United States) appar-
ently unknowingly consider cleansing rituals to “wash 
away their sins.” The investigators had the subjects recall 
in detail either an ethical or an unethical deed they had 
committed in the past. Later, they were asked to com-
plete some word fragments by filling in letters where 
blanks occurred. Some word fragments could be made 
into words that did or did not pertain to cleansing. For 
example, W _ _ H, SH _ _ ER, and S _ _ P could be wash, 
shower, and soap, or they could be wish, shaker, and step. 
The subjects who had told about a misdeed were much 
more likely to think of cleansing-related words. And 
when offered a free gift—either a pencil or an antiseptic 
wipe—subjects who had told about a misdeed were 
more likely to chose the antiseptic wipe.
Possible Causes
Evidence indicates that obsessive-compulsive disorder is 
at least partly caused by hereditary factors. Several stud-
ies have found a greater concordance for obsessions and 
compulsions in monozygotic twins than in dizygotic 
twins (Hettema, Neale, and Kendler, 2001). Family stud-
ies have found that OCD is associated with a neurologi-
cal disorder that appears during childhood (Pauls and 
Leckman, 1986; Pauls et al., 1986). This disorder,  
Tourette’s syndrome, is characterized by muscular and 
they cannot keep from performing. Obsessions include 
concern or disgust with bodily secretions, dirt, germs, 
and the like; fear that something terrible might happen; 
and a need for symmetry, order, or exactness. Most com-
pulsions fall into one of four categories: counting, check-
ing, cleaning, and avoidance. For example, people might 
repeatedly check burners on the stove to see that they 
are off and windows and locks to be sure that they are 
locked. Some people will wash their hands hundreds of 
times a day, even if their hands become covered with 
painful sores. Other people meticulously clean their 
house or endlessly wash, dry, and fold their clothes. 
Some become afraid to leave home because they fear 
contamination and refuse to touch other members of 
their family. If they do accidentally become “contami-
nated,” they usually have lengthy purification rituals.
Obsessions are seen in a variety of mental disorders, 
including schizophrenia. However, unlike schizophren-
ics, people with obsessive-compulsive disorder recognize 
that their thoughts and behaviors are senseless and des-
perately wish that they would go away. Compulsions of-
ten become more and more demanding until they inter-
fere with people’s careers and daily lives.
The incidence of obsessive-compulsive disorder is 
1–2 percent. Females are slightly more likely than males 
to have this diagnosis. OCD most commonly begins in 
young adulthood (Robbins et al., 1984). People with 
severe symptoms of this disorder are unlikely to marry, 
perhaps because of the common obsessional fear of dirt 
and contamination or because of the shame associated 
with the rituals they are compelled to perform, which 
causes them to avoid social contacts (Turner, Beidel, 
and Nathan, 1985).
Some investigators believe that the compulsive behav-
iors seen in OCD are forms of species-typical behaviors—
for example, grooming, cleaning, and attention to sources 
of potential danger—that are released from normal con-
trol mechanisms by a brain dysfunction (Wise and Rapo-
port, 1988). Fiske and Haslam (1997) suggest that the 
behaviors seen in obsessive-compulsive disorder are sim-
ply pathological examples of a natural behavioral ten-
dency to develop and practice social rituals. For example, 
people perform cultural rituals to mark transitions or 
changes in social status, to diagnose or treat illnesses, to 
restore relationships with deities, or to ensure the success 
of hunting or planting. Consider the following scenario 
(from Fiske and Haslam, 1997):
Imagine that you are traveling in an unfamiliar 
country. Going out for a walk, you observe a man 
dressed in red, standing on a red mat in a red-
painted gateway. . . . He utters the same prayer 
six times. He brings out six basins of water and 
meticulously arranges them in a symmetrical 
configuration in front of the gateway. Then he 
washes his hands six times in each of the six  
x Tourette’s syndrome  A neurological disorder characterized 
by tics and involuntary vocalizations and sometimes by compulsive 
uttering of obscenities and repetition of the utterances of others.

590	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
The symptoms of OCD appear to be produced by 
damage to the basal ganglia. Bodner, Morshed, and Pe-
terson (2001) report the case of a twenty-five-year-old 
man whose untreated sore throat (he lived in a religious 
group that prohibited antibiotics) developed into an 
autoimmune disease that produced obsessions and com-
pulsions. The investigators found antibodies to type A 
-hemolytic streptococcus, and MRI scans indicated ab-
normalities in the basal ganglia. An MRI study of thirty-
four children with streptococcus-associated tics or OCD 
by Giedd et al. (2000) found an increase in the size of 
the basal ganglia that they attributed to an autoimmune 
inflammation of this region.
Several functional-imaging studies have found evi-
dence of increased activity in the frontal lobes and cau-
date nucleus in patients with OCD. A review by Whiteside, 
Port, and Abramowitz (2004) found that functional- 
imaging studies consistently found increased activity of 
the caudate nucleus and the orbitofrontal cortex. Guehl 
et al. (2008) inserted microelectrodes into the caudate 
nuclei of three patients with OCD who were being evalu-
ated for neurosurgery. They found that two of the pa-
tients, who reported the presence of obsessive thoughts 
during the surgery, showed increased activity in neurons 
in the caudate nucleus. The third patient, who did not 
report obsessive thoughts, showed a lower rate of neural 
activity.
A review by Saxena et al. (1998) described several 
studies that measured regional brain activity of OCD 
patients before and after successful treatment with drugs 
or cognitive behavior therapy. In general, the improve-
ment in a patient’s symptoms was correlated with a re-
duction in the activity of the caudate nucleus and orbi-
tofrontal cortex. The fact that cognitive behavior therapy 
and drug therapy produced similar results is especially 
remarkable: It indicates that very different procedures 
may bring about physiological changes that alleviate a 
serious mental disorder.
Treatment
As we saw in the prologue to this chapter, clinicians de-
veloped procedures that damaged the prefrontal cortex 
or disconnected it from other parts of the brain to treat 
people with emotional reactions. Some patients with se-
vere OCD have been successfully treated with cingulotomy—
surgical destruction of specific fiber bundles in the sub-
cortical frontal lobe, including the cingulum bundle 
(which connects the prefrontal and cingulate cortex 
with the limbic cortex of the temporal lobe) and a re-
gion that contains fibers that connect the basal ganglia 
with the prefrontal cortex (Ballantine et al., 1987; Min-
dus, Rasmussen, and Lindquist, 1994). These operations 
have a reasonably good success rate (Dougherty et al., 
2002). Another reasonably successful surgical proce-
dure, capsulotomy, destroys a region of a fiber bundle 
vocal tics: facial grimaces, squatting, pacing, twirling, 
barking, sniffing, coughing, grunting, or repeating spe-
cific words (especially vulgarities). Leonard et al. (1992a, 
1992b) found that many patients with obsessive-compulsive 
disorder had tics and that many patients with Tourette’s 
syndrome showed obsessions and compulsions. Grados 
et al. (2001) found a family association between OCD 
and tic disorders (a broad category that includes To-
urette’s syndrome). Both groups of investigators believe 
that the two disorders are produced by the same under-
lying genotype. It is not clear why some people with this 
genotype gene develop Tourette’s syndrome and others 
develop obsessive-compulsive disorder.
As with schizophrenia, not all cases of OCD have a 
genetic origin; the disorder sometimes occurs after 
brain damage caused by various means, such as birth 
trauma, encephalitis, and head trauma (Hollander et al., 
1990; Berthier et al., 1996). In particular, the symptoms 
appear to be associated with damage to or dysfunction 
of the basal ganglia, cingulate gyrus, and prefrontal cor-
tex (Giedd et al., 1995; Robinson et al., 1995).
Tic disorders (including OCD) can be caused by a 
group A -hemolytic streptococcal infection (Perlmutter 
et al., 1998; Kawikova et al., 2010). This infection can trig-
ger several autoimmune diseases, in which the patient’s 
immune system attacks and damages certain tissues of 
the body, including the valves of the heart, the kidneys, 
and—in this case—parts of the brain. Figure 17.3 shows 
the parallel course of a child’s symptoms and the level of 
antistreptococcal DNA-B in her blood, which indicates 
the presence of an active infection. (See Figure 17.3.)
figure 17.3  OCD and Streptococcal Hemolytic 
Infection
The graph shows the parallel course of a child’s 
symptoms and the level of antistreptococcal DNA-B in 
her blood, which indicates the presence of an active 
infection. This relationship provides evidence that a 
group A b-hemolytic streptococcal infection can produce 
tics and the symptoms of OCD, presumably by affecting 
the basal ganglia.
(Based on data from Perlmutter et al., 1998.)
0
0
2
4
8
10
12
6
10
20
30
Antibody treatment
Antibody treatment
0
200
400
600
Rating of OCD symptoms
Antibody titer (IU/ml)
Time (months)
Obsessive-compulsive 
rating
Antibody titer

	
Anxiety Disorders	
591
receive information from the cerebral cortex. As this 
information is processed by the basal ganglia, it flows 
through two pathways before it passes to the thalamus 
and is sent back to the cortex. The direct pathway is excit-
atory, and the indirect pathway is inhibitory. (Refer back 
to Figure 8.23.) Saxena et al. (1998) suggest that the 
symptoms of OCD may be a result of overactivity of the 
direct pathway. They propose that one of the functions 
of this pathway is control of previously learned behavior 
sequences that have become automatic so that they can 
be executed rapidly. The orbitofrontal cortex, which is 
involved in recognizing situations that have personal 
significance, can activate this pathway and the behaviors 
that it controls. The inhibitory indirect pathway is in-
volved in suppressing these automatic behaviors, per-
mitting the person to switch to other, more adaptive 
behaviors. Thus, obsessive-compulsive behavior could 
be a result of an imbalance between the direct and indi-
rect pathways.
Three drugs are regularly used to treat the symptoms 
of OCD: clomipramine, fluoxetine, and fluvoxamine. 
These effective antiobsessional drugs are specific blockers 
of 5-HT reuptake; thus, they are serotonergic agonists. In 
general, serotonin has an inhibitory effect on species-
typical behaviors, which has tempted several investigators 
to speculate that these drugs alleviate the symptoms of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder by reducing the strength of 
innate tendencies for counting, checking, cleaning, and 
avoidance behaviors that may underlie this disorder. 
Brain regions that have been implicated in OCD, includ-
ing the orbitofrontal cortex and the basal ganglia, receive 
input from serotonergic terminals (Lavoie and Parent, 
1990; El Mansari and Blier, 1997).
The importance of serotonergic activity in inhibit-
ing compulsive behaviors is underscored by three inter-
esting compulsions: trichotillomania, onychophagia, 
and acral lick dermatitis. Trichotillomania is compulsive 
hair pulling. People with this disorder (almost always 
females) often spend hours each night pulling hairs out 
one by one, sometimes eating them (Rapoport, 1991). 
Onychophagia is compulsive nail biting, which in its 
extreme can cause severe damage to the ends of the 
fingers. (For those who are sufficiently agile, toenail bit-
ing is not uncommon.) Double-blind studies have shown 
that both of these disorders can be treated successfully 
by clomipramine, the drug of choice for obsessive- 
compulsive disorder (Leonard et al., 1992a).
Acral lick dermatitis is a disease of dogs, not humans. 
Some dogs will continuously lick at a part of their body, 
especially their wrist or ankle (called the carpus and the 
hock). The licking removes the hair and often erodes 
away the skin as well. The disorder seems to be genetic; 
it is seen almost exclusively in large breeds such as Great 
Danes, Labrador retrievers, and German shepherds, 
and it runs in families. A double-blind study found that 
(the internal capsule) that connects the caudate nucleus 
with the medial prefrontal cortex (Rück et al., 2008). Of 
course, brain lesions cannot be undone, so such proce-
dures must be considered only as a last resort. As Rück 
and his colleagues report, some patients suffer from 
adverse side effects after surgery, such as problems of 
planning, apathy, or difficulty inhibiting socially inap-
propriate behavior.
In one extraordinary case a patient performed his own 
psychosurgery. Solyom, Turnbull, and Wilensky (1987) 
reported the case of a young man with a serious  
obsessive-compulsive disorder whose ritual hand wash-
ing and other behaviors made it impossible for him to 
continue his schooling or lead a normal life. Finding 
that his life was no longer worthwhile, he decided to 
end it. He placed the muzzle of a .22-caliber rifle in his 
mouth and pulled the trigger. The bullet entered the 
base of the brain and damaged the frontal lobes. He 
survived, and he was amazed to find that his compul-
sions were gone. Fortunately, the damage did not dis-
rupt his ability to make or execute plans; he went back 
to school and completed his education and found 
employment. His IQ was unchanged. Ordinary surgery 
would have been less hazardous and messy, but it 
could hardly have been more successful.
As we saw in Chapter 15, deep brain stimulation 
(DBS) has been found to be useful in treating the symp-
toms of Parkinson’s disease. Because OCD, like Parkin-
son’s disease, appears to involve abnormalities in the 
basal ganglia, several clinics have tried to use DBS of the 
basal ganglia or fiber tracts connected with them to treat 
this disorder. This form of therapy appears to reduce 
the symptoms of OCD in some patients (Abelson et al., 
2005; Larson, 2008). Le Jeune et al. (2010) found that 
DBS of the subthalamic nucleus, which plays an integral 
role in the cortical–basal ganglia circuitry, reduces the 
symptoms of OCD. As I mentioned at the beginning of 
this subsection, one of the more modern forms of psy-
chosurgery is destruction of the internal capsule. Good-
man et al. (2010) found that DBS of the internal capsule 
reduced the symptoms of OCD in four of six patients 
with severe, treatment-resistant OCD. A significant ben-
efit of DBS is that, unlike psychosurgical procedures 
that destroy brain tissue, it is reversible: If no benefit is 
obtained from the stimulation, the electrodes can be 
removed.
As we saw in Chapters 8 and 14, the principal parts 
of the basal ganglia, the caudate nucleus and the putamen, 

592	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
clomipramine reduces this compulsive behavior (Rapoport, 
Ryland, and Kriete, 1992). At first, when I read the term 
“double-blind” in the report by Rapoport and her col-
leagues, I was amused to think that the investigators 
were careful not to let the dogs learn whether they were 
receiving clomipramine or a placebo. Then I realized 
that, of course, it was the dogs’ owners who had to be 
kept in the dark.
We saw in the previous subsection that an NMDA 
receptor agonist, d-cycloserine, appears to be useful in 
treating the symptoms of a variety of anxiety disorders. 
This drug appears also to help in the treatment of the 
symptoms of OCD as well. A double-blind study by Wil-
helm et al. (2010) found that compared with patients 
who received a placebo, patients who received d-cyclo-
serine along with sessions of behavior therapy showed a 
greater decrease in their obsessive symptoms and re-
tained this improvement after the sessions ended. Pre-
sumably, the drug facilitated the extinction of the mal-
adaptive thoughts and behaviors, just as it facilitates the 
extinction of conditioned emotional responses in pa-
tients with anxiety disorders. (See Figure 17.4.)
figure 17.4  d-Cycloserine and OCD
The graph shows the effects of d-cycloserine and placebo 
in conjunction with cognitive behavior therapy on the 
symptoms of obsessive-compulsive behavior.
(Based on data from Wilhelm et al., 2010.)
10
15
20
25
30
OCD score
Placebo
DCS
Pretreatment
Midtreatment
Posttreatment
1-month 
follow-up
Section Summary
Anxiety Disorders
The anxiety disorders severely disrupt some people’s 
lives. People with panic disorder periodically have panic 
attacks, during which they experience intense symp-
toms of autonomic activity and often feel as if they are 
going to die. Frequently, panic attacks lead to the 
development of agoraphobia, an avoidance of being 
away from a safe place, such as home. Family and twin 
studies have shown that panic disorder is at least partly 
heritable, which suggests that it has biological causes.
Panic attacks can be triggered in many suscepti-
ble people by conditions that activate the autonomic 
nervous system, such as an caffeine, yohimbine, injec-
tion of lactate, or inhalation of air containing an ele-
vated amount of carbon dioxide. Panic attacks can be 
alleviated by the administration of a benzodiazepine, 
and a benzodiazepine antagonist can trigger a panic 
attack. Nowadays, the first choice of medical treat-
ment for panic attacks is an SSRI. In addition, the 
presence of a particular allele of the BDNF gene is 
associated with increased levels of anxiety. 
Functional-imaging studies suggest that the amygdala 
and the cingulate, prefrontal, and insular cortices are 
involved in anxiety disorders.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is charac-
terized by obsessions—unwanted thoughts—and 
compulsions—uncontrollable behaviors, especially 
those involving cleanliness and attention to danger. 
Some investigators believe that these behaviors rep-
resent overactivity of species-typical behavioral ten-
dencies.
OCD has a heritable basis and is related to 
Tourette’s syndrome, a neurological disorder charac-
terized by tics and strange verbalizations. It can also 
be caused by brain damage at birth, encephalitis,  
and head injuries, especially when the basal ganglia 
are involved. A type A -hemolytic streptococcus 
infection can stimulate an autoimmune attack— 
presumably on the basal ganglia—that produces  
the symptoms of OCD.
Functional imaging indicates that people with 
obsessive-compulsive disorder tend to show 
increased activity in the orbitofrontal cortex, cingulate 
cortex, and caudate nucleus. Drug treatment or 
behavior therapy that successfully reduces the symp-
toms of OCD generally reduces the activity of the 
orbitofrontal cortex and caudate nucleus. In severe 

	
Autistic Disorder	
593
classes. The reported incidence of autism has increased 
in the past two decades, but evidence indicates that the 
apparent increase is a result of heightened awareness of 
the disorder and broadening of the diagnostic criteria. 
By the way, studies have failed to find evidence that  
autism is linked to childhood immunization. In fact, the  
investigator who originally claimed to have obtained evi-
dence for a linkage between immunization and autism 
was found guilty of dishonesty by the UK General Medi-
cal Council, and the article that first made this claim was 
retracted by the journal that published it, The Lancet 
(Dwyer, 2010).
Autistic disorder is one of several pervasive develop-
mental disorders that have similar symptoms. Asperger’s 
syndrome, the mildest form of autistic spectrum disorder, is 
generally less severe than autistic disorder, and its symp-
toms do not include a delay in language development or 
the presence of important cognitive deficits. The primary 
symptoms of Asperger’s syndrome are deficient or absent 
social interactions and repetitive and stereotyped behav-
iors along with obsessional interest in narrow subjects. 
Rett’s disorder is a genetic neurological syndrome seen in 
girls that accompanies an arrest of normal brain develop-
ment that occurs during infancy. Children with childhood 
disintegrative disorder show normal intellectual and social 
development and then, sometime between the ages of 
two and ten years, show a severe regression into autism.
Autistic Disorder
Description
When a baby is born, the parents normally expect to 
love and cherish the child and to be loved and cher-
ished in return. Unfortunately, some infants are born 
with a disorder that impairs their ability to return their 
parents’ affection. The symptoms of autistic disorder 
(often simply referred to as autism) include a failure to 
develop normal social relations with other people, im-
paired development of communicative ability, and the 
presence of repetitive, stereotyped behavior. Most peo-
ple with autistic disorder display cognitive impairments. 
The syndrome was named and characterized by Kanner 
(1943), who chose the term (auto, “self,” -ism, “condi-
tion”) to refer to the child’s apparent self-absorption.
According to a review by Silverman et al. (2010), 
the incidence of autistic disorder is 0.6–1.0 percent in 
the population. The disorder is four times more com-
mon in males than in females. However, if only cases of 
autism with mental retardation are considered, the ra-
tio falls to 2:1, and if only cases of high-functioning  
autism are considered (those with average or above- 
average intelligence and reasonably good communicative 
ability), the ratio rises to approximately 7:1 (Fombonne, 
2005). These data suggest that the social impairments 
are much more common in males, but the cognitive and 
communicative impairments are more evenly shared by 
males and females. At one time, clinicians believed that 
autism was more prevalent in families with higher socio-
economic status, but more recent studies have found 
that the frequency of autism is the same in all social 
cases of OCD that do not respond to other treat-
ments, surgical procedures such as cingulotomy and 
capsulotomy may provide relief. Deep brain stimula-
tion with implanted electrodes has been shown to be 
effective in some patients and, unlike cingulotomy 
and capsulotomy, has the benefits of being revers-
ible. The most effective drugs are SSRIs such as clo-
mipramine. Some investigators believe that clomip-
ramine and related drugs alleviate the symptoms of 
OCD by increasing the activity of serotonergic path-
ways that play an inhibitory role on species-typical 
behaviors. Three other compulsions—hair pulling, nail 
biting, and (in dogs) acral lick syndrome—are also 
suppressed by clomipramine. In conjunction with cog-
nitive behavior therapy, d-cycloserine, which acts as 
an indirect agonist at NMDA receptors, also appears 
to reduce the symptoms of OCD.
 Thought Question
Most reasonable people would agree that a person 
with mental disorders cannot be blamed for his or her 
thoughts and behaviors. Most of us would sympathize 
with someone whose life is disrupted by panic attacks 
or obsessions and compulsions, and we would not see 
their plight as a failure of will power. After all, whether 
these disorders are caused by traumatic experiences or 
brain abnormalities (or both), the afflicted person has 
not chosen to be the way he or she is. But what about 
less dramatic examples: Should we blame people for 
their shyness or hostility or other maladaptive person-
ality traits? If, as many psychologists believe, people’s 
personality characteristics are largely determined by 
their heredity (and thus by the structure and chemistry 
of their brains), what are the implications for our con-
cepts of “blame” and “personal responsibility”?
x autistic disorder  A chronic disorder whose symptoms include 
failure to develop normal social relations with other people, 
impaired development of communicative ability, lack of imagina-
tive ability, and repetitive, stereotyped movements.

594	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
adept and graceful. Some have isolated skills, such as the 
ability to multiply two four-digit numbers very quickly, 
without apparent effort.
Possible Causes
When Kanner first described autism, he suggested that 
it was of biological origin; but not long afterward, influ-
ential clinicians argued that autism was learned. More 
precisely, they said, it was taught—by cold, insensitive, 
distant, demanding, introverted parents. Bettelheim 
(1967) believed that autism was similar to the apathetic, 
withdrawn, and hopeless behavior seen in some of the 
survivors of the German concentration camps of World 
War II. You can imagine the guilt felt by parents who 
were told by a mental health professional that they were 
to blame for their child’s pitiful condition. Some profes-
sionals saw the existence of autism as evidence for child 
abuse and advocated that autistic children be removed 
from their families and placed with foster parents.
Nowadays, researchers and mental health profes-
sionals are convinced that autism is caused by biological 
factors and that parents should be given help and sym-
pathy, not blame. Careful studies have shown that the 
parents of autistic children are just as warm, sociable, 
and responsive as other parents (Cox et al., 1975). In 
addition, parents with one autistic child often raise one 
or more normal children. If the parents were at fault, we 
should expect all of their offspring to be autistic.
Heritability
Evidence indicates that autism is strongly heritable. The 
best evidence for genetic factors comes from twin stud-
ies. These studies indicate that the concordance rate for 
autism in monozygotic twins is approximately 70 percent, 
while the rate in dizygotic twins studied so far is ap-
proximately 5 percent. The concordance rate for the 
more broadly defined autistic spectrum disorders (ASD), 
is 90 percent for monozygotic twins and 10 percent for 
dizygotic twins (Sebat et al., 2007). A study by Ozonoff 
et al. (2011) found that an infant with an older sibling 
with ASD has an 18.7 percent likelihood of developing 
an ASD. Having multiple older siblings with ASD in-
creased the risk to 32.2 percent. Genetic studies indicate 
that autistic disorder can be caused by a wide variety of 
rare mutations, especially those that interfere with neu-
ral development and communication (Betancur, Sakurai, 
and Buxbaum, 2009).
Brain Pathology
The fact that autism is highly heritable is presumptive 
evidence that the disorder is a result of structural or 
biochemical abnormalities in the brain. In addition, a 
variety of medical disorders—especially those that occur 
According to the DSM-IV, a diagnosis of autistic dis-
order requires the presence of three categories of symp-
toms: impaired social interactions, absent or deficient 
communicative abilities, and the presence of stereotyped 
behaviors. Social impairments are the first symptoms to 
emerge. Infants with autistic disorder do not seem to 
care whether they are held, or they may arch their backs 
when picked up, as if they do not want to be held. They 
do not look or smile at their caregivers. If they are ill, 
hurt, or tired, they will not look to someone else for 
comfort. As they get older, they do not enter into social 
relationships with other children and avoid eye contact 
with them. In severe cases, autistic people do not even 
seem to recognize the existence of other people.
Frith, Morton, and Leslie (1991) suggest that some 
of the symptoms of autism stem from abnormalities in 
the brain that prevent autistic people from forming a 
“theory of mind.” That is, they are unable “to predict 
and explain the behavior of other humans in terms of 
their mental states” (p. 434). They cannot infer the 
thoughts, feelings, and intentions of other people from 
their emotional expressions, tone of voice, and behav-
ior. As one autistic man complained, comparing his own 
social abilities with those of others, “Other people seem 
to have a special sense by which they can read other 
people’s thoughts” (Rutter, 1983).
The language development of people with autism is 
abnormal or even nonexistent. They often echo what is 
said to them, and they may refer to themselves as others 
do—in the second or third person. For example, they 
may say, “You want some milk?” to mean “I want some 
milk.” They may learn words and phrases by rote, but they 
fail to use them productively and creatively. Those who do 
acquire reasonably good language skills talk about their 
own preoccupations without regard for other people’s 
interests. They usually interpret other people’s speech 
literally. For example, when an autistic person is asked, 
“Can you pass the salt?,” he might simply say “Yes”—and 
not because he is trying to be funny or sarcastic.
Autistic people generally show abnormal interests 
and behaviors. For example, they may show stereotyped 
movements, such as flapping their hand back and forth 
or rocking back and forth. They may become obsessed 
with investigating objects, sniffing them, feeling their 
texture, or moving them back and forth. They may be-
come attached to a particular object and insist on carry-
ing it around with them. They may become preoccupied 
in lining up objects or in forming patterns with them, 
oblivious to everything else that is going on around 
them. They often insist on following precise routines 
and may become violently upset when they are hindered 
from doing so. They show no make-believe play and are 
not interested in stories that involve fantasy. Although 
most autistic people are mentally retarded, not all are; 
and unlike most retarded people, they may be physically 

	
Autistic Disorder	
595
children. By the time of early adulthood it is the same size 
as the amygdala of nonautistic people but contains fewer 
neurons (Schumann and Amaral, 2006).
Autistic brains also show abnormalities in white mat-
ter. Herbert et al. (2004) found that, in the autistic 
brain, the volume of white matter containing short-
range axons was increased but that the volume of white 
matter containing long-range axons that connect distant 
regions of the brain was not. Courchesne et al. (2005, 
2007) suggest that the production of excessive numbers 
of neurons early in development may cause the develop-
ment of such a large number of short-range axons that 
the development of long-range axons is inhibited. The 
apparent hyperconnectivity of local regions of the cere-
bral cortex might possibly account for the exceptional 
isolated talents and skills shown by some autistics.
Researchers have employed structural- and func-
tional-imaging methods to investigate the neural basis of 
the three categories of autistic symptoms. For example, 
Castelli et al. (2002) showed normal subjects and high-
functioning people with autism or Asperger’s syndrome 
animations that depicted two triangles interacting in 
various goal-directed ways (for example, simply chasing 
or fighting) or in a way that suggested that one triangle 
was trying to trick or coax the other. For example, one 
normal subject described an animation in this way: “Tri-
angles cuddling inside the house. Big wanted to per-
suade little to get out. He didn’t want to . . . cuddling 
again” (p. 1843). People in the autism group were able 
to accurately describe the goal-directed interactions of 
the triangles, but they had difficulty accurately describ-
ing the “intentions” of a triangle trying to trick or coax 
the other. In other words, they had difficulty forming a 
theory of mind. Functional imaging during presenta-
tion of the animations showed normal activation of early 
levels of the visual association cortex (the extrastriate 
cortex), but activation of the superior temporal sulcus 
(STS) and the medial prefrontal cortex was much lower 
in members of the autism group. (See Figure 17.5 and 
Simulate inferring causation on MyPsychLab.) Previ-
ous research has shown that the STS plays an important 
role in detection of stimuli that indicate the actions of 
another individual (Allison, Puce, and McCarthy, 2000).
The lack of interest in or understanding of other 
people is reflected in the response of the autistic brain to 
the sight of the human face. As we saw in Chapter 6, the 
fusiform face area (FFA), located on a region of visual 
association cortex on the base of the brain, is involved in 
the recognition of individual faces. A functional-imaging 
study by Schultz (2005) found little or no activity in the 
fusiform face area of autistic adults looking at pictures of 
human faces. (See Figure 17.6.) Autistics are poor at rec-
ognizing facial expressions of emotion or the direction of 
another person’s gaze and have low rates of eye contact 
with other people. It seems likely that the FFA of autistics 
during prenatal development—can produce the symp-
toms of autism. Evidence suggests that approximately  
10 percent of all cases of autism have definable biologi-
cal causes, such as rubella (German measles) during 
pregnancy, prenatal thalidomide, encephalitis caused 
by the herpes virus, and tuberous sclerosis, a genetic 
disorder that causes the formation of benign tumors in 
many organs, including the brain (DeLong, 1999; 
Rapin, 1999; Fombonne, 2005). Ploeger et al. (2010) 
suggest that interference with a particular stage of pre-
natal development can cause autism. Early organogen-
esis is a stage of embryonic development that occurs 
during days 20–40 after fertilization. During this stage, 
major organs are beginning to develop, and factors that 
interfere with normal development can cause many ab-
normalities, including limb deformities, malformations 
of the skull and face, and brain pathologies. In the 
1960s, many pregnant women took thalidomide, a drug 
that suppressed the symptoms of morning sickness. Un-
fortunately, it was discovered later that this drug caused 
severe birth defects—including autism. Because most 
women knew when they had taken thalidomide, the 
time of drug exposure could be correlated with the de-
velopment of autism in the women’s children. It turned 
out that the sensitive period, during which exposure to 
thalidomide was most likely to cause the development of 
autism, was twenty to thirty-six days postfertilization, which 
coincides with the stage of early organogenesis. Presum-
ably, drug-induced interference with normal brain devel-
opment at this time set the stage for later development 
of autism.
Evidence indicates significant abnormalities in the 
development of the brains of autistic children. Courchesne 
et al. (2005, 2007) note that although the autistic brain is, 
on average, slightly smaller at birth, it begins to grow ab-
normally quickly, and by two to three years of age it is 
about 10 percent larger than a normal brain. Following 
this early spurt, the growth of the autistic brain slows 
down, so by adolescence it is only about 1–2 percent larger 
than normal.
Not all parts of the autistic brain show the same pat-
tern of growth. The regions that appear to be most in-
volved in the functions that are impaired in autism show 
the greatest growth early in life and the slowest growth 
between early childhood and adolescence. For example, 
the frontal cortex and temporal cortex of the autistic 
brain grow quickly during the first two years of life but 
then show little or no increase in size during the next four 
years, whereas these two regions grow by 20 percent and 
17 percent, respectively, in normal brains. However, the 
growth pattern of “lower-order” regions of the cerebral 
cortex, such as the primary visual cortex and extrastriate 
cortex, are relatively normal in the autistic brain. The 
amygdala also shows an abnormal pattern of growth during 
development. By four years of age it is larger in autistic 

596	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
failure of the sight of faces to activate the FFA in people 
with autism is caused by a of lack of interest in faces, not 
by abnormalities in the FFA.
A study by Pelphrey et al. (2002) found that autistic 
people who were asked to identify the emotions shown in 
photographs of faces failed to look at other people’s eyes, 
which are informative in making judgments of emotion. 
This tendency undoubtedly contributes to their impair-
ment in analyzing social information. We saw in Chapter 
11 that people with damage to the amygdala also fail to 
look at other people’s eyes. The abnormal development 
of the amygdala in people with autism may be at least 
partly responsible for the low rates of eye contact with 
other people and their difficulty in assessing other peo-
ple’s emotional state.
As we saw in Chapter 10, oxytocin, a peptide that 
serves as a hormone and neuromodulator, facilitates 
pair bonding and increases trust and closeness to oth-
ers. Modahl et al. (1998) reported that autistic children 
had lower levels of this peptide. Studies suggest that 
oxytocin can improve sociability of people with ASD. 
Guastella et al. (2010a) found that administration of 
oxytocin increased the performance of adolescent males 
with ASD on a test of emotional recognition. Andari  
et al. (2010) found that oxytocin improved the perfor-
mance of adults with high-functioning ASD on a com-
puterized ball-toss game that required social interac-
tions with fictitious partners.
In Chapters 8 and 11 I described the role of a circuit 
of mirror neurons in the perception of emotions and be-
havioral intentions. This circuit is activated when we see 
another person produce an expression of emotion or 
perform a goal-directed action, and feedback from this 
activity helps us to understand what the person feels or 
is trying to accomplish. In other words, the mirror neu-
ron system may be involved in our ability to understand 
what people are trying to do and to empathize with their 
emotions.
Iacoboni and Dapretto (2006) suggest that the so-
cial deficits seen in autism may be a result of abnormal 
development of the mirror neuron system. In fact, a 
functional-imaging study by Dapretto et al. (2006) ob-
served deficient activation in the mirror motor neuron 
system of autistic children, and structural MRI study by 
Hadjikhani et al. (2006) found that the cerebral cortex 
in the mirror neuron system was thinner in autistics. A 
study by Senju et al. (2007) even found that children 
with autism failed to yawn when they saw a video of other 
people yawning. Control subjects showed an increased 
rate of yawning during or immediately after seeing vid-
eos that depicted yawning but not those that depicted 
other kinds of mouth movements. Presumably, the mir-
ror neuron system is involved in this type of imitation.
Baron-Cohen (2002) noted that the behavioral 
characteristics of people with autistic spectrum disorders 
fails to respond to the sight of the human face because 
these people spend very little time studying other peo-
ple’s faces and hence do not develop the expertise the 
rest of us acquire through normal interpersonal interac-
tions. Grelotti et al. (2005) reported the case of an autis-
tic boy who had a consuming interest in “Digimon” car-
toon characters. Functional imaging showed no activation 
of the FFA when the boy viewed photos of faces, but 
photos of Digimon characters evoked strong activation of 
this region. This case supports the conclusion that the 
figure 17.5  Theory of Mind
The graph shows relative activation of specific brain 
regions of autistic adults and normal control subjects 
viewing a “theory of mind” animation of two triangles 
moving interactively with implied intentions. STS = 
superior temporal sulcus.
(Based on data from Castelli et al., 2002.)
0
0.5
1.5
1.0
2.5
2.0
Relative differences in regional blood flow
Right STS
Right medial
prefrontal
Right extrastriate
Regions with Significant Increase in Cerebral Blood Flow
Control
Autism
figure 17.6  Fusiform Face Area and Autism
The scans show activation of the fusiform face area of 
control subjects but not of autistic subjects while looking 
at pictures of human faces.
(From Schultz, R. T. International Journal of Developmental Neuroscience, 2005, 
23, 125–141. Reprinted with permission.)
Control
Autistic

	
Autistic Disorder	
597
is correct, we cannot conclude that autism is caused by 
prenatal exposure to excessive amounts of testosterone. 
An “extreme masculine brain” could be caused by ge-
netic abnormalities that increase the sensitivity of a de-
veloping brain to androgens, and there could be (and 
probably are) other causes of autism that have nothing 
to do with masculinization of the brain.
Many investigators have noted that the presence of 
repetitive, stereotyped behavior and obsessive preoccu-
pations with particular subjects resemble the symptoms 
of obsessive-compulsive disorder. As we saw earlier in 
this chapter, the symptoms of OCD appear to be related 
to increased activity of the caudate nucleus. Research 
suggests that the same may be true for the behavioral 
symptoms of autism. Several studies have observed in-
creased volume of the caudate nucleus in autism (Sears 
et al., 1999; Langen et al., 2007). In fact, Hollander et al. 
(2005) found that the volume of the right caudate nu-
cleus was positively correlated with ratings of repetitive 
behavior in patients with ASD. (See Figure 17.7.)
appear to be exaggerations of the traits that tend to be 
associated with males. As we saw, the incidence of autistic 
spectrum disorders is four times more prevalent in males 
and that of Asperger’s disorder, in particular, nine times 
more prevalent. Baron-Cohen suggested that these disor-
ders may be a reflection of an “extreme male brain.” For 
example, he noted that on average, females are better 
than males at inferring the thoughts or intentions of oth-
ers, are more sensitive to facial expressions, are more 
likely to respond empathetically to the distress of others, 
and are more likely to share with others and take turns 
with them. On average, males are less likely to display 
these characteristics, and they are more likely to com-
pete with their peers, to engage in rough-and-tumble 
play, and to establish dominance hierarchies. Males also 
tend to show more interest in toy vehicles, weapons, and 
building blocks and in pursuits such as engineering, metal­
working, and computer programming and are generally 
better at map reading. In other words, males generally 
exhibit more interest in working with physical objects 
and logical systems than with social relations. According 
to Baron-Cohen, people with autistic spectrum disorders 
show an exaggerated pattern of masculine interests and 
behaviors. For example, the lack of interest in other 
people and an obsession with counting and lining-up 
objects in a row that is seen in many people with autism 
are seen as extreme examples of masculine traits.
We saw in Chapter 10 that sexual differentiation of 
the brain is largely controlled by exposure to prenatal 
androgens. Auyeung et al. (2009) used two tests that 
measure autistic traits to assess the behavior of normal 
children whose mothers had undergone amniocentesis 
(removal of a small amount of amniotic fluid during 
pregnancy). Auyeung and her colleagues found a sig-
nificant positive correlation in both males and females 
between fetal testosterone levels and scores on these 
tests. In addition, Knickmeyer, Baron-Cohen, and Fane 
(2006) found that females with congenital adrenal hy-
perplasia, who were exposed to abnormally high levels 
of androgens during fetal development, had a greater 
number of autistic traits. Even if Baron-Cohen’s hypothesis 
figure 17.7  Caudate Nucleus and Stereotyped 
Behavior in Autism
The graph shows repetitive behavior scores of people 
with autistic spectrum disorders as a function of the 
volume of the right caudate nucleus. Larger volumes are 
associated with higher scores.
(Adapted from Hollander et al., 2005.)
6000
5500
5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
Volume of right caudate nucleus
10
12
14
16
8
6
4
2
Repetitive behavior score
Section Summary
Autistic Disorder
The incidence of autistic disorder is 0.6–1.0 percent. It 
is characterized by poor or absent social relations and 
communicative abilities and the presence of repetitive, 
stereotyped movements. Although autistics are usu-
ally, but not always, mentally retarded, they may have 
a particular, isolated talent. Autistic people have diffi-
culty predicting the behavior of other people or form-
ing a theory of mind to explain why they are acting as 
they do. They tend not to pay attention to other people’s 
(continued on next page)

598	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
butts into conversations or games)” (American Psychiat-
ric Association, 1994, pp. 64–65).
ADHD can be very disruptive of a child’s education 
and that of other children in the same classroom. It is 
seen in 4–5 percent of grade school children. Boys are 
about ten times more likely than girls to receive a diagno-
sis of ADHD, but in adulthood the ratio is approximately 
2 to 1, which suggests that many girls with this disorder 
fail to be diagnosed. Because the symptoms can vary—
some children’s symptoms are primarily those of inatten-
tion, some are those of hyperactivity, and some show 
mixed symptoms—most investigators believe that this dis-
order has more than one cause. Diagnosis is often diffi-
cult because the symptoms are not well defined. ADHD is 
often associated with aggression, conduct disorder, learn-
ing disabilities, depression, anxiety, and low self-esteem. 
Approximately 60 percent of children with ADHD con-
tinue to display symptoms of this disorder into adulthood, 
at which time a disproportionate number develop anti­
social personality disorder and substance abuse disorder 
(Ernst et al., 1998). Adults with ADHD are also more 
likely to show cognitive impairments and lower occupa-
tional attainment than would be predicted by their educa-
tion (Seidman et al., 1998). The most common treatment 
for ADHD is administration of methylphenidate (Ritalin), 
a drug that inhibits the reuptake of dopamine. Amphet-
amine, another dopamine agonist, also reduces the symp-
toms of ADHD, but this drug is used much less often.
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity 
Disorder
Some children have difficulty concentrating, remaining 
still, and working on a task. At one time or other, most 
children exhibit these characteristics. But children with 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) display 
these symptoms so often that they interfere with the 
children’s ability to learn.
Description
ADHD is the most common behavior disorder that 
shows itself in childhood. It is usually first discovered in 
the classroom, where children are expected to sit quietly 
and pay attention to the teacher or work steadily on a 
project. Some children’s inability to meet these expecta-
tions then becomes evident. They have difficulty with-
holding a response, act without reflecting, often show 
reckless and impetuous behavior, and let interfering 
activities intrude into ongoing tasks.
According to the DSM-IV, the diagnosis of ADHD 
requires the presence of six or more of nine symptoms 
of inattention and six or more of nine symptoms of hy-
peractivity and impulsivity that have persisted for at least 
six months. Symptoms of inattention include such 
things as “often had difficulty sustaining attention in 
tasks of play activities” or “is often easily distracted by 
extraneous stimuli,” and symptoms of hyperactivity and 
impulsivity include such things as “often runs about or 
climbs excessively in situations in which it is inappropri-
ate” or “often interrupts or intrudes on others (e.g., 
faces, as reflected in the lack of activation of the fusi-
form face area when they do so, and their ability to 
perceive emotional expressions on other people’s 
faces is impaired. Childhood immunization does not 
play a role in the development of autism.
In the past, clinicians blamed parents for autism, 
but now it is generally accepted as a disorder with 
biological roots. Genetic studies have shown that 
autism is highly heritable but that many different 
genes are responsible for its development. Autism 
can also be caused by events that interfere with pre-
natal development, such as prenatal thalidomide or 
maternal infection with rubella. MRI studies indicate 
that the brains of babies who become autistic show 
abnormally rapid growth until two to three years of 
age and then grow more slowly than the brains of 
unaffected children. The amygdala follows a similar 
pattern of development. Regions of the brain 
involved in higher-order processes such as communi-
cative functions and interpretation of social stimuli 
develop more quickly in the autistic brain but then fail 
to continue to develop normally.
Some characteristics of autism can be seen as 
exaggerations of behaviors more often seen in males, 
which has led to the “extreme male brain” hypothesis.
 Thought Question
Have you heard about research that suggests that 
childhood immunizations are associated with the devel-
opment of autism? Have you heard (before reading this 
chapter) that the publication that reported this research 
and its principal author have been discredited? Why do 
you think that many parents are still fearful about having 
their children immunized?
x attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)  A disorder 
characterized by uninhibited responses, lack of sustained 
attention, and hyperactivity; first shows itself in childhood.

	
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder	
599
gradient, reinforcement with a short delay will be even 
more effective, thus producing overactivity. On the 
other hand, these people will be less likely to engage in 
behaviors that are followed by delayed reinforcement, as 
many of our behaviors (especially classroom activities) 
are. In support of this hypothesis, Sagvolden et al. (1998) 
trained normal boys and boys with ADHD on an instru-
mental conditioning task. When a signal was present, 
responses would be reinforced every 30 seconds with 
coins or trinkets. When the signal was not present, re-
sponses were never reinforced. The normal boys learned 
to respond only when the signal was present. When the 
signal was off, they waited patiently until it came on 
again. In contrast, the boys with ADHD showed impul-
sive behavior—intermittent bursts of rapid responses 
whether the signal was present or not. According to the 
investigators, this pattern of responding was what 
would be expected by a steep delay of reinforcement 
gradient.
The symptoms of ADHD resemble those produced 
by damage to the prefrontal cortex: distractibility, forget-
fulness, impulsivity, poor planning, and hyperactivity 
(Aron, Robbins, and Poldrack, 2004). As we saw in Chap-
ter 13, the prefrontal cortex plays a critical role in short-
term memory. We use short-term memory to remember 
what we have just perceived, to remember information 
that we have just recalled from long-term memory, and to 
process (“work on”) all of this information. For this rea-
son, short-term memory is often referred to as working 
memory. The prefrontal cortex uses working memory to 
guide thoughts and behavior, regulate attention, monitor 
the effects of our actions, and organize plans for future 
actions (Arnsten, 2009). Damage or abnormalities in the 
neural circuits that perform these functions give rise to 
the symptoms of ADHD.
As we saw in Chapter 16, the fact that dopamine 
antagonists were discovered to reduce the positive symp-
toms of schizophrenia suggested the hypothesis that 
schizophrenia is caused by overactivity of dopaminergic 
transmission. Similarly, the fact that methylphenidate, a 
dopamine agonist, alleviates the symptoms of ADHD has 
suggested the hypothesis that this disorder is caused by 
underactivity of dopaminergic transmission. As we saw in 
Chapter 13, normal functioning of the prefrontal cortex 
is impaired by low levels of dopamine receptor stimula-
tion in this region, so the suggestion that abnormalities 
in dopaminergic transmission play a role in ADHD seem 
reasonable.
Berridge et al. (2006) administered methylpheni-
date to rats and established a moderate dose that im-
proved their performance on tasks that required atten-
tion and working memory—tasks that involve the 
participation of the prefrontal cortex. They used micro-
dialysis to measure the release of dopamine and norepi-
nephrine and found that the drug increased the levels 
Possible Causes
There is strong evidence from both family studies and 
twin studies that hereditary factors play an important 
role in determining a person’s likelihood of developing 
ADHD. The estimated heritability of ADHD is high, 
ranging from 75 to 91 percent (Thapar, O’Donovan, 
and Owen, 2005).
According to Sagvolden and his colleagues (Sagvolden 
and Sergeant, 1998; Sagvolden et al., 2005), the impulsive 
and hyperactive behaviors that are seen in children with 
ADHD are the result of a delay of reinforcement gradient that 
is steeper than normal. As we saw in Chapter 13, the oc-
currence of an appetitive stimulus can reinforce the be-
havior that just preceded it. For example, a piece of food 
can reinforce the lever press that a rat just made, and a 
smile can reinforce a person’s attempts at conversation. 
Reinforcing stimuli are most effective if they immediately 
follow a behavior: The longer the delay, the less effective 
the reinforcement. Sagvolden and Sergeant suggest that 
deficiencies in dopaminergic transmission in the brains 
of people with ADHD increase the steepness of their de-
lay of reinforcement gradient, which means that immedi-
ate reinforcement is even more effective in these chil-
dren, but even slightly delayed reinforcement loses its 
potency. (See Figure 17.8.)
Why would a steeper delay of reinforcement gradi-
ent produce the symptoms of ADHD? According to 
Sagvolden and his colleagues, for people with a steep 
figure 17.8  Hypothetical Delay of Reinforcement 
Gradients in ADHD
The graph illustrates different delay of reinforcement 
gradients as a function of time. Sagvolden and Sergeant 
(1998) hypothesize that a steeper gradient is responsible 
for the impulsive behavior of children with ADHD.
Short
Long
Strength of reinforcement
High
Low
Children with ADHD
Normal children
Delay between response and 
reinforcing stimulus

600	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
fluid. Although reuptake is the primary means of remov-
ing catecholamines from the synapse, COMT also plays 
a role in deactivating these neurotransmitters after they 
are released. Mattay et al. (2003) noted that the clinical 
effects of amphetamine (which are similar to those of 
methylphenidate) are variable. In some people, am-
phetamine increases positive mood and facilitates per-
formance on cognitive tasks, but in other people it has 
the opposite effect. Mattay et al. tested the effect of 
amphetamine on tasks that made demands on working 
memory in people with two different variants of the 
COMT gene. They found that people with the val-val 
variant, who have lower brain levels of catecholamines, 
performed better when they were given low doses of 
amphetamine. In contrast, administration of amphet-
amine to people with the met-met variant, who have 
higher brain levels of catecholamines, actually impaired 
their performance. Presumably, the first group was 
pushed up the U-shaped curve, and the second group, 
already around the top of the curve, was pushed down 
the other side. (See Figure 17.10.)
I mentioned a few paragraphs ago that Berridge  
et al. (2006) found that methylphenidate increased the 
level of both dopamine and norepinephrine in the pre-
frontal cortex. It appears that both of these effects im-
prove the symptoms of ADHD. Drugs that block 2 re-
ceptors (one of the families of receptors that respond to 
of both of these neurotransmitters in the prefrontal 
cortex but not in other brain regions. A follow-up study 
by Devilbiss and Berridge (2008) found that a moderate 
dose of methylphenidate increased the responsiveness 
of neurons in the prefrontal cortex. A high dose of 
methylphenidate profoundly suppressed neural activity.
Many studies have shown that the effect of dopamine 
levels in the prefrontal cortex on the functions of this 
region follow an inverted U-shaped curve. (See Figure 17.9.) 
Graphs of many behavioral functions have an inverted U 
shape. For example, moderate levels of motivation in-
crease performance on most tasks, but very low levels fail 
to induce a person to perform, and very high levels tend 
to make people nervous and interfere with their perfor-
mance. The dose-response curve for the effects of meth-
ylphenidate also follow an inverted U-shaped function, 
which is why Berridge and his colleagues tested different 
doses of the drug to find a dose that optimized the ani-
mals’ performance. Clinicians have found the same to be 
true for the treatment of ADHD: Doses that are too low 
are ineffective, and doses that are too high produce in-
creases in activity level that disrupt children’s attention 
and cognition.
Good evidence that the levels of dopamine in the 
human prefrontal cortex have effects on behavior comes 
from studies of people with two different variants of  
the gene for an enzyme that affects dopamine levels in 
the brain. COMT (catechol-O-methyltransferase) is an 
enzyme that breaks down catecholamines (including 
dopamine and norepinephrine) in the extracellular 
figure 17.9  An Inverted U Curve
The graph illustrates an inverted U-curve function, in 
which low and high values of the variable on the 
horizontal axis are associated with low values of the 
variable on the vertical axis and moderate values are 
associated with high values. Presumably, the relationship 
between brain dopamine levels and the symptoms of 
ADHD follow a function like this one.
Low
Moderate
High
Strength of variable
Low
High
Size of response
figure 17.10  Interactions Between Amphetamine 
and COMT Alleles on Working Memory
The graph shows the differential effects of amphetamine 
on the performance on a working memory task of people 
with two different variants of the gene for the COMT 
enzyme. The performance of people with the val-val variant 
was enhanced by amphetamine, and the performance of 
people with the met-met variant was reduced.
(Based on data from Mattay et al., 2003.)
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Val-val
Met-met
Placebo
Amphetamine
Mean errors

	
Stress Disorders	
601
of unaffected children at 7.5 years. Ultimately, the 
growth of the brains of the children with ADHD caught 
up with those of unaffected children.
Most investigators believe that ADHD is caused by ab-
normalities in a network of brain regions that involves the 
striatum (caudate nucleus and putamen) as well as the 
prefrontal cortex, which has reciprocal connections with 
the striatum. Functional-imaging studies lend support to 
this hypothesis. Studies have reported decreased activation 
of the caudate nucleus (Rubia et al., 1999; Durston et al., 
2003; Vaidya et al., 2005) or medial prefrontal cortex (Rubia 
et al., 1999; Tamm et al., 2004) while subjects with ADHD 
were performing tasks that required careful attention and 
the ability to inhibit a response. Given the importance of 
dopaminergic innervation of both regions, abnormalities in 
dopaminergic transmission may be responsible for the al-
terations in brain functions.
norepinephrine) impair performance of monkeys on 
working-memory tasks and produce the symptoms of 
ADHD. Conversely, that stimulate these receptors im-
prove performance (Arnsten and Li, 2005). Evidence 
suggests that optimal levels of both dopamine and nor-
epinephrine in the prefrontal cortex facilitate the func-
tions of this region, and the effects of methylphenidate 
on both of these neurotransmitters is responsible for 
the drug’s therapeutic effects.
We saw in the previous section that the brains of 
children with autism develop differently from those of 
unaffected children. A study by Shaw et al. (2007) found 
differences in the development of the brains of children 
with ADHD as well. The investigators found that cortical 
growth was delayed in children with ADHD. In fact, the 
cortical thickness of the brains of children with ADHD 
at age 10.5 years was about the same as that of the brains 
Section Summary
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is the most 
common behavior disorder that first appears in child-
hood. Children with ADHD show symptoms of inat-
tention, hyperactivity, and impulsivity. The most com-
mon medical treatment is methylphenidate, a 
dopamine agonist.
Family and twin studies indicate a heritable com-
ponent in this disorder. Evidence suggests that a 
steeper delay of reinforcement gradient may account 
for impulsiveness and hyperactivity. Molecular genetic 
studies have found an association between ADHD 
and different alleles for COMT, an enzyme that deac-
tivates monoamines.
Growth of the brains of children with ADHD fol-
lows that of the brains of unaffected children, but the 
rate of growth is slower. Most investigators believe that 
ADHD is caused by abnormalities in a network of brain 
regions that involves the striatum and the prefrontal 
cortex. Functional-imaging studies have shown hypoac-
tivation of these structures in the brains of people with 
ADHD while they are performing tasks that require 
careful attention and the ability to inhibit a response.
Stress Disorders
Aversive stimuli can harm people’s health. Many of 
these harmful effects are produced not by the stimuli 
themselves but by our reactions to them. Walter Cannon, 
the physiologist who criticized the James-Lange theory 
described in Chapter 11, introduced the term stress to 
refer to the physiological reaction caused by the percep-
tion of aversive or threatening situations.
The word stress was borrowed from engineering, in 
which it refers to the action of physical forces of me-
chanical structures. The word can be a noun or a verb; 
and the noun can refer to situations or the individual’s 
response to them. When we say that someone was sub-
jected to stress, we really mean that someone was  
exposed to a situation that elicited a particular reaction 
in that person: a stress response.
The physiological responses that accompany the neg-
ative emotions prepare us to threaten rivals or fight them 
or to run away from dangerous situations. Walter Cannon 
introduced the phrase fight-or-flight response to refer to 
x stress  A general, imprecise term that can refer either to a 
stress response or to a situation that elicits a stress response.
x stress response  A physiological reaction caused by the 
perception of aversive or threatening situations.
x fight-or-flight response  A species-typical response prepara-
tory to fighting or fleeing; thought to be responsible for some of 
the deleterious effects of stressful situations on health.

602	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
brain stem that contains norepinephrine-secreting neu-
rons (Van Bockstaele et al., 2001).
The other stress-related hormone is cortisol, a steroid 
secreted by the adrenal cortex. Cortisol is called a gluco-
corticoid because it has profound effects on glucose me-
tabolism. In addition, glucocorticoids help to break 
down protein and convert it to glucose, help to make fats 
available for energy, increase blood flow, and stimulate 
behavioral responsiveness, presumably by affecting the 
brain. They decrease the sensitivity of the gonads to lu-
teinizing hormone (LH), which suppresses the secretion 
of the sex steroid hormones. In fact, Singer and Zumoff 
(1992) found that the blood level of testosterone in male 
hospital residents (doctors, not patients) was severely 
depressed, presumably because of the stressful work 
schedule they were obliged to follow. Glucocorticoids 
have other physiological effects, too, some of which are 
only poorly understood. Almost every cell in the body 
contains glucocorticoid receptors, which means that few 
of them are unaffected by these hormones.
The secretion of glucocorticoids is controlled by 
neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothala-
mus (PVN), whose axons terminate in the median emi-
nence, where the hypothalamic capillaries of the portal 
blood supply to the anterior pituitary gland are located. 
(The pituitary portal blood supply was described in 
Chapter 3.) The neurons of the PVN secrete a peptide 
called corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), which 
stimulates the anterior pituitary gland to secrete adreno-
corticotropic hormone (ACTH). ACTH enters the gen-
eral circulation and stimulates the adrenal cortex to se-
crete glucocorticoids. (See Figure 17.11.)
CRH (also called CRF, or corticotropin-releasing 
factor) is also secreted within the brain, where it serves 
as a neuromodulator/neurotransmitter, especially in re-
gions of the limbic system that are involved in emotional 
responses, such as the periaqueductal gray matter, the 
locus coeruleus, and the central nucleus of the amyg-
dala. The behavioral effects produced by an injection of 
CRH into the brain are similar to those produced by 
aversive situations; thus, some elements of the stress re-
sponse appear to be produced by the release of CRH by 
neurons in the brain. For example, intracerebroven-
tricular injection of CRH decreases the amount of time 
the physiological reactions that prepare us for the strenu-
ous efforts required by fighting or running away. Nor-
mally, once we have bluffed or fought with an adversary 
or run away from a dangerous situation, the threat is over, 
and our physiological condition can return to normal. 
The fact that the physiological responses may have ad-
verse long-term effects on our health is unimportant as 
long as the responses are brief. But sometimes, the threat-
ening situations are continuous rather than episodic, pro-
ducing a more or less continuous stress response. And as 
we will see in the section on posttraumatic stress disorder, 
sometimes threatening situations are so severe that they 
trigger responses that can last for months or years.
Physiology of the Stress Response
As we saw in Chapter 11, emotions consist of behavioral, 
autonomic, and endocrine responses. The latter two 
components, the autonomic and endocrine responses, 
are the ones that can have adverse effects on health. 
(Well, I guess the behavioral components can, too, if a 
person rashly gets into a fight with someone who is 
much bigger and stronger.) Because threatening situa-
tions generally call for vigorous activity, the autonomic 
and endocrine responses that accompany them are cata-
bolic; that is, they help to mobilize the body’s energy 
resources. The sympathetic branch of the autonomic 
nervous system is active, and the adrenal glands secrete 
epinephrine, norepinephrine, and steroid stress hor-
mones. Because the effects of sympathetic activity are 
similar to those of the adrenal hormones, I will limit my 
discussion to the hormonal responses.
Epinephrine affects glucose metabolism, causing 
the nutrients stored in muscles to become available to 
provide energy for strenuous exercise. Along with nor-
epinephrine, the hormone also increases blood flow to 
the muscles by increasing the output of the heart. In 
doing so, it also increases blood pressure, which, over 
the long term, contributes to cardiovascular disease.
Besides serving as a stress hormone, norepineph-
rine is (as you know) secreted in the brain as a neu-
rotransmitter. Some of the behavioral and physiological 
responses produced by aversive stimuli appear to be 
mediated by noradrenergic neurons. For example, mi-
crodialysis studies have found that stressful situations 
increase the release of norepinephrine in the hypothal-
amus, frontal cortex, and lateral basal forebrain (Yokoo 
et al., 1990; Cenci et al., 1992). Montero, Fuentes, and 
Fernandez-Tome (1990) found that destruction of the 
noradrenergic axons that ascend from the brain stem to 
the forebrain prevented the rise in blood pressure that 
is normally produced by social isolation stress. The 
stress-induced release of norepinephrine in the brain is 
controlled by a pathway from the central nucleus of the 
amygdala to the locus coeruleus, the nucleus of the 
x glucocorticoid  One of a group of hormones of the adrenal 
cortex that are important in protein and carbohydrate metabolism, 
secreted especially in times of stress.
x corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)  A hypothalamic 
hormone that stimulates the anterior pituitary gland to secrete 
ACTH (adrenocorticotropic hormone).
x adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)  A hormone released 
by the anterior pituitary gland in response to CRH; stimulates the 
adrenal cortex to produce glucocorticoids.

	
Stress Disorders	
603
injure or kill people are more likely to suffer from ill-
nesses several months later (Theorell et al., 1992). Air 
traffic controllers, especially those who work at busy 
airports where the danger of collisions is greatest, show 
a greater incidence of high blood pressure, which gets 
worse as they grow older (Cobb and Rose, 1973). (See 
Figure 17.12.) They also are more likely to suffer from 
ulcers or diabetes.
A pioneer in the study of stress, Hans Selye suggested 
that most of the harmful effects of stress were produced 
by the prolonged secretion of glucocorticoids (Selye, 
1976). Although the short-term effects of glucocorticoids 
are essential, the long-term effects are damaging. These 
effects include increased blood pressure, damage to mus-
cle tissue, steroid diabetes, infertility, inhibition of growth, 
inhibition of the inflammatory responses, and suppres-
sion of the immune system. High blood pressure can lead 
to heart attacks and stroke. Inhibition of growth in chil-
dren who are subjected to prolonged stress prevents them 
from attaining their full height. Inhibition of the inflam-
matory response makes it more difficult for the body to 
heal itself after an injury, and suppression of the immune 
system makes an individual vulnerable to infections. Long-
term administration of steroids to treat inflammatory dis-
eases often produces cognitive deficits and can even lead 
to steroid psychosis, whose symptoms include profound dis-
tractibility, anxiety, insomnia, depression, hallucinations, 
and delusions (Lewis and Smith, 1983; de Kloet, Joëls, 
and Holsboer, 2005).
a rat spends in the center of a large open chamber (Britton 
et al., 1982), enhances the acquisition of a classically 
conditioned fear response (Cole and Koob, 1988), and 
increases the startle response elicited by a sudden loud 
noise (Swerdlow et al., 1986). On the other hand, intra-
cerebroventricular injection of a CRH antagonist reduces 
the anxiety caused by a variety of stressful situations 
(Kalin, Sherman, and Takahaski, 1988; Heinrichs et al., 
1994; Skutella et al., 1994).
The secretion of glucocorticoids does more than 
help an animal react to a stressful situation: It helps the 
animal to survive. If a rat’s adrenal glands are removed, 
the rat becomes much more susceptible to the effects of 
stress. In fact, a stressful situation that a normal rat 
would take in its stride might kill one whose adrenal 
glands have been removed. And physicians know that if 
an adrenalectomized person is subjected to stressors, he 
or she must be given additional amounts of glucocorti-
coid (Tyrell and Baxter, 1981).
Health Effects of Long-Term Stress
Many studies of people who have been subjected to 
stressful situations have found evidence of ill health. For 
example, survivors of concentration camps, who were 
obviously subjected to long-term stress, have had gener-
ally poorer health later in life than other people of the 
same age (Cohen, 1953). Drivers of subway trains that 
figure 17.11  Control of Secretion of Stress 
Hormones
The diagram illustrates control of the secretion of 
glucocorticoids by the adrenal cortex and of 
catecholamines by the adrenal medulla.
Hypothalamus
ACTH
(adrenocorticotropic
hormone)
Glucocorticoids
Anterior
pituitary gland
Adrenal cortex
Neuron of sympathetic
nervous system
Adrenal medulla
Epinephrine and
norepinephrine
Corticotropin-releasing
hormone (CRH)
figure 17.12  Stress and Hypertension
The graph shows the incidence of hypertension in various 
age groups of air traffic controllers at high-stress and low-
stress airports.
(Based on data from Cobb and Rose, 1973.)
20–24 25–29 30–34 35–39 40–44 45–49
10
20
30
40
50
0
Age group (years)
High
stress
Low
stress
Hypertension (cases per thousand)

604	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
flow, which often occurs as a result of the aging process. 
The increased amounts of extracellular glutamate per-
mit calcium to enter through NMDA receptors. (You 
will recall that the entry of excessive amounts of calcium 
can kill neurons.) Perhaps, then, the stressors to which 
people are subjected throughout their lives increase the 
likelihood of memory problems as they grow older. In 
fact, Lupien et al. (1996) found that elderly people with 
elevated blood levels of glucocorticoids learned a maze 
more slowly than did those with normal levels.
Prenatal stress can cause long-lasting malfunctions 
in learning and memory by interfering with normal de-
velopment of the hippocampus. Son et al. (2006) sub-
jected pregnant mice to stress caused by periodic re-
straint in a small chamber. They found that this treatment 
interfered with the establishment of hippocampal long-
term potentiation in the offspring of the stressed fe-
males, along with impairments in a spatial learning task 
that requires the participation of the hippocampus.
Brunson et al. (2005) confirmed that stress early in 
life can cause the deterioration of normal hippocampal 
functions later in life. During the first week after deliv-
ery the investigators placed female rats and their new-
born pups in cages with hard floors and only a small 
amount of nesting material. When the animals were 
tested at 4–5 months of age, their behavior was normal. 
However, when they were tested at 12 months of age, 
the investigators observed impaired performance in the 
Morris water maze and deficient development of long-
term potentiation in the hippocampus. They also found 
dendritic atrophy in the hippocampus, which might 
have accounted for the impaired spatial learning and 
synaptic plasticity.
Even brief exposure to stress can have adverse effects 
on normal brain functioning. Diamond and his col-
leagues (Diamond et al., 1999; Mesches et al., 1999) 
placed rats individually in a Plexiglas box and then placed 
the box in a cage with a cat for 75 minutes. Although the 
cat could not harm the rats, the cat’s presence (and 
odor) clearly alarmed the rats and elicited a stress re-
sponse; the stressed rats’ blood glucocorticoid increased 
to approximately five times its normal level. The investi-
gators found that this short-term stress affected the func-
tioning of the animals’ hippocampus. The stressed rats’ 
ability to learn a spatial task was impaired, and primed-
burst potentiation (a form of long-term potentiation) was 
impaired in hippocampal slices taken from stressed rats. 
(See Figure 17.14.) A study by Thomas, Hotsenpiller, and 
Peterson (2007) found that acute stress diminished the 
long-term survival of hippocampal neurons produced by 
the process of neurogenesis. As we saw in Chapter 16, 
impaired hippocampal neurogenesis appears to play a 
role in the development of depression.
Salm et al. (2004) found that mild prenatal stress 
can affect brain development and produce changes that 
The adverse effects of stress on healing were dem-
onstrated in a study by Kiecolt-Glaser et al. (1995), who 
performed punch biopsy wounds in the subjects’ fore-
arms, a harmless procedure that is used often in medical 
research. The subjects were people who were providing 
long-term care for relatives with Alzheimer’s disease—a 
situation that is known to cause stress—and control sub-
jects of the same approximate age and family income. 
The investigators found that healing of the wounds took 
significantly longer in the caregivers (48.7 days versus 
39.3 days). (See Figure 17.13.) A subsequent study 
(Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 2005) found that the wounds of 
couples who displayed high levels of hostile behavior 
healed more slowly than those of couples with more 
friendly interactions.
Effects of Stress on the Brain
Sapolsky and his colleagues have investigated one rather 
serious long-term effect of stress: brain damage. As you 
learned in Chapter 14, the hippocampal formation plays 
a crucial role in learning and memory, and evidence 
suggests that one of the causes of memory loss that oc-
curs with aging is degeneration of this brain structure. 
Research with animals has shown that long-term expo-
sure to glucocorticoids destroys neurons located in field 
CA1 of the hippocampal formation. The hormone  
appears to destroy the neurons by decreasing the entry 
of glucose and decreasing the reuptake of glutamate 
(Sapolsky, 1992, 1995; McEwen and Sapolsky, 1995). 
Both of these effects make neurons more susceptible to 
potentially harmful events, such as decreased blood 
figure 17.13  Stress and Healing of Wounds
The graph shows the percentage of caregivers and 
control subjects whose wounds had healed as a function 
of time after the biopsy was performed.
(Based on data from Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 1995.)
0
4
5
6
7
8
Time (weeks)
Caregivers
Controls
20
40
60
80
 100
Percent of subjects 
with fully healed wounds

	
Stress Disorders	
605
female rats to stress and later observed the effects of this 
treatment on their offspring once they grew up. They 
found that the prenatally stressed rats showed a pro-
longed secretion of glucocorticoids when they were sub-
jected to restraint stress. However, if the mothers’ adre-
nal glands had been removed so that glucocorticoid 
levels could not increase during the stressful situation, 
their offspring reacted normally in adulthood. (The ex-
perimenters gave the adrenalectomized mothers con-
trolled amounts of glucocorticoids to maintain them in 
good health.) (See Figure 17.16.)
Uno et al. (1989) found that if long-term stress is 
intense enough, it can even cause severe brain damage 
in young primates. The investigators studied a colony of 
vervet monkeys housed in a primate center in Kenya. 
They found that some monkeys died, apparently from 
stress. Vervet monkeys have a hierarchical society, and 
monkeys near the bottom of the hierarchy are picked 
on by the others; thus, they are almost continuously 
subjected to stress. (Ours is not the only species with 
social structures that cause a stress reaction in some of 
its members.) The deceased monkeys had gastric ulcers 
and enlarged adrenal glands, which are signs of chronic 
stress. And as Figure 17.17 shows, neurons in the CA1 
field of the hippocampal formation were completely 
destroyed. (See Figure 17.17.) Severe stress appears to 
cause brain damage in humans as well; Jensen, Genefke, 
and Hyldebrandt (1982) found evidence of brain de-
generation in CT scans of people who had been sub-
jected to torture. More mild forms of stress early in life 
also appear to affect brain development. van Harmelen 
et al. (2010) found that episodes of emotional maltreat-
ment during childhood was associated with an average 
last the animal’s lifetime. Once a day during the last 
week of gestation, they removed pregnant rats from 
their cage and gave them an injection of a small amount 
of sterile saline—a procedure that lasted less than five 
minutes. This mild stress altered the development of 
their amygdalas. The investigators found that the vol-
ume of the lateral nucleus of the amygdala, measured in 
adulthood, was increased by approximately 30 percent 
in the animals that sustained mild prenatal stress. (See 
Figure 17.15.) As previous experiments have shown, pre-
natal stress increases fearfulness in a novel environment 
(Ward et al., 2000). Presumably, the increased size of 
the lateral nucleus contributes to this fearfulness.
A study by Fenoglio, Chen, and Baram (2006) found 
that experiences that occur during early life can reduce 
reactivity to stressful situations in adulthood. Fenoglio 
and her colleagues removed rat pups from their cage, 
handled them for fifteen minutes, and then returned 
them to their cage. Their mother immediately began 
licking and grooming the pups. This nurturing behavior 
activated several regions of the pups’ brains, including 
the central nucleus of the amygdala and the paraven-
tricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, the location of 
neurons that secrete CRH. The result of this treatment 
was to reduce the production of CRH in response to 
stressful stimuli, which conferred a lifelong attenuation 
of the hormonal stress response.
At least some of the effects of prenatal stress on the 
fetus appear to be mediated by the secretion of gluco-
corticoids. Barbazanges et al. (1996) subjected pregnant 
figure 17.14  Acute Stress, Glucocorticoid Level, 
Synaptic Plasticity, and Learning
The graphs show the effects of acute stress caused by 
exposing a rat to the sight and smell of a cat. The stress 
raised the glucocorticoid level (corticosterone, in the case 
of a rat), impaired the development of primed-burst 
potentiation (PBP, a form of long-term potentiation) in 
slices taken from these animals, and interfered with 
learning of a spatial task that requires the hippocampus.
(Based on data from Diamond et al., 1999.)
100
75
50
25
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
Errors in spatial task
20
16
12
8
4
0
Corticosterone (µg/dl)
Magnitude of PBP (% change)
Condition
Condition
Condition
Chamber + cat
Home cage
Chamber
figure 17.15  Prenatal Stress and the Amygdala
The graph shows volumes of nuclei of the amygdala in 
control rats and rats that had been subjected to prenatal 
stress.
(Based on data from Salm et al., 2004.)
0
0.5
1.0
Volume of nucleus (mm3)
Dorsal
nucleus
Central
nucleus
Basal
nucleus
Lateral
nucleus
Control
Prenatal stress

606	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
In addition, Apkarian et al. (2004a) found that chronic 
back pain led to poor performance on a task that has 
been shown to be affected by prefrontal lesions.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
The aftermath of tragic and traumatic events such as 
those that accompany wars, violence, and natural disas-
ters often includes psychological symptoms that persist 
long after the stressful events are over. According to the 
DSM IV, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is caused 
by a situation in which a person “experienced, witnessed, 
or was confronted with an event or events that involved 
actual or threatened death or serious injury, or a threat 
to the physical integrity of self or others” that provoked 
figure 17.16  Prenatal Stress and Glucocorticoids 
in Adulthood
The graph shows the effects of prenatal stress and 
glucocorticoid level on the stress response of adult rats. 
Adrenalectomy of the mother before she was subjected 
to stress prevented the development of an elevated 
stress response in the offspring during adulthood.
(Based on data from Barbazanges et al., 1996.)
8
6
4
2
0
10
Mother was not
stressed
Mother was stressed
Normal
Adrenalectomized
Plasma corticosterone (µg/100 ml)
120 min after stress
Condition of Mother
figure 17.17  Brain Damage Caused by Stress
The photomicrographs show sections through the hippocampus. (a) A normal monkey. 
(b) A monkey of low social status subjected to stress. Compare the regions between 
the arrowheads, which are normally filled with large pyramidal cells.
(Based on data from Hollander et al., 2005.)
(a)
(b)
7.2 percent reduction in the volume of the dorsomedial 
prefrontal cortex. (See Figure 17.18.)
Several studies have confirmed that the stress of 
chronic pain has adverse effects on the brain and on cog-
nitive behavior. Apkarian et al. (2004b) found that each 
year of severe chronic back pain resulted in the loss of 1.3 
cm3 of gray matter in the cerebral cortex, with the great-
est reductions seen in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. 
figure 17.18  Early Stress and the Prefrontal Cortex
The scans show the region of the dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex that showed a 7.2 percent reduction in volume in 
adults who were subjected to emotional maltreatment 
during childhood.
(From van Harmelen, A. L., van Tol, M. J., van der Wee, N. J., et al. Biological 
Psychiatry, 2010, 68, 832–838. Reprinted by permission.)
x posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)  A psychological 
disorder caused by exposure to a situation of extreme danger and 
stress; symptoms include recurrent dreams or recollections; can 
interfere with social activities and cause a feeling of hopelessness.

	
Stress Disorders	
607
overlap between PTSD and panic disorder, generalized 
anxiety disorder, and depressive disorder is at least partly 
a result of shared genetic factors (Nugent, Amstadter, 
and Koenen, 2008). Presumably, these genetic factors 
make some people more sensitive to the effects of stress.
A few studies have identified specific genes as pos-
sible risk factors for developing PTSD. These genes in-
clude those responsible for the production of dopamine 
D2 receptors, dopamine transporters, and 5-HT trans-
porters (Nugent, Amstadter, and Koenen, 2008). The 
risk for PTSD appears to depend on both genetic and 
environmental factors. and Kolassa et al. (2010) studied 
424 survivors of the genocide in the Rwanda. They 
found that the likelihood of developing PTSD increased 
with the number of traumatic events the person had 
experienced. (See Figure 17.19.) They also found that 
people with a particular allele of the gene responsible 
for the production of COMT, the enzyme that destroys 
catecholamines present in the interstitial fluid, were 
more likely to develop PTSD. This allele (the Val158Met 
polymorphism) is associated with slower destruction of 
catecholamines, which supports the conclusion from 
other research that these neurotransmitters are associ-
ated with the deleterious effects of stress.
As we saw in the previous subsection, studies with 
laboratory animals have shown that prolonged exposure 
to stress can cause brain abnormalities, particularly in 
the hippocampus and amygdala. At least two MRI studies 
have found evidence of hippocampal damage in veterans 
a response that “involved intense fear, helplessness, or 
horror.” The likelihood of developing PTSD is increased 
if the traumatic event involved danger or violence from 
other people, such as assault, rape, or wartime experi-
ences (Yehuda and LeDoux, 2007). The symptoms pro-
duced by such exposure include recurrent dreams or 
recollections of the event, feelings that the traumatic 
event is recurring (“flashback” episodes), and intense 
psychological distress. These dreams, recollections, or 
flashback episodes can lead the person to avoid thinking 
about the traumatic event, which often results in dimin-
ished interest in social activities, feelings of detachment 
from others, suppressed emotional feelings, and a sense 
that the future is bleak and empty. Particular psycho-
logical symptoms include difficulty falling or staying 
asleep, irritability, outbursts of anger, difficulty in con-
centrating, and heightened reactions to sudden noises 
or movements. As this description indicates, people with 
PTSD have impaired mental health functioning. They 
also tend to have generally poor physical health (Zayfert 
et al., 2002). Although men are exposed to traumatic 
events more often than women are, women are more 
likely to develop PTSD after being exposed to such 
events (Fullerton et al., 2001).
Evidence from twin studies suggest that genetic fac-
tors play a role in a person’s susceptibility to develop 
PTSD. In fact, genetic factors influence not only the 
likelihood of developing PTSD after being exposed to 
traumatic events but also the likelihood that the person 
will be involved in such an event (Stein et al., 2002). For 
example, people with a genetic predisposition toward 
irritability and anger are more likely to be assaulted, and 
those with a predisposition toward risky behavior are 
more likely to be involved in accidents. In a review of the 
Vietnam Era Twin Registry, Koenen et al. (2002) re-
ported that the following demographic and personality 
factors predict an increased risk for being exposed to 
traumatic events: military service in Southeast Asia dur-
ing the Vietnam war, a preexisting conduct disorder or 
substance dependence, and a family history of mood 
disorders. The following factors predict the risk of devel-
oping PTSD after exposure: earlier age at the time of 
the traumatic event; exposure to more than one trau-
matic event; a father with a depressive disorder; a low 
educational level; poor social support; and a preexisting 
conduct disorder, panic disorder, generalized anxiety 
disorder, or depressive disorder.
Although many people are exposed to potentially 
traumatic event during their lives, most of them recover 
rapidly and do not develop PTSD (Kessler et al., 1995). 
For example, Rothbaum and Davis (2003) reported that 
two weeks after having been raped, 92 percent of the 
victims showed symptoms that met the criteria for PTSD. 
However, within thirty days, the symptoms in most of the 
victims had subsided. Twin studies have shown that the 
figure 17.19  Prevalence of PTSD and Traumatic 
Events
This graph shows the prevalence of PTSD in survivors  
of the Rwanda genocide as a function of the number  
of traumatic events they had suffered.
(Based on data from Kolassa et al., 2010.)
0
5
10
15
20
25
0
20
40
60
80
100
Frequency of PTSD (percent)
Number of traumatic events

608	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
thicker in people who showed rapid extinction of a con-
ditioned emotional response. And as we also saw earlier, 
van Harmelen et al. (2010) found a reduction in the 
volume of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex in adults 
who had sustained emotional maltreatment during 
childhood.
Several studies have found evidence that the amyg-
dala is responsible for emotional reactions in people 
with PTSD and that the prefrontal cortex plays a role in 
these reactions in people without PTSD by inhibiting 
the activity of the amygdala (Rauch, Shin, and Phelps, 
2006). For example, a functional-imaging study by Shin 
et al. (2005) found that, when shown pictures of faces 
with fearful expressions, people with PTSD show greater 
activation of the amygdala and smaller activation of the 
prefrontal cortex than did people without PTSD. In fact, 
the symptoms of the people with PTSD were positively 
correlated with the activation of the amygdala and nega-
tively correlated with the activation of the medial pre-
frontal cortex. (See Figure 17.21.)
The most common treatments for PTSD are cogni-
tive behavior therapy, group therapy, and SNRIs. Boggio 
et al. (2010) report on the results of a clinical trial of 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) of the dorso-
lateral prefrontal cortex on thirty patients with PTSD. 
They found that ten sessions of stimulation of the left or 
right dlPFC significantly reduced the symptoms of PTSD 
with combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder (Bremner 
et al., 1995; Gurvits et al., 1996). In the study by Gurvits 
et al., the volume of the hippocampal formation was re-
duced by over 20 percent, and the loss was proportional 
to the amount of combat exposure the veteran had expe-
rienced. Lindauer et al. (2005) found that police officers 
with PTSD had a smaller hippocampus than those who 
had also been exposed to trauma but had not developed 
the disorder.
An intriguing study by Gilbertson et al. (2002) sug-
gests that at least part of the reduction in hippocampal 
volume seen in people with PTSD may predate the expo-
sure to stress. In other words, a smaller hippocampus 
may be a predisposing factor in the acquisition of PTSD. 
Gilbertson and his colleagues studied forty pairs of 
monozygotic twins in which only one member went to 
Vietnam and experienced combat. Almost half of the 
men who experienced combat developed PTSD. As ex-
pected, the hippocampal volumes of these men were 
smaller than those of the men who did not develop 
PTSD after their combat experience. In addition, a 
smaller hippocampus was associated with more severe 
PTSD. The interesting fact is that the twin brothers of 
the PTSD patients who stayed home also showed smaller-
than-average hippocampal volumes. Given that monozy-
gotic twins are genetically identical and usually have very 
similar brains, this finding suggests that a person with a 
small hippocampus is more likely to develop PTSD after 
exposure to psychological trauma. (See Figure 17.20.)
What role might the hippocampus play in a per-
son’s susceptibility to developing PTSD? One possibility 
is that the hippocampus, which plays a role in contex-
tual learning, participates in recognition of the context 
in which a traumatic event occurs. The hippocampus 
then aids in distinguishing safe from dangerous con-
texts (Yehuda and LeDoux, 2007). Consider a person 
who has been attacked by another person. The sight of 
other people who even slightly resemble the attacker or 
situations that even slightly resemble the one in which 
the attack occurred might then activate the amygdala 
and trigger an emotional response. However, a normally 
functioning hippocampus would detect the difference 
between the present context and the one associated 
with the attack and inhibit the activity of the amygdala.
I mentioned a few paragraphs ago that most people 
who are exposed to a potentially traumatic event man-
age to suppress their emotional reaction. What brain 
mechanisms suppress the emotional reaction and enable 
a person to recover? As we saw in Chapters 11 and 16, 
the prefrontal cortex can exert an inhibitory effect on 
the amygdala and suppress emotional reactions. For ex-
ample, the medial prefrontal cortex plays an essential 
role in the extinction of conditioned emotional re-
sponses. In fact, Milad, Vidal-Gonzalez, and Quirk 
(2005) found that the medial prefrontal cortex was 
figure 17.20  Hippocampal Volumes of Pairs  
of Monozygotic Twins
The graph shows that the size of the hippocampus of 
twins not exposed to combat was similar to the size of 
their combat-exposed co-twins whether or not the 
co-twins had PTSD. These results suggest that 
hippocampal size is a genetically determined trait that 
predates the exposure to combat.
(Based on data from Gilbertson et al., 2002.)
Combat-exposed
twin with PTSD
5
6
7
8
9
Unexposed
co-twin
Unexposed
co-twin
10
Hippocampal volume (ml)
Combat-exposed
twin without PTSD

	
Stress Disorders	
609
The Immune System
The immune system is one of the most complex systems 
of the body. Its function is to protect us from infection; 
and because infectious organisms have developed devi-
ous tricks through the process of evolution, our immune 
system has evolved devious tricks of its own. The descrip-
tion I provide here is abbreviated and simplified, but it 
presents some of the important elements of the system.
The immune system derives from white blood cells 
that develop in the bone marrow and in the thymus 
gland. Some of the cells roam through the blood or lym-
phatic system; others reside permanently in one place. 
Two types of specific immune reaction occur when the 
body is invaded by foreign organisms, including bacteria, 
fungi, and viruses: chemically mediated and cell-mediated. 
Chemically mediated immune reactions involve antibod-
ies. Infectious microorganisms have unique proteins on 
their surfaces, called antigens. These proteins serve as the 
invaders’ calling cards, identifying them to the immune 
system. Through exposure to the microorganisms, the 
immune system learns to recognize these proteins. (I will 
not try to explain the mechanism by which this learning 
takes place.) The result of this learning is the development 
of special lines of cells that produce specific antibodies—
proteins that recognize antigens and help to kill the in-
vading microorganism.
One type of antibody is released into the circulation 
by B-lymphocytes, which receive their name from the 
fact that they develop in bone marrow. These antibod-
ies, called immunoglobulins, are chains of protein. Each 
type of immunoglobulin (there are five of them) is iden-
tical except for one end, which contains a unique recep-
tor. A particular receptor binds with a particular anti-
gen, just as a molecule of a hormone or neurotransmitter 
binds with its receptor. When the appropriate line of 
B-lymphocytes detects the presence of an invading bac-
terium, the cells release their antibodies, which bind 
with the antigens present on the surface of the invading 
microorganisms. The antigens either kill the invaders 
directly or attract other white blood cells, which then 
destroy them. (See Figure 17.23a.)
and that the beneficial effects was still seen three months 
later. (See Figure 17.22.)
Psychoneuroimmunology
As we have seen, long-term stress can be harmful to one’s 
health and can even result in brain damage. The most 
important cause of these effects is elevated levels of gluco-
corticoids, but the high blood pressure caused by epi-
nephrine and norepinephrine also plays a contributing 
role. In addition, the stress response can impair the func-
tions of the immune system, which protects us from as-
sault from viruses, microbes, fungi, and other types of 
parasites. Study of the interactions between the immune 
system and behavior (mediated by the nervous system, of 
course) is called psychoneuroimmunology. Some research 
in this field is described in the following subsection.
figure 17.21  Amygdala and Medial Prefrontal 
Cortex Activation in PTSD
The graph shows the activation of the amygdala and 
medial prefrontal cortex in response to the sight of happy 
or fearful faces in control subjects and subjects with PTSD.
(Based on data from Shin et al., 2005.)
Amygdala
Medial Prefrontal Cortex
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Activation
PTSD
Control
PTSD
Control
Fearful face
Happy face
figure 17.22  Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation 
and PTSD
The graph shows the effects of TMS of the dorsolateral 
prefrontal cortex on symptoms of PTSD.
(Based on data from Boggio et al., 2010.)
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
PTSD scale score
Right TMS
Left TMS
Sham TMS
Baseline
Day 5
Day 10
x psychoneuroimmunology  The branch of neuroscience 
involved with interactions among environmental stimuli, the 
nervous system, and the immune system.
x antigen  A protein present on a microorganism that permits 
the immune system to recognize the microorganism as an invader.
x antibody  A protein produced by a cell of the immune system 
that recognizes antigens present on invading microorganisms.
x B-lymphocyte  A white blood cell that originates in the bone 
marrow; part of the immune system.
x immunoglobulin  An antibody released by B-lymphocytes that 
bind with antigens and help to destroy invading microorganisms.

610	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
A direct relationship between stress and the immune 
system was demonstrated by Kiecolt-Glaser et al. (1987). 
Using several different laboratory tests, these investigators 
found that caregivers of family members with Alzheimer’s 
disease, who certainly underwent considerable stress, 
showed weaker immune systems. One measure of the 
quality of a person’s immune response is measurement of 
antibodies produced in response to a vaccination. Glaser 
et al. (2000) found that people taking care of spouses 
with Alzheimer’s disease maintained lower levels of IgG 
antibodies after receiving a pneumococcal bacterial vac-
cine. (See Figure 17.24.) Bereavement, another source of 
stress, also suppresses the immune system. Schleifer  
et al. (1983) tested the husbands of women with breast 
cancer and found that their immune response was lower 
after their wives died. Knapp et al. (1992) even found that 
when healthy subjects imagined themselves reliving un-
pleasant emotional experiences, the immune response 
measured in samples of their blood was decreased.
Several studies indicate that the suppression of the 
immune response by stress is largely (but not entirely) 
mediated by glucocorticoids (Keller et al., 1983).  
Because the secretion of glucocorticoids is controlled by 
the brain (through its secretion of CRH), the brain is 
The other type of defense by the immune system, 
cell-mediated immune reactions, is produced by T- 
lymphocytes, which originally develop in the thymus 
gland. These cells also produce antibodies, but the anti-
bodies remain attached to the outside of their mem-
brane. T-lymphocytes primarily defend the body against 
fungi, viruses, and multicellular parasites. When anti-
gens bind with their surface antibodies, the cells either 
directly kill the invaders or signal other white blood cells 
to come and kill them. (See Figure 17.23b.)
The reactions illustrated in Figure 17.23 are much 
simplified; actually, both chemically mediated and cell-
mediated immune reactions involve several different 
types of cells. The communication between these cells is 
accomplished by cytokines, chemicals that stimulate cell 
division. The cytokines that are released by certain white 
blood cells when an invading microorganism is detected 
(principally interleukin-1 and interleukin-2) cause other 
white blood cells to proliferate and direct an attack 
against the invader. The primary way in which glucocor-
ticoids suppress specific immune responses is by inter-
fering with the messages conveyed by the cytokines 
(Sapolsky, 1992).
Neural Control of the Immune System
As we will see in the next subsection, the stress response 
can increase the likelihood of infectious diseases. What 
is the physiological explanation for these effects? One 
answer, probably the most important one, is that stress 
increases the secretion of glucocorticoids, and as we 
saw, these hormones directly suppress the activity of the 
immune system.
figure 17.23  Immune Reactions
(a) Chemically mediated reaction. The B-lymphocyte detects an antigen on a bacterium 
and releases a specific immunoglobulin. (b) Cell-mediated reaction. The T-lymphocyte 
detects an antigen on a bacterium and kills it directly or releases a chemical that 
attracts other white blood cells.
B-lymphocyte
Bacterium
Antigen
Receptor
Immunoglobulin binds with
antigen on bacterium; kills
it directly or attracts white
blood cells
Chemical that attracts
other white blood cells
or
Direct kill
T-lymphocyte
(b)
(a)
x T-lymphocyte  A white blood cell that originates in the thymus 
gland; part of the immune system.
x cytokine  A category of chemicals released by certain white 
blood cells when they detect the presence of an invading 
microorganism; causes other white blood cells to proliferate and 
mount an attack against the invader.

	
Stress Disorders	
611
respiratory infection, people experienced an increased 
number of undesirable events and a decreased number 
of desirable events in their lives. (See Figure 17.25.)
obviously responsible for the suppressing effect of these 
hormones on the immune system. Neurons in the cen-
tral nucleus of the amygdala send axons to CRH-secreting 
neurons in the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothala-
mus; thus, we can reasonably expect that the mechanism 
that is responsible for negative emotional responses is 
also responsible for the stress response and the immuno-
suppression that accompanies it.
Stress and Infectious Diseases
Often when a married person dies, his or her spouse 
dies soon afterward, frequently of an infection. In fact, a 
wide variety of stress-producing events in a person’s life 
can increase the susceptibility to illness. For example, 
Glaser et al. (1987) found that medical students were 
more likely to contract acute infections and to show evi-
dence of suppression of the immune system during the 
time that final examinations were given.
Stone, Reed, and Neale (1987) attempted to deter-
mine whether stressful events in people’s daily lives might 
predispose them to upper respiratory infection. If a per-
son is exposed to a microorganism that might cause such 
a disease, the symptoms do not occur for several days; 
that is, there is an incubation period between exposure 
and signs of the actual illness. Thus, the authors reasoned 
that if stressful events suppressed the immune system, 
one might expect to see a higher likelihood of respira-
tory infections several days after such stress. To test their 
hypothesis, they asked volunteers to keep a daily record 
of desirable and undesirable events in their lives over a 
twelve-week period. The volunteers also kept a daily re-
cord of any discomfort or symptoms of illness.
The results were as predicted: During the three- to 
five-day period just before showing symptoms of an upper 
figure 17.24  Effect of Stress on Immune Function
The graph shows levels of antibodies produced in 
response to a pneumococcal bacterial vaccine in the 
blood of controls and former and current caregivers of 
spouses with Alzheimer’s disease.
(Based on data from Glaser, R., Sheridan, J., Malarkey, W. B., MacCallum, R. C., 
and Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. Psychosomatic Medicine, 2000, 62, 804–807.)
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
Baseline
2 weeks
1 month
3 months
6 months
Antibody titer (log10)
Controls
Former caregivers
Current caregivers
Time
figure 17.25  Role of Desirable and Undesirable 
Events on Susceptibility to Upper Respiratory 
Infections
The graph shows mean percentage change in frequency 
of undesirable and desirable events during the ten-day 
period preceding the onset of symptoms of upper 
respiratory infections.
(Based on data from Stone et al., 1987.)
0
60
160
10
80
100
120
140
180
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Percentage change in frequency
Days before onset of symptoms
Undesirable
events
Desirable
events
figure 17.26  Colds and Psychological Stress
The graph shows the percentage of subjects with colds as 
a function of an index of psychological stress.
(Based on data from Cohen et al., 1991.)
30
25
35
40
45
50
3–4
5–6
7–8
9–10
11–12
0
Index of psychological stress
Percentage of subjects who developed colds

612	
Chapter 17  Anxiety, Autistic, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity, and Stress Disorders
the production of IgA, lead to a rise in the likelihood of 
upper respiratory infections.
The results of the study by Stone and his colleagues 
were confirmed by an experiment by Cohen, Tyrrell, 
and Smith (1991). The investigators found that subjects 
who were given nasal drops containing cold viruses were 
much more likely to develop colds if they reported 
stressful experiences during the past year and if they 
said they felt threatened, out of control, or overwhelmed 
by events. (See Figure 17.26 on page 611.)
Stone et al. (1987) suggest that the effect is caused 
by decreased production of a particular immunoglobu-
lin that is present in the secretions of mucous mem-
branes, including those in the nose, mouth, throat, and 
lungs. This immunoglobulin, IgA, serves as the first de-
fense against infectious microorganisms that enter the 
nose or mouth. They found that IgA is associated with 
mood; when a subject is unhappy or depressed, IgA lev-
els are lower than normal. The results suggest that the 
stress caused by undesirable events may, by suppressing 
Section Summary
Stress Disorders
People’s emotional reactions to aversive stimuli can 
harm their health. The stress response, which Cannon 
called the fight-or-flight response, is useful as a short-
term response to threatening stimuli but is harmful in 
the long term. This response includes increased activity 
of the sympathetic branch of the autonomic nervous 
system and increased secretion of hormones by the 
adrenal gland: epinephrine, norepinephrine, and glu-
cocorticoids. Corticotropin-releasing hormone, which 
stimulates the secretion of ACTH by the anterior pitu-
itary gland, is also secreted in the brain, where it elicits 
some of the emotional responses to stressful situations.
Although increased levels of epinephrine and nor-
epinephrine can raise blood pressure, most of the 
harm to health comes from glucocorticoids. Prolonged 
exposure to high levels of these hormones can 
increase blood pressure, damage muscle tissue, lead 
to infertility, inhibit growth, inhibit the inflammatory 
response, and suppress the immune system. It can 
also damage the hippocampus. Acute stress can also 
impair hippocampal functioning. Exposure to stress 
during prenatal or early postnatal life can affect brain 
development and behavior such as impaired functions 
of the hippocampus and increased size of the amyg-
dala. Stress also decreases the survival rate of hippo-
campal neurons produced by adult neurogenesis. 
These changes appear to predispose animals to react 
more to stressful situations. In humans the stress of 
chronic pain can cause loss of cerebral gray matter, 
especially in the prefrontal cortex, with accompanying 
deficits in behaviors that involve the prefrontal cortex.
Exposure to extreme stress can also have long-
lasting effects; it can lead to the development of 
posttraumatic stress disorder. This disorder is associ-
ated with memory deficits, poorer health, and a 
decrease in the size of the hippocampus. Twin studies 
indicate a hereditary component to susceptibility to 
PTSD. Predisposing factors appear to involve 
decreased hippocampal volume and differences in 
the genes for D2 receptors, dopamine transporters, 
and 5-HT transporters. The prefrontal cortex of peo-
ple who are resistant to the development of PTSD fol-
lowing severe stress appears to inhibit the amygdala. 
The prefrontal cortex appears to be hypoactive in 
people with PTSD. Transcranial magnetic stimulation 
of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex appears to 
reduce the symptoms of PTSD.
Psychoneuroimmunology is a field of study that 
investigates interactions between behavior and the 
immune system, mediated by the nervous system. 
The immune system consists of several types of white 
blood cells that produce both nonspecific and spe-
cific responses to invading microorganisms. The non-
specific responses include the inflammatory response, 
the antiviral effect of interferon, and the action of nat-
ural killer cells against viruses and cancer cells. The 
specific responses include chemically mediated and 
cell-mediated responses. Chemically mediated 
responses are carried out by B-lymphocytes, which 
release antibodies that bind with the antigens on 
microorganisms and kill them directly or target them 
for attack by other white blood cells. Cell-mediated 
responses are carried out by T-lymphocytes, whose 
antibodies remain attached to their membranes.
A wide variety of stressful situations have been shown 
to increase people’s susceptibility to infectious diseases. 

	
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab	
613
The most important mechanism by which stress 
impairs immune function is the increased blood levels 
of glucocorticoids. The neural input to the bone mar-
row, lymph nodes, and thymus gland may also play a 
role; and the endogenous opioids appear to suppress 
the activity of natural killer cells.
 Thought Question
Researchers are puzzled by the fact that glucocorticoids 
suppress the immune system. Can you think of any 
potential benefits that come from the fact that our 
immune system is suppressed during times of danger 
and stress?
1.  Describe the symptoms and possible causes of panic 
disorder.
2.  Describe the symptoms and possible causes of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder.
3.  Describe the symptoms and possible causes of  
autistic disorder.
4.  Describe the symptoms and possible causes of  
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Review Questions
5.  Describe the physiological responses to stress and 
their effects on health.
6.  Discuss posttraumatic stress disorder.
7.  Discuss psychoneuroimmunology and the interactions 
between the immune system and stress.
Study and Review on MyPsychLab
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Emotion and Stress
Dysregulation of the neural circuits involved in emotion and stress may underlie 
some psychopathologies, including anxiety disorders and stress disorders. The 
Emotion and Stress module of the virtual brain reviews the brain regions and  
circuits involved in these processes.

614	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
Drug Abuse
Outline
18
 Common Features of Addiction
A Little Background
Positive Reinforcement
Negative Reinforcement
Craving and Relapse
Section Summary
 Commonly Abused Drugs
Opiates
Stimulant Drugs: Cocaine  
and Amphetamine
Nicotine
Alcohol
Cannabis
Section Summary
 Heredity and Drug Abuse
Section Summary
 Therapy for Drug Abuse
Section Summary
chapter

in Chapter 13, is that all of these substances stimulate 
brain mechanisms responsible for positive reinforce-
ment. In addition, most of them also reduce or elimi-
nate unpleasant feelings, some of which are produced 
by the drugs themselves. The immediate effects of these 
drugs are more powerful than the realization that in the 
long term, bad things will happen.
Common Features  
of Addiction
The term addiction derives from the Latin word addicere, “to 
sentence.” Someone who is addicted to a drug is, in a way, 
sentenced to a term of involuntary servitude, being obliged 
to fulfill the demands of his or her drug dependency.
A Little Background
Long ago, people discovered that many substances found 
in nature—primarily leaves, seeds, and roots of plants 
but also some animal products—had medicinal qualities. 
They discovered herbs that helped to prevent infections, 
that promoted healing, that calmed an upset stomach, 
John was beginning to feel that perhaps he would be able 
to get his life back together. It looked as though his drug 
habit was going to be licked. He had started taking drugs 
several years ago. At first, he had used them only on 
special occasions—mostly on weekends with his friends—
but heroin proved to be his undoing. One of his acquaint-
ances had introduced him to the needle, and John had 
found the rush so blissful that he couldn’t wait a whole 
week for his next fix. Soon he was shooting up daily. Shortly 
after that, he lost his job and, to support his habit, began 
earning money through car theft and small-time drug 
dealing. As time went on, he needed more and more 
heroin at shorter and shorter intervals, which necessitated 
even more money. Eventually, he was arrested and con-
victed of selling heroin to an undercover agent.
The judge gave John the choice of prison or a drug 
rehabilitation program, and he chose the latter. Soon after 
starting the program, he realized that he was relieved to 
have been caught. Now that he was clean and could reflect 
on his life, he realized what would have become of him 
had he continued to take drugs. Withdrawal from heroin 
was not an experience he would want to live through 
again, but it turned out not to be as bad as he had feared. 
The counselors in his program told him to avoid his old 
neighborhood and to break contact with his old acquaint-
ances, and he followed their advice. He had been clean for 
eight weeks, he had a job, and he had met a woman who 
really seemed sympathetic. He knew that he hadn’t 
completely kicked his habit, because every now and then, 
despite his best intentions, he found himself thinking about 
the wonderful glow that heroin provided him. But things 
were definitely looking up.
Then one day, while walking home from work, he 
turned a corner and saw a new poster plastered on the 
wall of a building. The poster, produced by an antidrug 
agency, showed all sorts of drug paraphernalia in full color: 
glassine envelopes with white powder spilling out of them, 
syringes, needles, a spoon and candle used to heat and 
dissolve the drug. John was seized with a sudden, intense 
compulsion to take some heroin. He closed his eyes, trying 
to will the feeling away, but all he could feel were his 
churning stomach and his trembling limbs, and all he could 
think about was getting a fix. He hopped on a bus and 
went back to his old neighborhood.
D
rug addiction poses a serious problem to our 
species. Consider the disastrous effects caused 
by the abuse of one of our oldest drugs, alcohol: 
automobile accidents, fetal alcohol syndrome, cirrhosis 
of the liver, Korsakoff’s syndrome, increased rate of 
heart disease, and increased rate of intracerebral hem-
orrhage. Smoking (addiction to nicotine) greatly in-
creases the chances of dying of lung cancer, heart at-
tack, and stroke; and women who smoke give birth to 
smaller, less healthy babies. Cocaine addiction can cause 
psychotic behavior, brain damage, and death from over-
dose; and competition for lucrative and illegal markets 
terrorizes neighborhoods, subverts political and judicial 
systems, and causes many violent deaths. The use of 
“designer drugs” exposes users to unknown dangers of 
untested and often contaminated products, as several 
people discovered when they acquired Parkinson’s dis-
ease after taking a synthetic opiate that was tainted with 
a neurotoxin. (This unfortunate event was described in 
the opening case of Chapter 5.) Addicts who take their 
drugs intravenously run a serious risk of contracting 
AIDS, hepatitis, or other infectious diseases. What makes 
these drugs so attractive to so many people?
The answer, as you might have predicted from what 
you have learned about the physiology of reinforcement 

616	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
of these drugs on their brains kept them coming back 
for more. Table 18.1 lists the most important addictive 
drugs and indicates their sites of action.
Positive Reinforcement
Drugs that lead to dependency must first reinforce peo-
ple’s behavior. As we saw in Chapter 13, positive rein-
forcement refers to the effect that certain stimuli have 
on the behaviors that preceded them. If, in a particular 
situation, a behavior is regularly followed by an appeti-
tive stimulus (one that the organism will tend to ap-
proach), then that behavior will become more frequent 
in that situation. For example, if a hungry rat acciden-
tally bumps into a lever and receives some food, the rat 
will eventually learn to press the lever. What actually 
seems to happen is that the occurrence of an appetitive 
stimulus activates a reinforcement mechanism in the 
brain that increases the likelihood of the most recent 
response (the lever press) in the present situation (the 
chamber that contains the lever).
Addictive drugs have reinforcing effects. That is, 
their effects include activation of the reinforcement 
mechanism. This activation strengthens the response 
that was just made. If the drug was taken by a fast-acting 
route such as injection or inhalation, the last response 
will be the act of taking the drug, so that response will 
be reinforced. This form of reinforcement is powerful 
and immediate and works with a wide variety of species. 
For example, a rat or a monkey will quickly learn to 
press a lever that controls a device that injects cocaine 
through a plastic tube inserted into a vein.
that reduced pain, or that helped to provide a night’s 
sleep. They also discovered “recreational drugs”—drugs 
that produced pleasurable effects when eaten, drunk, or 
smoked. The most universal recreational drug, and per-
haps the first one that our ancestors discovered, is ethyl 
alcohol. Yeast spores are present everywhere, and these 
microorganisms can feed on sugar solutions and pro-
duce alcohol as a by-product. Undoubtedly, people in 
many different parts of the world discovered the pleasur-
able effects of drinking liquids that had been left alone 
for a while, such as the juice that had accumulated in the 
bottom of a container of fruit. The juice may have be-
come sour and bad-tasting because of the action of bac-
teria, but the effects of the alcohol encouraged people to 
experiment, which led to the development of a wide va-
riety of fermented beverages.
Our ancestors also discovered other recreational 
drugs. Some of them were consumed only locally; others 
became so popular that their cultivation as commercial 
crops spread throughout the world. For example, Asians 
discovered the effects of the sap of the opium poppy 
and the beverage made from the leaves of the tea plant, 
Indians discovered the effects of the smoke of cannabis, 
South Americans discovered the effects of chewing coca 
leaves and making a drink from coffee beans, and North 
Americans discovered the effects of the smoke of the 
tobacco plant. Many of the drugs they discovered were 
actually poisons that served to protect the plants from 
animals (primarily insects) that ate them. Although the 
drugs were toxic in sufficient quantities, our ancestors 
learned how to take these drugs in amounts that would 
not make them ill—at least, not right away. The effects 
Source: Adapted from Hyman, S. E., and Malenka, R. C. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2001, 2, 695–703.
table 18.1  Addictive Drugs
Drug
Sites of Action
Ethyl alcohol
NMDA receptor (indirect antagonist), GABAA receptor (indirect agonist)
Barbiturates
GABAA receptor (indirect agonist)
Benzodiazepines (tranquilizers)
GABAA receptor (indirect agonist)
Cannabis (marijuana)
CB1 cannabinoid receptor (agonist)
Nicotine
Nicotinic ACh receptor (agonist)
Opiates (heroin, morphine, etc.)
μ and  opiate receptor (agonist)
Phencyclidine (PCP) and ketamine
NMDA receptor (indirect antagonist)
Cocaine
Blocks reuptake of dopamine (and serotonin and norepinephrine)
Amphetamine and methamphetamine 
Causes release of dopamine (by running dopamine transporters  
in reverse)

	
Common Features of Addiction 	
617
more complicated. If a person takes a pill and several min-
utes later experiences a feeling of euphoria, he or she will 
certainly remember swallowing the pill. The recollection 
of this behavior will activate some of the same neural cir-
cuits involved in actually swallowing the pill, and the rein-
forcement mechanism, now active because of the effects 
of the drug, will reinforce the behavior. In other words, 
people’s ability to remember having performed a behav-
ior make it possible to reinforce their behavior vicariously. 
The immediacy is between an imagined act and a reinforc-
ing stimulus—the euphoria produced by the drug. Other 
cognitive processes contribute to the reinforcement, too, 
such as the expectation that euphoric effects will occur. 
Perhaps someone said, “Take one of these pills; you’ll get 
a great high!” But if a nonhuman animal is fed one 
of these pills, its behavior is unlikely to be reinforced. By 
the time the euphoric effect occurs, the animal will be  
doing something other than ingesting the drug. Without 
the ability to recall an earlier behavior and thus activate 
circuits involved in the performance of that behavior,  
the delay between the behavior and the reinforcing effect 
of the drug prevents the animal from learning to take  
the drug.
Neural Mechanisms
As we saw in Chapter 13, all natural reinforcers that have 
been studied so far (such as food for a hungry animal, 
water for a thirsty one, or sexual contact) have one 
physiological effect in common: They cause the release 
of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens (White, 1996). 
This effect is not the only effect of reinforcing stimuli, 
and even aversive stimuli can trigger the release of do-
pamine (Salamone, 1992). But although there is much 
that we do not yet understand about the neural basis of 
reinforcement, the release of dopamine appears to be a 
necessary (but not sufficient) condition for positive rein-
forcement to take place.
Addictive drugs—including amphetamine, cocaine, 
opiates, nicotine, alcohol, PCP, and cannabis—trigger 
the release of dopamine in the nucleus accumbens 
(NAC), as measured by microdialysis (Di Chiara, 1995). 
Different drugs stimulate the release of dopamine in 
different ways. The details of the ways in which particu-
lar drugs interact with the mesolimbic dopaminergic 
system are described later, in sections devoted to par-
ticular categories of drugs.
The fact that the reinforcing properties of addictive 
drugs involve the same brain mechanisms as natural rein-
forcers indicated that these drugs “hijack” brain mecha-
nisms that normally help us adapt to our environment. It 
appears that the process of addiction begins in the meso-
limbic dopaminergic system and then produces long-
term changes in other brain regions that receive input 
from these neurons (Kauer and Malenka, 2007). The first 
Role in Drug Abuse
When appetitive stimuli occur, they usually do so be-
cause we just did something to make them happen—
and not because an experimenter was controlling the 
situation. The effectiveness of a reinforcing stimulus is 
greatest if it occurs immediately after a response occurs. 
If the reinforcing stimulus is delayed, it becomes consid-
erably less effective. The reason for this fact is found by 
examining the function of instrumental conditioning: 
learning about the consequences of our own behavior. 
Normally, causes and effects are closely related in time; 
we do something, and something happens, good or bad. 
The consequences of the actions teach us whether to 
repeat that action, and events that follow a response by 
more than a few seconds were probably not caused by 
that response.
As we saw in Chapter 4, drug users prefer heroin to 
morphine not because heroin has a different effect, but 
because it has a more rapid effect. In fact, heroin is con-
verted to morphine as soon as it reaches the brain. But 
because heroin is more lipid soluble, it passes through 
the blood–brain barrier more rapidly, and its effects on 
the brain are felt sooner than those of morphine. The 
most potent reinforcement occurs when drugs produce 
sudden changes in the activity of the reinforcement 
mechanism; slow changes are much less reinforcing. A 
person taking an addictive drug seeks a sudden “rush” 
produced by a fast-acting drug. (As we will see later, the 
use of methadone to treat opiate addiction and nicotine 
patches to treat tobacco addiction are based on this 
phenomenon.)
Earlier, I posed the question of why people would 
ever expose themselves to the risks associated with dan-
gerous addictive drugs. Who would rationally chose to 
become addicted to a drug that produced pleasurable 
effects in the short term but also produced even more 
powerful aversive effects in the long term: loss of em-
ployment and social status, legal problems and possible 
imprisonment, damage to health, and even premature 
death? The answer is that, as we saw, our reinforcement 
mechanism evolved to deal with the immediate effects of 
our behavior. The immediate reinforcing effects of an 
addictive drug can, for some individuals, overpower the 
recognition of the long-term aversive effects. Fortu-
nately, most people are able to resist the short-term ef-
fects; only a minority of people who try addictive drugs 
go on to become dependent on them. Although co-
caine is one of the most addictive drugs currently avail-
able, only about 15 percent of people who use it be-
come addicted to it (Wagner and Anthony, 2002). As we 
will see later, particular brain mechanisms are respon-
sible for inhibiting behavior that has unfavorable long-
term consequences.
If an addictive drug is taken by a slow-acting route, 
reinforcement can also occur, but the process is somewhat 

618	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
a dorsally cascading set of reciprocal connections be-
tween the striatum and the ventral tegmental area. Ana-
tomical studies show that neurons in the ventral NAC 
project to the VTA, which sends dopaminergic projec-
tions back to a more dorsal region of the NAC, and so 
on. This back-and-forth communication continues, con-
necting increasingly dorsal regions of the striatum, all 
the way up to the caudate nucleus and putamen. Belin 
and Everitt found that bilateral infusions of a dopamine 
antagonist into the dorsal striatum of rats suppressed 
responding to a light that had been associated with infu-
sions of cocaine but that unilateral infusions had no ef-
fect. They also found that a unilateral lesion of the NAC 
had no effect on responding. However, they found that 
a lesion of the NAC on one side of the brain combined 
with infusion of a dopamine antagonist into the dorsal 
striatum on the other side of the brain suppressed re-
sponding to the light. (See Figure 18.1.) These results 
suggest that the control of compulsive addictive behav-
ior is established by interactions between the ventral 
and dorsal striatum that are mediated by dopaminergic 
connections between these regions and the VTA.
The alterations that occur in the NAC and later in 
the dorsal striatum include changes in dopamine recep-
tors on the medium spiny neurons, which are the source 
of axons that project from both of these regions to other 
parts of the brain. Increases are seen in dopamine D1 
receptors, which cause excitation and facilitate behav-
ior, and decreases are seen in dopamine D2 receptors, 
changes appear to take place in the ventral tegmental 
area (VTA). Saal et al. (2003) found that a single admin-
istration of a variety of addictive drugs (including co-
caine, amphetamine, morphine, alcohol, and nicotine) 
increased the strength of excitatory synapses on dopami-
nergic neurons in the VTA in mice. This change appears 
to result from insertion of additional AMPA receptors 
into the postsynaptic membrane of the DA neurons 
(Mameli et al., 2009). As we saw in Chapter 13, this pro-
cess, normally mediated by glutamatergic NMDA recep-
tors, is the neural basis of many forms of learning. A sin-
gle injection of an addictive drug produces synaptic 
strengthening in the VTA that lasts for about five days. If 
an animal receives cocaine for about two weeks, the 
changes in the VTA persist.
As a result of the changes in the VTA, increased 
activation is seen in a variety of regions that receive do-
paminergic input from the VTA, including the ventral 
striatum, which includes the NAC, and the dorsal stria-
tum, which includes the caudate nucleus and putamen. 
Synaptic changes that are responsible for the compul-
sive behaviors that characterize addiction occur only af-
ter continued use of an addictive drug. The most impor-
tant of these changes appears to occur in the dorsal 
striatum. We saw in Chapter 13 that the basal ganglia 
(which includes the dorsal striatum) play a critical role 
in instrumental conditioning, and the process of addic-
tion involves just that.
At first, the potential addict experiences the plea-
surable effects of the drug, reinforcing the behaviors 
that cause the drug to be delivered to the brain (procur-
ing the drug, taking necessary steps to prepare it, then 
swallowing, smoking, sniffing, or injecting it). Eventu-
ally, these behaviors become habitual, and the impulse 
to perform them becomes difficult to resist. The early 
reinforcing effects that take place in the ventral striatum 
(namely, in the NAC) encourage drug-taking behavior, 
but the changes that make the behaviors become habit-
ual involve the dorsal striatum. As we saw in Chapter 8, 
an important role of the dorsal striatum is establishment 
of automatic behaviors—the type of behaviors that are 
impaired in people with Parkinson’s disease, which is 
caused by disruption of dopaminergic input to this re-
gion. Studies with monkeys performing a response rein-
forced by infusion of cocaine over a long period of time 
show a progression of neural changes, beginning in the 
ventral striatum (in the NAC) and continuing upward  
to the dorsal striatum (Letchworth et al., 2001; Porrino 
et al., 2004, 2007). A study with rats found that infusion 
of a dopamine antagonist into the dorsal striatum sup-
pressed lever presses that had been reinforced by the 
illumination of a light that had been paired with intrave-
nous injections of cocaine Vanderschuren et al. (2005).
An experiment by Belin and Everitt (2008) suggests 
that the neural changes responsible for addiction follow 
figure 18.1  Establishment of Neural Changes  
in the Dorsal Striatum
The graph shows the effects of infusing various amounts of 
a drug that blocks dopamine receptors into the dorsal 
striatum contralateral to a lesion of the nucleus accumbens.
(Based on data from Belin and Everitt, 2008.)
200
150
100
0
50
Number of lever presses
0
5
10
15
Lesion in
nucleus 
accumbens
Infusion of
dopamine 
antagonist
in dorsal striatum
-flupenthixol (µg/infusion)
α

	
Common Features of Addiction 	
619
addicted individuals dopamine is released in the dorsal 
striatum not by the drug itself but by stimuli associated 
with procuring and taking the drug, including places 
where the drug was taken and people with whom it was 
taken. So when people first take an addictive drug, they 
experience pleasurable effects. If they continue to take 
the drug and become addicted, their compulsion to 
take the drug is not motivated by the pleasurable effects, 
but by drug-related cues that give rise to the urge to 
perform drug-seeking behaviors. As Volkow and her col-
leagues note, drug addicts are aroused and motivated 
when they are seeking a drug but are withdrawn and 
apathetic when they are in a drug-free environment, 
engaged in activities not related to drug taking.
Most people who are exposed to addictive drugs do 
not become addicted (Volkow and Li, 2005). The likeli-
hood of becoming addicted is a function of heredity, 
age (adolescents are most vulnerable), and environ-
ment (such as access to drugs and stressful life events). 
The role of heredity is discussed in a later section of this 
chapter. The role of the prefrontal cortex in judgment, 
risk taking, and control of inappropriate behaviors may 
explain why adolescents are much more vulnerable to 
drug addiction than are adults. Adolescence is a time of 
rapid and profound maturational change in the brain—
particularly in the prefrontal cortex. Before these cir-
cuits reach their adult form, adolescents are more likely 
to display increased levels of impulsive, novelty-driven, 
risky behavior, including experimentation with alcohol, 
nicotine, and illicit drugs. Addiction in adults most of-
ten begins in adolescence or young adulthood. Approx-
imately 50 percent of cases of addiction begin between 
the ages of fifteen and eighteen, and very few begin af-
ter age twenty. In addition, early onset of drug-taking is 
associated with more severe addiction and a greater 
likelihood of multiple substance abuse (Chambers, Tay-
lor, and Potenza, 2003). In fact, Tarter et al. (2003) 
found that ten- to twelve-year-old boys who scored the 
lowest on tests of behavioral inhibition had an increased 
risk of developing substance use disorder by age nine-
teen. Some regions of the prefrontal cortex have inhibi-
tory connections with the striatum, and increased activ-
ity of these regions is correlated with resistance to 
addiction. Presumably, the increased vulnerability of 
adolescents to drug addiction is related to the relative 
immaturity of inhibitory mechanisms of their prefrontal 
cortex. The final development of neural circuits in-
volved in behavioral control and judgment, along with 
the maturity that comes from increased experience, ap-
parently helps people emerging from adolescence to 
resist the temptation to abuse drugs.
Two peptides, orexin and MCH, play a crucial role in 
the reinforcing effects of drugs. As we saw in Chapters 9 
and 12, orexin (also called hypocretin) plays an important 
role in control of sleep stages and food-seeking behavior. 
which cause inhibition and suppress behavior. A study 
by Witten et al. (2010) found that one of the neural 
changes in the NAC caused by cocaine intake involves 
acetylcholinergic interneurons. ACh neurons comprise 
less than one percent of the neurons in the NAC, but 
these neurons have a powerful effect on the activity of 
the medium spiny neurons located there. Witten and 
her colleagues found that cocaine increased the firing 
of the interneurons, and that inhibiting the firing of 
these neurons by optogenetic methods blocked the re-
inforcing effect of cocaine.
Functional-imaging studies by Volkow and her col-
leagues (reviewed by Volkow et al., 2011) provide evidence 
that addiction involves the dorsal striatum in humans, as 
well as in other animals. The investigators found that 
when cocaine addicts are given an injection of methyl-
phenidate (a drug with effects like those of cocaine or 
amphetamine), they show a much smaller release of do-
pamine in the NAC or dorsal striatum than do non­
addicted people. However, when addicted people are  
shown a video of people smoking cocaine, they showed 
an increased release of dopamine in the dorsal striatum. 
Thus, the response to the drug itself is diminished in ad-
dicts, but the response to cues associated with the drug 
is augmented—in the dorsal striatum. (See Figure 18.2.)
These results are consistent with those of studies 
with animals cited above: The release of dopamine in 
the NAC leads to acquisition of a drug addiction, but 
changes in the dorsal striatum are responsible for the 
establishment of the drug-taking habit. In addition, in 
figure 18.2  Dopamine Release Stimulated  
by Methylphenidate
The scatter plot shows that increases in the release of 
dopamine in the putamen (part of the dorsal striatum) are 
associated with increased craving in cocaine addicts.
(Based on data from Volkow et al., 2011.)
Percent change in binding potential
                                     
30
20
10
0
–10
–20
–30
–40
0
.05
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Change in craving
–.05
less
more
DA release

620	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
It is worth pointing out that negative reinforcement 
should not be confused with punishment. Both phenom-
ena involve aversive stimuli, but one makes a response 
more likely, while the other makes it less likely. For 
negative reinforcement to occur, the response must 
make the unpleasant stimulus end (or at least decrease). 
For punishment to occur, the response must make the 
unpleasant stimulus occur. For example, if a little boy 
touches a mousetrap and hurts his finger, he is unlikely 
to touch a mousetrap again. The painful stimulus pun-
ishes the behavior of touching the mousetrap.
People who abuse some drugs become physically 
dependent on the drug; that is, they show tolerance and 
withdrawal symptoms. As we saw in Chapter 4, tolerance is 
the decreased sensitivity to a drug that comes from its 
continued use; the user must take larger and larger 
amounts of the drug for it to be effective. Once a person 
has taken an opiate regularly enough to develop toler-
ance, that person will exhibit withdrawal symptoms if he 
or she stops taking the drug. Withdrawal symptoms are 
primarily the opposite of the effects of the drug itself. 
The effects of heroin—euphoria, constipation, and re-
laxation—lead to the withdrawal effects of dysphoria, 
cramping and diarrhea, and agitation.
Most investigators believe that tolerance is produced 
by the body’s attempt to compensate for the unusual con-
dition of heroin intoxication. The drug disturbs normal 
homeostatic mechanisms in the brain, and in reaction 
these mechanisms begin to produce effects opposite to 
those of the drug, partially compensating for the distur-
bance. Because of these compensatory mechanisms, the 
user must take increasing amounts of heroin to achieve 
the effects that were produced when he or she first started 
taking the drug. These mechanisms also account for the 
symptoms of withdrawal: When the person stops taking 
the drug, the compensatory mechanisms make them-
selves felt, unopposed by the action of the drug.
Although positive reinforcement seems to be what 
provokes drug taking in the first place, reduction of 
withdrawal effects could certainly play a role in main-
taining someone’s drug addiction. The withdrawal ef-
fects are unpleasant, but as soon as the person takes 
some of the drug, these effects go away, producing neg-
ative reinforcement.
Negative reinforcement could also explain the acquisi-
tion of drug addictions under some conditions. If a stressed 
person is suffering from some unpleasant feelings and 
then takes a drug that eliminates these feelings, the per-
son’s drug-taking behavior is likely to be reinforced. For 
example, alcohol can relieve feelings of anxiety. A person 
Orexin is synthesized in neurons in the lateral hypo-
thalamus and released in many parts of the brain, in-
cluding those that play a role in addiction, such as the 
VTA, NAC, and dorsal striatum. Administration of ad-
dictive drugs or presentation of stimuli associated with 
them activate orexinergic neurons, and infusion of 
orexin into the VTA reinstate drug seeking that was 
previously extinguished. (Relapse—resumption of drug-
seeking—is discussed later in this chapter.) In addition, 
infusion into the VTA of a drug that blocks orexin re-
ceptors also blocks cocaine seeking elicited by drug- 
related cues and prevents the learning of a conditioned 
place preference—preference for a place where morphine 
was previously administered (Aston-Jones et al., 2009; 
Sharf, Sarhan, and DiLeone, 2010; Kenney, 2011).
The second peptide, MCH (melanin-concentrating 
hormone), is also synthesized in the lateral hypothalamus, 
and as we saw in Chapter 12, stimulates hunger and re-
duces metabolic rate. MCH receptors are found in sev-
eral places in the brain, including the NAC, where it is 
found on neurons that also contain DA receptors. 
Chung et al. (2009) found that stimulating both DA re-
ceptors and MCH receptors increased firing of NAC 
neurons, and that administering a drug that blocks 
MCH receptors decreased the effectiveness of cocaine 
or cocaine-related cues on the animals’ behavior. A tar-
geted mutation against the MCH receptor gene had the 
same effect. Cippitelli et al. (2010) found that MCH 
played a similar role in alcohol intake.
Negative Reinforcement
You have probably heard the old joke in which someone 
says that the reason he bangs his head against the wall is 
that “it feels so good when I stop.” Of course, that joke 
is funny (well, mildly amusing) because we know that 
although no one would act that way, ceasing to bang our 
head against the wall certainly does feel better than con-
tinuing to do so. If someone started hitting us on the 
head and we were able to do something to get the per-
son to stop, whatever it was that we did would certainly 
be reinforced.
A behavior that turns off (or reduces) an aversive 
stimulus will be reinforced. This phenomenon is known 
as negative reinforcement, and its usefulness is obvious. 
For example, consider the following scenario: A woman 
staying in a rented house cannot get to sleep because of 
the unpleasant screeching noise that the furnace makes. 
She goes to the basement to discover the source of the 
noise and finally kicks the side of the oil burner. The 
noise ceases. The next time the furnace screeches, she 
immediately goes to the basement and kicks the side of 
the oil burner. The unpleasant noise (the aversive stimu-
lus) is terminated when the woman kicks the side of the 
oil burner (the response), so the response is reinforced.
x negative reinforcement  The removal or reduction of an 
aversive stimulus that is contingent on a particular response, with 
an attendant increase in the frequency of that response.

	
Common Features of Addiction 	
621
this kind of relapse (reinstatement of a previously extin-
guished response) is a good model for the craving that 
motivates drug-seeking behavior in a former addict. 
(See Figure 18.3.)
To understand the process of reinstatement (and 
the craving the underlies it), let’s first consider what 
happens during extinction. As we saw in Chapter 11, 
extinction is a form of learning. An animal does not 
forget to make a particular response; it learns not to 
make it. The ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) 
plays a critical role in this process. For example, we saw 
in Chapter 11 that lesions of the vmPFC impair the ex-
tinction of a conditioned emotional response, that stim-
ulation of this region inhibits conditioned emotional 
responses, and that extinction training activates neu-
rons located there.
Studies with rats indicate that different regions of 
the prefrontal cortex exert facilitatory and inhibitory 
effects on drug-related responding by means of excit-
atory and inhibitory connections with the brain’s rein-
forcement system. These effects appear to be respon-
sible for extinction and reinstatement. Peters, 
LaLumiere, and Kalivas (2008) found that stimulation 
of the vmPFC with an infusion of AMPA, a glutamate 
agonist, blocked reinstatement of responding normally 
produced by a free shot of cocaine or the presentation 
of a stimulus associated with cocaine reinforcement. 
That is, activation of the vmPFC inhibited responding. 
McFarland, Lapish, and Kalivas (2003) found that rein-
statement of lever pressing for infusions of cocaine was 
who finds him- or herself in a situation that arouses anxiety 
might find that having a drink or two makes him or her 
feel much better. In fact, people often anticipate this effect 
and begin drinking before the situation actually occurs.
Craving and Relapse
Why do drug addicts crave drugs? Why does this craving 
occur even after a long period of abstinence? Even after 
going for months or years without taking an addictive 
drug, a former drug addict might sometimes experience 
intense craving that leads to relapse. Clearly, taking a 
drug over an extended period of time must produce 
some long-lasting changes in the brain that increase a 
person’s likelihood of relapsing. Understanding this 
process might help clinicians to devise therapies that 
will assist people in breaking their drug dependence 
once and for all.
As everyone knows, a taste of food can provoke hun-
ger, which is why we refer to tidbits we eat before a meal 
as “appetizers.” For a person with a history of drug abuse, 
a small dose of the drug has similar effects: It increases 
craving, or “appetite,” for the drug. In addition, through 
the process of classical conditioning, stimuli that have 
been associated with drugs in the past can also elicit 
craving. For example, an alcoholic who sees a liquor 
bottle is likely to feel the urge to take a drink. In the 
past, agencies that sponsored antiaddiction programs 
sometimes prepared posters illustrating the dangers of 
drug abuse that featured drug paraphernalia: syringes, 
needles, spoons, piles of white powder, and so on. Pos-
sibly, these posters did succeed in reminding people 
who did not use drugs that they should avoid them. But 
we do know that their effect on people who were trying 
to break a drug habit was exactly the opposite of what 
was intended. As we saw in the case at the beginning of 
this chapter, John, a former drug addict, saw a poster 
that pictured drug paraphernalia, and this sight pro-
voked an urge to take the drug again. For this reason, 
such posters are no longer used in campaigns against 
drug addiction.
One of the ways in which craving has been investi-
gated in laboratory animals is through the reinstatement 
model of drug seeking. Animals are first trained to 
make a response (for example, pressing a lever) that is 
reinforced by intravenous injections of a drug such  
as cocaine. Next, the response is extinguished by pro-
viding injections of a saline solution rather than the 
drug. Once the animal has stopped responding, the 
experimenter administers a “free” injection of the 
drug (drug reinstatement procedure) or presents a 
stimulus that has been associated with the drug (cue 
reinstatement procedure). In response to these stimuli, 
the animals begin responding at the lever once more 
(Kalivas, Peters, and Knackstedt, 2006). Presumably, 
figure 18.3  The Reinstatement Procedure,  
a Measure of Craving
The graph shows the acquisition of lever pressing for 
injections of an addictive drug during the self-
administration phase and the extinction of lever pressing 
when the drug was no longer administered. A “free” shot 
of the drug or presentation of a cue associated with the 
drug during acquisition will reinstate responding.
(Based on data from Kalivas et al., 2006.)
250
150
200
100
50
0
1
1
4
4
7
7
10
10
14
Self-administration
Extinction
Days
Cue or
cocaine
Number of lever presses

622	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
regions of the prefrontal cortex of chronic cocaine 
abusers. Thompson et al. (2004) found decreases in the 
gray matter volume of the cingulate cortex and limbic 
cortex of methamphetamine users, and Ersche et al. 
(2011) found similar decreases in the brains of cocaine 
users. de Ruiter et al. (2011) found evidence of loss of 
behavioral control caused by decreased activation of the 
dorsomedial PFC in both heavy smokers and pathologi-
cal gamblers, which supports the assertion of some in-
vestigators that pathological gambling should be re-
garded as a form of addiction (Thomas et al., 2011). 
Zhang et al. (2011) found decreased gray matter in the 
prefrontal cortex that was proportional to the amount 
of people’s lifetime tobacco use. Of course, the results 
of these studies do not permit us to determine whether 
abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex predispose peo-
ple to become addicted or whether drug taking causes 
these abnormalities (or both).
As we saw in Chapter 16, the negative and cognitive 
symptoms of schizophrenia appear to be a result of hy-
pofrontality—decreased activity of the prefrontal cor-
tex. These symptoms are very similar to those that ac-
company long-term drug abuse. In fact, studies have 
shown a high level of comorbidity of schizophrenia and 
substance abuse. (Comorbidity refers to the simultaneous 
presence of two or more disorders in the same person.) 
For example, up to half of all people with schizophre-
nia have a substance abuse disorder (alcohol or illicit 
drugs), and 70–90 percent are nicotine dependent 
(Brady and Sinha, 2005). In fact, in the United States, 
smokers with psychiatric disorders, who constitute ap-
proximately 7 percent of the population, consume 34 
percent of all cigarettes (Dani and Harris, 2005). 
Mathalon et al. (2003) found that prefrontal gray mat-
ter volumes were 10.1 percent lower in alcoholic pa-
tients, 9.0 percent lower in schizophrenic patients, and 
15.6 percent lower in patients with both disorders. (See 
Figure 18.5.)
Weiser et al. (2004) administered a smoking ques-
tionnaire to a random sample of adolescent military re-
cruits each year. Over a four- to sixteen-year follow-up 
period, they found that, compared with nonsmokers, 
the prevalence of hospitalization for schizophrenia was 
2.3 times higher in recruits who smoked at least ten 
cigarettes per day. (See Figure 18.6.) These results sug-
gest that abnormalities in the prefrontal cortex may be 
a common factor in schizophrenia and substance abuse 
disorders. Again, I must note that research has not yet 
determined whether preexisting abnormalities increase 
the risk of these disorders or whether the disorders 
cause the abnormalities.
As we have just seen, the presence of drug-related 
stimuli can trigger craving and drug-seeking behavior. 
In addition, clinicians have long observed that stressful 
situations can cause former drug addicts to relapse. 
abolished by injecting a GABA agonist into the dorsal 
anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), a region or the dor-
sal PFC that has excitatory connections with the NAC. 
That is, inhibition of the dACC prevented the reinstate-
ment of the response. These results indicate that the 
dACC plays a role in craving and the vmPFC plays a 
role in its suppression.
Volkow et al. (1992) found that the activity of the 
medial prefrontal cortex of cocaine abusers was lower 
than that of normal subjects during abstinence. In addi-
tion, when addicts are performing tasks that normally 
activate the prefrontal cortex, their medial prefrontal 
cortex is less activated than that of healthy control sub-
jects, and they perform more poorly on the tasks (Bolla 
et al., 2004; Garavan and Stout, 2005). In fact, Bolla and 
her colleagues found that the amount of activation of 
the medial prefrontal cortex was inversely related to the 
amount of cocaine that cocaine abusers normally took 
each week: The lower the brain activity, the more co-
caine the person took. (See Figure 18.4.)
People with a long history of drug abuse not only 
show the same deficits on tasks that involve the prefron-
tal cortex as do people with lesions of this region, they 
also show structural abnormalities of this region. For 
example, Franklin et al. (2002) reported an average 
decrease of 5–11 percent in the gray matter of various 
figure 18.4  Cocaine Intake and the Medial 
Prefrontal Cortex
The graph shows the relative activation of the medial 
prefrontal cortex as a function of the amount of cocaine 
normally taken each week by cocaine abusers.
(Based on data from Bolla et al., 2004.)
Low
High
11
10
Amount of cocaine consumed each week (gm)
Relative activation
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

	
Common Features of Addiction 	
623
These effects have been observed in rats that had previ-
ously learned to self-administer cocaine or heroin. For 
example, Covington and Miczek (2001) paired naïve 
rats with rats that had been trained to become domi-
nant. After being defeated by the dominant rats, the 
socially stressed rats became more sensitive to the effects 
of cocaine and showed bingeing—self-administration of 
larger amounts of the drug. Kosten, Miserendino, and 
Kehoe (2000) showed that stress that occurs early in life 
can have long-lasting effects. They stressed infant rats by 
isolating them from their mother and littermates for 
one hour per day for eight days. When these rats were 
given the opportunity in adulthood to inject themselves 
with cocaine, they readily acquired the habit and took 
more of the drugs than did control rats that had not 
been stressed. (See Figure 18.7.)
An important link between stressful experiences 
and drug craving is provided by corticotropin releasing 
hormone, or CRH. (This peptide is also referred to as 
corticotropin releasing factor, or CRF.) As we saw in 
Chapter 17, CRH plays an important role in develop-
ment of adverse effects on health produced by stress 
and on the development of anxiety disorders. Just as 
administration of a drug or of stimuli previously associ-
ated with drug-taking behavior can cause relapse, so can 
stressful experiences (Shalev, Erb, and Shaham, 2010). 
For example, administration of CRH can reinstate drug-
taking behavior, and administration of a drug that 
blocks CRH receptors can reduce the likelihood of re-
lapse from drugs or drug cues. CRH receptors in the 
VTA appear to be particularly important. For example, 
infusion of CRH into the VTA causes relapse, and infu-
sion of a CRH receptor antagonist prevents reinstate-
ment of drug-taking by a stressful stimulus (B. Wang  
et al., 2007).
figure 18.5  Alcoholism, Schizophrenia,  
and Prefrontal Gray Matter
The graph shows the volume of gray matter in the 
prefrontal cortex of healthy controls, alcoholic patients, 
schizophrenic patients, and patients comorbid for both 
disorders.
(Based on data from Mathalon et al., 2003.)
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
Healthy
controls
Alcoholic
patients
Schizophrenic
patients
Comorbid
patients
Volume of prefrontal gray matter (ml)
Subject Group
figure 18.6  Smoking and Schizophrenia
The graph shows the prevalence of schizophrenia during 
a four- to sixteen-year follow-up period as a function of 
number of cigarettes smoked each day at age eighteen.
(Based on data from Weiser et al., 2004.)
0 
1–9 
>10 
Number of cigarettes smoked per day at age 18
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
Prevalence of schizophrenia during follow-up (percent)
figure 18.7  Social Stress and Cocaine Intake
The graph shows the cocaine intake of control rats and 
rats subjected to isolation stress early in life.
(Based on data from Kosten et al., 2000.)
0.125
0.25
0.5
1.0
0.0625
Cocaine dose (mg/kg/infusion)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Mean cocaine intake (mg/day)
Isolated rats
Control rats

624	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
Section Summary
Common Features of Addiction
Addictive drugs are those whose reinforcing effects 
are so potent that some people who are exposed to 
them are unable to go for very long without taking 
the drugs and whose lives become organized around 
taking them. Fortunately, most people who are 
exposed to drugs do not become addicted to them. 
Originally, most addictive drugs came from plants, 
which used them as a defense against insects or 
other animals that otherwise would eat them, but 
chemists have synthesized many other drugs that 
have even more potent effects. If a person regularly 
takes some addictive drugs (most notably, the opi-
ates), the effects of the drug show tolerance, and the 
person must take increasing doses to achieve the 
same effect. If the person then stops taking the drug, 
withdrawal effects, opposite to the primary effects of 
the drug, will occur. However, withdrawal effects are 
not the cause of addiction; the abuse potential of a 
drug is related to its ability to reinforce drug-taking 
behavior.
Positive reinforcement occurs when a behavior is 
regularly followed by an appetitive stimulus—one 
that an organism will approach. Addictive drugs pro-
duce positive reinforcement; they reinforce drug- 
taking behavior. Laboratory animals will learn to make 
responses that result in the delivery of these drugs. 
The faster a drug produces its effects, the more 
quickly dependence will be established. All addictive 
drugs that produce positive reinforcement stimulate 
the release of dopamine in the NAC, a structure that 
plays an important role in reinforcement. Neural 
changes that begin in the VTA and NAC eventually 
involve the dorsal striatum, which plays a critical role 
in instrumental conditioning. The activity of inhibitory 
circuits in the prefrontal cortex promote resistance to 
addiction. The susceptibility of adolescents to the 
addictive potential of drugs may be associated with 
the relative immaturity of the prefrontal cortex. 
Orexin and MCH play a role in the establishment of 
addiction.
Negative reinforcement occurs when a behavior 
is followed by the reduction or termination of an aver-
sive stimulus. If, because of a person’s social situation 
or personality characteristics, he or she feels unhappy 
or anxious, a drug that reduces these feelings can 
reinforce drug-taking behavior by means of negative 
reinforcement. Also, the reduction of unpleasant with-
drawal symptoms by a dose of the drug undoubtedly 
plays a role in maintaining drug addictions, but it is 
not the sole cause of craving.
Craving—the urge to take a drug to which one has 
become addicted—cannot be completely explained by 
withdrawal symptoms, because it can occur even after 
an addict has refrained from taking the drug for a long 
time. In laboratory animals a “free” shot of cocaine or 
presentation of stimuli previously associated with 
cocaine reinstates drug-seeking behavior. The vmPFC 
plays an inhibitory role in reinstatement, and the dACC 
plays a facilitatory role. Functional-imaging studies find 
that craving for addictive drugs and natural reinforcers 
such as appetizing food increases the activity of the 
ACC, OFC, insula, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. 
Long-term drug abuse is associated with decreased 
activity of the prefrontal cortex and even with a 
decreased volume of prefrontal gray matter, which 
may impair people’s judgment and ability to inhibit 
inappropriate responses, such as further drug taking. 
Schizophrenia is seen in a higher proportion of drug 
addicts than in the general population. Stressful stim-
uli—even those that occur early in life—increase sus-
ceptibility to drug addiction. Release of CRH in the 
VTA plays an important role in this process.
 Thought Question
Explain what it means to say that addictive drugs 
“hijack” the reinforcement system.
Commonly Abused Drugs
People have been known to abuse an enormous variety 
of drugs, including alcohol, barbiturates, opiates, to-
bacco, amphetamine, cocaine, cannabis, hallucinogens 
such as LSD, PCP, and volatile solvents such as glues or 
even gasoline, ether, and nitrous oxide. The pleasure 
that children often derive from spinning themselves 
until they become dizzy may even be similar to the ef-
fects of some of these drugs. Obviously, I cannot hope 

	
Commonly Abused Drugs	
625
are responsible for the hypothermia, and those in the 
mesencephalic reticular formation are responsible for 
the sedation. As we shall see, opiate receptors in the 
ventral tegmental area and the NAC appear to play a 
role in the reinforcing effects of opiates.
As we saw in Chapter 4, there are three major types 
of opiate receptors: μ (mu),  (delta), and k (kappa). 
Evidence suggests that μ receptors and d receptors are 
responsible for reinforcement and analgesia and that 
stimulation of k receptors produces aversive effects. Evi-
dence for the role of μ receptors comes from a study by 
Matthes et al. (1996), who performed a targeted muta-
tion against the gene responsible for production of the 
μ opiate receptor in mice. These animals, when they 
grew up, were completely insensitive to the reinforcing 
or analgesic effects of morphine, and they showed  
no signs of withdrawal symptoms after having been 
given increasing doses of morphine for six days. (See 
Figure 18.8.)
As we saw earlier, reinforcing stimuli cause the re-
lease of dopamine in the NAC. Injections of opiates are 
no exception to this general rule; Wise et al. (1995) 
found that the level of dopamine in the NAC increased 
by 150–300 percent while a rat was pressing a lever that 
delivered intravenous injections of heroin. Rats will also 
press a lever that delivers injections of an opiate directly 
into the ventral tegmental area (Devine and Wise, 1994) 
or the NAC (Goeders, Lane, and Smith, 1984). In other 
words, injections of opiates into both ends of the meso-
limbic dopaminergic system are reinforcing.
The release of endogenous opioids may even play a 
role in the reinforcing effects of some addictive drugs. 
Studies have shown that administration of naloxone (a 
drug that blocks opiate receptors), reduces the reinforc-
ing effects of alcohol in both humans and laboratory 
animals. Because the use of opiate blockers has recently 
been approved as a treatment for alcoholism, I will dis-
cuss relevant research later in this chapter.
Neural Basis of Tolerance  
and Withdrawal
Several studies have investigated the neural systems that 
are responsible for the development of tolerance and 
subsequent withdrawal effects of opiates. Maldonado et 
al. (1992) made rats physically dependent on morphine 
and then injected naloxone into various regions of the 
brain to determine whether the sudden blocking of opi-
ate receptors would stimulate symptoms of withdrawal. 
This technique—administering an addictive drug for a 
prolonged interval and then blocking its effects with an 
to discuss all these drugs in any depth and keep the 
chapter to a reasonable length, so I will restrict my dis-
cussion to the most important of them in terms of 
popularity and potential for addiction. Some drugs, 
such as caffeine, are both popular and addictive, but 
because they do not normally cause intoxication, im-
pair health, or interfere with productivity, I will not 
discuss them here. (Chapter 4 did discuss the behav-
ioral effects and site of action of caffeine.) I will also not 
discuss the wide variety of hallucinogenic drugs such as 
LSD or PCP. Although some people enjoy the mind- 
altering effects of LSD, many people simply find them 
frightening; in any event, LSD use does not normally 
lead to addiction. PCP (phencyclidine) acts as an indi-
rect antagonist at the NMDA receptor, which means 
that its effects overlap with those of alcohol. Rather 
than devoting space to this drug, I have chosen to say 
more about alcohol, which is abused far more than any 
of the hallucinogenic drugs.
Opiates
Opium, derived from a sticky resin produced by the 
opium poppy, has been eaten and smoked for centuries. 
Opiate addiction has several high personal and social 
costs. First, because heroin, the most commonly abused 
opiate, is an illegal drug in most countries, an addict 
becomes, by definition, a criminal. Second, because of 
tolerance, a person must take increasing amounts of the 
drug to achieve a “high.” The habit thus becomes more 
and more expensive, and the person often turns to crime 
to obtain enough money to support his or her habit. 
Third, an opiate addict often uses unsanitary needles; at 
present, a substantial percentage of people who inject 
illicit drugs have been exposed in this way to hepatitis or 
the AIDS virus. Fourth, if the addict is a pregnant woman, 
her infant will also become dependent on the drug, 
which easily crosses the placental barrier. The infant 
must be given opiates right after being born and then 
weaned off the drug with gradually decreasing doses. 
Fifth, the uncertainty about the strength of a given batch 
of heroin makes it possible for a user to receive an un-
usually large dose of the drug, with possibly fatal conse-
quences. And some of the substances used to dilute 
heroin are themselves toxic.
Neural Basis of Reinforcing Effects
As we saw earlier, laboratory animals will self-administer 
opiates. When an opiate is administered systemically, it 
stimulates opiate receptors located on neurons in vari-
ous parts of the brain and produces a variety of effects, 
including analgesia, hypothermia (lowering of body 
temperature), sedation, and reinforcement. Opiate re-
ceptors in the periaqueductal gray matter are primarily 
responsible for the analgesia, those in the preoptic area 
x naloxone  A drug that blocks μ opiate receptors; antagonizes 
the reinforcing and sedative effects of opiates.

626	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
antagonist—is referred to as antagonist-precipitated 
withdrawal. The investigators found that the most sensi-
tive site was the locus coeruleus, followed by the periaq-
ueductal gray matter. Injection of naloxone into the 
amygdala produced a weak withdrawal syndrome. Using 
a similar technique (first infusing morphine into various 
regions of the brain and then precipitating withdrawal 
by giving the animals an intraperitoneal injection of 
naloxone), Bozarth (1994) confirmed the role of the 
locus coeruleus and the periaqueductal gray matter in 
the production of withdrawal symptoms.
A single dose of an opiate decreases the firing rate 
of neurons in the locus coeruleus, but if the drug is ad-
ministered chronically, the firing rate will return to nor-
mal. Then, if an opiate antagonist is administered (to 
precipitate withdrawal symptoms), the firing rate of 
these neurons increases dramatically, which increases 
the release of norepinephrine in the regions that re-
ceive projections from this nucleus (Koob, 1996; Nes-
tler, 1996). In addition, lesions of the locus coeruleus 
reduce the severity of antagonist-precipitated withdrawal 
symptoms (Maldonado and Koob, 1993). A microdialy-
sis study by Aghajanian, Kogan, and Moghaddam (1994) 
found that antagonist-precipitated withdrawal caused an 
increase in the level of glutamate, the major excitatory 
neurotransmitter, in the locus coeruleus.
Stimulant Drugs: Cocaine  
and Amphetamine
Cocaine and amphetamine have similar behavioral ef-
fects, because both act as potent dopamine agonists. 
However, their sites of action are different. Cocaine 
binds with and deactivates the dopamine transporter 
proteins, thus blocking the reuptake of dopamine after 
it is released by the terminal buttons. Amphetamine also 
inhibits the reuptake of dopamine, but its most impor-
tant effect is to directly stimulate the release of dopa-
mine from terminal buttons. Methamphetamine is chemi-
cally related to amphetamine but is considerably more 
potent. Freebase cocaine (“crack”), a particularly potent 
form of the drug, is smoked and thus enters the blood 
supply of the lungs and reaches the brain very quickly. 
Because its effects are so potent and so rapid, it is prob-
ably the most effective reinforcer of all available drugs.
When people take cocaine, they become euphoric, 
active, and talkative. They say that they feel powerful and 
alert. Some of them become addicted to the drug, and 
obtaining it becomes an obsession to which they devote 
figure 18.8  Effects of a Targeted Deletion  
of the μ Opiate Receptor
The graphs show a lack of responses to morphine in  
mice with targeted mutations against the μ opiate 
receptor. (a) Latency to tail withdrawal from a hot  
object (a measure of analgesia). (b) Wet-dog shakes  
(a prominent withdrawal symptom in rodents) after  
being withdrawn from long-term morphine adminis­
tration. (c) Conditioned place preference for a chamber 
associated with an injection of morphine (a measure  
of reinforcement).
(Based on data from Matthes et al., 1996.)
0
2
4
6
8
0
2
6
0
2
4
6
8
0
Normal
mice
Normal
mice
Knockout
mice
Knockout
mice
Morphine (mg/kg of body weight)
Saline
Morphine
Saline
Morphine
200
100
–100
Place preference score
Wet-dog shakes
Latency to withdrawal tail (sec)
(a)
(b)
(c)
x antagonist-precipitated withdrawal  Sudden withdrawal from 
long-term administration of a drug caused by cessation of the 
drug and administration of an antagonistic drug.

	
Commonly Abused Drugs	
627
more and more time and money. Laboratory animals, 
which will quickly learn to self-administer cocaine intra-
venously, also act excited and show intense exploratory 
activity. After receiving the drug for a day or two, rats 
start showing stereotyped movements, such as groom-
ing, head bobbing, and persistent locomotion (Geary, 
1987). If rats or monkeys are given continuous access to 
a lever that permits them to self-administer cocaine, they 
often self-inject so much cocaine that they die. In fact, 
Bozarth and Wise (1985) found that rats that self-admin-
istered cocaine were almost three times more likely to 
die than were rats that self-administered heroin. As we 
have seen, the mesolimbic dopamine system plays an es-
sential role in all forms of reinforcement, except per-
haps for the reinforcement that is mediated by stimula-
tion of opiate receptors. Many studies have shown that 
intravenous injections of cocaine and amphetamine in-
crease the concentration of dopamine in the NAC, as 
measured by microdialysis. For example, Figure 18.9 
shows data collected by Di Ciano et al. (1995) in a study 
with rats that learned to press a lever that delivered in-
travenous injections of cocaine or amphetamine. The 
colored bars at the base of the graphs indicate the ani-
mals’ responses, and the line graphs indicate the level of 
dopamine in the NAC. (See Figure 18.9.)
One of the alarming effects of cocaine and amphet-
amine seen in people who abuse these drugs regularly is 
psychotic behavior: hallucinations, delusions of persecu-
tion, mood disturbances, and repetitive behaviors. 
These symptoms so closely resemble those of paranoid 
schizophrenia that even a trained mental health profes-
sional cannot distinguish them unless he or she knows 
about the person’s history of drug abuse. However, 
these effects apparently disappear once people stop tak-
ing the drug. As we saw in Chapter 16, the fact that these 
symptoms are provoked by dopamine agonists and re-
duced by drugs that block dopamine receptors suggests 
that overactivity of dopaminergic synapses is responsible 
for the positive symptoms of schizophrenia.
Some evidence suggests that the use of stimulant 
drugs may have adverse long-term effects on the brain. 
For example, a PET study by McCann et al. (1998) dis-
covered that prior abusers of methamphetamine showed 
a decrease in the numbers of dopamine transporters in 
the caudate nucleus and putamen, despite the fact that 
they had abstained from the drug for approximately 
three years. The decreased number of dopamine trans-
porters suggests that the number of dopaminergic ter-
minals in these regions is diminished. As the authors 
note, these people might have an increased risk of Par-
kinson’s disease as they get older. (See Figure 18.10.) 
Studies with laboratory animals have also found that 
methamphetamine can damage terminals of serotoner-
gic axons and trigger death of neurons through apoptosis 
figure 18.9  Release of Dopamine in the Nucleus 
Accumbens
The graphs show dopamine concentration in the nucleus 
accumbens, measured by microdialysis, during self-
administration of intravenous cocaine or amphetamine  
by rats.
(Based on data from Di Ciano et al., 1995.)
4
2
10
0
0
1
2
3
Time (hours)
DA concentration (nM)
Number of self-injections/15 min
Cocaine Self-Injections
20
10
0
4
6
2
0
1
2
3
4
Time (hours)
DA concentration (nM)
Number of self-injections/15 min
Amphetamine Self-Injections
in the cerebral cortex, striatum, and hippocampus  
(Cadet, Jayanthi, and Deng, 2003).
Nicotine
Nicotine might seem rather tame in comparison to opi-
ates, cocaine, and amphetamine. Nevertheless, nicotine 
is an addictive drug, and it accounts for more deaths than 

628	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
Although executives of tobacco companies and oth-
ers whose economic welfare is linked to the production 
and sale of tobacco products used to argue that smoking 
is a “habit” rather than an “addiction,” evidence suggests 
that the behavior of people who regularly use tobacco is 
that of compulsive drug users. In a review of the litera-
ture, Stolerman and Jarvis (1995) note that smokers 
tend to smoke regularly or not at all; few can smoke just 
a little. Males smoke an average of seventeen cigarettes 
per day, while females smoke an average of fourteen. 
Nineteen out of twenty smokers smoke every day, and 
only sixty out of 3500 smokers questioned smoke fewer 
than five cigarettes per day. Forty percent of people 
continue to smoke after having had a laryngectomy 
(which is usually performed to treat throat cancer). In-
deed, physicians have reported that patients with tubes 
inserted into their tracheas so that they can breathe will 
sometimes press a cigarette against the opening of these 
tubes and try to smoke (Hyman and Malenka, 2001). 
More than 50 percent of heart attack survivors continue 
to smoke, and about 50 percent of people continue to 
smoke after submitting to surgery for lung cancer. Of 
those who attempt to quit smoking by enrolling in a 
special program, 20 percent manage to abstain for one 
year. The record is much poorer for those who try to 
quit on their own: One-third manage to stop for one 
day, one-fourth abstain for one week, but only 4 percent 
manage to abstain for six months. It is difficult to recon-
cile these figures with the assertion that smoking is 
merely a “habit” that is pursued for the “pleasure” that 
it produces.
Ours is not the only species willing to self-adminis-
ter nicotine; so will laboratory animals (Donny et al., 
1995). Nicotine stimulates nicotinic acetylcholine recep-
tors, of course. It also increases the activity of dopami-
nergic neurons of the mesolimbic system (Mereu et al., 
1987) and causes dopamine to be released in the NAC 
(Damsma, Day, and Fibiger, 1989). Figure 18.11 shows 
the effects of two injections of nicotine or saline on the 
extracellular dopamine level of the NAC, measured by 
microdialysis. (See Figure 18.11.)
Injection of a nicotinic agonist directly into the ven-
tral tegmental area will reinforce a conditioned place 
preference (Museo and Wise, 1994). Conversely, injec-
tion of a nicotinic antagonist into the VTA will block the 
ability of nicotine to cause the release of dopamine in the 
nucleus accumbens and reduce the reinforcing effect of 
intravenous injections of nicotine (Corrigall, Coen, and 
Adamson, 1994; Gotti et al., 2010). But although nico-
tinic receptors are found in both the VTA and the NAC, 
Corrigall and his colleagues found that injections of a 
nicotinic antagonist in the NAC have no effect on rein-
forcement. Consistent with these findings, Nisell, Nomi-
kos, and Svensson (1994) found that infusion of a nico-
tinic antagonist into the VTA will prevent an intravenous 
the so-called hard drugs. The combination of nicotine 
and other substances in tobacco smoke is carcinogenic 
and leads to cancer of the lungs, mouth, throat, and 
esophagus. Approximately one-third of the adult popula-
tion of the world smokes, and smoking is one of the few 
causes of death that is rising in developing countries. The 
World Health Organization estimates that 50 percent of 
the people who begin to smoke as adolescents and con-
tinue smoking throughout their lives will die from smok-
ing-related diseases. Investigators estimate that, in just a 
few years, tobacco will be the largest single health prob-
lem worldwide, with over 6 million deaths per year 
(Mathers and Loncar, 2006). In fact, tobacco use is the 
leading cause of preventable death in developed coun-
tries (Dani and Harris, 2005). In the United States alone, 
tobacco addiction kills more than 430,000 people each 
year (Chou and Narasimhan, 2005). Smoking by preg-
nant women also has negative effects on the health of 
their fetuses—apparently worse than those of cocaine 
(Slotkin, 1998). Unfortunately, approximately 25 percent 
of pregnant women in the United States expose their  
fetuses to nicotine.
The addictive potential of nicotine should not be 
underestimated; many people continue to smoke even 
when doing so causes serious health problems. For ex-
ample, Sigmund Freud, whose theory of psychoanalysis 
stressed the importance of insight in changing one’s be-
havior, was unable to stop smoking even after most of his 
jaw had been removed because of the cancer that this 
habit had caused (Brecher, 1972). He suffered severe pain 
and, as a physician, realized that he should have stopped 
smoking. He did not, and his cancer finally killed him.
figure 18.10  Dopamine Transporters, 
Methamphetamine Abuse, and Parkinson’s Disease
The scans show concentrations of dopamine transporters 
from a control subject, a subject who had previously 
abused methamphetamine, and a subject with Parkinson’s 
disease. Decreased concentrations of dopamine 
transporters indicate loss of dopaminergic terminals.
(From McCann, U. D., Wong, D. F., Yokoi, F., et al. Journal of Neuroscience, 1998, 
18, 8417–8422. By permission.)
Control
Methamphetamine
Parkinson's
disease

	
Commonly Abused Drugs	
629
and the receptors either close again or enter a desensi-
tized state, during which they bind with, but do not react 
to, ACh. Normally, few nicotinic receptors enter the de-
sensitized state. However, when a person smokes, the 
level of nicotine in the brain rises slowly and stays steady 
for a prolonged period because nicotine, unlike ACh, is 
not destroyed by AChE. At first, nicotinic receptors are 
activated, but the sustained low levels of the drug convert 
many nicotinic receptors to the desensitized state. Thus, 
nicotine has dual effects on nicotinic receptors: activa-
tion and then desensitization. In addition, probably in 
response to desensitization, the number of nicotinic re-
ceptors increases (Dani and De Biasi, 2001).
Most smokers report that their first cigarette in the 
morning brings the most pleasure, presumably because 
the period of abstinence during the night has allowed 
many of their nicotinic receptors to enter the closed state 
and become sensitized again. The first dose of nicotine 
in the morning activates these receptors and has a rein-
forcing effect. After that, a large proportion of the smok-
er’s nicotinic receptors become desensitized again; as a 
consequence, most smokers say that they smoke less for 
pleasure than to relax and gain relief from nervousness 
and craving. If smokers abstain for a few weeks, the num-
ber of nicotinic receptors in their brains returns to nor-
mal. However, as the high rate of relapse indicates, crav-
ing continues, which means that other changes in the 
brain must have occurred.
Cessation of smoking after long-term use causes 
withdrawal symptoms, including anxiety, restlessness, in-
somnia, and inability to concentrate (Hughes et al., 
1989). Like the withdrawal symptoms of other drugs, 
these symptoms may increase the likelihood of relapse, 
but they do not explain why people become addicted to 
the drug in the first place.
injection of nicotine from triggering the release of dopa-
mine in the NAC. Infusion of the antagonist into the 
NAC will not have this effect. Thus, the reinforcing effect 
of nicotine appears to be caused by activation of nico-
tinic receptors in the ventral tegmental area.
Studies have found that the endogenous cannabi-
noids play a role in the reinforcing effects of nicotine. 
Rimonabant, a drug that blocks cannabinoid CB1 recep-
tors, reduces nicotine self-administration and nicotine-
seeking behavior in rats (Cohen, Kodas, and Griebel, 
2005), apparently by reducing the release of dopamine 
in the NAC (De Vries and Schoffelmeer, 2005). By 
blocking CB1 receptors, rimonabant decreases the rein-
forcing effects of nicotine. As we saw in Chapter 12, 
rimonabant was used for antiobesity therapy for a short 
time but was withdrawn from the market because of 
dangerous side effects. Clinical trials have found that 
rimonabant appears to help prevent relapse in people 
who are trying to quit smoking, but it is not approved 
for this purpose, either. However, the effects of the drug 
in humans and laboratory animals suggest that craving 
for nicotine, like the craving for food, is enhanced by 
the release of endocannabinoids in the brain.
The nicotinic ACh receptor exists in three states. 
When a burst of ACh is released by an acetylcholinergic 
terminal button, the receptors open briefly, permitting 
the entry of calcium. (Most nicotinic receptors serve as 
heteroreceptors on terminal buttons that release another 
neurotransmitter. The entry of calcium stimulates the 
release of that neurotransmitter.) Within a few millisec-
onds, the enzyme AChE has destroyed the acetylcholine, 
figure 18.11  Nicotine and Dopamine Release  
in the Nucleus Accumbens
The graph shows changes in dopamine concentration in 
the nucleus accumbens, measured by microdialysis, in 
response to injections of nicotine or saline. The arrows 
indicate the time of the injections.
(Based on data from Damsma et al., 1989.)
–60
180
360
120
140
160
100
0
60
120
180
240
300
Time (min)
Dopamine (percent of baseline)
Nicotine
Saline
Patient N. is a [38-year-old man who] started smoking at 
the age of 14. At the time of his stroke, he was smoking 
more than 40 unfiltered cigarettes per day and was 
enjoying smoking very much… [H]e used to experience 
frequent urges to smoke, especially upon waking, after 
eating, when he drank coffee or alcohol, and when he 
was around other people who were smoking. He often 
found it difficult to refrain from smoking in situations 
where it was inappropriate, e.g., at work or when he 
was sick and bedridden. He was aware of the health 
risks of smoking before his stroke but was not particu-
larly concerned about those risks. Before his stroke, he 
had never tried to stop smoking, and he had had no 
intention of doing so. N. smoked his last cigarette on 
the evening before his stroke. When asked about his 

630	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
One of the several deterrents to cessation of smok-
ing is the fact that overeating and weight gain frequently 
occur when people stop smoking. As I mentioned earlier 
in this chapter and in Chapter 12, eating and a reduction 
As Naqvi et al. (2007) report, Mr. N. sustained a 
stroke that damaged his insula. In fact, several other pa-
tients with insular damage had the same experience. 
Naqvi and his colleagues identified nineteen cigarette 
smokers with damage to the insula and fifty smokers with 
brain damage that spared this region. Of the nineteen 
patients who had damage to the insula, twelve “quit smok-
ing easily, immediately, without relapse, and without per-
sistence of the urge to smoke” (Naqvi et al., 2007, p. 531). 
One patient with insula damage quit smoking but still 
reported feeling an urge to smoke. Figure 18.12 shows 
computer-generated images of brain damage that showed 
a statistically significant correlation with disruption of 
smoking. As you can see, the insula, which is colored red, 
showed the highest association with cessation of smoking. 
(See Figure 18.12.)
Other studies have corroborated the report by 
Naqvi and his colleagues (Hefzy, Silver, and Silver, 
2011). In addition, Forget et al. (2010) found that infu-
sion of an inhibitory drug into the insula of rats reduced 
the reinforcing effects of nicotine. (See Figure 18.13.) I 
mentioned earlier that Zhang et al. (2011) found de-
creased gray matter in the frontal cortex of smokers, 
which may be at least partly responsible for the difficulty 
that smokers have in breaking their habit. These investi-
gators also found that the insula was larger in smokers, 
which is consistent with the apparent role of the insula 
in nicotine addiction.
reason for quitting smoking, he stated simply, “I forgot 
that I was a smoker.” When asked to elaborate, he said 
that he did not forget the fact that he was a smoker but 
rather that “my body forgot the urge to smoke.” He felt 
no urge to smoke during his hospital stay, even though 
he had the opportunity to go outside to smoke. His 
wife was surprised by the fact that he did not want to 
smoke in the hospital, given the degree of his prior 
addiction. N. recalled how his roommate in the hospital 
would frequently go outside to smoke and that he was 
so disgusted by the smell upon his roommate’s return 
that he asked to change rooms. He volunteered that 
smoking in his dreams, which used to be pleasurable 
before his stroke, was now disgusting. N. stated that, 
although he ultimately came to believe that his stroke 
was caused in some way by smoking, suffering a stroke 
was not the reason why he quit. In fact, he did not recall 
ever making any effort to stop smoking. Instead, it 
seemed to him that he had spontaneously lost all inter-
est in smoking. When asked whether his stroke might 
have destroyed some part of his brain…that made him 
want to smoke, he agreed that this was likely to have 
been the case. (Naqvi et al., 2007, p. 534)
figure 18.12  Damage to the Insula and Smoking 
Cessation
The diagrams show the regions of the brain (shown in 
red) where damage was most highly correlated with 
cessation of smoking.
(From Naqvi, N. H., Rudrauf, D., Damasio, H., and Bechara, A. Science, 2007, 315, 
531–534. By permission.)
Degree of correlation 
with smoking cessation
+4
+6
+2
0
–2
–4
–6
L
R
L
R
Insula
figure 18.13  Effect of Inactivation of the Insula 
on Reinstatement of Drug-Seeking Behavior in Rats
Rats were trained to work for injections of nicotine, and 
then the behavior was extinguished. The graph shows 
that inactivation of the insula substantially reduced drug-
seeking behavior elicited by nicotine or cues previously 
associated with nicotine.
(Based on data of Forget et al., 2010.)
80
60
40
20
0
Nicotine
Placebo
Inhibitory drug
100
120
140
Nicotine-related cue
Number of lever presses

	
Commonly Abused Drugs	
631
the head and the brain and accompanying mental retar-
dation. In fact, alcohol consumption by pregnant women 
is one of the leading causes of mental retardation in the 
Western world today. Therefore, understanding the 
physiological and behavioral effects of this drug is an 
important issue.
Alcohol has the most serious effects on fetal devel-
opment during the brain growth spurt period, which 
occurs during the last trimester of pregnancy and for 
several years after birth. Ikonomidou et al. (2000) found 
that exposure of the immature rat brain triggered wide-
spread cell death through apoptosis. The investigators 
exposed immature rats to alcohol at different times dur-
ing the period of brain growth and found that different 
regions were vulnerable to the effects of the alcohol at 
different times. Alcohol has two primary sites of action: 
It serves as an indirect agonist at GABAA receptors and 
as an indirect antagonist at NMDA receptors. Appar-
ently, both of these actions trigger apoptosis. Ikonomi-
dou and her colleagues found that administration of a 
GABAA agonist (phenobarbital, a barbiturate) or an 
NMDA antagonist (MK-801) to seven-day-old rats caused 
brain damage by means of apoptosis. (See Figure 18.15.)
At low doses, alcohol produces mild euphoria and 
has an anxiolytic effect—that is, it reduces the discomfort 
of anxiety. At higher doses, it produces incoordination 
and sedation. In studies with laboratory animals, the 
anxiolytic effects manifest themselves as a release from 
the punishing effects of aversive stimuli. For example, if 
in metabolic rate are stimulated by the release of MCH 
and orexin in the brain. Jo, Wiedl, and Role (2005) 
found that nicotine inhibits MCH neurons, thus sup-
pressing appetite. When people try to quit smoking, they 
are often discouraged by the fact that the absence of 
nicotine in their brains releases their MCH neurons 
from this inhibition, increasing their appetite. Nicotine 
also stimulates the release of orexin, which, as we saw 
earlier in this chapter, is involved in drug-seeking behav-
ior (Huang, Xu, and van den Pol, 2011). Orexin is re-
leased in many parts of the brain, but one region may 
play an especially important role in smoking: the insula. 
Hollander et al. (2008) found that infusion of a drug 
into the insula that blocks orexin receptors decreased 
the responding of rats for injections of nicotine.
Researchers have discovered a pathway in the brain 
that inhibits the reinforcing effects of nicotine. Neurons 
in the medial habenula, a region of the midbrain, contain 
a special type of nicotinic ACh receptor that includes an 
a5 subunit. The neurons that contain these receptors 
send their axons to the interpeduncular nucleus, located 
in the midline of the midbrain, caudal to the medial 
habenula. This pathway appears to be part of a system 
that inhibits the reinforcing effects of nicotine. Fowler 
et al. (2011) prepared a targeted mutation against the 
gene responsible for synthesis of a5 ACh receptors in 
the medial habenula of mice. They found that the 
knockout increased self-administration of high doses  
of nicotine. They also found that the procedure de-
creased the ability of nicotine to activate the interpe-
duncular nucleus, and that disruption of activity in this 
nucleus increased nicotine self-administration. The medial  
habenula-interpeduncular nucleus circuit appears to 
protect the animals (and presumably, our own species) 
against intake of large quantities of nicotine. A normal 
mouse will increase its response rate when the amount 
of nicotine contained in each injection increases—up to 
a point, that is. Eventually, larger injections will suppress 
the animal’s response rate so that it will not receive too 
much nicotine. But if a5 ACh receptors in the habenula 
are deactivated, this inhibitory effect does not occur. 
(See Figure 18.14.)
Alcohol
Alcohol has enormous costs to society. A large percent-
age of deaths and injuries caused by motor vehicle acci-
dents are related to alcohol use, and alcohol contributes 
to violence and aggression. Chronic alcoholics often 
lose their jobs, their homes, and their families; and 
many die of cirrhosis of the liver, exposure, or diseases 
caused by poor living conditions and abuse of their bod-
ies. As we saw in Chapter 15, women who drink during 
pregnancy run the risk of giving birth to babies with fe-
tal alcohol syndrome, which includes malformation of 
figure 18.14  Effect of Knockout of the a5 ACh 
Receptor Gene in Mice
The graph shows that mice with a targeted mutation 
against a5 ACh receptors in the medial habenula self-
administer increasing doses of nicotine, whereas normal 
mice limit their intake.
(Based on data of Fowler et al., 2011.)
0
.030
0.10
0.25
0.40
0.60
1.0
Nicotine (mg/kg body wt.) per infusion
Normal mice
α5-ACH receptor
knockout mice
Amount of nicotine obtained (mg/kg body wt.)
1
6
5
4
3
2
0

632	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
that alcohol can produce. An injection of a dopamine 
antagonist directly into the NAC decreases alcohol in-
take in rats (Samson et al., 1993), as does the injection 
of a drug into the ventral tegmental area that decreases 
the activity of the dopaminergic neurons there (Hodge 
et al., 1993). In a double-blind study, Enggasser and de 
Wit (2001) found that haloperidol, an antischizophrenic 
drug that blocks DA receptors, decreased the amount of 
alcohol that nonalcoholic subjects subsequently drank. 
Presumably, the drug reduced the reinforcing effect of 
the alcohol. In addition, the subjects who normally feel 
stimulated and euphoric after having a drink reported a 
reduction in these effects after taking haloperidol.
As I just mentioned, alcohol has two major sites of 
action in the nervous system, acting as an indirect an-
tagonist at NMDA receptors and an indirect agonist at 
GABAA receptors (Chandler, Harris, and Crews, 1998). 
That is, alcohol enhances the action of GABA at GABAA 
receptors and interferes with the transmission of gluta-
mate at NMDA receptors.
As we saw in Chapter 13, NMDA receptors are in-
volved in long-term potentiation, a phenomenon that 
plays an important role in learning. Therefore, it will 
not surprise you to learn that alcohol, which antago-
nizes the action of glutamate at NMDA receptors, dis-
rupts long-term potentiation and interferes with the 
spatial receptive fields of place cells in the hippocampus 
(Givens and McMahon, 1995; Matthews, Simson, and 
Best, 1996). Presumably, this effect at least partly ac-
counts for the deleterious effects of alcohol on memory 
and other cognitive functions.
Withdrawal from long-term alcohol intake (like that 
of heroin, cocaine, amphetamine, and nicotine) de-
creases the activity of mesolimbic neurons and their re-
lease of dopamine in the NAC (Diana et al., 1993). If an 
indirect antagonist for NMDA receptors is then admin-
istered, dopamine secretion in the NAC recovers. The 
evidence suggests the following sequence of events: 
Some of the acute effects of a single dose of alcohol are 
caused by the antagonistic effect of the drug on NMDA 
receptors. Long-term suppression of NMDA receptors 
causes upregulation—a compensatory increase in the 
sensitivity of the receptors. Then, when alcohol intake 
suddenly ceases, the increased activity of NMDA recep-
tors inhibits the activity of ventral tegmental neurons 
and the release of dopamine in the NAC.
Although the effects of heroin withdrawal have 
been exaggerated, those produced by barbiturate or 
alcohol withdrawal are serious and can even be fatal. 
The increased sensitivity of NMDA receptors as they 
rebound from the suppressive effect of alcohol can trig-
ger seizures and convulsions. Convulsions caused by 
alcohol withdrawal are considered to be a medical 
emergency and are usually treated with benzodiaze-
pines. Confirming the cause of these reactions, Liljequist 
an animal is given electric shocks whenever it makes a 
particular response (say, one that obtains food or wa-
ter), it will stop doing so. However, if it is then given 
some alcohol, it will begin making the response again 
(Koob et al., 1984). This phenomenon explains why 
people often do things they normally would not when 
they have had too much to drink; the alcohol removes 
the inhibitory effect of social controls on their behavior.
Alcohol produces both positive and negative rein-
forcement. The positive reinforcement manifests itself 
as mild euphoria. As we saw earlier, negative reinforce-
ment is caused by the termination of an aversive stimu-
lus. If a person feels anxious and uncomfortable, then 
an anxiolytic drug that relieves this discomfort provides 
at least a temporary escape from an unpleasant situation.
The negative reinforcement provided by the anxio-
lytic effect of alcohol is probably not enough to explain 
the drug’s addictive potential. Other drugs, such as the 
benzodiazepines (tranquilizers such as Valium), are 
even more potent anxiolytics than alcohol, yet such 
drugs are abused less often. It is probably the unique 
combination of stimulating and anxiolytic effects—of 
positive and negative reinforcement—that makes alco-
hol so difficult for some people to resist.
Alcohol, like other addictive drugs, increases the 
activity of the dopaminergic neurons of the mesolimbic 
system and increases the release of dopamine in the 
NAC as measured by microdialysis (Gessa et al., 1985; 
Imperato and Di Chiara, 1986). The release of dopa-
mine appears to be related to the positive reinforcement 
figure 18.15  Early Exposure to Alcohol  
and Apoptosis
The photomicrographs of sections of rat brain show 
degenerating neurons (black spots). Exposure to alcohol 
during the period of rapid brain growth causes cell death 
by inducing apoptosis. These effects are mediated by the 
actions of alcohol as an NMDA antagonist and a GABAA 
agonist. MK-801, an NMDA antagonist, and 
phenobarbital, a GABAA agonist, also induce apoptosis.
(From Ikonomidou, C., Bittigau, P., Ishimaru, M. J., et al. Science, 2000, 287, 
1056–1060. By permission.)
SALINE
MK-801
PHENOBARB
ETHANOL

	
Commonly Abused Drugs	
633
the process. Drug companies naturally fear possible lia-
bility suits stemming from such occurrences.
I mentioned earlier that opiate receptors appear to 
be involved in a reinforcement mechanism that does 
not directly involve dopaminergic neurons. The rein-
forcing effect of alcohol is at least partly caused by its 
ability to trigger the release of the endogenous opioids. 
Several studies have shown that the opiate receptor 
blockers such as naloxone or naltrexone block the rein-
forcing effects of alcohol in a variety of species, includ-
ing rats, monkeys, and humans (Altschuler, Phillips, and 
Feinhandler, 1980; Davidson, Swift, and Fitz, 1996; Reid, 
1996). In addition, endogenous opioids may play a role 
in craving in abstinent alcoholics. Heinz et al. (2005) 
found that one to three weeks of abstinence increased 
the number of μ opiate receptors in the NAC. The 
greater the number of receptors, the more intense the 
craving was. Presumably, the increased number of μ re-
ceptors increased the effects of endogenous opiates on 
the brain and served as a contributing factor to the crav-
ing for alcohol. (See Figure 18.17.)
Because naltrexone has become a useful adjunct to 
treatment of alcoholism, I will discuss this topic further 
in the last section of this chapter.
Cannabis
Another drug that people regularly self-administer— 
almost exclusively by smoking—is THC, the active ingre-
dient in marijuana. As you learned in Chapter 4, the site 
of action of the endogenous cannabinoids in the brain 
is the CB1 receptor. The endogenous ligands for the 
CB1 receptor, anandamide and 2-AG, are lipids. Admin-
istration of a drug that blocks CB1 receptors abolishes 
the “high” produced by smoking marijuana (Huestis et 
al., 2001).
By the way, di Tomaso, Beltramo, and Piomelli 
(1996) discovered that chocolate contains three anan-
damide-like chemicals. Whether the existence of these 
chemicals is related to the great appeal that chocolate 
has for many people is not yet known. (I suppose that 
this is the place for a chocoholic joke.)
THC, like other drugs with abuse potential, has a 
stimulating effect on dopaminergic neurons. Chen et al. 
(1990) injected rats with low doses of THC and measured 
the release of dopamine in the NAC by means of micro-
dialysis. Sure enough, they found that the injections 
caused the release of dopamine. (See Figure 18.18.) Chen 
et al. (1993) found that local injections of small amounts 
of THC into the ventral tegmental area had no effect on 
the release of dopamine in the NAC. However, injection 
of THC into the NAC did cause dopamine release there. 
Thus, the drug appears to act directly on dopaminergic 
terminal buttons—presumably on presynaptic heterore-
ceptors, where it increases the release of dopamine.
(1991) found that seizures caused by alcohol withdrawal 
could be prevented by giving mice a drug that blocks 
NMDA receptors.
The second site of action of alcohol is the GABAA 
receptor. Alcohol binds with one of the many binding 
sites on this receptor and increases the effectiveness of 
GABA in opening the chloride channel and producing 
inhibitory postsynaptic potentials. Proctor et al. (1992) 
recorded the activity of single neurons in the cerebral 
cortex of slices of rat brains. They found that the pres-
ence of alcohol significantly increased the postsynaptic 
response produced by the action of GABA at the GABAA 
receptor. As we saw in Chapter 4, the anxiolytic effect of 
the benzodiazepine tranquilizers is caused by their ac-
tion as indirect agonists at the GABAA receptor. Because 
alcohol has this effect also, we can surmise that the 
anxiolytic effect of alcohol is a result of this action of 
the drug.
The sedative effect of alcohol also appears to be ex-
erted at the GABAA receptor. Suzdak et al. (1986) discov-
ered a drug (Ro15-4513) that reverses alcohol intoxica-
tion by blocking the alcohol binding site on this receptor. 
Figure 18.16 shows two rats that received injections of 
enough alcohol to make them pass out. The one facing 
us also received an injection of the alcohol antagonist 
and appears completely sober. (See Figure 18.16.)
This wonder drug has not been put on the market, 
nor is it likely to be. Although the behavioral effects of 
alcohol are mediated by their action on GABAA recep-
tors and NMDA receptors, high doses of alcohol have 
other, potentially fatal effects on all cells of the body, in-
cluding destabilization of cell membranes. Thus, people 
taking some of the alcohol antagonist could then go on 
to drink themselves to death without becoming drunk in 
figure 18.16  Effects of Ro15-4513, an Alcohol 
Antagonist
Both rats received an injection of alcohol, but the one 
facing us also received an injection of the alcohol 
antagonist.
(Photograph courtesy of Steven M. Paul, National Institute of Mental Health, 
Bethesda, Md.)

634	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
blocks CB1 receptors, decreases the reinforcing effects 
of nicotine.
The primary reinforcing component of marijuana, 
THC, is one of approximately seventy different chemi-
cals produced only by the cannabis plant. Another 
chemical, cannabidiol (CBD), plays an entirely different 
role. Unlike THC, which produces anxiety and psychotic-
like behavior in large doses, CBD had antianxiety and 
antipsychotic effects. THC is a partial agonist of cannabi-
noid receptors, whereas CBD is an antagonist. Also un-
like THC, CBD does not produce psychotropic effects: It 
is not reinforcing, and it does not produce a “high.” In 
recent years, levels of THC in marijuana have increased 
greatly, while levels of CBD have decreased. During the 
past decade, the numbers of people who seek treatment 
for dependence on cannabis has also increased (Morgan 
et al., 2010). Morgan and her colleagues recruited 
ninety-four people who used marijuana regularly for a 
study on the effects of THC and CBD. The investigators 
measured the concentration of THC and CBD in a sam-
ple of their marijuana and in a sample of their urine. 
They found that people smoking their customary mari-
juana with low levels of CBD and high levels of THC paid 
more attention to photographs of cannabis-related stim-
uli and said that they liked them better than those smok-
ing their customary marijuana with higher levels of CBD. 
Both groups gave high ratings to food-related photo-
graphs, so CBD had no effect on their interest in food. 
(See Figure 18.19.) A study by Ren et al. (2009) found 
that an injection of CBD reduced heroin-seeking behav-
ior in rats, even up to two weeks later, which indicates 
that the effects of this drug are not limited to marijuana. 
CBD did not affect the animals’ intake of heroin, but it 
A variety of laboratory animals, including mice, 
rats, and monkeys, will self-administer drugs that stimu-
late CB1 receptors, including THC (Maldonado and 
Rodriguez de Fonseca, 2002). A targeted mutation that 
blocks the production of CB1 receptors abolishes the 
reinforcing effect not only of cannabinoids but also of 
morphine and heroin (Cossu et al., 2001). This muta-
tion also decreases the reinforcing effects of alcohol 
and the acquisition of self-administration of cocaine 
(Houchi et al., 2005; Soria et al., 2005). In addition, as 
we saw in the previous section, rimonabant, a drug that 
figure 18.17  Craving for Alcohol and μ opiate 
Receptors
The drawings of the results of PET scans show the 
presence of μ opiate receptors in the dorsal striatum of 
detoxified alcoholic patients and healthy control subjects. 
The graph shows the relative alcohol craving score as a 
function of relative numbers of μ opiate receptors.
(Based on data from Heinz et al., 2005.)
30
35
25
20
15
10
5
0
Relative craving score
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
Relative number of µ opiate receptors
Alcoholic patients
Healthy controls
Low
High
figure 18.18  THC and Dopamine Secretion in the 
Nucleus Accumbens
The graph shows changes in dopamine concentration in 
the nucleus accumbens, measured by microdialysis, in 
response to injections of THC or an inert placebo.
(Based on data from Chen et al., 1990.)
0
175
100
125
150
75
20
40
60
80
100
120
Time (min)
THC
Inert placebo
Injection
Percent increase
in dopamine release

	
Commonly Abused Drugs	
635
hippocampus, which plays such an important role in 
memory. Pyramidal cells in the CA1 region of the hip-
pocampus release endogenous cannabinoids, which 
provide a retrograde signal that inhibits GABAergic 
neurons that normally inhibit them. In this way the re-
lease of endogenous cannabinoids facilitates the activ-
ity of CA1 pyramidal cells and facilitates long-term po-
tentiation (Kunos and Batkai, 2001).
We might expect that facilitating long-term poten-
tiation in the hippocampus would enhance its memory 
functions. However, the reverse is true; Hampson and 
Deadwyler (2000) found that the effects of cannabi-
noids on a spatial memory task were similar to those 
produced by hippocampal lesions. Thus, excessive acti-
vation of CB1 receptors in field CA1 appears to interfere 
with normal functioning of the hippocampal formation.
Three articles (Moore et al., 2007; Le Bec et al., 
2009; Minozzi et al., 2010) report a disturbing finding: 
The incidence of psychotic disorders such as schizophre-
nia is increased in cannabis users—especially those who 
have used cannabis frequently. Of course, a correlational 
study cannot prove the existence of a cause-and-effect 
relationship. It is possible that people who are more 
likely to develop psychotic symptoms are also more likely 
to use cannabis. However, statistical adjustments suggest 
that a cause-and-effect relationship between cannabis 
use and psychosis cannot be ruled out. Moore et al. 
(2007) conclude “that there is now sufficient evidence to 
warn young people that using cannabis could increase 
their risk of developing a psychotic illness later in life” 
(p. 319). This issue certainly deserves further study.
did decrease the reinforcing effect of stimuli that had 
previously been associated with heroin.
As we saw in Chapter 4, the hippocampus contains 
a large concentration of THC receptors. Marijuana  
is known to affect people’s memory. Specifically, it  
impairs their ability to keep track of a particular topic; 
they frequently lose the thread of a conversation if they 
are momentarily distracted. Evidence indicates that the 
drug does so by disrupting the normal functions of the 
figure 18.19  Effects of Varying Ratios of 
Cannabidiol and THC in Marijuana
The graph shows that smoking marijuana with high levels 
of CBD decreases the pleasantness of photographs 
associated with marijuana smoking.
(Based on data of Morgan et al., 2010.)
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Pleasantness rating
High CBD/THC ratio
Low CBD/THC ratio
Food cues
Drug cues
Neutral cues
Section Summary
Commonly Abused Drugs
Opiates produce analgesia, hypothermia, sedation, 
and reinforcement. Opiate receptors in the periaque-
ductal gray matter are responsible for the analgesia, 
those in the preoptic area for the hypothermia, those 
in the mesencephalic reticular formation for the seda-
tion, and those in the ventral tegmental area and NAC 
at least partly for the reinforcement. A targeted muta-
tion in mice indicates that μ opiate receptors are 
responsible for analgesia, reinforcement, and with-
drawal symptoms. The release of the endogenous opi-
oids may play a role in the reinforcing effects of natural 
stimuli or even other addictive drugs such as alcohol.
The symptoms that are produced by antagonist-
precipitated withdrawal from opiates can be elicited 
by injecting naloxone into the periaqueductal gray 
matter and the locus coeruleus, which implicates 
these structures in these symptoms.
Cocaine inhibits the reuptake of dopamine by 
terminal buttons, and amphetamine causes the dopa-
mine transporters in terminal buttons to run in 
reverse, releasing dopamine from terminal buttons. 
Besides producing alertness, activation, and positive 
reinforcement, cocaine and amphetamine can pro-
duce psychotic symptoms that resemble those of par-
anoid schizophrenia. The reinforcing effects of 
cocaine and amphetamine are mediated by an 
increase in dopamine in the NAC. Chronic metham-
phetamine abuse is associated with reduced numbers 
of dopaminergic axons and terminals in the striatum 
(continued on next page)

636	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
(revealed as a decrease in the numbers of dopamine 
transporters located there).
The status of nicotine as a strongly addictive drug 
(for both humans and laboratory animals) was long 
ignored, primarily because it does not cause intoxica-
tion and because the ready availability of cigarettes 
and other tobacco products does not make it neces-
sary for addicts to engage in illegal activities. 
However, the craving for nicotine is extremely moti-
vating. Nicotine stimulates the release of mesolimbic 
dopaminergic neurons, and injection of nicotine into 
the ventral tegmental area is reinforcing. Cannabinoid 
CB1 receptors are involved in the reinforcing effect of 
nicotine as well. Nicotine from smoking excites nico-
tinic acetylcholine receptors but also desensitizes 
them, which leads to unpleasant withdrawal effects. 
The activation of nicotinic receptors on presynaptic 
terminal buttons in the ventral tegmental area also 
produced long-term potentiation. Damage to the 
insula is associated with cessation of smoking, which 
suggests that this region plays a role in the mainte-
nance of cigarette addiction. Suppression of its activ-
ity with inhibitory drugs reduces nicotine intake in 
laboratory animals. Nicotine stimulation of the release 
of GABA in the lateral hypothalamus decreases the 
activity of MCH neurons and reduces food intake, 
which explains why cessation of smoking often leads 
to weight gain. Infusion of an orexin antagonist in the 
insula suppresses nicotine intake. Activity of a circuit 
from the medial habenula to the interpeduncular 
nucleus does the same. This effect depends on the 
presence of neurons with a5 ACh receptors in the 
habenula.
Exposure to alcohol during the period of rapid 
brain development has devastating effects and is the 
leading cause of mental retardation. This exposure 
causes neural destruction through apoptosis. Alcohol 
and barbiturates have similar effects. Alcohol has posi-
tively reinforcing effects and, through its anxiolytic 
action, has negatively reinforcing effects as well. It 
serves as an indirect antagonist at NMDA receptors and 
an indirect agonist at GABAA receptors. It stimulates 
the release of dopamine in the NAC. Withdrawal from 
long-term alcohol abuse can lead to seizures, an effect 
that seems to be caused by compensatory upregulation 
of NMDA receptors. Release of the endogenous opi-
oids also plays a role in the reinforcing effects of alco-
hol. Increases in the numbers of μ opiate receptors dur-
ing abstinence from alcohol may intensify craving.
The active ingredient in cannabis, THC, stimu-
lates receptors whose natural ligand is anandamide. 
THC, like other addictive drugs, stimulates the release 
of dopamine in the NAC. The presence of cannabi-
diol (CBD) in marijuana has a protective effect against 
dependence on cannabis. The CB1 receptor is 
responsible for the physiological and behavioral 
effects of THC and the endogenous cannabinoids. A 
targeted mutation against the CB1 receptor reduces 
the reinforcing effect of alcohol, cocaine, and the opi-
ates as well as that of the cannabinoids. Blocking CB1 
receptors also decreases the reinforcing effects of nic-
otine. Cannabinoids produce memory deficits by act-
ing on inhibitory GABAergic neurons in the CA1 field 
of the hippocampus. Two disturbing reports indicate 
that cannabis use is associated with the incidence of 
schizophrenia.
 Thought Questions
1.	 Although executives of tobacco companies used to 
insist that cigarettes were not addictive and 
asserted that people smoked simply because of the 
pleasure the act gave them, research indicates that 
nicotine is indeed a potent addictive drug. Why do 
you think it took so long to recognize this fact?
2.	 In most countries, alcohol is legal and marijuana is 
not. In your opinion, why? What criteria would you 
use to decide whether a newly discovered drug 
should be legal or illegal? Danger to health? Effects 
on fetal development? Effects on behavior? 
Potential for dependence? If you applied these cri-
teria to various substances in current use, would 
you have to change the legal status of any of them?
Heredity and Drug Abuse
Not everyone is equally likely to become addicted to a 
drug. Many people manage to drink alcohol moder-
ately, and most users of potent drugs such as cocaine 
and heroin use them “recreationally” without becoming 
dependent on them. Evidence indicates that both ge-
netic and environmental factors play a role in determin-
ing a person’s likelihood of consuming drugs and of 
becoming dependent on them. In addition, there are 

	
Heredity and Drug Abuse	
637
Alcohol consumption is not distributed equally across 
the population; in the United States, 10 percent of the 
people drink 50 percent of the alcohol (Heckler, 1983). 
Many twin studies and adoption studies confirm that the 
primary reason for this disparity is genetic.
A susceptibility to alcoholism could conceivably be 
caused by differences in the ability to digest or metabo-
lize alcohol or by differences in the structure or bio-
chemistry of the brain. There is evidence that variability 
in the gene responsible for the production of alcohol 
dehydrogenase, an enzyme involved in metabolism of 
alcohol, plays a role in susceptibility to alcoholism. A 
particular variant of this gene, which is especially preva-
lent in eastern Asia, is responsible for a reaction to al-
cohol intake that most people find aversive and that 
discourages further drinking (Goldman, Oroszi, and 
Ducci, 2005). However, most investigators believe that 
differences in brain physiology—for example, those 
that control sensitivity to the reinforcing effects of 
drugs or sensitivity to various environmental stressors—
are more likely to play a role. For example, increased 
sensitivity to environmental stressors might encourage 
the use of alcohol as a means to reduce the stress- 
related anxiety.
Investigators have also focused on the possibility 
that susceptibility to addiction may involve differences 
in functions of specific neurotransmitter systems. As we 
saw earlier, nicotinic ACh receptors that contain the a5 
subunit, found on neurons in the medial habenula, play 
a role in inhibiting the reinforcing effects of nicotine. 
Genetic studies found that a particular allele of the gene 
responsible for the production of this receptor is associ-
ated with increased susceptibility to nicotine addiction 
and consequent development of lung cancer (Bierut, 
2008). A study by Kuryatov, Berrettini, and Lindstrom 
(2011) found that the presence of this allele reduces the 
sensitivity of the a5 ACh receptors, and hence reduces 
the inhibitory effect of large doses of nicotine. The re-
sult would be increased susceptibility to the addictive 
effects of nicotine.
Renthal et al. (2009) performed a genome-wide 
analysis of the effects of cocaine on genetic material in 
the mouse DNA. They found that cocaine turned on 
hundreds of genes, many of which were already known 
to be involved in the behavioral effects of the drug. One 
of their most interesting discoveries was that cocaine 
turns on the genes that produce sirtuins, proteins that 
play important regulatory roles in cells. They also found 
that a sirtuin agonist increased the reinforcing effects of 
cocaine and that a sirtuin antagonist decreased it. As 
other investigators have noted, their approach holds 
promise for discovering the molecular biology of addic-
tive drugs and identifying potential treatments for peo-
ple who abuse them.
both general factors (likelihood of taking and becoming 
addicted to any of a number of drugs) and specific  
factors (likelihood of taking and becoming addicted to 
a particular drug).
Tsuang et al. (1998) studied 3372 male twin pairs 
to estimate the genetic contributions to drug abuse. 
They found strong general genetic and environmental 
factors: Abusing any category of drug was associated 
with abusing drugs in all other categories: sedatives, 
stimulants, opiates, marijuana, and psychedelics. 
Abuse of marijuana was especially influenced by family 
environmental factors. Abuse of every category except 
psychedelics was influenced by genetic factors pecu-
liar to that category. Abuse of heroin had a particu-
larly strong unique genetic factor. Another study of 
male twin pairs (Kendler et al., 2003) found a strong 
common genetic factor for the use of all categories of 
drugs and found in addition that shared environmen-
tal factors had a stronger effect on use than on abuse. 
In other words, environment plays a strong role in  
influencing a person to try a drug and perhaps con-
tinue to use it recreationally, but genetics plays a stron-
ger role in determining whether the person becomes 
addicted.
Goldman, Oroszi, and Ducci (2005) reviewed twin 
studies that attempted to measure the heritability of 
various classes of addictive disorders. Heritability (h2) is 
the percentage of variability in a particular population 
that can be attributed to genetic variability. The average 
value of h2 ranged from approximately 0.4 for hallucino-
genic drugs to just over 0.7 for cocaine. As you will see 
in Figure 18.20, the authors included addiction to gam-
bling. (See Figure 18.20.)
The genetic basis of addiction to alcohol has re-
ceived more attention than addiction to other drugs. 
figure 18.20  Heritability (h2) of Addiction  
to Specific Addictive Agents
(Adapted from Goldman et al., 2005.)
Hallucinogens
Stimulants
Cannabis
Sedatives
Gambling
Smoking
Alcohol
Caffeine
Opiates
Cocaine
Addictive Agents
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Heritability of addiction (h2)

638	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
than methadone (Vocci, Acri, and Elkashef, 2005). Bu-
prenorphine is a partial agonist for the μ opiate recep-
tor. (You will recall from Chapter 16 that a partial ago-
nist is a drug that has a high affinity for a particular 
receptor but activates that receptor less than the normal 
ligand does. This action reduces the effects of a receptor 
ligand in regions of high concentration and increases it 
in regions of low concentration, as shown in Figure 
16.14.) Buprenorphine blocks the effects of opiates and 
itself produces only a weak opiate effect. Unlike metha-
done, it has little value on the illicit drug market. A 
randomized placebo-controlled trial compared the ef-
fectiveness of buprenorphine and buprenorphine plus 
naloxone in recovering opiate addicts (Fudala et al., 
2003). People in the two drug-treatment groups re-
ported less craving than those in the control group. The 
proportion of people who continued to be abstinent was 
17.8 percent for people treated with buprenorphine, 
20.7 percent for people treated with the combination of 
the two drugs, and only 5.8 percent for people receiving 
a placebo. (See Figure 18.21.) After one month, all sub-
jects were given buprenorphine plus naloxone for 
eleven months. The percentage of people who abstained 
(indicated by the absence of opiates in urine samples) 
ranged from 35.2 to 67.4 percent at various times during 
the eleven-month period.
A major advantage of buprenorphine, besides its 
efficacy, is the fact that it can be used in office-based 
treatment. The addition of a small dose of naloxone 
ensures that the combination drug has no abuse poten-
tial—and will, in fact, cause withdrawal symptoms if it is 
taken by an addict who is currently taking an opiate.
Therapy for Drug Abuse
There are many reasons for engaging in research on the 
physiology of drug abuse, including an academic inter-
est in the nature of reinforcement and the pharmacol-
ogy of psychoactive drugs. But most researchers enter-
tain the hope that the results of their research will 
contribute to the development of ways to treat and—
better yet—prevent drug abuse in members of our own 
species. As you well know, the incidence of drug abuse 
is far too high; obviously, research has not yet solved the 
problem. However, real progress is being made.
The most common treatment for opiate addiction is 
methadone maintenance. Methadone is a potent opi-
ate, just like morphine or heroin. If it were available in 
a form suitable for injection, it would be abused. (In 
fact, methadone clinics must control their stock of 
methadone carefully to prevent it from being stolen and 
sold to opiate abusers.) Methadone maintenance pro-
grams administer the drug to their patients in the form 
of a liquid, which they must drink in the presence of the 
personnel supervising this procedure. Because the oral 
route of administration increases the opiate level in the 
brain slowly, the drug does not produce a high, the way 
an injection of heroin will. In addition, because metha-
done is long lasting, the patient’s opiate receptors re-
main occupied for a long time, which means that an 
injection of heroin has little effect. Of course, a very 
large dose of heroin will still produce a “rush,” so the 
method is not foolproof.
A newer drug, buprenorphine, shows promise of being 
an even better therapeutic agent for opiate addiction 
Section Summary
Heredity and Drug Abuse
Most people who are exposed to addictive drugs—
even drugs with a high abuse potential—do not 
become addicts. Evidence suggests that the likeli-
hood of addiction, especially to alcohol and nicotine, 
is strongly affected by heredity. Drug taking and 
addiction are affected by general hereditary and 
environmental factors that apply to all drugs and 
specific factors that apply to particular drugs. A bet-
ter understanding of the physiological basis of rein-
forcement and punishment will help us to understand 
the effects of heredity on susceptibility to addiction. 
Some individual genes have been shown to affect 
abuse of particular drugs. For example, variations in 
the genes for alcohol dehydrogenase play a role in 
susceptibility to alcoholism, variations in the gene for 
the a5 ACh receptor affect the likelihood of nicotine 
addiction, and the genes that produce sirtuins mod-
ify responsiveness to the addictive potential of 
cocaine.
 Thought Question
Can you think of any genetic factors besides the ones 
I’ve described in the previous section that might 
affect a person’s susceptibility to drug abuse? For 
example, what kinds of individual differences might 
affect the likelihood that a person tries a drug, likes 
the effects of the drug, is able to resist taking more of 
the drug, etc.?

	
Therapy for Drug Abuse	
639
trials with vaccines for cocaine and nicotine have taken 
place (Cerny and Cerny, 2009; Carroll et al., 2011; 
Hicks et al., 2011; Stowe et al., 2011). The results of 
these animal studies and human trials are promising, 
and more extensive human trials are in progress. Theo-
retically, at least, treatment of addictions with immuno-
therapy should interfere only with the action of an 
abused drug and not with the normal operations of 
people’s reinforcement mechanisms. Thus, the treat-
ment should not decrease their ability to experience 
normal pleasure.
Yet another approach to addiction is being investi-
gated. As we saw in Chapters 13, 16, and 17, deep brain 
stimulation (DBS) has been shown to have therapeutic 
effects on the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease, depres-
sion, anxiety disorders, and obsessive-compulsive disor-
der. A review by Luigjes et al. (2011) reported that seven 
animal studies have investigated the effectiveness of stim-
ulation of the NAC, subthalamic nucleus (STN), dorsal 
striatum, habenula, medial PFC, and hypothalamus. 
Eleven studies with human subjects have targeted the 
NAC or the STN. So far, the authors report, the NAC  
appears to be the most promising target. For example, 
Mantione et al. (2010) stimulated the NAC of a forty-
seven-year-old male smoker. The investigators reported 
that the man effortlessly stopped smoking and lost weight 
(he was obese).
Deep brain stimulation is not a procedure to take 
lightly. It involves brain surgery, which runs a risk of com-
plications such as hemorrhage and infection. Of course, 
addictions include significant health risks, including 
death from infections or lung cancer, so each case  
requires an analysis of the potential risks and benefits. In 
any event, the use of DBS is currently experimental, and 
we must consider the strong possibility that such a dra-
matic procedure will produce placebo effects. (Yes, surgi-
cal procedures are susceptible to placebo effects.) A less 
invasive procedure, transcranial magnetic stimulation, is 
also being investigated as a treatment for addictions. For 
example, Amiaz et al. (2009) applied TMS over the left 
dorsolateral PFC of nicotine addicts. The treatment re-
duced tobacco use (verified by urinalysis), but the thera-
peutic effects eventually diminished over time.
A treatment similar to methadone maintenance 
has been used successfully as an adjunct to treatment 
for nicotine addiction. For several years, chewing gum 
containing nicotine has been available, and more re-
cently, transdermal patches that release nicotine 
through the skin have been marketed. Both methods 
maintain a sufficiently high level of nicotine in the 
brain to decrease a person’s craving for nicotine. Once 
the habit of smoking has subsided, the dose of nico-
tine can be decreased to wean the person from the 
drug. Carefully controlled studies have shown that 
nicotine maintenance therapy, and not administration 
As we saw, opiate receptor blockers such as nalox-
one and naltrexone interfere with the action of opiates. 
Emergency rooms always have one of these drugs avail-
able to rescue patients who have taken an overdose of 
heroin, and many lives have been saved by these means. 
But although an opiate antagonist will block the effects 
of heroin, the research reviewed earlier in this chapter 
suggests that it should increase the craving for heroin.
As we saw earlier, the reinforcing effects of cocaine 
and amphetamine are primarily a result of the sharply 
increased levels of dopamine that these drugs produce 
in the NAC. Drugs that block dopamine receptors cer-
tainly block the reinforcing effects of cocaine and am-
phetamine, but they also produce dysphoria and anhe-
donia. People will not tolerate the unpleasant feelings 
these drugs produce, so they are not useful treatments 
for cocaine and amphetamine abuse. Drugs that stimu-
late dopamine receptors can reduce a person’s depen-
dence on cocaine or amphetamine, but these drugs are 
just as addictive as the drugs they replace and have the 
same deleterious effects on health.
An interesting approach to cocaine addiction was 
suggested by a study by Carrera et al. (1995), who con-
jugated cocaine to a foreign protein and managed to 
stimulate rats’ immune systems to develop antibodies 
to cocaine. The antibodies bound with molecules of 
cocaine and prevented them from crossing the blood–
brain barrier. As a consequence, these “cocaine-immu-
nized” rats were less sensitive to the activating effects of 
cocaine, and brain levels of cocaine in these animals 
were lower after an injection of cocaine. Since this 
study was carried out, animal studies with vaccines 
against cocaine, heroin, methamphetamine, and nico-
tine have been carried out, and several human clinical 
figure 18.21  Buprenorphine as a Treatment  
for Opiate Addiction
The graph shows the effects of treatment with 
buprenorphine, buprenorphine + naloxone, and a 
placebo on opiate craving in recovering opiate addicts.
(Based on data from Fudala et al., 2003.)
40
20
60
80
0
0
1
2
3
4
Weeks
Relative craving for opiate
Placebo
Buprenorphine + naloxone
Buprenorphine alone

640	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
of its approval as an antiobesity medication. At the pres-
ent time, approval of rimonabant to treat nicotine ad-
diction seems unlikely.
Another drug, varenicline, has been approved for 
therapeutic use to treat nicotine addiction. Vareni-
cline was developed especially as a treatment for nico-
tine addiction. The drug serves as a partial agonist for 
the nicotinic receptor, just as buprenorphine serves 
as a partial agonist for the μ opiate receptor. As a 
partial nicotinic agonist, varenicline maintains a mod-
erate level of activation of nicotinic receptors but pre-
vents high levels of nicotine from providing excessive 
levels of stimulation. Figure 18.22 shows the effects of 
treatment with varenicline and bupropion on con-
tinuous abstinence rates of smokers enrolled in a ran-
domized, double-blind, placebo control study (Nides 
et al., 2006). By the end of the fifty-two-week treat-
ment program, 14.4 percent of the smokers treated 
with varenicline were still abstinent, compared with 
6.3 percent and 4.9 percent of the smokers who  
received bupropion and placebo, respectively. (See 
Figure 18.22.)
As I mentioned earlier, several studies have shown 
that opiate antagonists decrease the reinforcing value of 
alcohol in a variety of species, including our own. This 
finding suggests that the reinforcing effect of alcohol—
at least in part—is produced by the secretion of endog-
enous opioids and the activation of opiate receptors in 
the brain. A study by Davidson, Swift, and Fitz (1996) 
clearly illustrates this effect. The investigators arranged 
a double-blind, placebo-controlled study with sixteen 
college-age men and women to investigate the effects of 
naltrexone on social drinkers. None of the participants 
were alcohol abusers, and pregnancy tests ensured that 
of a placebo, is useful in treatment for nicotine depen-
dence (Raupach and van Schayck, 2011). However, 
nicotine maintenance therapy is most effective if it is 
part of a counseling program.
One of the limitations of treating a smoking addic-
tion with nicotine maintenance is that this procedure 
does not provide an important non-nicotine compo-
nent of smoking: the sensations produced by the action 
of cigarette smoke on the airways. As we saw earlier in 
this chapter, stimuli associated with the administration 
of addictive drugs play an important role in sustaining 
an addictive habit. Smokers who rate the pleasurability 
of puffs of normal and denicotinized cigarettes within 
seven seconds, which is less time than it takes for nico-
tine to leave the lungs, enter the blood, and reach the 
brain, reported that puffing denicotinized cigarettes 
produced equally strong feelings of euphoria and satis-
faction and reductions in the urge to smoke. Further-
more, blocking the sensations of cigarette smoke on 
the airways by first inhaling a local anesthetic dimin-
ishes smoking satisfaction. Denicotinized cigarettes are 
not a completely adequate substitute for normal ciga-
rettes, because nicotine itself, not just the other com-
ponents of smoke, makes an important contribution to 
the sensations felt in the airways. In fact, trimethaphan, 
a drug that blocks nicotinic receptors but does not 
cross the blood–brain barrier, decreases the sensory 
effects of smoking and reduces satisfaction. Because 
trimethaphan does not interfere with the effects of 
nicotine on the brain, this finding indicates that the 
central effects of nicotine are not sufficient by them-
selves to maintain an addiction to nicotine. Instead, 
the combination of an immediate cue from the  
sensory effects of components of cigarette smoke on 
the airways and a more delayed, and more continu-
ous, effect of nicotine on the brain serves to make 
smoking so addictive (Naqvi and Bechara, 2005; 
Rose, 2006).
As we saw earlier in this chapter, studies with labora-
tory animals have found that the endogenous cannabi-
noids are involved in the reinforcing effects of nicotine 
as well as those of marijuana. A recent clinical trial re-
ported that rimonabant, a drug that blocks CB1 recep-
tors, was effective in helping smokers to quit their habit 
(Henningfield et al., 2005). One significant benefit of 
the drug was a decrease in the weight gain that typically 
accompanies cessation of smoking and often discour-
ages smokers who are trying to quit. As we saw in Chap-
ter 12, the endocannabinoids stimulate eating, appar-
ently by increasing the release of MCH and orexin. 
Blocking CB1 receptors abolishes this effect and helps 
to counteract the effects of withdrawal from nicotine on 
these neurons. But the problem with rimonabant is that 
some clinical trials have found that the drug can cause 
anxiety and depression, which provoked the withdrawal 
figure 18.22  Varenicline as a Treatment  
for Smoking
The graph shows the percentage of smokers treated with 
varenicline, bupropion, or placebo who abstained from 
cigarette smoking.
(Based on data from Nides et al., 2006.)
10
20
30
40
0
4–7
4–12
4–24
4–52
Weeks of abstinence
Varenicline
Bupropion
Placebo
Percentage of smokers 
remaining abstinent

	
Therapy for Drug Abuse	
641
the women were not pregnant. They gathered around a 
table in a local restaurant/bar for three two-hour drink-
ing sessions, two weeks apart. For several days before the 
meeting, they swallowed capsules that contained either 
naltrexone or an inert placebo. The results showed that 
naltrexone increased the latency to take the first sip and 
to take a second drink and that the blood alcohol levels 
of the naltrexone-treated participants were lower at the 
end of the session. In general, the people who had taken 
naltrexone found that their drinks did not taste very 
good—in fact, some of them asked for a different drink 
after taking the first sip.
These results are consistent with reports of the ef-
fectiveness of naltrexone as an adjunct to programs 
designed to treat alcohol abuse. For example, O’Brien, 
Volpicelli, and Volpicelli (1996) reported the results of 
two long-term programs using naltrexone along with 
more traditional behavioral treatments. Both programs 
found that administration of naltrexone significantly 
increased the likelihood of success. As Figure 18.23 
shows, naltrexone decreased the participants’ craving 
for alcohol and increased the number of participants 
who managed to abstain from alcohol. (See Figure 
18.23.) Currently, many treatment programs are using a 
sustained-release form of naltrexone to help treat alco-
holism, and results with the drug have been encourag-
ing (Gastfriend, 2011).
One more drug has shown promise for treatment 
of alcoholism. As we saw earlier in this chapter, alcohol 
serves as an indirect agonist at the GABAA receptor and 
an indirect antagonist at the NMDA receptor. Acampro-
sate, an NMDA-receptor antagonist that has been used 
in Europe to treat seizure disorders, was tested for  
its ability to stop seizures induced by withdrawal from 
alcohol. The researchers discovered that the drug  
had an unexpected benefit: Alcoholic patients who re-
ceived the drug were less likely to start drinking again 
(Wickelgren, 1998). Several double-blind studies have 
confirmed the therapeutic benefits of acamprosate, but 
these benefits appear to be modest (Rösner et al., 
2010).
figure 18.23  Naltrexone as a Treatment for 
Alcoholism
The graphs show mean craving score and proportion of 
patients who abstained from drinking while receiving 
naltrexone or a placebo.
(Based on data from O’Brien et al., 1996.)
3
2
1
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12
12
0.7
0.6
0.8
0.9
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11
Placebo-treated group
Placebo-treated group
Naltrexone-treated group
Naltrexone-treated group
Number of weeks receiving medication
Number of weeks receiving medication
Mean craving score (0–9)
Cumulative proportion with no relapse
Section Summary
Although drug abuse is difficult to treat, researchers 
have developed several useful therapies. Methadone 
maintenance replaces addiction to heroin by addic-
tion to an opiate that does not produce euphoric 
effects when administered orally. Buprenorphine, a 
Therapy for Drug Abuse
partial agonist for the μ opiate receptor, reduces crav-
ing for opiates. Because it is not of interest to opiate 
addicts (especially when it is combined with naltrex-
one), it can be administered by a physician at an 
(continued on next page)

642	
Chapter 18  Drug Abuse
office visit. The development of antibodies to cocaine 
and nicotine in humans and to several other drugs in 
rats holds out the possibility that people may some-
day be immunized against addictive drugs, preventing 
the entry of the drugs into the brain. Deep brain stim-
ulation of the NAC and STN and TMS of the prefron-
tal cortex show promise as a treatment for addiction. 
Nicotine-containing gum and transdermal patches 
help smokers to combat their addiction. However, 
sensations from the airways produced by the presence 
of cigarette smoke play an important role in addiction, 
and oral and transdermal administration do not pro-
vide these sensations. Rimonabant, a CB1 receptor 
antagonist, aids in smoking cessation and reduces the 
likelihood of weight gain, but it may produce adverse 
emotional effects. Bupropion, an antidepressant drug, 
has also been shown to help smokers stop their habit. 
Varenicline, a partial agonist for the nicotinic receptor, 
may be even more effective. The most effective phar-
macological adjunct to treatment for alcoholism 
appears to be naltrexone, an opiate receptor blocker 
that reduces the drug’s reinforcing effects. 
Acamprosate, an NMDA-receptor antagonist, appears 
to facilitate treatment of alcoholism.
A personal note: You are now at the end of the 
book (as you well know), and you have spent a consid-
erable amount of time reading my words. While work-
ing on this book, I have tried to imagine myself talking 
to someone who is interested in learning something 
about the physiology of behavior. As I mentioned in 
the preface, writing is often a lonely activity, and the 
imaginary audience helped to keep me company. If 
you would like to turn this communication into a two-
way conversation, write to me: nrc@psych.umass.edu
Thought Question
Consider the experimental studies with laboratory 
animals described in this chapter that have revealed 
ways that addictive drugs interact with the brain. For 
example, we saw that orexin and MCH are involved in 
the reinforcing effects of drugs, and that the insula is 
specifically involved in the reinforcing effects of nico-
tine. Can you think of ways that these findings might 
lead to new ways to treat drug addiction?

	
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab	
643
Explore the Virtual Brain in MyPsychLab
 Drug Addiction and Brain Reward Circuits 
The brain circuitry thought to be involved in drug abuse is shown in the Drug 
Addiction and Brain Reward Circuits module of the virtual brain.
5.  Describe the behavioral and physical effects of nicotine.
6.  Describe the behavioral and physical effects of alcohol 
and cannabis.
7.  Describe research on the role that heredity plays in 
addiction.
8.  Discuss different methods of therapy for drug abuse.
Review Questions
1.  Describe two common features of addition: positive 
and negative reinforcement.
2.  Describe the neural mechanisms responsible for crav-
ing and relapse.
3.  Review the neural basis of the reinforcing effects and 
withdrawal effects of opiates.
4.  Describe the behavioral and physical effects of 
cocaine and amphetamine.
Study and Review on MyPsychLab

This page intentionally left blank 

645
Abelson, J. L., Curtis, G. C., Sagher, O., Albucher, R. C., 
et al. Deep brain stimulation for refractory obsessive-­
compulsive disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 2005, 57, 
510–516.
Abizaid, A., Liu, Z. W., Andrews, Z. B., Shanabrough, M., 
et al. Ghrelin modulates the activity and synaptic input 
organization of midbrain dopamine neurons while 
promoting appetite. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 
2006, 116, 3229–3239.
Abrevalo, E., Shanmugasundararaj, S., Wilkemeyer, 
M. F., Dou, X., et al. An alcohol binding site on the 
neural cell adhesion molecule L1. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2008, 105, 371–375.
Adair, J. C., and Barrett, A. M. Spatial neglect: Clinical 
and neuroscience review. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Science, 2008, 1142, 21–43.
Adamantidis, A., Carter, M. C., and de Lecea, L. 
Optogenetic deconstruction of sleep–wake circuitry in 
the brain. Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience, 2010, 2, 1–9.
Adams, D. B., Gold, A. R., and Burt, A. D. Rise in 
female-initiated sexual activity at ovulation and its 
suppression by oral contraceptives. New England 
Journal of Medicine, 1978, 299, 1145–1150.
Adams, R. B., and Kleck, R. E. Effects of direct and 
averted gaze on the perception of facially communi-
cated emotion. Emotion, 2005, 5, 3–11.
Adams, R. D. The anatomy of memory mechanisms 
in the human brain. In The Pathology of Memory, 
edited by G. A. Talland and N. C. Waugh. New York: 
Academic Press, 1969.
Adey, W. R., Bors, E., and Porter, R. W. EEG sleep pat-
terns after high cervical lesions in man. Archives of 
Neurology, 1968, 19, 377–383.
Adler, C. M., Malhotra, A. K., Elman, I., Goldberg, T., 
et al. Comparison of ketamine-induced thought dis-
order in healthy volunteers and thought disorder in 
schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1999, 
156, 1646–1649.
Adolphs, R. Neural systems for recognizing emotion. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 2002, 12, 169–177.
Adolphs, R., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., Cooper, G., et al. 
A role for somatosensory cortices in the visual recogni-
tion of emotion as revealed by three-dimensional lesion 
mapping. Journal of Neuroscience, 2000, 20, 2683–2690.
Adolphs, R., Gosselin, F., Buchanan, T. W., Tranel, D., 
et al. A mechanism for impaired fear recognition 
after amygdala damage. Nature, 2005, 433, 68–72.
Adolphs, R., and Tranel, D. Intact recognition of 
emotional prosody following amygdala damage. 
Neuropsychologia, 1999, 37, 1285–1292.
Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Damasio, H., and Damasio, 
A. Impaired recognition of emotion in facial expres-
sions ­following bilateral damage to the human amyg-
dala. Nature, 1994, 372, 669–672.
Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Damasio, H., and Damasio, A. Fear 
and the human amygdala. Journal of Neuroscience, 1995, 
15, 5879–5891.
Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., Hamann, S., Young, A. W., et al. 
Recognition of facial emotion in nine individuals with 
bilateral amygdala damage. Neuropsychologia, 1999, 37, 
1111–1117.
Advokat, C., and Kutlesic, V. Pharmacotherapy of the 
­eating disorders: A commentary. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 1995, 19, 59–66.
Agarwal, N., Pacher, P., Tegeder, I., Amaya, F., et al. 
Cannabinoids mediate analgesia largely via peripheral 
type 1 cannabinoid receptors in nociceptors. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2007, 10, 870–879.
Aghajanian, G. K., Kogan, J. H., and Moghaddam, B. 
Opiate withdrawal increases glutamate and aspartate 
efflux in the locus coeruleus: An in vivo microdialysis 
study. Brain Research, 1994, 636, 126–130.
Aharon, L., Etcoff, N., Ariely, D., Chabris, C. F., et al. 
Beautiful faces have variable reward value: fMRI and 
­behavioral evidence. Neuron, 2001, 32, 537–551.
Aktas, O., Kieseier, B., and Hartung, H.-P. Neuroprotection, 
regeneration and immunomodulation: Broadening 
the therapeutic repertoire in multiple sclerosis. 
Trends in Neuroscience, 2009, 33, 140–152.
Alain, C., He, Y., and Grady, C. The contribution of the 
inferior parietal lobe to auditory spatial working mem-
ory. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2008, 20, 285–295.
Albrecht, D. G. Analysis of visual form. Doctoral disser-
tation, University of California, Berkeley, 1978.
Alexander, G. M. An evolutionary perspective of sex-
typed toy preferences: Pink, blue, and the brain. 
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 2003, 32, 7–14.
Alexander, G. M., and Hines, M. Sex differences in 
response to children’s toys in nonhuman primates 
(Cercopithecus aethiops sabaeus). Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 2002, 23, 467–479.
Alexander, M. P., Fischer, R. S., and Friedman, R. 
Lesion localization in apractic agraphia. Archives of 
Neurology, 1992, 49, 246–251.
References

646	
References
Anderson, A. K., and Phelps, E. A. Intact recognition of 
vocal expressions of fear following bilateral lesions of 
the human amygdala. Neuroreport, 1998, 9, 3607–3613.
Anderson, A. K., and Phelps, E. A. Expression without 
recognition: Contributions of the human amygdala to 
emotional communication. Psychological Science, 2000, 
11, 106–111.
Anderson, S., Barrash, J., Bechara, A., and Tranel, D. 
Impairments of emotion and real-world complex 
behavior following childhood- or adult-onset dam-
age to ventromedial prefrontal cortex. Journal of 
the International Neuropsychological Society, 2006, 12, 
224–235.
ann het Rot, M., Collins, K. A., Murrough, J. W., et al. 
Safety and efficacy of repeated-dose intravenous 
­ketamine for treatment-resistant depression. Biological 
Psychiatry, 2010, 67, 139–145.
Annese, J., Gazzaniga, M. S., and Toga, A. W. 
Localization of the human cortical visual area MT 
based on computer aided histological analysis. 
Cerebral Cortex, 2005, 15, 1044–1053.
Anonymous. Effects of sexual activity on beard growth 
in man. Nature, 1970, 226, 867–870.
Anzai, A., Peng, X., and Van Essen, D. C. Neurons in 
­monkey visual area V2 encode combinations of orien-
tations. Nature Neuroscience, 2007, 10, 1313–1321.
Apkarian, A. V., Sosa, Y., Krauss, B. R., Thomas, P. S., 
et al. Chronic pain patients are impaired on an 
emotional decision-­making task. Pain, 2004a, 108, 
129–136.
Apkarian, A. V., Sosa, Y., Sonty, S., Levy, R. M., et al. 
Chronic back pain is associated with decreased pre-
frontal and ­thalamic gray matter density. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2004b, 24, 10410–10415.
Arancio, O., Kandel, E. R., and Hawkins, R. D. Activity-
dependent long-term enhancement of transmitter 
release by presynaptic 3’,5’-cyclic GMP in cultured 
hippocampal neurons. Nature, 1995, 376, 74–80.
Archer, J. Testosterone and aggression. Journal of 
Offender Rehabilitation, 1994, 5, 3–25.
Arendt, J., Deacon, S., English, J., Hampton, S., et al. 
Melatonin and adjustment to phase-shift. Journal of 
Sleep Research, 1995, 4, 74–79.
Arnason, B. G. Immunologic therapy of multiple  
sclerosis. Annual Review of Medicine, 1999, 50, 291–302.
Arnott, S. T., Binns, M. A., Grady, C. L., and Alain, C.  
Assessing the auditory dual-pathway model in 
humans. Neuroimage, 2004, 22, 401–408.
Arnsten, A. F. The emerging neurobiology of attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder: The key role of the pre-
frontal association cortex. Journal of Pediatrics, 2009, 
54, I-S43.
Arnsten, A. F. T., and Li, B.-M. Neurobiology of execu-
tive functions: Catecholamine influences on prefrontal 
Alirezaei, M., Watry, D. D., Flynn, C. F., Kiosses, W. B., 
et al. Human immunodeficiency virus-1/surface 
glycoprotein 120 induces apoptosis through RNA-
activated protein kinase signaling in neurons. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 11047–11055.
Allebrandt, K. V., Teder-Laving, M., Akylo, M., et al. 
CLOCK gene variants associate with sleep duration 
in two independent populations. Biological Psychiatry, 
2010, 67, 1040–1047.
Allen, L. S., and Gorski, R. A. Sexual orientation and 
the size of the anterior commissure in the human 
brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 1992, 89, 7199–7202.
Allison, T., Puce, A., and McCarthy, G. Social percep-
tion from visual cues: Role of the STS region. Trends 
in Cognitive Science, 2000, 4, 267–278.
Allman, J. M. Evolving Brains. New York: Scientific 
American Library, 1999.
Altschuler, H. L., Phillips, P. E., and Feinhandler, D. A. 
Alterations of ethanol self-administration by naltrex-
one. Life Sciences, 1980, 26, 679–688.
Amano, T., Unal, C. T., and Paré, D. Synaptic correlates of 
fear extinction in the amygdala. Nature Neuroscience, 2010, 
13, 489–494.
Amaral, D. G. The amygdala, social behavior, and 
danger detection. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences, 2003, 1000, 337–347.
Amaral, D. G., Price, J. L., Pitkänen, A., and Carmichael, 
S. T. Anatomical organization of the primate amygda-
loid complex. In The Amygdala: Neurobiological Aspects 
of Emotion, Memory, and Mental Dysfunction, edited by 
J. P. Aggleton. New York: Wiley-Liss, 1992.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed. Washington, D.C.: 
American Psychiatric Association, 1994.
Amiaz, R., Levy, D., Vainiger, D., et al. Repeated high-
frequency transcranial magnetic stimulation over 
the ­dorsolateral prefrontal cortex reduces cigarette 
craving and consumption. Addiction, 2009, 104, 
653–660.
Anand, B. K., and Brobeck, J. R. Hypothalamic control 
of food intake in rats and cats. Yale Journal of Biology 
and Medicine, 1951, 24, 123–140.
Ancoli-Israel, S., and Roth, T. Characteristics of insom-
nia in the United States: Results of the 1991 National 
Sleep Foundation survey. Sleep, 1999, 22, S347–S353.
Andari, E., Duhamel, J. R., Zalla, T., et al. Promoting 
social behavior with oxytocin in high-functioning 
autism spectrum disorders. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2010, 107, 4389–4394.
Anders, S., Birbaumer, N., Sadowski, B., Erb, M., et al. 
Parietal somatosensory association cortex mediates 
affective blindsight. Nature Neuroscience, 2004, 7, 
339–340.

	
References	
647
Avenet, P., and Lindemann, B. Perspectives of taste 
reception. Journal of Membrane Biology, 1989, 112, 1–8.
Avila, M. T., Weiler, M. A., Lahti, A. C., Tamminga, C. A., 
et al. Effects of ketamine on leading saccades during 
smooth-pursuit eye movements may implicate cerebel-
lar dysfunction in schizophrenia. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 2002, 159, 1490–1496.
Aziz-Zadeh, L., Cattaneo, L., Rochat, M., and Rizzolatti, 
G. Covert speech arrest induced by rTMS over both 
motor and nonmotor left hemisphere frontal sites. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2005, 17, 928–938.
Baddeley, A. D. Memory: Verbal and visual subsystems 
of working memory. Current Biology, 1993, 3, 563–565.
Bagatell, C. J., Heiman, J. R., Rivier, J. E., and Bremner, 
W. J. Effects of endogenous testosterone and estradiol 
on sexual behavior in normal young men. Journal of 
Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 1994, 7, 211–216.
Bai, F. L., Yamano, M., Shiotani, Y., Emson, P. C., et al. 
An arcuato-paraventricular and -dorsomedial hypo-
thalamic neuropeptide Y-containing system which 
lacks noradrenaline in the rat. Brain Research, 1985, 
331, 172–175.
Baier, B., Karnath, H.-O., Dieterich, M, et al. Keeping 
memory clear and stable—The contribution of 
human basal ganglia and prefrontal cortex to work-
ing memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 2010, 30,  
9788–9792.
Bailey, C. H., Kandel, E. R., and Si, K. The persistence 
of long-term memory: A molecular approach to self-
sustaining changes in learning-induced synaptic growth. 
Neuron, 2004, 44, 49–57.
Bailey, J. M., and Pillard, R. C. A genetic study of male 
sexual orientation. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1991, 
48, 1089–1096.
Bailey, J. M., Pillard, R. C., Neale, M. C., and Agyei, Y. 
Heritable factors influence sexual orientation in 
women. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1993, 50,  
217–223.
Baizer, J. S., Ungerleider, L. G., and Desimone, R. 
Organization of visual inputs to the inferior temporal 
and posterior parietal cortex in macaques. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 1991, 11, 168–190.
Bak, T. H., O’Donovan, D. G., Xuereb, J. H., Boniface, 
S., et al. Selective impairment of verb processing asso-
ciated with pathological changes in Brodman areas 
44 and 45 in the motor neurone disease-dementia-
aphasia syndrome. Brain, 2001, 124, 103–120.
Baker, C. I., Behrman, M., and Olson, C. R. Impact of 
learning on representation of parts and wholes in mon-
key Inferotemporal cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 2002, 5, 
1210–1216.
Baker, M. Light tools. Nature Methods, 2011, 8, 19–22.
Baldessarini, R. J. Chemotherapy in Psychiatry. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1977.
cortical functions. Biological Psychiatry, 2005, 57, 
1377–1384.
Aron, A. R., Robbins, T. W, and Poldrack, R. A. 
Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex. 
Trends in Cognitive Science, 2004, 8, 170–177.
Aronson, B. D., Bell-Pedersen, D., Block, G. D., Bos,  
N. P. A., et al. Circadian rhythms. Brain Research Reviews, 
1993, 18, 315–333.
Arrasate, M., Mitra, S., Schweitzer, E. S., Segal, M. R.,  
et al. Inclusion body formation reduces levels of mutant 
huntingtin and the risk of neuronal death. Nature, 
2004, 431, 747–748.
Arroyo, S., Lesser, R. P., Gordon, B., Uematsu, S., et al. 
Mirth, laughter and gelastic seizures. Brain, 1993, 
116, 757–780.
Artmann, H., Grau, H., Adelman, M., and Schleiffer, R. 
Reversible and non-reversible enlargement of cerebrospi-
nal fluid spaces in anorexia nervosa. Neuroradiology, 1985, 
27, 103–112.
Aschoff, J. Circadian rhythms: General features and 
endocrinological aspects. In Endocrine Rhythms, edited 
by D. T. Krieger. New York: Raven Press, 1979.
Asnis, G. M., Hameedi, F. A., Goddard, A. W., Potkin,  
S. G., et al. Fluvoxamine in the treatment of panic disor-
der: A multi-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
study in ­outpatients. Psychiatry Research, 2001, 103, 1–14.
Astafiev, S. V., Shulman, G. L., Stanley, C. M., Snyder,  
A. Z., et al. Functional organization of human intrapa-
rietal and frontal cortex for attending, looking, and 
pointing. Journal of Neuroscience, 2003, 23, 4689–4699.
Aston-Jones, G., and Bloom, F. E. Activity of norepi-
nephrine-containing locus coeruleus neurons in 
behaving rats anticipates fluctuations in the sleep-
waking cycle. Journal of Neuroscience, 1981, 1, 876–886.
Aston-Jones, G., Smith, R. J., Moorman, D. E., and 
Richardson, K. A. Role of lateral hypothalamic 
orexin ­neurons in reward processing and addiction. 
Neuropharmacology, 2009, 56, 112–121.
Aston-Jones, G., Rajkowski, J., Kubiak, P., and Alexinsky, 
T. Locus coeruleus neurons in monkey are selectively 
activated by attended cues in a vigilance task. Journal 
of Neuroscience, 1994, 14, 4467– 4480.
Attia, E., Haiman, C., Walsh, T., and Flater, S. T. Does 
fluoxetine augment the inpatient treatment of 
anorexia nervosa? American Journal of Psychiatry, 1998, 
155, 548–551.
Aurora, R. N., Zak, R. S., Maganti, P. K., et al. Best 
practice guide for the treatment of REM sleep behav-
ior disorder (RBD). Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, 
2010, 6, 85–95.
Auyeung, B., Baron-Cohen, S., Ashwin, E., et al. Fetal 
testosterone predicts sexually differentiated child-
hood behavior in girls and in boys. Psychological 
Science, 2009, 20, 144–148.

648	
References
hypothalamic brain areas predicts feeding behaviour 
in humans. Nature, 2007, 450, 106–109.
Bautista, D. M., Jordt, S.-E., Nikai, T., Tsuruda, P. R., 
et al. TRPA1 mediates the inflammatory actions of 
environmental irritants and proalgesic agents. Cell, 
2006, 124, 1269–1282.
Bautista, D. M., Siemens, J., Glazer, J. M., Tsuruda, P. R.,  
et al. The menthol receptor TRPM8 is the principal 
detector of environmental cold. Nature, 2007, 448, 
204–208.
Bayley, P. J., Frascino, J. C., and Squire, L. R. Robust 
habit learning in the absence of awareness and inde-
pendent of the medial temporal lobe. Nature, 2005, 
436, 550–553.
Bayley, P. J., Hopkins, R. O., and Squire, L. R. The fate 
of old memories after medial temporal lobe damage. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2006, 26, 13311–13317.
Beamer, W., Bermant, G., and Clegg, M. T. Copulatory 
behaviour of the ram, Ovis aries. II: Factors affect-
ing copulatory satiation. Animal Behavior, 1969, 17, 
706–711.
Bean, N. J. Modulation of agonistic behavior by the 
dual olfactory system in male mice. Physiology and 
Behavior, 1982, 29, 433–437.
Bean, N. J., and Conner, R. Central hormonal replace-
ment and home-cage dominance in castrated rats. 
Hormones and Behavior, 1978, 11, 100–109.
Beauvois, M. F., and Dérouesné, J. Phonological alexia: 
Three dissociations. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery 
and Psychiatry, 1979, 42, 1115–1124.
Beauvois, M. F., and Dérouesné, J. Lexical or ortho-
graphic dysgraphia. Brain, 1981, 104, 21–45.
Bechara, A., Tranel, D., Damasio, H., Adolphs, R., et al. 
Double dissociation of conditioning and declarative 
knowledge relative to the amygdala and hippocampus 
in humans. Science, 1995, 269, 1115–1118.
Beckstead, R. M., Morse, J. R., and Norgren, R. 
The nucleus of the solitary tract in the monkey: 
Projections to the thalamus and brainstem nuclei. 
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 1980, 190, 259–282.
Beecher, H. K. Measurement of Subjective Responses: 
Quantitative Effects of Drugs. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1959.
Beeman, E. A. The effect of male hormone on aggres-
sive behavior in mice. Physiological Zoology, 1947, 20, 
373–405.
Behrman, M., Avidan, G., Gao, F., and Black, S. 
Structural imaging reveals anatomical alterations in 
Inferotemporal cortex in congenital prosopagnosia. 
Cerebral Cortex, 2007, 17, 2354–2363.
Beidler, L. M. Physiological properties of mammalian 
taste receptors. In Taste and Smell in Vertebrates, edited 
by G. E. W. Wolstenholme. London: J. &A. Churchill, 
1970.
Baldo, J. V., Wilkins, D. P., Ogar, J., et al. Role of the 
­precentral gyrus of the insula in complex articulation. 
Cortex, 2011, 47, 800–807.
Ballantine, H. T., Bouckoms, A. J., Thomas, E. K., and 
Giriunas, I. E. Treatment of psychiatric illness by ste-
reotactic cingulotomy. Biological Psychiatry, 1987, 22, 
807–819.
Bandell, M., Macpherson, L. J., and Patapoutian, A. 
From chills to chilis: Mechanisms for thermosen-
sation and chemesthesis via thermoTRPs. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology, 2007, 17, 490–497.
Banks, M. S., Aslin, R. N., and Letson, R. D. Sensitive 
period for the development of human binocular 
vision. Science, 1975, 190, 675–677.
Barbazanges, A., Piazza, P. V., Le Moal, M., and Maccari, 
S. Maternal glucocorticoid secretion mediates long-
term effects of prenatal stress. Journal of Neuroscience, 
1996, 16, 3943–3949.
Barclay, C. D., Cutting, J. E., and Kozlowski, L. T. 
Temporal and spatial factors in gait perception 
that influence gender recognition. Perception and 
Psychophysics, 1978, 23, 145–152.
Bard, F., Cannon, C., Barbour, R., Burke, R. L., et al. 
Peripherally administered antibodies against amyloid 
beta-peptide enter the central nervous system and 
reduce ­pathology in a mouse model of Alzheimer  
disease. Nature Medicine, 2000, 6, 916–919.
Baron-Cohen, S. The extreme male brain theory of 
autism. Trends in Cognitive Science, 2002, 6, 248–254.
Bartels, A., and Zeki, S. The neural basis of romantic 
love. Neuroreport, 2000, 27, 3829–3834.
Bartels, A., and Zeki, S. The neural correlates of mater-
nal and romantic love. Neuroimage, 2004, 21,  
1155–1166.
Bartness, T. J., Powers, J. B., Hastings, M. H., Bittman, 
E. L., et al. The timed infusion paradigm for melato-
nin delivery: What has it taught us about the melato-
nin signal, its reception, and the photoperiodic con-
trol of seasonal responses? Journal of Pineal Research, 
1993, 15, 161–190.
Basbaum, A. I., and Fields, H. L. Endogenous pain con-
trol mechanisms: Review and hypothesis. Annals of 
Neurology, 1978, 4, 451–462.
Basbaum, A. I., and Fields, H. L. Endogenous pain con-
trol systems: Brainstem spinal pathways and endorphin 
circuitry. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 1984, 7, 309–338.
Basheer, R., Strecker, R. E., Thakkar, M. M., and 
McCarley, R. W. Adenosine and sleep–wake regula-
tion. Progress in Neurobiology, 2004, 73, 379–396.
Batterham, R. L., Cowley, M. A., Small, C. J., Herzog, 
H., et al. Gut hormone PYY3–36 physiologically inhib-
its food intake. Nature, 2002, 418, 650–654.
Batterham, R. L., ffytche, D. H., Rosenthal, J. M., 
Zelaya, R. O., et al. PYY modulation of cortical and 

	
References	
649
Benson, D. L., Colman, D. R., and Huntley, G. W. 
Molecules, maps and synapse specificity. Nature 
Reviews: Neuroscience, 2001, 2, 899–909.
Ben-Tovim, D. I. Eating disorders: Outcome, preven-
tion, and treatment of eating disorders. Current 
Opinion in Psychiatry, 2003, 16, 65–69.
Berenbaum, S. A., and Resnick, S. M. Early androgen 
effects on aggression in children and adults with con-
genital adrenal hyperplasia. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 
1997, 22, 505–515.
Bergasa, N. V. The pruritis of cholestasis. Journal of 
Hepatology, 2005, 43, 1078–1088.
Berglund, H., Lindström, P., and Savic, I. Brain 
response to putative pheromones in lesbian women. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
2006, 103, 8269–8274.
Berkovic, S. F., Mulley, J. C., Scheffer, I. E., and Petrou, 
S. Human epilepsies: Interaction of genetic and 
acquired ­factors. Trends in Neurosciences, 2006, 29, 
391–397.
Bermant, G., and Davidson, J. M. Biological Bases of 
Sexual Behavior. New York: Harper & Row, 1974.
Bernhardt, P. C., Dabbs, J. M., Fielden, J. A., and Lutter, 
C. D. Testosterone changes during vicarious experi-
ences of ­winning and losing among fans at sporting 
events. Physiology and Behavior, 1998, 65, 59–62.
Berns, G. S., McClure, S. M., Pagnoni, G., and 
Montague, P. R. Predictability modulates human 
brain response to reward. Journal of Neuroscience, 2001, 
21, 2793–2798.
Berridge, C. W., Devilbiss, D. M., Andrzejewski, M. E., 
Arnsten, A. F. T., et al. Methylphenidate preferentially 
increases catecholamine neurotransmission within the 
­prefrontal cortex at low doses that enhance cognitive 
­function. Biological Psychiatry, 2006, 60, 1111–1120.
Berson, D. M., Dunn, F. A., and Takao, M. 
Phototransduction by retinal ganglion cells that set 
the circadian clock. Science, 2002, 295, 1070–1073.
Berthier, M., Kulisevsky, J., Gironell, A., and Heras, J. A. 
Obsessive-compulsive disorder associated with brain 
lesions: Clinical phenomenology, cognitive function, 
and anatomic correlates. Neurology, 1996, 47, 353–361.
Berthier, M., Starkstein, S., and Leiguarda, R. Asymbolia 
for pain: A sensory-limbic disconnection syndrome. 
Annals of Neurology, 1988, 24, 41–49.
Berthoud, H.-R., Shin, A. C., and Zheng, H. Obesity 
surgery and gut-brain communication. Physiology and 
Behavior, 2011, 105, 106–119.
Bertolini, A., Ferrari, A., Ottani, A., Guerzoni, S., et al. 
Paracetamol: New vistas of an old drug. CNS Drug 
Review, 2006, 12, 250–275.
Best, P. J., White, A. M., and Minai, A. Spatial process-
ing in the brain: The activity of hippocampal place 
cells. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 2001, 24, 459–486.
Beitz, A. J. The organization of afferent projections 
to the midbrain periaqueductal gray of the rat. 
Neuroscience, 1982, 7, 133–159.
Belichenko, N. P., Belichenko, P. V., Kleschevnikov, 
A. M., et al. The “Down syndrome critical region” is 
sufficient in the mouse model to confer behavioral, 
neurophysiological, and synaptic phenotypes char-
acteristic of Down syndrome. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2010, 29, 5938–5948.
Belin, D., and Everitt, B. J. Cocaine seeking habits 
depend upon dopamine-dependent serial connectivity 
linking the ventral with the dorsal striatum. Neuron, 
2008, 57, 432–441.
Belin, P., Fecteau, S., and Bédard, C. Thinking the 
voice: Neural correlates of voice perception. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 2004, 8, 129–135.
Bell, A. H., Hadj-Bouziane, F., Frihauf, J. B., et al. 
Object representations in the temporal cortex of 
monkeys and humans as revealed by functional mag-
netic resonance ­imaging. Journal of Neurophysiology, 
2009, 101, 688–700.
Bell, A.P., and Weinberg, M. S. Homosexualities: A Study of 
Diversity Among Men and Women. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1978.
Bell, A. P., Weinberg, M. S., and Hammersmith, S. K. 
Sexual Preference: Its Development in Men and Women. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1981.
Bellocchio, L., Lafenêtre, P., Cannich, A., et al. Bimodal 
control of stimulated food intake by the endocannab-
inoid system. Nature Neuroscience, 2010, 13, 281–283.
Belnoue, L., Grosjean, N., Abrous, D. N., and Koehl,  
M. A critical time window for the recruitment of 
bulbar newborn neurons by olfactory discrimination 
learning. Journal of Neuroscience, 2011, 31, 1010–1016.
Ben Mamou, C., Gamache, K., and Nader, K. NMDA 
­receptors are critical for unleashing consolidated auditory 
fear memories. Nature Neuroscience, 2006, 9, 1237–1239.
Benchenane, K., López-Atalaya, J. P., Fernández-
Monreal, M., Touzani, O., et al. Equivocal roles of 
tissue-type plasminogen activator in stroke-induced 
injury. Trends in Neuroscience, 2004, 27, 155–160.
Bendor, D., and Wang, X. Cortical representations of 
pitch in monkeys and humans. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology, 2006, 16, 391–399.
Benington, J. H., Kodali, S. K., and Heller, H. C. 
Monoaminergic and cholinergic modulation of REM-
sleep timing in rats. Brain Research, 1995, 681, 141–146.
Bennett, D. A., Wilson, R. S., Schneider, J. A., Evans, D. A., 
et al. Education modifies the relation of AD pathology 
to level of cognitive function in older persons. Neurology, 
2003, 60, 1909–1915.
Benowitz, L. I., and Carmichael, S. T. Promoting axonal 
rewiring to improve outcome after stroke. Neurobiology 
of Disease, 2010, 37, 259–266.

650	
References
Blundell, J. E., and Halford, J. C. G. Serotonin and appe-
tite regulation: Implications for the pharmacological 
treatment of obesity. CNS Drugs, 1998, 9, 473–495.
Bobrow, D., and Bailey, M. J. Is male homosexuality 
­maintained via kin selection? Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 2001, 22, 361–368.
Bodner, S. M., Morshed, S. A., and Peterson, B. S. The 
question of PANDAS in adults. Biological Psychiatry, 2001, 
49, 807–810.
Boeve, B. F., Silber, M. H., Saper, C. B., Ferman, T. J., 
et al. Pathophysiology of REM sleep behaviour dis-
order and relevance to neurodegenerative disease. 
Brain, 2007, 130, 2770–2788.
Bogaert, A. F. Biological versus nonbiological older 
brothers and men’s sexual orientation. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2006, 103, 
10771–10774.
Boggio, P. S., Rocha, M., Oliveira, M. O., et al. 
Noninvasive brain stimulation with high-frequency 
and low-intensity repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation treatment for posttraumatic stress disor-
der. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 2010, 71, 992–999.
Bohbot, V. D., Lerch, J., Thorndycraft, B., Iaria, G., 
et al. Gray matter differences correlate with sponta-
neous strategies in a human virtual navigation task. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 10078–10083.
Boksa, P. Animal models of obstetric complications 
in relation to schizophrenia. Brain Research Reviews, 
2004, 45, 1–17.
Bolla, K., Ernst, M., Kiehl, K., Mouratidis, M., et al. 
Prefrontal cortical dysfunction in abstinent cocaine 
abusers. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical 
Neuroscience, 2004, 16, 456–464.
Bolwig, T. G. How does electroconvulsive therapy work? 
Theories on its mechanism. Canadian Journal of 
Psychiatry, 2011, 56, 13–18.
Boodman, S. G. Hungry in the dark: Some sleepeaters 
don’t wake up for their strange nighttime binges. 
Washington Post, Sept. 7, 2004, HE01.
Booth, F. W., and Neufer, P. D. Exercise controls gene 
expression. American Scientist, 2005, 93, 28–35.
Born, R. T., and Tootell, R. B. H. Spatial frequency tuning 
of single units in macaque supragranular striate cortex. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 1991, 
88, 7066–7070.
Bornstein, B., Stroka, H., and Munitz, H. Prosopagnosia 
with animal face agnosia. Cortex, 1969, 5, 164–169.
Borod, J. C., Koff, E., Yecker, S., Santschi, C., et al. 
Facial asymmetry during emotional expression: 
Gender, falence, and measurement technique. 
Neuropsychologia, 1998, 36, 1209–1215.
Bossy-Wetzel, E., Schwarzenbacher, R., and Lipton, S. 
A. Molecular pathways to neurodegeneration. Nature 
Medicine, 2004, 10, S2–S9.
Betancur, C., Sakurai, T., and Buxbaum, J. D. The emerg-
ing role of synaptic cell-adhesion pathways in the 
pathogenesis of autism spectrum disorders. Trends in 
Neuroscience, 2009, 32, 402–412.
Bettelheim, B. The Empty Fortress. New York: Free Press, 
1967.
Beversdorf, D. Q., Ratcliffe, N. R., Rhodes, C. H., and 
Reeves, A. G. Pure alexia: Clinical-pathologic evi-
dence for a lateralized visual language association 
cortex. Clinical Neuropathology, 1997, 16, 328–331.
Bewernick, B. H., Hurlemann, R., Matusch, A., et al. 
Nucleus accumbens deep brain stimulation decreases 
ratings of depression and anxiety in treatment-
resistant depression. Biological Psychiatry, 2009, 67, 
110–116.
Bierut, L. J., Stitzel, J. A., Wang, J. C., et al. Variants in 
­nicotinic receptors and risk for nicotine dependence. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 2008, 165, 1163–1171.
Billings, L. M., Green, K. N., McGaugh, J. L., and 
LaFerla, F. M. Learning decreases Ab*56 and tau 
pathology and amerliorates behavioral decline in 3xTg-
AD mice. Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 751–761.
Bisiach, E., and Luzzatti, C. Unilateral neglect of repre-
sentational space. Cortex, 1978, 14, 129–133.
Blackwood, D. H., Fordyce, A., Walker, M. T., et al. 
Schizophrenia and affective disorders—Cosegregation 
with a translocation at chromosome 1q42 that 
directly disrupts brain-expressed genes: Clinical and 
P300 findings in a ­family. American Journal of Human 
Genetics, 2001, 69, 428–433.
Blair, R. J. R. The amygdala and ventromedial ­prefrontal 
cortex: Functional contributions and dysfunction 
in psychopathy. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London B, 2008, 363, 2557–2565.
Blanchard, R. Fraternal birth order and the maternal 
immune hypothesis of male homosexuality. Hormones 
and Behavior, 2001, 40, 105–114.
Blaustein, J. D., and Feder, H. H. Cytoplasmic progestin 
receptors in guinea pig brain: Characteristics and 
relationship to the induction of sexual behavior. 
Brain Research, 1979, 169, 481–497.
Blaustein, J. D., and Olster, D. H. Gonadal steroid hor-
mone receptors and social behaviors. In Advances in 
Comparative and Environmental Physiology, Vol. 3, edited 
by J. Balthazart. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1989.
Blest, A. D. The function of eyespot patterns in insects. 
Behaviour, 1957, 11, 209–256.
Bleuler, E. Dementia Praecox of the Group of Schizophrenia, 
1911. Translated by J. Zinkin. New York: International 
Universities Press, 1911/1950.
Bliss, T. V., and Lømo, T. Long-lasting potentiation 
of ­synaptic transmission in the dentate area of the 
­anaesthetized rabbit following stimulation of the per-
forant path. Journal of Physiology, 1973, 232, 331–356.

	
References	
651
and their projections during human rapid eye move-
ment sleep. Science, 1998, 279, 91–95.
Braun, S. New experiments underscore warnings on 
­maternal drinking. Science, 1996, 273, 738–739.
Bray, G. A., Nielsen, S. J., and Popkin, B. M. Consump­
tion of high-fructose corn syrup in beverages may play 
a role in the epidemic of obesity. American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition, 2004, 79, 537–543.
Brecher, E. M. Licit and Illicit Drugs. Boston: Little, 
Brown & Co., 1972.
Bredel, M. Translating biological insights into clinical 
endpoints in neuro-oncology. Lancet Oncology, 2009, 
10, 928–929.
Breedlove, S. M. Sexual differentiation of the brain and 
behavior. In Behavioral Endocrinology, edited by J. B. 
Becker, S. M. Breedlove, and D. Crews. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 1992.
Breedlove, S. M. Sexual differentiation of the human 
nervous system. Annual Review of Psychology, 1994, 45, 
389–418.
Breier, A., Su, T.-P., Saunders, R., Carson, R. E., et al. 
Schizophrenia is associated with elevated amphet-
amine-induced synaptic dopamine concentrations: 
Evidence from a novel positron emission tomography 
method. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 1997, 94, 2569–2574.
Brem, S., Bach, S., Kucian, K., et al. Brain sensitivity 
to print emerges when children learn letter–speech 
sound correspondences. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2010, 107, 7939–7964.
Bremner, J. D., Randall, P., Scott, T. M., et al. MRI-based 
measurement of hippocampal volume in patients with 
­combat-related posttraumatic stress disorder. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 1995, 152, 973–981.
Brennan, P. A., and Keverne, E. B. Something in the 
air? New insights into mammalian pheromones. 
Current Biology, 2004, 14, R81–R89.
Brickner, R. M. The Intellectual Functions of the Frontal 
Lobe: A Study Based Upon Observations of a Man After 
Partial Frontal Lobectomy. New York: Macmillan, 1936.
Bridges, R. S., DiBiase, R., Loundes, D. D., and Doherty, 
P. C. Prolactin stimulation of maternal behavior in 
female rats. Science, 1985, 227, 782–784.
Bridges, R. S., Rigero, B. A., Byrnes, E. M., Yang, L., 
et al. Central infusions of the recombinant human 
prolactin receptor antagonist, S179D-PRL, delay the 
onset of ­maternal behavior in steroid-primed, nullipa-
rous female rats. Endocrinology, 2001, 142, 730–739.
Bridges, R. S., Robertson, M. C., Shiu, R. P. C., Sturgis, 
J. D., et al. Central lactogenic regulation of mater-
nal behavior in rats: Steroid dependence, hormone 
specificity, and behavioral potencies of rat prolactin 
and rat placental lactogen I. Endocrinology, 1997, 138, 
756–763.
Bouchard, C., Tremblay, A., Despres, J. P., Nadeau, A., 
et al. The response to long-term overfeeding in iden-
tical twins. New England Journal of Medicine, 1990, 322, 
1477–1482.
Boulos, Z., Campbell, S. S., Lewy, A. J., Terman, M., 
et al. Light treatment for sleep disorders: Consensus 
report. 7: ­Jet-lag. Journal of Biological Rhythms, 1995, 
10, 167–176.
Bourne, J., and Harris, K. M. Do thin spines learn to be 
mushroom spines that remember? Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology, 2007, 17, 381–386.
Bourque, C. W. Central mechanisms of osmosensa-
tion and systemic osmoregulation. Nature Reviews: 
Neuroscience, 2008, 9, 519–531.
Boussaoud, D., Desimone, R., and Ungerleider, L. G. 
Visual topography of area TEO in the macaque. 
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 1991, 306, 554–575.
Bouvier, S. E., and Engel, S. A. Behavioral deficits and 
­cortical damage loci in cerebral achromatopsia. 
Cerebral Cortex, 2006, 16, 183–191.
Bowers, D., Blonder, L. X., Feinberg, T., and Heilman, 
K. M. Differential impact of right and left hemisphere 
lesions on facial emotion and object imagery. Brain, 
1991, 114, 2593–2609.
Boyden, E. S., Zhang, F., Bamberg, E., Nagel, G., et al. 
Millisecond-timescale, genetically targeted optical 
control of neural activity. Nature Neuroscience, 2005, 8, 
1263–1268.
Bozarth, M. A. Physical dependence produced by central 
morphine infusions: An anatomical mapping study. 
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 1994, 18, 373–383.
Bozarth, M. A., and Wise, R. A. Toxicity associated 
with ­long-term intravenous heroin and cocaine 
self-­administration in the rat. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 1985, 254, 81–83.
Brackett, N. L., Ferrell, S. M., Aballa, T. C., Amador,  
M. J., et al. An analysis of 653 trials of penile vibratory 
stimulation in men with spinal cord injury. Journal of 
Urology, 1998, 159, 1931–1934.
Bradbury, M. W. B. The Concept of a Blood–Brain Barrier. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1979.
Bradley, D. C., Maxwell, M., Andersen, R. A., Banks,  
M. S., et al. Mechanisms of heading perception in pri-
mate visual cortex. Science, 1996, 273, 1544–1547.
Brady, K. T., and Sinha, R. Co-occurring mental and 
substance use disorders: The neurobiological effects 
of chronic stress. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2005, 
162, 1483–1493.
Brandon, N. J., Millar, J. K., Korth, C., et al. Under­
standing the role of DISC1 in psychiatric disease and 
during normal development. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2009, 29, 12768–12775.
Braun, A. R., Balkin, T. J., Wesensten, N. J., Gwadry, F., 
et al. Dissociated pattern of activity in visual cortices 

652	
References
Brownell, H. H., Simpson, T. L., Bihrle, A. M., Potter, 
H. H., and Gardner, H. Appreciation of metaphoric 
alternative word meanings by left and right brain-
damaged patients. Neuropsychologia, 1990, 28,  
173–184.
Brownell, W. E., Bader, C. R., Bertrand, D., and de-­
Ribaupierre, Y. Evoked mechanical responses of 
isolated cochlear outer hair cells. Science, 1985, 227, 
194–196.
Brüning, J. C., Gautam, D., Burks, D. J., Gillette, J., et al. 
Role of brain insulin receptor in control of body weight 
and reproduction. Science, 2000, 289, 2122–2125.
Brunson, K. L., Kramár, E., Lin, B., Chen, Y., et al. 
Mechanisms of late-onset cognitive decline after early-
life stress. Journal of Neuroscience, 2005, 25, 9328–9338.
Bu, G. Apolipoprotein E and its receptors in Alzheimer’s 
disease: Pathways, pathogenesis and therapy. Nature 
Reviews: Neuroscience, 2010, 10, 333–344.
Buccino, G., Riggio, L., Melli, G., Binkofski, F., et al. 
Listening to action-related sentences modulates the 
activity of the motor system: A combined TMS and 
behavioral study. Cognitive Brain Research, 2005, 24, 
355–363.
Buccino, G., Vogt, S., Ritzi, A., Fink, G. R., et al. Neural 
circuits underlying imitation learning of hand 
actions: An event-related fMRI study. Neuron, 2004, 
42, 323–334.
Buchsbaum, M. S., Gillin, J. C., Wu, J., Hazlett, E., et al. 
Regional cerebral glucose metabolic rate in human 
sleep assessed by positron emission tomography. Life 
Sciences, 1989, 45, 1349–1356.
Buck, L. Information coding in the vertebrate olfac-
tory ­system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 1996, 19, 
517–544.
Buck, L., and Axel, R. A novel multigene family may 
encode odorant receptors: A molecular basis for odor 
recognition. Cell, 1991, 65, 175–187.
Buckner, R. L., Snyder, A. Z., Shannon, B. J., LaRossa, 
G., et al. Molecular, structural, and functional char-
acterization of Alzheimer’s disease: Evidence for a 
relationship between default activity, amyloid, and 
memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 2005, 25, 7709–7717.
Budka, H., Almer, G., Hainfellner, J. A., Brücke, T., et al. 
The Austrian FFI cases. Brain Pathology, 1998, 8, 554.
Bueler, H., Aguzzi, A., Sailer, A., Grenier, R. A., et al. Mice 
devoid of PrP are resistant to scrapie. Cell, 1993, 73, 
1339–1347.
Buhmann, C., Glauche, V., Sturenburg, H. J., Oechsner, 
M., et al. Pharmocologically modulated fMRI-cortical 
responsiveness to levodopa in drug-naïve hemiparkin-
sonian patients. Brain, 2003, 126, 451–461.
Bullivant, S. B., Sellergren, S. A., Stern, K., Spencer, N. A., 
et al. Women’s sexual experience during the menstrual 
cycle: Identification of the sexual phase by noninvasive 
Britten, K. H., and van Wezel, R. J. Electrical microstim-
ulation of cortical area MST biases heading percep-
tion in ­monkeys. Nature Neuroscience, 1998, 1, 59–63.
Britton, D. R., Koob, G. F., Rivier, J., and Vale, W. 
Intraventricular corticotropin-releasing factor 
enhances behavioral effects of novelty. Life Sciences, 
1982, 31, 363–367.
Broberger, C., de Lecea, L., Sutcliffe, J. G., and Hökfelt, 
T. Hypocretin/orexin- and melanin concentrating hor-
mone-expressing cells form distinct populations in the 
rodent ­lateral hypothalamus: Relationship to the neu-
ropeptide Y and agouti gene-related protein systems. 
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 1998, 402, 460–474.
Broca, P. Remarques sur le siège de la faculté du langage 
articulé, suivies d’une observation d’aphemie (perte de la 
parole). Bulletin de la Société Anatomique (Paris), 1861, 36, 
330–357.
Brolin, R. E. Bariatric surgery and long-term control 
of ­morbid obesity. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 2002, 288, 2793–2796.
Brown, A. M., Tekkök, S. B., and Ransom, B. R. Energy 
transfer from astrocytes to axons: The role of CNS gly-
cogen. Neurochemistry International, 2004, 45, 529–536.
Brown, A. S. Prenatal infection as a risk factor for 
­schizophrenia. Schizophrenia bulletin, 2006, 32, 200–202.
Brown, A. S., and Derkits, E. J. Prenatal infection and 
schizophrenia: A review of epidemiologic and transla-
tional studies. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2010, 167, 
261–280.
Brown, A. S., Hooton, J., Schaefer, C. A., Zhang, H., 
et al. Elevated maternal interleukin-8 levels and risk 
of ­schizophrenia in adult offspring. American Journal 
of Psychiatry, 2004, 161, 889–895.
Brown, A. S., Schaefer, C. A., Wyatt, R. J., Begg, M. D., 
et al. Paternal age and risk of schizophrenia in adult 
offspring. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2002, 159, 
1528–1533.
Brown, R. E., Stevens, D. R., and Haas, H. L. The physi-
ology of brain histamine. Progress in Neurobiology, 2001, 
63, 637–672.
Brown, S., Ingham, R. J., Ingham, J. C., Laird, A. R., and 
Fox, P. T. Stuttered and fluent speech production: 
An ALE meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging 
studies. Human Brain Mapping, 2005, 25, 105–117.
Brown, T. H., Ganong, A. H., Kairiss, E. W., Keenan,  
C. L., et al. Long-term potentiation in two synaptic 
systems of the hippocampal brain slice. In Neural 
Models of Plasticity: Experimental and Theoretical 
Approaches, edited by J. H. Byrne and W. O. Berry. 
San Diego: Academic Press, 1989.
Brownell, H. H., Michel, D., Powelson, J., and Gardner, H. 
Surprise but not coherence: Sensitivity to verbal humor 
in right-hemisphere patients. Brain and Language, 1983, 
18, 20–27.

	
References	
653
Campfield, L. A., Smith, F. J., Guisez, Y., Devos, R., et al. 
Recombinant mouse ob protein: Evidence for a 
peripheral signal linking adiposity and central neural 
networks. Science, 1995, 269, 546–549.
Cannon, M., Jones, P. B., and Murray, R. M. Obstetric 
­complications and schizophrenia: Historical and meta-­
analytic review. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2002, 159, 
1080–1092.
Cannon, T. D., Thompson, P. M., van Erp, T. G., et al. 
Cortex mapping reveals regionally specific patterns 
of ­genetic and disease-specific gray-matter deficits in 
twins ­discordant for schizophrenia. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2002, 99, 3228–3233.
Cannon, W. B. The James-Lange theory of emotions: 
A critical examination and an alternative. American 
Journal of Psychology, 1927, 39, 106–124.
Cape, E. G., and Jones, B. E. Effects of glutamate agonist 
versus procaine microinjections into the basal forebrain 
cholinergic cell area upon gamma and theta EEG activ-
ity and sleep-wake state. European Journal of Neuroscience, 
2000, 12, 2166–2184.
Carew, T. J. Development assembly of learning in 
Aplysia. Trends in Neuroscience, 1989, 12, 389–394.
Carleton, A., Accolla, R., and Simon, S. A. Coding in the 
mammalian gustatory system. Trends in Neuroscience, 2010, 
33, 326–334.
Carmichael, M. S., Humbert, R., Dixen, J., Palmisano, 
G., et al. Plasma oxytocin increases in the human 
sexual response. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, 1987, 64, 27–31.
Carpenter, C. R. Sexual behavior of free ranging rhesus 
monkeys (Macaca mulatta). I: Specimens, procedures 
and behavioral characteristics of estrus. Journal of 
Comparative Psychology, 1942, 33, 113–142.
Carr, C. E., and Konishi, M. Axonal delay lines for time 
­measurement in the owl’s brainstem. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 1989, 85, 8311–8315.
Carr, C. E., and Konishi, M. A circuit for detection of 
­interaural time differences in the brain stem of the 
barn owl. Journal of Neuroscience, 1990, 10, 3227–3246.
Carr, L., Iacoboni, M., Dubeau, M. C., Mazziotta, J. C., 
et al. Neural mechanisms of empathy in humans: 
A relay from neural systems for imitation to limbic 
areas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 2003, 100, 5497–5502.
Carrera, M. R., Ashley, J. A., Parsons, L. H., Wirsching, 
P., et al. Suppression of psychoactive effects of 
cocaine by active immunization. Nature, 1995, 378, 
727–730.
Carroll, F. L., Blouch, B. E., Pidaparthi, R. R., et al. 
Synthesis of mercapto-(+)-methamphetamine haptens 
and their use for obtaining improved epitope density 
on (+)-methamphetamine conjugate vaccines. Journal 
of Medical Chemistry, 2011, 54, 5221–5228.
measurement of luteinizing hormone. Journal of Sex 
Research, 2004, 41, 82–93.
Bunyard, L. B., Katzel, L. I., Busby-Whitehead, M. J., 
Wu, Z., et al. Energy requirements of middle-aged 
men are modifiable by physical activity. American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 1998, 68, 1136–1142.
Burt, R. K., Loh, Y., Cohen, B., et al. Autologous non-­
myeloablative haemopoetic stem cell transplantation 
in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: A phase I/II 
study. Lancet Neurology, 2009, 8, 244–253.
Busskamp, V., Duebel, J., Balya, D., et al. Genetic reacti­
vation of cone photoreceptors restores visual responses 
in ­retinitis pigmentosa. Science, 2010, 329, 413–417.
Buxbaum, L. J., Glosser, G., and Coslett, H. B. Impaired 
face and word recognition without object agnosia. 
Neuropsychologia, 1999, 37, 41–50.
Byne, W., Tobet, S., Mattiace, L. A., Lasco, M. S., et al. 
The interstitial nuclei of the human anterior hypo-
thalamus: An investigation of variation with sex, 
sexual orientation, and HIV status. Hormones and 
Behavior, 2001,40, 85–92.
Cabanac, M., and Lafrance, L. Facial consummatory 
­responses in rats support the ponderostat hypothesis. 
Physiology and Behavior, 1991, 50, 179–183.
Cadet, J. L., Jayanthi, S., and Deng, X. Speed kills: 
Cellular and molecular bases of methamphetamine-
induced nerve terminal degeneration and neuronal 
apoptosis. FASEB Journal, 2003, 17, 1775–1788.
Cahill, L., Babinsky, R., Markowitsch, H. J., and McGaugh, 
J. L. The amygdala and emotional memory. Nature, 
1995, 377, 295–296.
Calder, A. J., Keane, J., Manes, F., Anntoun, N., et al. 
Impaired recognition and experience of disgust follow-
ing brain injury. Nature Neuroscience, 2000, 3, 1077–1078.
Calder, A. J., Young, A. W., Rowland, D., Perrett, D. I., 
et al. Facial emotion recognition after bilateral amyg-
dala damage: Differentially severe impairment of fear. 
Cognitive Neuropsychology, 1996, 13, 699–745.
Calvo-Merino, B., Grèzes, J., Glaser, D. E., et al. Seeing 
or doing? Influence of visual and motor familiarity in 
action observation. Current Biology, 2006, 16, 1905–1910.
Campbell, R., Heywood, C. A., Cower, A., Regard, M., 
et al. Sensitivity to eye gaze in prosopagnosic patients 
and ­monkeys with superior temporal sulcus ablation. 
Neuropsychologia, 1990, 28, 1123–1142.
Campeau, S., Hayward, M. D., Hope, B. T., Rosen, J. B., 
et al. Induction of the c-fos proto-oncogene in rat 
amygdala during unconditioned and conditioned 
fear. Brain Research, 1991, 565, 349–352.
Camperio-Ciani, A., Corna, F., and Capiluppi, C. 
Evidence for maternally inherited factors favouring 
male ­homosexuality and promoting female fecundity. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B, 2004, 271, 
2217–2221.

654	
References
Chambers, R. A., Taylor, J. R., and Potenza, M. N. 
Developmental neurocircuitry of motivation in ado-
lescence: A critical period of addiction vulnerability. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 2003, 160, 1041–1052.
Chaminade, T., Meltzoff, A. N., and Decety, J. An fMRI 
study of imitation: Action representation and body 
schema. Neuropsychologia, 2005, 43, 115–127.
Chan, J. L., Mun, E. C., Stoyneva, V., Mantzoros, C. S.,  
et al. Peptide YY levels are elevated after gastric 
bypass surgery. Obesity, 2006, 14, 194–198.
Chandler, L. J., Harris, R. A., and Crews, F. T. Ethanol 
­tolerance and synaptic plasticity. Trends in Pharma­
cological Science, 1998, 19, 491–495.
Chaney, M. A. Side effects of intrathecal and epidural 
­opioids. Canadian Journal of Anaesthology, 1995, 42, 
891–903.
Changizi, M. A., Zhang, Q., Ye, H., and Shimojo, S. The 
structures of letters and symbols throughout human 
­history are selected to match those found in objects 
in natural scenes. American Naturalist, 2006, 167, 
E117–E139.
Chatterjee, S., and Callaway, E. M. Parallel colour- 
opponent pathways to primary visual cortex. Nature, 
2003, 426, 668–671.
Chemelli, R. M., Willie, J. T., Sinton, C. M., Elmquist, J. K., 
et al. Narcolepsy in orexin knockout mice: Molecular 
­genetics of sleep regulation. Cell, 1999, 98, 437–451.
Chen, A. J.-W., and D’Esposito, M. Traumatic brain 
injury: From bench to bedside to society. Neuron, 
2010, 66, 11–14.
Chen, G., Henter, I. D., and Manji, H. K. Presynaptic 
­glutamatergic function in bipolar disorder. Biological 
Psychiatry, 2010, 67, 1007–1009.
Chen, J., Marmer, R., Pulles, A., Paredes, W., et al. 
Ventral tegmental microinjection of delta9- 
tetrahydrocannabinol enhances ventral tegmental 
somatodendritic dopamine levels but not forebrain 
dopamine levels: Evidence for local neural action by 
marijuana’s psychoactive ingredient. Brain Research, 
1993, 621, 65–70.
Chen, J., Paredes, W., Li, J., Smith, D., et al. Delta9-
tetrahydrocannabinol produces naloxone-blockable 
enhancement of presynaptic basal dopamine efflux 
in ­nucleus accumbens of conscious, freely-moving 
rats as ­measured by intracerebral microdialysis. 
Psychopharmacology, 1990, 102, 156–162.
Chen, Y.-C., Thaler, D., Nixon, P. D., Stern, C. E., et al. 
The functions of the medial premotor cortex. II: 
The timing and selection of learned movements. 
Experimental Brain Research, 1995, 102, 461–473.
Chen, Y. W., and Dilsaver, S. C. Lifetime rates of suicide 
attempts among subjects with bipolar and unipolar 
­disorders relative to subjects with other axis I disor-
ders. Biological Psychiatry, 1996, 39, 896–899.
Carroll, R. C., Lissin, D. V., von Zastrow, M., Nicolol, R. 
A., et al. Rapid redistribution of glutamate receptors 
contributes to long-term depression in hippocampal 
cultures. Nature Neuroscience, 1999, 2, 454–460.
Carter, C. S. Hormonal influences on human sexual behav-
ior. In Behavioral Endocrinology, edited by J. B. Becker, 
S. M. Breedlove, and D. Crews. Cambridge, Mass.: 
MIT Press, 1992.
Carter, M. E., Yizhar, O., Chikahisa, S., et al. Tuning 
arousal with optogenetic modulation of locus coeru-
leus neurons. Nature Neuroscience, 2010, 13, 1526–1533.
Cartoni, C., Yasumatsu, K., Ohkuri, T., et al. Taste 
­preference for fatty acids is mediated by GPR40 and 
GPR120. Journal of Neuroscience, 2010, 30, 8376–8382.
Cash, S. S., Halgren, E., Dehghani, N., et al. The human 
K-complex represents an isolated cortical down-state. 
Science, 2009, 324, 1084–1087.
Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T. E., Taylor, A., et al. 
Influence of life stress on depression: Moderation 
by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene. Science, 2003, 
301, 386–389.
Castelli, F., Frith, C., Happé, F., and Frith, U. Autism, 
Asperger syndrome and brain mechanisms for the 
attribution of mental states to animated shapes. Brain, 
2002, 125, 1839–1849.
Catani, M., Jones, D. K., and ffytche, D. H. Perisylvian 
­language networks of the human brain. Annals of 
Neurology, 2005, 57, 8–16.
Caterina, M. J., Leffler, A., Malmberg, A. B., Martin, 
W. J., et al. Impaired nociception and pain sensation 
in mice ­lacking the capsaicin receptor. Science, 2000, 
288, 306–313.
Cavaco, S., Anderson, S. W., Allen, J. S., Castro-Caldas, 
A., et al. The scope of preserved procedural memory 
in ­amnesia. Brain, 2004, 127, 1863–1867.
Cecil, J. E., Francis, J., and Read, N. W. Relative 
­contributions of intestinal, gastric, oro-sensory 
influences and information to changes in appetite 
induced by the same liquid meal. Appetite, 1998, 31, 
377–390.
Cenci, M. A., Kalen, P., Mandel, R. J., and Bjoerklund, 
A. Regional differences in the regulation of dopa-
mine and ­noradrenaline release in medial frontal 
cortex, nucleus accumbens and caudate-putamen: 
A microdialysis study in the rat. Brain Research, 1992, 
581, 217–228.
Cerletti, U., and Bini, L. Electric shock treatment. 
Bollettino ed Atti della Accademia Medica di Roma, 1938, 
64, 36.
Cerny, E. H., and Cerny, T. Vaccines against nicotine. 
Human Vaccines, 2009, 5, 200–205.
Chamberlain, M. C. Bevacizumab for the treatment 
of ­recurrent Glioblastoma. Clinical Medicine Insights: 
Oncology, 2011, 5, 117–129.

	
References	
655
disordered subjects. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
1997, 54, 1081–1088.
Coccaro, E. F., Silverman, J. M., Klar, H. M., Horvath, 
T. B., and Siever, L. J. Familial correlates of reduced 
central ­serotonergic system function in patients with 
personality ­disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
1994, 51, 318–324.
Cohen, C., Kodas, E., and Griebel, G. CB1 receptor 
­antagonists for the treatment of nicotine addiction. 
Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 2005, 81, 
387–395.
Cohen, E. A. Human Behavior in the Concentration Camp. 
New York: W. W. Norton, 1953.
Cohen, S., Tyrrell, D. A. J., and Smith, A. P. 
Psychological stress and susceptibility to the com-
mon cold. New England Journal of Medicine, 1991, 325, 
606–612.
Cohen-Bendahan, C. C., Buitelaar, J. K., van Goozen,  
S. H. M., Orlebeke, J. F., et al. Is there an effect of pre-
natal ­testosterone on aggression and other behavioral 
traits? A study comparing same-sex and opposite-sex 
twin girls. Hormones and Behavior, 2005, 47, 230–237.
Cohen-Bendahan, C. C., van de Beek, C., and 
Berenbaum S. A. Prenatal sex hormone effects on 
child and adult ­sex-typed behavior: Methods and 
findings. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 2005, 
29, 353–384.
Colapinto, J. As Nature Made Him: The Boy Who Was 
Raised as a Girl. New York: Harper-Collins, 2000.
Cole, B. J., and Koob, G. F. Propranalol antagonizes 
the enhanced conditioned fear produced by corti-
cotropin releasing factor. Journal of Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics, 1988, 247, 901–910.
Cole, J. Empathy needs a face. Journal of Consciousness 
Studies, 2001, 8, 51–68.
Collaborative Research Group. A novel gene containing 
a trinucleotide repeat that is expanded and unstable 
on Huntington’s disease chromosomes. Cell, 1993, 72, 
971–983.
Connellan, J., Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Batki, A., 
et al. Sex differences in human neonatal social percep-
tion. Infant Behavior and Development, 2000, 23, 113–118.
Connolly, J. D., Andersen, R. A., and Goodale, M. A. 
fMRI evidence for a “parietal reach region” in the 
human brain. Experimental Brain Research, 2003, 153, 
140–145.
Conway, B. R., Moeller, S., and Tsao, D. Y. Specialized color 
­modules in macaque extrastriate cortex. Neuron, 2007, 56, 
560–573.
Coolen, L. M. Neural control of ejaculation. Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 2005, 493, 39–45.
Coolen, L. M., Allard, J., Truitt, W. A., and McKenna, 
K. E. Central regulation of ejaculation. Physiology and 
Behavior, 2004, 83, 203–215.
Chimowitz, M. I., Lynn, M. J, Derdeyn, C. P., et al. 
Stending versus aggressive medical therapy for 
intracranial arterial ­stenosis. New England Journal of 
Medicine, 2011, 365, 993–1003.
Christensen, R., Kristensen, P. K., Bartels, E. M., et al. 
Efficacy and safety of the weight-loss drug rimonabant: 
a meta-analysis of randomised trials. Lancet, 2007, 370, 
1706–1713.
Ciocchi, S., Herry, C., Grenier, F., et al. Encoding of 
­conditioned fear in central amygdala inhibitory cir-
cuits, Nature, 2010, 468, 277–282.
Cho, M. M., DeVries, A. C., Williams, J. R., and Carter, 
C. S. The effects of oxytocin and vasopressin on 
partner ­preferences in male and female prairie voles 
(Microtus ­ochrogaster). Behavioral Neuroscience, 1999, 
113, 1071–1079.
Chou, I.-H., and Narasimhan, K. Neurobiology of addic-
tion. Nature Neuroscience, 2005, 8, 1427.
Chou, T. C., Bjorkum, A. A., Gaus, S. E., Lu, J., et al. 
Afferents to the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2002, 22, 977–990.
Chubb, J. E., Bradshaw, N. J., Soares, D. C., Porteous, 
D. J., et al. The DISC locus in psychiatric illness. 
Molecular Psychiatry, 2008, 13, 36–64.
Chung, S., Hopf, F. W., Nagasaki, H., et al. The 
melanin-concentrating hormone system modulates 
cocaine reward. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, USA, 2009, 106, 6772–6777.
Cipolotti, L., and Warrington, E. K. Does recognizing 
orally spelled words depend on reading? An investiga-
tion into a case of better written than oral spelling. 
Neuropsychologia, 1996, 34, 427–440.
Cippitelli, A., Karlsson, C., Shaw, J. L., et al. Suppression 
of alcohol self-administration and reinstatement of 
alcohol seeking by melanin-concentrating hormone 
receptor 1 (MCH1-R) antagonism in Wistar rats. 
Psychopharmacology, 2010, 211, 367–375.
Clark, J. T., Kalra, P. S., Crowley, W. R., and Kalra, S. P. 
Neuropeptide Y and human pancreatic polypeptide 
stimulates feeding behavior in rats. Endocrinology, 1984, 
115, 427–429.
Clarke, S., Bellmann, A., Meuli, R. A., et al. Auditory 
­agnosia and auditory spatial deficits following left 
­hemispheric lesions: evidence for distinct processing 
pathways. Neuropsychologia, 2000, 38, 797–807.
Cnattingius, S., Hultman, C. M., Dahl, M., and Sparen, 
P. Very preterm birth, birth trauma, and the risk 
of anorexia nervosa among girls. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 1999, 56, 634–638.
Cobb, S., and Rose, R. M. Hypertension, peptic ulcer, 
and diabetes in air traffic controllers. Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 1973, 224, 489–492.
Coccaro, E. F., and Kavoussi, R. J. Fluoxetine and 
­impulsive aggressive behavior in personality- 

656	
References
behavioral ­phenotype of autism. Development and 
Psychopathology, 2005, 17, 577–597.
Court, J., Bergh, C., and Södersten, P. Mandometer 
­treatment of Australian patients with eating disorders. 
Medical Journal of Australia, 2008, 288, 120–121.
Covington, H. E., and Miczek, K. A. Repeated social-
defeat stress, cocaine or morphine: Effects on 
behavioral sensitization and intravenous cocaine self-
administration “binges.” Psychopharmacology, 2001, 
158, 388–398.
Cowey, A. The blindsight saga. Experimental Brain 
Research, 2010, 200, 3–24.
Cowley, M. A., Smith, R. G., diano, S., Tschöp, M., et al. 
The distribution and mechanism of action of ghrelin 
in the CNS demonstrates a novel hypothalamic cir-
cuit regulating energy homeostasis. Neuron, 2003, 37, 
649–661.
Cox, A., Rutter, M., Newman, S., and Bartak, L. A com-
parative study of infantile autism and specific devel-
opmental language disorders. I: Parental characteris-
tics. British Journal of Psychiatry, 1975, 126, 146–159.
Cox, D., Meyers, E., and Sinha, P. Contextually evoked 
object-specific responses in human visual cortex. 
Science, 2004, 304, 115–117.
Cox, J. J., Reimann, F., Nicholas, A. K., Thornton, G., 
et al. An SCN9A channelopathy causes congenital 
inability to experience pain. Nature, 2006, 444, 894–898.
Crane, G. E. Iproniazid (Marsilid) phosphate, a thera-
peutic agent for mental disorders and debilitating dis-
eases. Psychiatry Research Reports, 1957, 8, 142–152.
Creese, I., Burt, D. R., and Snyder, S. H. Dopamine 
receptor binding predicts clinical and pharmacologi-
cal potencies of antischizophrenic drugs. Science, 
1976, 192, 481–483.
Criado, J. R., Sanchez-Alavez, M., Conti, B., Giacchino, 
J. L., et al. Mice devoid of prion protein have cogni-
tive ­deficits that are rescued by reconstitution of PrP 
in neurons. Neurobiology of Disease, 2005, 19, 255–265.
Crockett, M. J., Clark, L., Hauser, M. D., and Robbins, 
T. W. Serotonin selectively influences moral judg-
ment and behavior through effects on harm aversion. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
2010, 107, 17433–17438.
Crow, T. J. How and why genetic linkage has not solved 
the problem of psychosis: Review and hypothesis. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 2007, 164. 13–21.
Cubelli, R. A selective deficit for writing vowels in 
acquired dysgraphia. Nature, 1991, 353, 258–260.
Culebras, A., and Moore, J. T. Magnetic resonance find-
ings in REM sleep behavior disorder. Neurology, 1989, 
39, 1519–1523.
Culham, J. C., and Kanwisher, N. Neuroimaging of 
­cognitive functions in human parietal cortex. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology, 2001, 11, 157–163.
Coolen, L. M., and Wood, R. I. Testosterone stimula-
tion of the medial preoptic area and medial amyg-
dala in the control of male hamster sexual behavior: 
Redundancy without amplification. Behavioural Brain 
Research, 1999, 98, 143–153.
Cooper, J. A. A mechanism for inside-out lamination in 
the neocortex. Trends in Neurosciences, 2008, 32, 113–119.
Coover, G. D., Murison, R., and Jellestad, F. K. Subtotal 
lesions of the amygdala: The rostral central nucleus 
in passive avoidance and ulceration. Physiology and 
Behavior, 1992, 51, 795–803.
Copeland, B. J., and Pillsbury, H. C. Cochlear implanta-
tion for the treatment of deafness. Annual Review of 
Medicine, 2004, 55, 157–167.
Corey, D. P., Garcia-Añoveros, J., Holt, J. R., Kwan, K. Y., 
et al. TRPA1 is a candidate for the mechanosensitive 
transduction channel of vertebrate hair cells. Nature, 
2004, 432, 723–730.
Corkin, S., Amaral, D. G., González, R. G., Johnson, 
K. A., et al. H. M.’s medial temporal lobe lesion: 
Findings from magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 1997, 17, 3964–3979.
Corkin, S., Sullivan, E. V., Twitchell, T. E., and Grove, 
E. The amnesic patient H. M.: Clinical observations 
and test performance 28 years after operation. Society 
for Neuroscience Abstracts, 1981, 7, 235.
Corrigall, W. A., Coen, K. M., and Adamson, K. L. 
Self-administered nicotine activates the mesolimbic 
dopamine system through the ventral tegmental area. 
Brain Research, 1994, 653, 278–284.
Corwin, J. T., and Warchol, M. E. Auditory hair cells: 
Structure, function, development, and regeneration. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 1991, 14, 301–333.
Cossu, G., Ledent, C., Fattore, L., Imperato, A., et al. 
Cannabinoid CB1 receptor knockout mice fail to self-­
administer morphine but not other drugs of abuse. 
Behavioural Brain Research, 2001, 118, 61–65.
Cotman, C. W., Berchtold, N. C., and Christie, L.-A. 
Exercise builds brain health: Key roles of growth fac-
tor cascades and inflammation. Trends in Neuroscience, 
2007, 30, 464–472.
Cottingham, S. L., and Pfaff, D. Interconnectedness of 
­steroid hormone-binding neurons: Existence and implica-
tions. Current Topics in Neuroendocrinology, 1986, 7, 223–249.
Cottone, P., Sabino, V., Roberto, M., et al. CRF system 
recruitment mediates dark side of compulsive eating. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
2009, 106, 20016–20020.
Courchesne, E., Pierce, K., Schumann, C. M., Redcay, 
E., et al. Mapping early brain development in autism. 
Neuron, 2007, 56, 399–413.
Courchesne, E., Redcay, E., Morgan, J. T., and Kennedy, 
D. P. Autism at the beginning: Microstructural and 
growth abnormalities underlying the cognitive and 

	
References	
657
brain from the skull of a famous patient. Science, 1994, 
264, 1102–1105.
Damsma, G., Day, J., and Fibiger, H. C. Lack of toler-
ance to nicotine-induced dopamine release in the 
nucleus accumbens. European Journal of Pharmacology, 
1989, 168, 363–368.
Dani, J. A., and De Biasi, M. Cellular mechanisms of 
nicotine addiction. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and 
Behavior, 2001, 70, 439–446.
Dani, J. A., and Harris, R. A. Nicotine addiction and 
comorbidity with alcohol abuse and mental illness. 
Nature Neuroscience, 2005, 8, 1465–1470.
Daniele, A., Giustolisi, L., Silveri, M. C., Colosimo, C., et al. 
Evidence for a possible neuroanatomical basis for lexical 
processing of nouns and verbs. Neuropsychologia, 1994, 32, 
1325–1341.
Daniels, D., Miselis, R. R., and Flanagan-Cato, L. M. 
Central neuronal circuit innervating the lordosis-pro-
ducing muscles defined by transneuronal transport 
of pseudorabies virus. Journal of Neuroscience, 1999, 19, 
2823–2833.
Dapretto, M., Davies, M. S., Pfeifer, J. H., Scott, A. A., 
et al. Understanding emotions in others: Mirror neu-
ron ­dysfunction in children with autism spectrum 
disorders. Nature Neuroscience, 2006, 9, 28–30.
Darwin, C. The Expression of the Emotions in Man and 
Animals. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1872/1965.
Davidson, D., Swift, R., and Fitz, E. Naltrexone increases 
the latency to drink alcohol in social drinkers. 
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 1996, 20, 
732–739.
Davidson, S., and Giesler, G. J. The multiple pathways 
for itch and their interactions with pain. Trends in 
Neurosciences, 2010, 33, 550–558.
Davidson, S., Zhang, X., Khasabov, S. G., et al. Relief of 
itch by scratching: State-dependent inhibition of pri-
mate spinothalamic tract neurons. Nature Neuroscience, 
2009, 12, 544–546.
Davies, G., Welham, J., Chant, D., Torrey, E. F., et al. 
A systematic review and meta-analysis of Northern 
Hemisphere season of birth studies in schizophrenia. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 2003, 29, 587–593.
Davis, J. D., and Campbell, C. S. Peripheral control of 
meal size in the rat: Effect of sham feeding on meal 
size and drinking rate. Journal of Comparative and 
Physiological Psychology, 1973, 83, 379–387.
Davis, J. O., and Bracha, H. S. Famine and schizophre-
nia: First-trimester malnutrition or second-trimester 
beriberi? Biological Psychiatry, 1996, 40, 1–3.
Davis, J. O., Phelps, J. A., and Bracha, H. S. Prenatal 
­development of monozygotic twins and concordance 
for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 1995, 21, 
357–366.
Culotta, E., and Koshland, D. E. NO news is good news. 
Science, 1992, 258, 1862–1865.
Cummings, D. E. Ghrelin and the short- and long-term 
­regulation of appetite and body weight. Physiology and 
Behavior, 2006, 89, 71–84.
Cunningham, J. T., Beltz, T. G., Johnson, R. F., and 
Johnson, A. K. The effects of ibotenate lesions of 
the median preoptic on experimentally induced and 
circadian drinking behaviours in rats. Brain Research, 
1992, 580, 325–330.
Daban, C., Martinez-Aran, A., Cruz, N., and Vieta, E. 
Safety and efficacy of vagus nerve stimulation in treat-
ment-resistant depression: A systematic review. Journal 
of Affective Disorders, 2008, 110, 1–15.
Dabbs, J. M., and Morris, R. Testosterone, social class, 
and antisocial behavior in a sample of 4,462 men. 
Psychological Science, 1990, 1, 209–211.
Dai, S.-S., Zhou, Y.-G., Li, W., et al. Local glutamate 
level ­dictates adenosine A2A receptor regulation 
of neuroinflammation and traumatic brain injury. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2010, 30, 5802–5810.
Dallos, P. The active cochlea. Journal of Neuroscience, 
1992, 12, 4575–4585.
Damasio, A. R., and Damasio, H. The anatomic basis of 
pure alexia. Neurology, 1983, 33, 1573–1583.
Damasio, A. R., and Damasio, H. Hemianopia, hemia-
chromatopsia, and the mechanisms of alexia. Cortex, 
1986, 22, 161–169.
Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., and Van Hoesen, G. W. 
Prosopagnosia: Anatomic basis and behavioral mecha-
nisms. Neurology, 1982, 32, 331–341.f
Damasio, A. R., Grabowski, T. J., Bechara, A., Damasio, 
H., et al. Subcortical and cortical brain activity dur-
ing the ­feeling of self-generated emotions. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2000, 3, 1049–1056.
Damasio, A. R., and Tranel, D. Nouns and verbs are 
retrieved with differentially distributed neural systems. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
1993, 90, 4957–4960.
Damasio, A. R., Yamada, T., Damasio, H., Corbett, J., 
et al. Central achromatopsia: Behavioral, anatomic, 
and physiologic aspects. Neurology, 1980, 30,  
1064–1071.
Damasio, H. Neuroimaging contributions to the under-
standing of aphasia. In Handbook of Neuropsychology, 
Vol. 2, edited by F. Boller and J. Grafman. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1989.
Damasio, H., and Damasio, A. R. The anatomical basis 
of conduction aphasia. Brain, 1980, 103, 337–350.
Damasio, H., Eslinger, P., and Adams, H. P. Aphasia 
­following basal ganglia lesions: New evidence. 
Seminars in Neurology, 1984, 4, 151–161.
Damasio, H., Grabowski, T., Frank, R., Galaburda, A. M., 
et al. The return of Phineas Gage: Clues about the 

658	
References
Deacon, S., and Arendt, J. Adapting to phase shifts. I: 
An experimental model for jet lag and shift work. 
Physiology and Behavior, 1996, 59, 665–673.
Dealberto, M. J. Why are immigrants at increased risk for 
psychosis? Vitamin D insufficiency, epigenetic mecha-
nisms, or both? Medical Hypotheses, 2007, 68, 259–267.
Dean, P. Effects of inferotemporal lesions on the behav-
ior of monkeys. Psychological Bulletin, 1976, 83, 41–71.
Debanne, D., Gähwiler, B. H., and Thompson, S. M. 
Asynchronous pre- and postsynaptic activity induces 
­associative long-term depression in area CA1 of the 
rat hippocampus in vitro. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA. 1994, 91, 1148–1152.
Debiec, J., Diaz-Mataix, L., Bush, D. E. A., et al. The 
amygdala encodes specific sensory features of an aver-
sive reinforcer. Nature Neuroscience, 2010, 13, 536–537.
Dehaene, S. Reading in the Brain: The Science and Evolution 
of a Human Invention. New York: Viking, 2009.
Dehaene, S., Nakamure, K., Jobert, A., et al. Why do 
­children make mirror errors in reading? Neural cor-
relates of mirror invariance in the visual word form 
area. NeuroImage, 2010, 49, 1837–1848.
Dejerine, J. Contribution àl’étude anatomo-pathologique 
et ­clinique des différentes variétés de cécité verbale. 
Comptes Rendus des Séances de la Société de Biologie et de Ses 
Filiales, 1892, 4, 61–90.
Del Cerro, M. C. R., Izquierdo, M. A. P., Rosenblatt, J. S., 
Johnson, B. M., et al. Brain 2-deoxyglucose levels 
related to maternal behavior-inducing stimuli in the 
rat. Brain Research, 1995, 696, 213–220.
Delay, J., and Deniker, P. Le traitement des psy-
choses par une methode neurolytique derivée 
d’hibernothéraphie: Le 4560 RP utilisée seul une 
cure prolongée et continuée. Comptes Rendus Congrès 
des Médecins Aliénistes et Neurologistes de France et des 
Pays de Langue Française, 1952a, 50, 497–502.
Delay, J., and Deniker, P. 38 cas des psychoses traitées 
par la cure prolongée et continuée de 4560 RP. 
Comptes Rendus du Congrès des Médecins Aliénistes et 
Neurologistes de France et des Pays de Langue Française, 
1952b, 50, 503–513.
Delgado, P. L., Charney, D. S., Price, L. H., Aghajanian, 
G. K., et al. Serotonin function and the mechanism 
of ­antidepressant action: Reversal of antidepressant 
induced remission by rapid depletion of plasma trypto-
phan. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1990, 47, 411–418.
DeLoache, J. S., Uttal, D. H., and Rosengren, K. S. Scale 
errors offer evidence for a perception-action dissocia-
tion early in life. Science, 2004, 304, 1027–1029.
DeLong, G. R. Autism: New data suggest a new hypoth-
esis. Neurology, 1999, 52, 911–916.
DelParigi, A., Tschöp, M., Heiman, M. L., Salbe, A. D., 
et al. High circulating ghrelin: A potential cause for 
hyperphagia and obesity in Prader-Willi syndrome. 
Davis, M. The role of the amygdala in fear-potentiated 
startle: Implications for animal models of anxiety. 
Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 1992, 13, 35–41.
Daw, N. W. Colour-coded ganglion cells in the goldfish 
retina: Extension of their receptive fields by means of 
new stimuli. Journal of Physiology (London), 1968, 197, 
567–592.
Dawson, T. M., and Dawson, V. L. Molecular pathways 
of neurodegeneration in Parkinson’s disease. Science, 
2003, 302, 819–822.
Day, J. J., Roitman, M. F., Wightman, R. M., and Carelli, 
R. M. Associative learning mediates dynamic shifts in 
dopamine signaling in the nucleus accumbens. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2007, 10, 1020–1028.
de Castro, J. M. The control of eating behavior in free-
living humans. In Neurobiology of Food and Fluid Intake, 
2nd ed., edited by E. Stricker and S. Woods. New 
York: Plenum Publishers, 2004.
de Gelder, B. Towards the neurobiology of emotional 
body language. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2006, 7, 
242–249.
de Gelder, B., Vroomen, J., Pourtois, G., and 
Weiskrantz, L. Non-conscious recognition of affect 
in the absence of striate cortex. Neuroreport, 1999, 10, 
3759–3763.
De Jonge, F. H., Louwerse, A. L., Ooms, M. P., Evers, P.,  
et al. Lesions of the SDN-POA inhibit sexual behavior 
of male Wistar rats. Brain Research Bulletin, 1989, 23, 
483–492.
de Kloet, E. R., Joëls, M., and Holsboer, F. Stress and 
the brain: From adaptation to disease. Nature Reviews: 
Neuroscience, 2005, 6, 463–475.
De Ocampo, J., Foldvary, N., Dinner, D. S., and Golish, 
J. Sleep Medicine, 2002, 3, 525–526.
de Ruiter, M. B., Oosterlaan, J., Veltman, D. J., et al. 
Similar hyporesponsiveness of the dorsomedial pre-
frontal cortex in problem gamblers and heavy smok-
ers during an inhibitory control task. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependence, 2011, Epub ahead of print.
De Strooper, B. Aph-1, Pen-2, and nicastrin with prese-
nilin generate an active g-secretase complex. Neuron, 
2003, 38, 9–12.
De Valois, R. L., Albrecht, D. G., and Thorell, L. 
Cortical cells: Bar detectors or spatial frequency fil-
ters? In Frontiers in Visual Science, edited by S. J. Cool 
and E. L. Smith. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1978.
De Valois, R. L., and De Valois, K. K. Spatial Vision. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1988.
De Valois, R. L., Thorell, L. G., and Albrecht, D. G. 
Periodicity of striate-cortex-cell receptive fields. Journal 
of the Optical Society of America, 1985 2, 1115–1123.
De Vries, T. J., and Schoffelmeer, A. N. M. Cannabinoid 
CB1 receptors control conditioned drug seeking. 
Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 2005, 26, 420–426.

	
References	
659
Diamond, M., and Sigmundson, H. K. Sex reassignment 
ar birth: Long-term review and clinical implications. 
Archives of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, 1997, 151, 
298–304.
Diana, M., Pistis, M., Carboni, S., Gessa, G. L., et al. 
Profound decrement of mesolimbic dopaminergic 
neuronal activity during ethanol withdrawal syn-
drome in rats: Electrophysiological and biochemical 
evidence. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 1993, 90, 7966–7969.
Diba, K., and Buzsáki, G. Forward and reverse hippo-
campal place-cell sequences during ripples. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2007, 10, 1241–1242.
DiFiglia, M., Sena-Esteves, M., Chase, K., Sapp, E., et al. 
Therapeutic silencing of mutant huntingtin with 
siRNA attenuates striatal and cortical neuropathol-
ogy and behavioral deficits. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2007, 104, 17204–17209.
Dijk, D. J., Boulos, Z., Eastman, C. I., Lewy, A. J., et al. 
Light treatment for sleep disorders: Consensus 
report. 2: Basic properties of circadian physiology 
and sleep regulation. Journal of Biological Rhythms, 
1995, 10, 113–125.
Dixon, A. K. The effect of olfactory stimuli upon the 
social behaviour of laboratory mice (Mus musculus L).  
Doctoral dissertation, Birmingham University, 
Birmingham, England, 1973.
Dixon, A. K., and Mackintosh, J. H. Effects of female 
urine upon the social behaviour of adult male mice. 
Animal Behaviour, 1971, 19, 138–140.
Doetsch, F., and Hen, R. Young and excitable: The func-
tion of new neurons in the adult mammalian brain. 
Current Opinion in Neuroscience, 2005, 15, 121–128.
Dolan, R. P., and Schiller, P. H. Evidence for only depo-
larizing rod bipolar cells in the primate retina. Visual 
Neuroscience, 1989, 2, 421–424.
Döme, P., Kapitány, B., Ignits, G., and Rihmer, Z. Season 
of birth is significantly associated with the risk of com-
pleted suicide. Biological Psychiatry, 2010, 68, 148–155.
Dominguez, J. M., Gil, M., and Hull, E. M. Preoptic 
glutamate facilitates male sexual behavior. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2006, 26, 1699–1703.
Donny, E. C., Caggiula, A. R., Knopf, S., and Brown, C.  
Nicotine self-administration in rats. Psychopharmacology, 
1995, 122, 390–394.
Dorries, K. M., Adkins, R. E., and Halpern, B. P. 
Sensitivity and behavioral responses to the phero-
mone androsteneone are not mediated by the vom-
eronasal organ in domestic pigs. Brain, Behavior, and 
Evolution, 1997, 49, 53–62.
Doty, R. L. Olfaction. Annual Review of Psychology, 2001, 
52, 423–452.
Dougherty, D. D., Baie, L., Gosgrove, G. R., Cassem, E. H., 
et al. Prospective long-term follow-up of 44 patients who 
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 2002, 
87, 5461–5464.
Dement, W. C. The effect of dream deprivation. Science, 
1960, 131, 1705–1707.
Démonet, J.-F., Taylor, M. J., and Chaix, Y. Develop­
mental dyslexia. Lancet, 2004, 363, 1451–1460.
Deol, M. S., and Gluecksohn-Waelsch, S. The role of 
inner hair cells in hearing. Nature, 1979, 278, 250–252.
Derdikman, D., and Moser, E. I. A manifold of spatial 
maps in the brain. Trends in Cognitive Science, 2010, 
14, 561–568.
Dérouesné, J., and Beauvois, M. F. Phonological process-
ing in reading: Data from alexia. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 1979, 42, 1125–1132.
Deurveilher, S., and Semba, K. Indirect projections 
from the suprachiasmatic nucleus to major arousal-
promoting cell groups in rat: Implications for the cir-
cadian control of behavioural state. Neuroscience, 2005, 
130, 165–183.
Deutsch, J. A., and Gonzalez, M. F. Gastric nutrient con-
tent signals satiety. Behavioral and Neural Biology, 1980, 
30, 113–116.
Devane, W. A., Hanus, L., Breuer, A., Pertwee, R. G., 
et al. Isolation and structure of a brain constituent 
that binds to the cannabinoid receptor. Science, 1992, 
258, 1946–1949.
Devilbiss, D. M., and Berridge, C. W. Cognition-
enhancing doses of methylphenidate preferentially 
increase prefrontal cortex neuronal responsiveness. 
Biological Psychiatry, 2008, 64, 626–635.
Devine, D. P., and Wise, R. A. Self-administration of 
­morphine, DAMGO, and DPDPE into the ventral teg-
mental area of rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 1994, 14, 
1978–1984.
Dhaka, A., Uzzell, V., Dubin, A. E., et al. TRPV1 is 
activated by both acidic and basic pH. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2009, 29, 153–158.
Di Chiara, G. The role of dopamine in drug abuse 
viewed from the perspective of its role in motivation. 
Drug and Alcohol Dependency, 1995, 38, 95–137.
Di Ciano, P., Coury, A., Depoortere, R. Y., Egilmez, Y., 
et al. Comparison of changes in extracellular dopa-
mine ­concentrations in the nucleus accumbens during 
intravenous self-administration of cocaine or d-amphet-
amine. Behavioural Pharmacology, 1995, 6, 311–322.
Di Marzo, V., and Matias, I. Endocannabinoid con-
trol of food intake and energy balance. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2005, 8, 585–589.
di Tomaso, E., Beltramo, M., and Piomelli, D. Brain can-
nabinoids in chocolate. Nature, 1996, 382, 677–678.
Diamond, D. M., Park, C. R., Heman, K. L., and Rose, 
G. M. Exposing rats to a predator impairs spatial 
working memory in the radial arm water maze. 
Hippocampus, 1999, 9, 542–552.

660	
References
Durston, S., Tottenham, N. T., Thomas, K. M., 
Davidson, M. C., et al. Differential patterns of striatal 
activation in young children with and without ADHD. 
Biological Psychiatry, 2003, 53, 871–878.
Duvarci, S., Popa, D., and Paré, D. Central amygdala activ-
ity during fear conditioning. Journal of Neuroscience, 2011, 
31, 289–294.
Dwyer, C. Lancet retracts MMR paper after GMC finds 
Andrew Wakefield guilty of dishonesty. British Medical 
Journal, 2010, 340, c696.
Dykes, R. W. Parallel processing of somatosensory informa-
tion: A theory. Brain Research Reviews, 1983, 6, 47–115.
Eaton, W. W., Mortensen, P. B., and Frydenberg, 
M. Obstetric factors, urbanization and psychosis. 
Schizophrenia Research, 2000, 43, 117–123.
Ebisawa, T., Uchiyama, M., Kajimura, N., Mishima, K., 
et al. Association of structural polymorphisms in the 
human period3 gene with delayed sleep phase syn-
drome. EMBRO Reports, 2001, 2, 342–346.
Eden, G. F., and Zeffiro, T. A. Neural systems affected 
in developmental dyslexia revealed by functional neu-
roimaging. Neuron, 1998, 21, 279–282.
Edwards, D. P., Purpura, K. P., and Kaplan, E. Contrast 
­sensitivity and spatial-frequency response of primate 
cortical neurons in and around the cytochrome oxi-
dase blobs. Vision Research, 1995, 35, 1501–1523.
Egan, G., Silk, T., Zamarripa, F., Williams, J., et al. 
Neural correlates of the emergence of consciousness 
of thirst. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 2003, 100, 15241–15246.
Ehrsson, H. H., Spence, C., and Passingham, R. E. That’s 
my hand! Activity in premotor cortex reflects feeling of 
ownership of a limb. Science, 2004, 305, 875–877.
Ehrsson, H. H., Wiech, K., Weiskopf, N., Dolan, R. J.,  
and Passingham, R. E. Threatening a rubber 
hand that you feel is yours elicits a cortical anxiety 
response. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 2007, 104, 9828–9833.
Eichenbaum, H., Otto, T., and Cohen, N. J. The hippo-
campus: What does it do? Behavioral and Neural Biology, 
1992, 57, 2–36.
Eichenbaum, H., Stewart, C., and Morris, R. G. M. 
Hippocampal representation in spatial learning. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 1990, 10, 331–339.
Eippert, F., Bingel, U., Schoell, E. D., et al. Activation of 
the opioidergic descending pain control system under-
lies ­placebo analgesia. Neuron, 2009, 63, 533–543.
Eisele, Y. S., Bolmont, T., Heikenwalder, M., et al. 
Induction of cerebral b-amyloidosis: Intracerebral ver-
sus systemic Ab inoculation. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 1009, 106, 12926–12931.
Ekman, P. The Face of Man: Expressions of Universal 
Emotions in a New Guinea Village. New York: Garland 
STPM Press, 1980.
received cingulotomy for treatment-refractory obsessive-
compulsive ­disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2002, 
159, 269–275.
Douglass, J., McKinzie, A. A., and Couceyro, P. PCR 
­differential display identifies a rat brain mRNA that 
is ­transcriptionally regulated by cocaine and amphet-
amine. Journal of Neuroscience, 1995, 15, 2471–2481.
Downing, P. E., Chan, A. W.-Y., Peelen, M. V., Dodds,  
C. M., et al. Domain specificity in visual cortex. 
Cerebral Cortex, 2005, 16, 1453–1461.
Downing, P. E., Jiang, Y., Shuman, M., and Kanwisher, 
N. A cortical area selective for visual processing of the 
human body. Science, 2001, 293, 2470–2473.
Drake, C. L., Roehrs, T., Richardson, G., Walsh, J. K., 
et al. Shift work sleep disorder: Prevalence and con-
sequences beyond that of symptomatic day workers. 
Sleep, 2004, 27, 1453–1462.
Drayna, D., Manichaikul, A., de Lange, M., Snieder, H., 
et al. Genetic correlates of musical pitch recognition 
in humans. Science, 2001, 291, 1969–1972.
Dronkers, N. F. A new brain region for coordinating 
speech articulation. Nature, 1996, 384, 159–161.
Dube, M. G., Kalra, S. P., and Kalra, P. S. Food intake 
elecited by central administration of orexins/hypo-
cretins: Identification of hypothalamic sites of action. 
Brain Research, 1999, 842, 473–477.
Duchenne, G.-B. The Mechanism of Human Facial 
Expression. Translated by R. A. Cuthbertson. 
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 
1990. (Original work published 1862.)
Dudek, S. M., and Bear, M. F. Homosynaptic long-term 
depression in area CA1 of hippocampus and effects 
of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor blockade. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 1992, 89, 
4363–4367.
Dukelow, S. P., DeSouza, J. F., Culham, J. C., van den 
Berg, A. V., et al. Distinguishing subregions of the 
human MT+ complex using visual fields and pursuit 
eye movements. Journal of Neurophysiology, 2001, 86, 
1991–2000.
Dulac, C., and Axel, R. A novel family of genes encod-
ing putative pheromone receptors in mammals. Cell, 
1995, 83, 195–206.
Dunn, A. L., Trivedi, M. H., Kampert, J. B., Clark, C. G., 
et al. Exercise treatment for depression: Efficacy and 
dose response. Americal Journal of Preventive Medicine, 
2005, 28, 1–8.
Dupret, D., O’Niell, J., Pleydell-Bouverie, B., and 
Csicsvari, J. The organization and reactivation of hip-
pocampal maps predict spatial memory performance. 
Nature Neuroscience, 2010, 13, 995–1002.
Durie, D. J. Sleep in animals. In Psychopharmacology of 
Sleep, edited by D. Wheatley. New York: Raven Press, 
1981.

	
References	
661
Ernst, M., Zametkin, A. J., Matochik, J. A., Jons, P. H., 
et al. DOPA decarboxylase activity in attention deficit 
­hyperactivity disorder adults: A [fluorine18]flurodopa 
positron ­emission tomographic study. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 1998, 18, 5901–5907.
Ernulf, K. E., Innala, S. M., and Whitam, F. L. Biological 
explanation, psychological explanation, and tolerance 
of homosexuals: A cross-national analysis of beliefs 
and ­attitudes. Psychological Reports, 1989, 248, 183–188.
Ersche, K. D., Barnes, A., Jones, P. S., et al. Abnormal 
­structure of frontostriatal brain systems is associ-
ated with aspects of impulsivity and compulsivity in 
cocaine ­dependence. Brain, 2011, 134, 2013–2024.
Ertelt, D., Small, S., Solodkin, A., Dettmers, C., et al. 
Action observation has a positive impact on rehabili-
tation of motor deficits after stroke. NeuroImage, 2007, 
36, T164–T173.
Eslinger, P. J., and Damasio, A. R. Severe disturbance of 
higher cognition after bilateral frontal lobe ablation: 
Patient EVR. Neurology, 1985, 35, 1731–1741.
Esselink, R. A., de Bie, R. M., de Haan, R. J., et al. Long-
term superiority of subthalamic nucleus stimulation 
over pallidotomy in Parkinson disease. Neurology, 
2009, 73, 151–153.
Everson, C. A., and Wehr, T. A. Nutritional and meta-
bolic adaptations to prolonged sleep deprivation 
in the rat. American Journal of Physiology, 1993, 264, 
R376–R387.
Farber, N. B., Wozniak, D. F., Price, M. T., Labruyere, J., 
et al. Age-specific neurotoxicity in the rat associated 
with NMDA receptor blockade: Potential relevance to 
­schizophrenia? Biological Psychiatry, 1995, 38, 788–796.
Farina, C., Weber, M. S., Meinl, E., Wekerle, H., et al. 
Glatiramer acetate in multiple sclerosis: Update on 
potential mechanisms of action. Lancet Neurology, 
2005, 4, 567–575.
Farlow, M., Murrell, J., Ghetti, B., Unverzagt, F., et al. 
Clinical characteristics in a kindred with early-onset 
Alzheimers-disease and their linkage to a G®T 
change at position-2149 of amyloid precursor protein 
gene. Neurology, 1994, 44, 105–111.
Farooqi, I. S., and O’Rahilly, S. Monogenic obesity in 
humans. Annual Review of Medicine, 2005, 56, 443–458.
Farrell, M. J., Egan, G. F., Zamarripa, F., Shade, R., 
et al. Unique, common, and interacting cortical cor-
relates of thirst and pain. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2006, 103, 2416–2421.
Farroni, T., Johnson, M. H., Menon, E., Zulian, L., 
et al. Newborns’ preference for face-relevant stimuli: 
Effects of contrast polarity. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2005, 102, 17245–17250.
Feder, H. H. Estrous cyclicity in mammals. In Neuro­
endocrinology of Reproduction, edited by N. T. Adler.  
New York: Plenum Press, 1981.
Ekman, P. Facial expressions of emotion: An old con-
troversy and new findings. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London B, 1992, 335, 63–69.
Ekman, P., and Davidson, R. J. Voluntary smiling 
changes regional brain activity. Psychological Science, 
1993, 4, 342–345.
Ekman, P., and Friesen, W. V. Constants across cultures 
in the face and emotion. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 1971, 17, 124–129.
Ekman, P., Levenson, R. W., and Friesen, W. V. 
Autonomic nervous system activity distinguished 
between emotions. Science, 1983, 221, 1208–1210.
El Mansari, M., and Blier, P. In vivo electrophysiologi-
cal characterization of 5-HT receptors in the guinea 
pig head of caudate nucleus and orbitofrontal cortex. 
Neuropharmacology, 1997, 36, 577–588.
El Mansari, M., Sakai, K., and Jouvet, M. Unitary char-
acteristics of presumptive cholinergic tegmental neu-
rons during the sleep-waking cycle in freely moving 
cats. Experimental Brain Research, 1989, 76, 519–529.
Elbert, T., Flor, H., Birbaumer, N., Knecht, S., et al. 
Extensive reorganization of the somatosensory cor-
tex in adult humans after nervous system injury. 
Neuroreport, 1994, 5, 2593–2507.
Elbert, T., Pantev, C., Wienbruch, C., Rockstroh, B., et al. 
Increased cortical representation of the fingers of the 
left hand in string players. Science, 1995, 270, 305–307.
Elias, C. F., Lee, C., Kelly, J., Aschkenasi, C., et al. 
Leptin activates hypothalamic CART neurons project-
ing to the ­spinal cord. Neuron, 1998a, 21, 1375–1385.
Elias, C. F., Saper, C. B., Maratos-Flier, E., Tritos, N. A.,  
et al. Chemically defined projections linking the 
mediobasal hypothalamus and the lateral hypotha-
lamic area. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 1998b, 
402, 442–459.
Elias, M. Serum cortisol, testosterone and testosterone 
­binding globulin responses to competitive fighting in 
human males. Aggressive Behavior, 1981, 7, 215–224.
Elmquist, J. K., Elias, C. F., and Saper, C. B. From 
lesions to leptin: Hypothalamic control of food intake 
and body weight. Neuron, 1999, 22, 221–232.
Elsworth, J. D., Jentsch, J. D., Morrow, B. A., Redmond, 
D. E., et al. Clozapine normalizes prefrontal cortex 
­dopamine transmission in monkeys subchronically 
exposed to ­phencyclidine. Neuropsychopharmacology, 
2008, 33, 491–496.
Endoh, M., Maiese, K., and Wagner, J. A. Expression of 
the neural form of nitric oxide synthase by CA1 hip-
pocampal neurons and other central nervous system 
neurons. Neuroscience, 1994, 63, 679–689.
Enggasser, J. L., and de Wit, H. Haloperidol reduces 
stimulant and reinforcing effects of ethanol in social 
drinkers. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 
2001, 25, 1448–1456.

662	
References
Fisher, C., Gross, J., and Zuch, J. Cycle of penile erec-
tion synchronous with dreaming (REM) sleep: 
Preliminary report. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1965, 
12, 29–45.
Fisher, S. E. Genetic susceptibility to stuttering. New 
England Journal of Medicine, 2010, 362, 750–752.
Fiske, A. P., and Haslam, N. Is obsessive-compulsive 
disorder a pathology of the human disposition to per-
form socially meaningful rituals? Evidence of similar 
content. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 1997, 
185, 211–222.
Fitzgerald, P. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimula-
tion and electroconvulsive therapy: Complementary 
or competitive therapeutic options in depression? 
Australas Psychiatry, 2004, 12, 234–238.
Fitzpatrick, D., Itoh, K., and Diamond, I. T. The laminar 
organization of the lateral geniculate body and the 
striate cortex in the squirrel monkey (Saimiri sciureus). 
Journal of Neuroscience, 1983, 3, 673–702.
Flaum, M., and Andreasen, N. C. Diagnostic criteria 
for schizophrenia and related disorders: Options for 
DNS-IV. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 1990, 17, 27–49.
Fleming, A. S., Corter, C., Stallings, J., and Steiner, M.  
Testosterone and prolactin are associated with 
emotional responses to infant cries in new fathers. 
Hormones and Behavior, 2002, 542, 399–413.
Fleming, A. S., and Rosenblatt, J. S. Maternal behavior 
in the virgin and lactating rat. Journal of Comparative 
and Physiological Psychology, 1974, 86, 957–972.
Flier, J. S. What’s in a name? In search of leptin’s 
physiologic role. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, 1998, 83, 1407–1413.
Flock, A. Physiological properties of sensory hairs in the ear. 
In Psychophysics and Physiology of Hearing, edited by E. F. 
Evans and J. P. Wilson. London: Academic Press, 1977.
Flood, J. F., and Morley, J. E. Increased food intake by 
­neuropeptide Y is due to an increased motivation to 
eat. Peptides, 1991, 12, 1329–1332.
Flores, R., Hirota, Y., Armstrong, B., et al. DISC1 regu-
lates synaptic vesicle transport via a lithium-sensitive 
pathway. Neuroscience Research, 2011, 71, 71–77.
Flynn, F. W., and Grill, H. J. Insulin elicits ingestion in 
decerebrate rats. Science, 1983, 221, 188–190.
Fogel, S. M., and Smith, C. T. The function of the sleep 
­spindle: A physiological index of intelligence and a 
mechanism for sleep-dependent memory consolida-
tion. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 2011, 35, 
1154–1165.
Fombonne, E. Epidemiology of autistic disorder and 
other pervasive developmental disorders. Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry, 2005, 66 (Suppl. 10), 3–8.
Fontana, A., Gast, H., Reigh, W., et al. Narcolepsy: 
Autoimmunity, effector T cell activation due to infec-
tion, or T cell independent, major histocompatibility 
Feinle, C., Grundy, D., and Read, N. W. Effects of duo-
denal nutrients on sensory and motor responses of 
the human stomach to distension. American Journal of 
Physiology, 1997, 273, G721–G726.
Fenoglio, K. A., Chen, Y., and Baram, T. Z. Neuroplas­
ticity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis early 
in life requires recurrent recruitment of stress- 
regulation brain regions. Journal of Neuroscience,  
2006, 26, 2434–2442.
Fernandez-Ruiz, J., Wang, J., Aigner, T. G., and 
Mishkin, M. Visual habit formation in monkeys with 
neurotoxic lesions of the ventrocaudal neostriatum. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
2001, 98, 4196–4201.
Ferris, C. F., Kulkarni, P., Sullivan, J. M., Harder, J. A., 
et al. Pup suckling is more rewarding than cocaine: 
Evidence from functional magnetic resonance imag-
ing and ­three-dimensional computational analysis. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2005, 25, 149–156.
Fettiplace, R., and Hackney, C. M. The sensory and motor 
roles of auditory hair cells. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 
2006, 7, 19–29.
Fibiger, H. C. The dopamine hypothesis of schizo-
phrenia and mood disorders: Contradictions and 
speculations. In The Mesolimbic Dopamine System: 
From Motivation to Action, ­edited by P. Willner and 
J. Scheel-Krüger. Chichester, England: John Wiley & 
Sons, 1991.
Field, T., Woodson, R., Greenberg, R., and Cohen, D. 
Discrimination and imitation of facial expressions in 
­neonates. Science, 1982, 218, 179–181.
Fietz, S. A., Kelava, I., Vogt, J., et al. OSVZ progenitors 
of human and ferret neocortex are epithelial-like 
and expand by integrin signaling. Nature Neuroscience, 
2010, 13, 690–699.
Fieve, R. R. The clinical effects of lithium treatment. 
Trends in Neurosciences, 1979, 2, 66–68.
Finger, S. Origins of Neuroscience: A History of Explorations into 
Brain Function. New York: Oxford University Press, 1994.
Finger, T. E., Danilova, V., Barrows, J., Bartel, D. L., 
et al. ATP signaling is crucial for communication 
from taste buds to gustatory nerves. Science, 2005, 310, 
1495–1499.
Firestein, S., Zufall, F., and Shepherd, G. M. Single odor-­
sensitive channels in olfactory receptor neurons are also 
gated by cyclic nucleotides. Journal of Neuroscience, 1991, 
11, 3565–3572.
Fischer, H., Andersson, J. L. R., Furmark, T., and 
Fredrikson, M. Brain correlates of an unexpected 
panic attack: A human positron emission tomo-
graphic study. Neuroscience Letters, 1998, 251, 137–140.
Fisher, C., Byrne, J., Edwards, A., and Kahn, E. A 
­psychophysiological study of nightmares. Journal of the 
American Psychoanalytic Association, 1970, 18, 747–782.

	
References	
663
Frey, U., Krug, M., Reymann, K. G., and Matthies, H. 
Anisomycin, an inhibitor of protein synthesis, blocks 
late phases of LTP phenomena in the hippocampal 
CA1 region in vitro. Brain Research, 1988, 452, 57–65.
Frey, U., and Morris, R. G. Synaptic tagging and long-
term potentiation. Nature, 1997, 385, 533–536.
Fridricksson, F., Moss, J., Davis, B., et al. Motor speech 
perception modulates the cortical language areas. 
NeuroImage, 2008, 41, 605–613.
Fried, I., Katz, A., McCarthy, G., Sass, K. J., et al. 
Functional organization of human supplementary 
motor cortex studied by electrical stimulation. Journal 
of Neuroscience, 1991, 11, 3656–3666.
Friedman, M. I., and Bruno, J. P. Exchange of water 
during lactation. Science, 1976, 191, 409–410.
Friedman, M. I., Horn, C. C., and Ji, H. Peripheral 
signals in the control of feeding behavior. Chemical 
Senses, 2005, 30 (Suppl. 1), i182–i183.
Frisch, R. E. Body fat, menarche, fitness and fertility. In 
Adipose Tissue and Reproduction, edited by R. E. Frisch. 
Basel: S. Karger, 1990.
Frith, U., Morton, J., and Leslie, A. M. The cogni-
tive basis of a biological disorder: Autism. Trends in 
Neuroscience, 1991, 14, 433–438.
Fry, J. M. Treatment modalities for narcolepsy. 
Neurology, 1998, 50, S43–S48.
Fu, H. J., Liu, B., Frost, J. L., and Lemere, C. A. 
Amyloid-beta immunotherapy for Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. CNS and Neurological Disorders: Drug Targets, 
2010, 9, 197–206.
Fudala, P. J., Bridge, T. P., Herbert, S., Williford, W. O., 
et al. Office-based treatment of opiate addiction with 
a sublingual-tablet formulation of buprenorphine 
and naloxone. New England Journal of Medicine, 2003, 
349, 949–958.
Fukuwatari, T., Shibata, K., Igushi, K., Saeki, T., et al. 
Role of gustation in the recognition of oleate and 
triolein in anomic rats. Physiology and Behavior, 2003, 
78, 579–583.
Fullerton, C. S., Ursano, R. J., Epstein, R. S., Crowley, 
B., et al. Gender differences in posttraumatic stress 
disorder after motor vehicle accidents. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 2001, 158, 1485–1491.
Fulton, J. F. Functional Localization in Relation to Frontal 
Lobotomy. New York: Oxford University Press, 1949.
Funkiewiez, A., Ardouin, C., Caputo, E., Krack, P., 
et al. Long term effects of bilateral subthalamic 
nucleus stimulation on cognitive function, mood, and 
behaviour in Parkinson’s disease. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 2004, 75, 834–839.
Gagliardo, A., Ioalé, P., and Bingman, V. P. Homing in 
pigeons: The role of the hippocampal formation in 
the representation of landmarks used for navigation. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 1999, 19, 311–315.
complex class II induced neuronal loss? Brain, 2010, 
133, 1300–1311.
Forget, B., Pushparaj, A., and Le Foll, B. Granular 
insular cortex inactivation as a novel therapeutic 
strategy for nicotine addiction. Biological Psychiatry, 
2010, 68, 265–271.
Forno, L. S. Neuropathology of Parkinson’s disease. 
Journal of Neuropathology and Experimental Neurology, 
1996, 55, 259–272.
Fort, O., Bassetti, C. L., and Luppi, P. H. Alternating 
vigilance states: new insights regarding neuronal 
networks and mechanisms. European Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2009, 29, 1741–1753.
Foster, D. L., and Nagatani, S. Physiological perspectives 
on leptin as a regulator of reproduction: Role in 
timing puberty. Biology of Reproduction, 1999, 60, 
205–215.
Foundas, A. L., Bollich, A. M., Feldman, J., Corey, D. M.,  
et al. M. Aberrant auditory processing and atypical 
planum temporale in developmental stuttering. 
Neurology, 2004, 63, 1640–1646.
Fowler, C., Lu, Q., Johnson, P. M., et al. Habenular a5 
nicotinic receptor subunit signaling controls nicotine 
intake. Nature, 2011, 471, 597–601.
Frankle, W. G., Lombardo, I., New, A. S., Goodman, 
M., et al. Brain serotonin transporter distribution in 
subjects with impulsive aggressivity: A positron emis-
sion study with [11C]McN 5652. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 2005, 162, 915–923.
Franklin, T. R., Acton, P. D., Maldjian, J. A., Gray, J. D., 
et al. Decreased gray matter concentration in the insu-
lar, orbitofrontal, cingulate, and temporal cortices of 
cocaine patients. Biological Psychiatry, 2002, 51, 134–142.
Freed, C. R. Will embryonic stem cells be a useful 
source of dopamine neurons for transplant into 
patients with Parkinson’s disease? Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2002, 99, 1755–1757.
Freedman, M. S., Lucas, R. J., Soni, B., von Schantz, M., 
et al. Regulation of mammalian circadian behavior 
by non-rod, non-cone, ocular photoreceptors. Science, 
1999, 284, 502–504.
Freedman, R. Psychiatrists’ role in the health of the 
pregnant mother and the risk for schizophrenia in 
her offspring. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2010, 167, 
239–240.
Frendl, A., and Csiba, L. Pharmacological and non-
pharmacological recanalization strategies in acute 
ischemic stroke. Frontiers in Neurology, 2011, 2, 1–11.
Frenette, E. REM sleep behavior disorder. Medical 
Clinics of North America, 2010, 94, 593–614.
Frey, S. H., Vinton, D., Norlund, R., and Grafton, S. T. 
Cortical topography of human anterior intraparietal 
cortex active during visually guided grasping. 
Cognitive Brain Research, 2005, 23, 397–405.

664	
References
Geary, N. Cocaine: Animal research studies. In Cocaine 
Abuse: New Directions in Treatment and Research, edited 
by H. I. Spitz and J. S. Rosecan. New York: Brunner-
Mazel, 1987.
Gentilucci, M. Grasp observation influences speech produc-
tion. European Journal of Neuroscience, 2003, 17, 179–184.
George, M. S., Parekh, P. I., Rosinsky, N., Ketter, T. A.,  
et al. Understanding emotional prosody activates 
right hemisphere regions. Archives of Neurology, 1996, 
53, 665–670.
Gerashchenko, D., Blanco-Centurion, C., Greco, M. A., and 
Shiromani, P. J. Effects of lateral hypothalamic lesion 
with the neurotoxin hypocretin-2-saporin on sleep in 
Long-Evans rats. Neuroscience, 2003, 116, 223–235.
Gerashchenko, D., Chou, T. C., Blanco-Centurion, C. A.,  
Saper, C. B., and et al. Effects of lesions of the hista-
minergic tuberomammillary nucleus on spontaneous 
sleep in rats. Sleep, 2004, 27, 1275–1281.
Gerashchenko, D., Kohls, M. D., Greco, M., Waleh, N. S.,  
et al. Hypocretin-2-saporin lesions of the lateral 
hypothalamus produce narcoleptic-like sleep behavior 
in the rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 2001, 21, 7273–7283.
Gerbino, L., Oleshansky, M., and Gershon, S. 
Clinical use and mode of action of lithium. In 
Psychopharmacology: A Generation of Progress, edited by 
M. A. Lipton, A. DiMascio, and K. F. Killam. New 
York: Raven Press, 1978.
Gerfen, C. R. Molecular effects of dopamine on striatal-
projection pathways. Trends in Neuroscience, 2000, 
23(Suppl.), S64–S70.
Gerhand, S. Routes to reading: A report of a non-
semantic reader with equivalent performance on 
regular and exception words. Neuropsychologia, 2001, 
39, 1473–1484.
Gerloff, C., Corwell, B., Chen, R., Hallett, M., et al. 
Stimulation over the human supplementary motor area 
interferes with the organization of future elements in 
­complex motor sequences. Brain, 1997, 120, 1587–1602.
Gershon, E. S., Bunney, W. E., Leckman, J., Van 
Eerdewegh, M., et al. The inheritance of affective 
disorders: A review of data and hypotheses. Behavior 
Genetics, 1976, 6, 227–261.
Geschwind, N., Quadfasel, F. A., and Segarra, J. M. 
Isolation of the speech area. Neuropsychologia, 1968, 6, 
327–340.
Gessa, G. L., Muntoni, F., Collu, M., Vargiu, L., et al. 
Low doses of ethanol activate dopaminergic neurons 
in the ­ventral tegmental area. Brain Research, 1985, 
348, 201–204.
Getchell, T. V., Kwong, K., Saunders, C. P., et al. Leptin 
­regulates olfactory-mediated behavior in ob/ob mice. 
Physiology and Behavior, 2006, 87, 848–856.
Getz, L. L., and Carter, C. S. Prairie-vole partnerships. 
American Scientist, 1996, 84, 55–62.
Gaillard, R., Naccache, L., Pinel, P., Clémenceau, S., 
et al. Direct intracranial, fmri, and lesion evidence for 
the causal role of left inferotemporal cortex in read-
ing. Neuron, 2006, 50, 191–204.
Gajdusek, D. C. Unconventional viruses and the origin 
and disappearance of kuru. Science, 1977, 197, 943–960.
Galen. De Usu Partium. Translated by M. T. May. Ithaca, 
N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1968.
Gallassi, R., Morreale, A., Montagna, P., Cortelli, P., 
et al. Fatal familial insomnia: Behavioral and cogni-
tive features. Neurology, 1996, 46, 935–939.
Gallese, V., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., and Rizzolatti, G. 
Action recognition in the premotor cortex. Brain, 
1996, 119, 593–609.
Gangestad, S. W., and Thornhill, R. Human oestrus. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 2008, 275, 991–1000.
Garavan, H., and Stout, J. C. Neurocognitive insights 
into substance abuse. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2005, 
9, 195–201.
Garcia-Falgueras, A., and Swaab, D. F. A sex difference 
in the hypothalamic uncinate nucleus: Relationship 
to gender identity. Brain, 2008, 131, 3132–3146.
Garcia-Velasco, J., and Mondragon, M. The incidence 
of the vomeronasal organ in 1000 human subjects 
and its possible clinical significance. Journal of Steroid 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biololgy, 1991, 39, 561–563.
Gardner, H., Brownell, H. H., Wapner, W., and 
Michelow, D. Missing the point: The role of the 
right hemisphere in the processing of complex 
linguistic materials. In Cognitive Processing in the 
Right Hemisphere, edited by E. Pericman. New York: 
Academic Press, 1983.
Gariano, R. F., and Groves, P. M. Burst firing induced 
in midbrain dopamine neurons by stimulation of the 
medial prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices. 
Brain Research, 1988, 462, 194–198.
Garrido, L., Eisner, F., McGettigan, C., et al. Develop­
mental phonagnosia: A selective deficit of vocal identity 
recognition. Neuropsychology, 2009, 47, 123–131.
Gastfriend, D. T. Intramuscular extended-release nal-
trexone: current evidence. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences, 2011, 1216, 144–166.
Gauthier, I., Skudlarski, P., Gore, J. C., and Anderson, A. W. 
Expertise for cars and birds recruits brain areas involved 
in face recognition. Nature Neuroscience, 2000, 3, 191–197.
Gauthier, I., Tarr, M. J., Anderson, A. W., Skudlarski, 
P., et al. Activation of the middle fusiform “face area” 
increases with expertise in recognizing novel objects. 
Nature Neuroscience, 1999, 2, 568–573.
Gazzaniga, M. Forty-five years of split-brain research and 
still going strong. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2005, 6, 
653–659.
Gazzaniga, M. S., and LeDoux, J. E. The Integrated Mind. 
New York: Plenum Press, 1978.

	
References	
665
Goedert, M. Alpha-synuclein and neurodegenerative 
diseases. Nature Review Neuroscience, 2001, 2, 492–501.
Goedert, M., and Spillantini, M. G. Tau mutations in fronto­
temporal dementia FTDP-17 and their relevance for 
Alzheimer’s disease. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta, 2000, 
1502, 110–121.
Goel, V., and Dolan, R. J. The functional anatomy of 
humor: Segregating cognitive and affective compo-
nents. Nature Neuroscience, 2001, 4, 237–238.
Goel, V., and Dolan, R. J. Social regulation of affective 
experience of humor. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
2007, 19, 1574–1580.
Golarai, G., Ghahremani, D. G., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., 
Reiss, A., et al. Differential development of high-level 
visual cortex correlated with category-specific recogni-
tion memory. Nature Neuroscience, 2007, 10, 512–522.
Golarai, G., Hong, S., Haas, B. W., et al. The fusiform 
face area is enlarged in Williams syndrome. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2010, 30, 6700–3712.
Golby, A. J., Gabrieli, J. D., Chiao, J. Y., and Eberhardt, 
J. L. Differential responses in the fusiform region to 
same-race and other-race faces. Nature Neuroscience, 
2001, 4, 845–850.
Goldberg, R. F., Perfetti, C. A., and Schneider, W. 
Perceptual knowledge retrieval activates sensory brain 
regions. Journal of Neuroscience, 2006, 26, 4917–4921.
Goldman, D., Oroszi, G., and Ducci, F. The genetics 
of addictions: Uncovering the genes. Nature Reviews 
Genetics, 2005, 6, 521–532.
Goldstein, J. M., Seidman, L. J., Horton, N. J., Makris, 
N., et al. Normal sexual dimorphism of the adult 
human brain assessed by in vivo magnetic resonance 
imaging. Cerebral Cortex, 2001, 11, 490–497.
Golgi, C. Opera Omnia, Vols. I and II. Milan: Hoepli, 1903.
Golombek, D. A., and Rosenstein, R. E. Physiology of 
circadian entrainment. Physiological Reviews, 2010, 90, 
1063–1102.
González. M. M., and Aston-Jones, G. Circadian regu-
lation of arousal: role of the noradrenergic locus 
coeruleus system and light exposure. Sleep, 2006, 29, 
1327–1336.
González, M. M., and Aston-Jones, G. Light deprivation 
damages monoamine neurons and produces a depres-
sive behavioral phenotype in rats. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2008, 105, 4898–4903.
Goodale, M. A., Meenan, J. P., Bülthoff, H. H., Nicolle, 
D. A., et al. Separate neural pathways for the visual 
analysis of object shape in perception and prehen-
sion. Current Biology, 1994, 4, 604–610.
Goodale, M. A., and Milner, A. D. Separate visual path-
ways for perception and action. Trends in Neuroscience, 
1992, 15, 20–25.
Goodale, M. A., and Westwood, D. A. An evolving view 
of duplex vision: Separate but interacting cortical 
Ghilardi, J. R., Röhrich, H., Lindsay, T. H., Sevcik, 
M. A., et al. Selective blockade of the capsaicin recep-
tor TRPV1 attenuates bone cancer pain. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2005, 25, 3126–3131.
Giedd, J. N., Rapoport, J. L., Garvey, M. A., Perlmutter, 
S., et al. MRI assessment of children with obsessive-
compulsive disorder or tics associated with streptococ-
cal infection. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2000, 157, 
281–283.
Giedd, J. N., Rapoport, J. L., Kruesi, M. J. P., Parker, C.,  
et al. Sydenham’s chorea: Magnetic resonance imaging 
of the basal ganglia. Neurology, 1995, 45, 2199–2202.
Gilbertson, M. W., Shenton, M. E., Ciszewski, A., Kasai, 
K., et al. Smaller hippocampal volume predicts 
pathologic vulnerability to psychological trauma. 
Nature Neuroscience, 2002, 5, 1242–1247.
Gillespie, P. G. Molecular machinery of auditory and  
vestibular transduction. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 
1995, 5, 449–455.
Gillette, M. U., and McArthur, A. J. Circadian actions of 
melatonin at the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Behavioural 
Brain Research, 1995, 73, 135–139.
Girardeau, G., Benchenane, K., Wiener, S. I., et al. 
Selective suppression of hippocampal ripples impairs 
spatial memory. Nature Neuroscience, 2009, 12,  
1222–1223.
Givens, B., and McMahon, K. Ethanol suppresses the 
induction of long-term potentiation in vivo. Brain 
Research, 1995, 688, 27–33.
Glaser, R., Rice, J., Sheridan, J., Post, A., et al. Stress-
related immune suppression: Health implications. 
Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 1987, 1, 7–20.
Glaser, R., Sheridan, J., Malarkey, W. B., et al. 
Chronic stress modulates the immune response to 
a pneumococcal pneumonia vaccine. Psychosomatic 
Medicine, 2000, 62, 804–807.
Glaum, S. R., Hara, M., Bindokas, V. P., Lee, C. C., et al. 
Leptin, the obese gene product, rapidly modulates 
synaptic transmission in the hypothalamus. Molecular 
Pharmacology, 1996, 50, 230–235.
Gloor, P., Olivier, A., Quesney, L. F., Andermann, F., 
et al. The role of the limbic system in experiential phe-
nomena of temporal lobe epilepsy. Annals of Neurology, 
1982, 12, 129–144.
Goate, A. M. Monogenetic determinants of Alzheimer’s 
disease: APP mutations. Cellular and Molecular Life 
Sciences, 1998, 54, 897–901.
Godfrey, P. A., Malnic, B., and Buck, L. The mouse olfac-
tory receptor gene family. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2004, 101, 2156–2161.
Goeders, N. E., Lane, J. D., and Smith, J. E. Self-
administration of methionine enkephalin into the 
nucleus accumbens. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and 
Behavior, 1984, 20, 451–455.

666	
References
Grados, M. A., Riddle, M. A., Samuels, J. F., Liang, K.-Y.,  
et al. The familial phenotype of obsessive-compulsive 
disorder in relation to tic disorders: The Hopkins 
OCD Family Study. Biological Psychiatry, 2001, 50, 
559–565.
Grafton, S. T. Contributions of functional imaging 
to understanding parkinsonian symptoms. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology, 2004, 14, 715–719.
Graybiel, A. M. Basal ganglia: New therapeutic 
approaches to Parkinson’s disease. Current Biology, 
1996, 6, 368–371.
Graziano, M. S. A., and Aflalo, T. N. Mapping behavioral 
repertoire onto the cortex. Neuron, 2007, 56, 239–251.
Gréco, B., Edwards, D. A., Zumpe, D., and Clancy, 
A. N. Androgen receptor and mating-induced Fos 
immunoreactivity are co-localized in limbic and 
midbrain neurons that project to the male rat medial 
preoptic area. Brain Research, 1998, 781, 15–24.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R. B., Nystrom, L. E., 
Darley, J. M., et al. An fMRI investigation of emo-
tional engagement in moral judgment. Science, 2001, 
293, 2105–2108.
Gregg, T. R., and Siegel, A. Brain structures and 
neurotransmitters regulating aggression in cats: 
Implications for human aggression. Progress in Neuro-
Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 2001, 25, 
91–240.
Grelotti, D. J., Gauthier, I., and Schultz, R. T. Social interest 
and the development of cortical face specialization: What  
autism teaches us about face processing. Developmental 
Psychobiology, 2002, 40, 213–225.
Grelotti, D. J., Klin, A. J., Gauthier, I., Skudlarski, P.,  
et al. fMRI activation of the fusiform gyrus and amyg-
dala to cartoon characters but not to faces in a boy 
with autism. Neuropsychologia, 2005, 43, 373–385.
Grill, H. J., and Kaplan, J. M. Caudal brainstem 
participates in the distributed neural control of 
feeding. In Handbook of Behavioral Neurobiology, Vol. 
10: Neurobiology of Food and Fluid Intake, edited by E. 
Stricker. New York: Plenum Press, 1990.
Grill-Spector, K., Knouf, N., and Kanwisher, N. The fusi-
form face area subserves face perception, not generic 
within-­category identification. Nature Neuroscience, 
2004, 7, 555–561.
Grill-Spector, K., and Malach, R. The human visual cor-
tex. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 2004, 27, 649–677.
Gross, C. G. Visual functions of inferotemporal cor-
tex. In Handbook of Sensory Physiology, Vol. 7: Central 
Processing of Visual Information, edited by R. Jung. 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1973.
Grossman, E. D., Battelli, L., and Pascual-Leone, A. 
Repetitive TMS over posterior STS disrupts percep-
tion of biological motion. Vision Research, 2005, 45, 
2847–2853.
pathways for perception and action. Current Opinion 
in Neurobiology, 2004, 14, 203–211.
Goodglass, H., and Kaplan, E. Assessment of Aphasia and 
Related Disorders. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1972.
Goodman, W. K., Foote, K. D., Greenberg, B. D., et al. 
Deep brain stimulation for intractable obsessive 
compulsive disorder: Pilot study using a blinded, 
staggered-onset design. Biological Psychiatry, 2010, 67, 
535–542.
Gooley, J. J., Lu, J., Fischer, D., and Saper, C. B. A 
broad role for melanopsin in nonvisual photorecep-
tion. Journal of Neuroscience, 2003, 23, 7093–7106.
Gooren, L. The biology of human psychosexual 
differentiation. Hormones and Behavior, 2006, 50, 589–601.
Gordon, H. W., and Sperry, R. Lateralization of olfactory 
perception in the surgically separated hemispheres in 
man. Neuropsychologia, 1969, 7, 111–120.
Gordon, I., Zagoory-Sharon, O., Leckman, J. F., and 
Feldman, R. Prolactin, oxytocin, and the development 
of paternal behavior across the first six months of 
fatherhood. Hormones and Behavior, 2010, 58, 513–518.
Gosselin, N., Peretz, I., Noulhiane, M., Hasboun, D., 
et al. Impaired recognition of scary music following 
unilateral temporal lobe excision. Brain, 2005, 128, 
628–640.
Gottesman, I. I., and Bertelsen, A. Confirming unex-
pressed genotypes for schizophrenia. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 1989, 46, 867–872.
Gottesman, I. I., and Shields, J. Schizophrenia: The 
Epigenetic Puzzle. New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1982.
Gottfried, J. A., Winston, J. S., and Dolan, R. J. 
Dissociable codes of odor quality and odorant 
structure in human piriform cortex. Neurons, 2006, 
49, 467–479.
Gotti, C., Guiducci, S., Tedesco, V., et al. Nicotinic acetyl-
choline receptors in the mesolimbic pathway: primary 
role of ventral tegmental area alpha6beta2* receptors 
in mediating systemic nicotine effects on dopamine 
release, locomotion, and reinforcement. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2010, 30, 5311–5325.
Gould, E., Beylin, A., Tanapat, P., Reeves, A., et al. 
Learning enhances adult neurogenesis in the hippo-
campal formation. Nature Neuroscience, 1999, 2, 260–265.
Gouras, P. Identification of cone mechanisms in mon-
key ganglion cells. Journal of Physiology, 1968, 199, 
533–538.
Graber, G. C., and Kristal, M. B. Uterine distention 
facilitates the onset of maternal beahvior in pseu-
dopregnant but not in cycling rats. Physiology and 
Behavior, 1977, 19, 133–137.
Gradinaru, V., Mogri, M., Thompson, et al. Optical decon-
struction of parkinsonian neural circuitry. Science, 2009, 
324, 354–359.

	
References	
667
Haarmeier, T., Their, P., Repnow, M., and Petersen, D. 
False perception of motion in a patient who cannot com-
pensate for eye movements. Nature, 1997, 389, 849–852.
Haas, R. H. Thiamin and the brain. Annual Review of 
Nutrition, 1988, 8, 483–515.
Habib, M. The neurological basis of developmental dys-
lexia: An overview and working hypothesis. Brain, 2000, 
123, 2373–2399.
Hacke, W., Albers, G., Al-Rawi, Y., Bogousslavsky, J., 
et al. The desmoteplase in acute ischemic stroke 
trial (DIAS): A phase II MRI-based 9-hour window 
acute stroke thrombolysis trial with intravenous des-
moteplase. Stroke, 2005, 36, 66–73.
Hackett, R. A., Preuss, T. M., and Kaas, J. H. Architec­
tonic identification of the core region in auditory  
cortex of macaques, chimpanzees, and humans. 
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 2001, 441, 197–222.
Hadjikhani, N., and de Gelder, B. Seeing fearful body 
expressions activates the fusiform cortex and amyg-
dala. Current Biology, 2003, 13, 2201–2205.
Hadjikhani, N., Joseph, R. M., Snyder, J., and Tager-
Flusberg, H. Anatomical differences in the mirror 
neuron system and social cognition network in 
autism. Cerebral Cortex, 2006, 16, 1276–1282.
Hadjikhani, N., Liu, A. K., Dale, A. M., Cavanagh, P., 
et al. Retinotopy and color sensitivity in human visual 
cortical area V8. Nature Neuroscience, 1998, 1, 235–241.
Hadjipanayis, C. G., and Van Meir, E. G. Tumor initiat-
ing cells in malignant gliomas: Biology and implica-
tions for therapy. Journal of Molecular Medicine, 2009, 
87, 363–374.
Häfner, H., Riecher-Rössler, A., An Der Heiden, W., 
et al. Generating and testing a causal explanation of 
the gender difference in age at first onset of schizo-
phrenia. Psychological Medicine, 1993, 23, 925–940.
Hague, S. M., Klaffke, S., and Bandmann, O. Neuro­
degenerative disorders: Parkinson’s disease and  
Huntington’s disease. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 2005, 76, 1058–1063.
Hahn, T. M., Breininger, J. F., Baskin, D. G., and 
Schwartz, M. W. Coexpression of Agrp and NPY 
in fasting-activated hypothalamic neurons. Nature 
Neuroscience, 1998, 1, 271–272.
Hainer, V., Stunkard, A., Kunesova, M., Parizkova, 
J., et al. A twin study of weight loss and metabolic 
efficiency. International Journal of Obesity and Related 
Metabolic Disorders, 2001, 25, 533–537.
Hajak, G., Clarenbach, P., Fischer, W., Haase, W., et al. 
Effects of hypnotics on sleep quality and daytime well-
being: Data from a comparative multicentre study in 
outpatients with insomnia. European Psychiatry, 1995, 10 
(Suppl. 3), 173S–179S.
Halaas, J. L., Gajiwala, K. D., Maffei, M., Cohen, S. L., 
et al. Weight-reducing effects of the plasma protein 
Grossman, E. D., and Blake, R. Brain activity evoked 
by inverted and imagined biological motion. Vision 
Research, 2001, 41, 1475–1482.
Grossman, E. D., Donnelly, M., Price, R., Pickens, D., 
et al. Brain areas involved in perception of biologi-
cal motion. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2000, 12, 
711–720.
Groves, D. A., and Brown, V. J. Vagal nerve stimulation:  
A review of its applications and potential mecha-
nisms that mediate its clinical effects. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 2005, 29, 493–500.
Grunhaus, L., Shipley, J. E., Eiser, A., Pande, A. C., et al. 
Sleep-onset rapid eye movement after electroconvul-
sive therapy is more frequent in patients who respond 
less well to electroconvulsive therapy. Biological 
Psychiatry, 1997, 42, 191–200.
Guastella, A. J., Einfeld, S. L., Gray, K. M., et al. 
Intranasal oxytocin improves emotion recognition 
for youth with autism spectrum disorders. Biological 
Psychiatry, 2010a, 67, 692–694.
Guastella, A. J., Richardson, R., Lovibond, P. F., et al.  
A randomized controlled trial of D-cycloserine 
enhancement of exposure therapy for social anxiety 
disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 2010b, 63, 544–549.
Guehl, D., Benazzouz, A., Aouizerate, B., Cuny, E., et al. 
Neuronal correlates of obsessions in the caudate 
nucleus. Biological Psychiatry, 2008, 63, 557–562.
Guilleminault, C., Wilson, R. A., and Dement, W. C. 
A study on cataplexy. Archives of Neurology, 1974, 31, 
255–261.
Gulevich, G., Dement, W. C., and Johnson, L. 
Psychiatric and EEG observations on a case of pro-
longed (264 hours) wakefulness. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 1966, 15, 29–35.
Gurd, J. M., and Marshall, J. C. Cognition: Righting 
reading. Current Biology, 1993, 3, 593–595.
Guridi, J., and Obeso, J. A. The subthalamic nucleus, 
hemiballismus and Parkinson’s disease: Reappraisal 
of a neurosurgical dogma. Brain, 2001, 124, 5–19.
Gurvits, T. V., Shenton, M. E., Hokama, H., Ohta, H., et al. 
Magnetic resonance imaging study of hippocampal 
volume in chronic, combat-related posttraumatic stress 
disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 1996, 40, 1091–1099.
Gutiérrez-Galve, L., Wheeler, Kingshott, C. A. M., 
Altmann, D. R., et al. Changes in the frontotemporal 
cortex and cognitive correlates in first-episode psy-
chosis. Biological Psychiatry, 2010, 68, 51–60.
Gutin, B., Owens, S., Okuyama, T., Riggs, S., et al. Effect 
of physical training and its cessation on percent fat and 
bone density of children with obesity. Obesity Research, 
1999, 7, 208–214.
Gvilia, I., Xu, F., McGinty, D., and Szymusiak, R. Homeo­
static regulation of sleep: A role for preoptic area  
neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 2006, 26, 9426–9433.

668	
References
Haslinger, B., Erhard, P., Altenmüller, E., Schroeder, 
U., et al. Transmodal sensorimotor networks during 
action observation in professional pianists. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 2005, 17, 282–293.
Hattar, S., Liao, H.-W., Takao, M., Berson, D. M., 
et al. Melanopsin-containing retinal ganglion cells: 
Architecture, projections, and intrinsic photosensitiv-
ity. Science, 2002, 295, 1065–1070.
Haubensak, W., Kunwar, P. S., Cai, H., et al. Genetic 
dissection of an amygdala microcircuit that gates con-
ditioned fear. Nature, 2010, 468, 270–276.
Haug, H.-J. Prediction of sleep deprivation outcome by 
diurnal variation of mood. Biological Psychiatry, 1992, 
31, 271–278.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., and Pulvermüller, F. Somato­
topic representation of action words in human  
motor and premotor cortex. Neuron, 2004, 41,  
301–307.
Hauser, M. D. Right hemisphere dominance for the 
production of facial expression in monkeys. Science, 
1993, 261, 475–477.
Haverkamp, S., Wässle, H., Duebel, J., Kuner, T., et al. 
The primordial, blue-cone color system of the mouse 
retina. Journal of Neuroscience, 2005, 25, 5438–5445.
Hawke, C. Castration and sex crimes. American Journal of 
Mental Deficiency, 1951, 55, 220–226.
He, J., Ma, L., Kim, S., Nakai, J., and Yu, C. R. Encoding 
gender and individual information in the mouse 
vomeronasal organ. Science, 2008, 320, 535–538.
He, W., Yasumatsu, K., Varadarajan, V., Yamada, A., 
et al. Umami taste responses are mediated by a-trans-
ducin and a-gustducin. Journal of Neuroscience, 2004, 
24, 7574–7680.
Hebb, D. O. The Organization of Behaviour. New York: 
Wiley-Interscience, 1949.
Heckler, M. M. Fifth Special Report to the U.S. Congress 
on Alcohol and Health. Washington, D.C.: U.S. 
Government Printing Office, 1983.
Heeb, M. M., and Yahr, P. Cell-body lesions of the pos-
terodorsal preoptic nucleus or posterodorsal medial 
amygdala, but not the parvicellular subparafascicular 
thalamus, disrupt mating in male gerbils. Physiology and 
Behavior, 2000, 68, 317–331.
Heffner, H. E., and Heffner, R. S. Role of primate audi-
tory cortex in hearing. In Comparative Perception, Vol. 
II: Complex Signals, edited by W. C. Stebbins and M. A. 
Berkley. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1990.
Hefzy, H., Silver, R. W., and Silver, B. The no smoking 
sign—Insular infarction. Journal of Neuroimaging, 2011, 
213, 435–450.
Heilman, K. M., Rothi, L., and Kertesz, A. Localization 
of apraxia-producing lesions. In Localization in 
Neuropsychology, edited by A. Kertesz. New York: 
Academic Press, 1983.
encoded by the obese gene. Science, 1995, 269,  
543–546.
Halassa, M. M., Florian, C., Fellin, T., et al. Astrocytic 
modulation of sleep homeostasis and cognitive 
consequences of sleep loss. Neuron, 2009, 61, 213–219.
Halgren, E. Walter, R. D., Cherlow, D. G., and Crandall, 
P. E. Mental phenomena evoked by electrical stimul-
tion of the human hippocampal formation and amyg-
dala. Brain, 1978, 101, 83–117.
Halpern, M. The organization and function of the vom-
eronasal system. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 1987, 
10, 325–362.
Halsband, U., and Freund, H. J. Premotor cortex and 
conditional motor learning in man. Brain, 1990, 113, 
207–222.
Hamet, P., and Tremblay, J. Genetics and genomics of 
depression. Metabolism: Clinical and Experimental. 2005, 
54, 10–15.
Hamilton, L. D., and Meston, C. M. The effects of part-
ner togetherness on salivary testosterone in women 
in long distance relationships. Hormones and Behavior, 
2010, 57, 198–202.
Hampson, R. E., and Deadwyler, S. A. Cannabinoids 
reveal the necessity of hippocampal neural encoding 
for short-term memory in rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2000, 20, 8932–8942.
Hansen, D. V., Lui, J. H., Parker, P. R., and Kriegstein, A. 
R. Neurogenic radial glia in the outer subventricular 
zone of human neocortex. Nature, 2010, 464, 554–561.
Hardy, J. Amyloid, the presinilins and Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Trends in Neuroscience, 1997, 4, 154–159.
Harmon, L. D., and Julesz, B. Masking in visual recogni-
tion: Effects of two-dimensional filtered noise. Science, 
1973, 180, 1194–1197.
Harris, G. W., and Jacobsohn, D. Functional grafts of 
the anterior pituitary gland. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B, 1951–1952, 139, 263–267.
Harrison, Y., and Horne, J. A. Sleep loss impairs short 
and novel language tasks having a prefrontal focus. 
Journal of Sleep Research, 1998, 7, 95–100.
Harrison, Y., and Horne, J. A. One night of sleep loss 
impairs innovative thinking and flexible decision-­
making. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 1999, 78, 128–145.
Hart, B. L. Hormones, spinal reflexes, and sexual 
behaviour. In Determinants of Sexual Behaviour, edited 
by J. B. Hutchinson. Chichester, England: John  
Wiley & Sons, 1978.
Hartline, H. K. The response of single optic nerve fibers 
of the vertebrate eye to illumination of the retina. 
American Journal of Physiology, 1938, 121, 400–415.
Harvey, S. M. Female sexual behavior: Fluctuations 
during the menstrual cycle. Journal of Psychosomatic 
Research, 1987, 31, 101–110.

	
References	
669
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
2007, 104, 3562–3567.
Herholz, K. Neuroimaging in anorexia nervosa. 
Psychiatry Research, 1996, 62, 105–110.
Hering, E. Outlines of a Theory of the Light Sense, 1905. 
Translated by L. M. Hurvich and D. Jameson. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1965.
Hetherington, A. W., and Ranson, S. W. Hypothalamic 
lesions and adiposity in the rat. Anatomical Record, 
1942, 78, 149–172.
Hettema, J. M., Neale, M. C., and Kendler, K. S. A 
review and meta-analysis of the genetic epidemiology 
of anxiety disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
2001, 158, 1568–1578.
Heywood, C. A., and Cowey, A. The role of the “face-
cell” area in the discrimination and recognition of 
faces by monkeys. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London B, 1992, 335, 31–38.
Heywood, C. A., Gaffan, D., and Cowey, A. Cerebral 
achromatopsia in monkeys. European Journal of 
Neuroscience, 1995, 7, 1064–1073.
Heywood, C. A., and Kentridge, R. W. Achromatopsia, 
color vision, and cortex. Neurology Clinics of North 
America, 2003, 21, 483–500.
Hickok, G., Bellugi, U., and Klima, E. S. The neurobiol-
ogy of sign language and its implications for the neu-
ral basis of language. Nature, 1996, 381, 699–702.
Hickok, G., Wilson, M., Clark, K., Klima, E. S., et al. 
Discourse deficits following right hemisphere dam-
age in deaf signers. Brain and Language, 1999, 66, 
233–248.
Hicks, M. J., De, B. P., Rosenberg, J. B., et al. Cocaine 
analog coupled to disrupted adenovirus: A vaccine 
strategy to evoke high-titer immunity against addictive 
drugs. Molecular Therapy, 2011, 19, 612–619.
Hideyama, T., Yamashita, T., Suzuki, T., et al. Induced 
loss of ADAR2 engenders slow death of motor neurons 
from Q /R site-unedited GluR2. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2010, 30, 11917–11925.
Hikosaka, O., Sakai, K., Miyauchi, S., Takino, R., et al. 
Activation of human presupplementary motor area in 
learning of sequential procedures: A functional MRI 
study. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1996, 76, 617–621.
Hill, J. O., Wyatt, H. R., Reed, G. W., and Peters, J. C. 
Obesity and the environment: Where do we go from 
here? Science, 2003, 299, 853–855.
Hill, J. P., Hauptman, J., Anderson, J., Fujioka, K., et al. 
Orlistat, a lipase inhibitor, for weight maintenance 
after conventional dieting: A 1-year study. American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 1999, 69, 1108–1116.
Hillis, A. E., Newhart, M., Heidler, J., Barker, P. B., 
et al. Anatomy of spatial attention: Insights from 
perfusion imaging and hemispatial neglect in acute 
stroke. Journal of Neuroscience, 2005, 25, 3161–3167.
Heilman, K. M., Watson, R. T., and Bowers, D. Affective 
disorders associated with hemispheric disease. In 
Neuropsychology of Human Emotion, edited by K. M. 
Heilman and P. Satz. New York: Guilford Press, 1983.
Heimer, L., and Larsson, K. Impairment of mating 
behavior in male rats following lesions in the preop-
tic-anterior hypothalamic continuum. Brain Research, 
1966/1967, 3, 248–263.
Heinrichs, M., Baumgartner, T., Kirshbaum, C., and 
Ehlert, U. Social support and oxytocin interact to 
suppress cortisol and subjective responses to psycho-
social stress. Biological Psychiatry, 2003, 54, 1389–1398.
Heinrichs, S. C., Menzaghi, F., Pich, E. M., Baldwin, H. A.,  
et al. Anti-stress action of a corticotropin-releasing 
factor antagonist on behavioral reactivity to stressors 
of varying type and intensity. Neuropsychopharmacology, 
1994, 11, 179–186.
Heinz, A., Reimold, M., Wrase, J., Hermann, D., et al. 
Correlation of stable elevations in striatal μ-opioid 
receptor availability in detoxified alcoholic patients 
with alcohol ­craving. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
2005, 62, 57–64.
Helenius, P., Uutela, K., and Hari, R. Auditory stream 
­segregation in dyslexic adults. Brain, 1999, 122, 907–913.
Helmuth, L. Dyslexia: Same brains, different languages. 
Science, 2001, 291, 2064–2065.
Hendrickson, A. E., Wagoner, N., and Cowan, W. M. 
Autoradiographic and electron microscopic study of ret-
ino-hypothalamic connections. Zeitschrift für Zellforschung 
und Mikroskopische Anatomie, 1972, 125, 1–26.
Hendry, S. H. C., and Yoshioka, T. A neurochemically 
distinct third channel in the cacaque dorsal lateral 
geniculare nucleus. Science, 1994, 264, 575–577.
Henke, P. G. The telencephalic limbic system and 
experimental gastric pathology: A review. Neuroscience 
and Biobehavioral Reviews, 1982, 6, 381–390.
Hennessey, A. C., Camak, L., Gordon, F., and Edwards, 
D. A. Connections between the pontine central gray 
and the ventromedial hypothalamus are essential for 
lordosis in female rats. Behavioral Neuroscience, 1990, 
104, 477–488.
Henningfield, J. E., Fant, R. V., Buchhalter, A. R., and 
Stitzer, M. L. Pharmacotherapy for nicotine depen-
dence. CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians, 2005, 55, 
281–299.
Henry, M. L., Beeson, P. M., Stark, A. J., and Rapcsak,  
S. Z. The role of left perisylvian cortical regions in 
spelling. Brain and Language, 2007, 100, 44–52.
Herbert, M. R., Ziegler, D. A., Makris, N., Filipek, P. A., 
et al. Localization of white matter volume increase in 
autism and developmental language disorder. Annals 
of Neurology, 2004, 55, 530–540.
Herculano-Houzel, S., Collins, C. E., Wong, P., and 
Kaas, J. H. Cellular scaling rules for primate brains. 

670	
References
Holstege, G., Georgiadis, J. R., Paans, A. M. J., Meiners,  
L. C., et al. Brain activation during human male ejac-
ulation. Journal of Neuroscience, 2003a, 23, 9185–9193.
Holstege, G., Reinders, A. A. T., Panns, A. M. J., 
Meiners, L. C., et al. Brain activation during female 
sexual orgasm. Program No. 727.7. 2003 Abstract 
Viewer/Itinerary Planner. Washington, D.C.: Society for 
Neuroscience, 2003b.
Holtzheimer, P. E., and Mayberg, H. S. Stuck in a rut: 
Rethinking depression and its treatment. Trends in 
Neuroscience, 2011, 94, 1–9.
Hong, C. C. H., Jin, Y., Potkin, S. G., Buchsbaum, M. S.,  
et al. Language in dreaming and regional EEG alpha-
power. Sleep, 1996, 19, 232–235.
Hopf, H. C., Mueller-Forell, W., and Hopf, N. J. 
Localization of emotional and volitional facial paresis. 
Neurology, 1992, 42, 1918–1923.
Hoppe, C. Controlling epilepsy. Scientific American Mind, 
2006, 17, 62–67.
Horne, J. A. A review of the biological effects of total sleep 
deprivation in man. Biological Psychology, 1978, 7, 55–102.
Horne, J. A., and Minard, A. Sleep and sleepiness fol-
lowing a behaviourally “active” day. Ergonomics, 1985, 
28, 567–575.
Horowitz, R. M., and Gentili, B. Dihydrochalcone 
sweeteners. In Symposium: Sweeteners, edited by G. E. 
Inglett. Westport, Conn.: Avi Publishing, 1974.
Horowitz, T. S., Cade, B. E., Wolfe, J. M., and Czeisler, 
C. A. Efficacy of bright light and sleep/darkness 
scheduling in alleviating circadian maladaptation to 
night work. American Journal of Physiology, 2001, 281, 
E384–E391.
Horton, J. C., and Hubel, D. H. Cytochrome oxidase stain 
preferentially labels intersection of ocular dominance 
and vertical orientation columns in macaque striate 
cortex. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts, 1980, 6, 315.
Houchi, H., Babovic, D., Pierrefiche, O., Ledent, C.,  
et al. CB1 receptor knockout mice display reduced 
ethanol-induced conditioned place preference 
and increased striatal dopamine D2 receptors. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 2005, 30, 339–340.
Howard, J. D., Plailly, J., Grueschow, M., et al. Odor 
quality coding and categorization in human posterior 
piriform cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 2009, 12, 932–938.
Howell, M. J., and Schenck, C. H. Treatment of noc-
turnal eating disorders. Current Treatment Options in 
Neurology, 2009, 11, 333–339.
Howell, S., Westergaard, G., Hoos, B., Chavanne, T. J., 
et al. Serotonergic influences on life-history outcomes 
in free-ranging male rhesus macaques. American 
Journal of Primatology, 2007, 69, 851–865.
Hu, W.-P., Li, J.-D., Zhang, C., et al. Altered circadian 
and homeostatic sleep regulation in prokineticin 
2-deficient mice. Sleep, 2007, 30, 247–256.
Hillis, A. E., Work, M., Barker, P. B., Jacobs, M. A., et al. 
Re-examining the brain regions crucial for orchestrat-
ing speech articulation. Brain, 2004, 127, 1479–1487.
Hines, M., Allen, L. S., and Gorski, R. A. Sex differences 
in subregions of the medial nucleus of the amygdala 
and the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis of the rat. 
Brain Research, 1992, 579, 321–326.
Hobson, J. A. The Dreaming Brain. New York: Basic Books, 
1988.
Hochberg, L. R., Serruya, M. D., Friehs, G. M., Mukand, 
J. A., et al. Neuronal ensemble control of prosthetic 
devices by a human with tetraplegia. Nature, 2006, 
442, 164–171.
Hock, C., Konietzko, U., Streffer, J. R., Tracy, J., et al. 
Antibodies against b-amyloid slow cognitive decline in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Neuron, 2003, 38, 547–554.
Hodge, C. W., Haraguchi, M., Erickson, H., and Samson, 
H. H. Ventral tegmental microinjections of quinpirole 
decrease ethanol and sucrose-reinforced responding. 
Alcohol: Clinical and Experimental Research, 1993, 17, 
370–375.
Hoeft, F., Meyler, A., Hernandez, A., Juel, C., et al. 
Functional and morphometric brain dissociation 
between dyslexia and reading ability. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2007, 104, 4234–4239.
Hofbauer, R. K., Rainville, P., Duncan, G. H., and 
Bushnell, M. C. Cortical representation of the sensory 
dimension of pain. Journal of Neurophysiology, 2001, 86, 
402–411.
Hohman, G. W. Some effects of spinal cord lesions on 
experienced emotional feelings. Psychophysiology, 1966, 
3, 143–156.
Holden, C. The violence of the lambs. Science, 2000, 
289, 580–581.
Hollander, E., Anagnostou, E., Chaplin, W., Esposito, 
K., et al. Striatal volume on magnetic resonance 
imaging and repetitive behaviors in autism. Biological 
Psychiatry, 2005, 58, 226–232.
Hollander, E., Schiffman, E., Cohen, B., Rivera-Stein, M. A.,  
et al. Signs of central nervous system dysfunction 
in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 1990, 47, 27–32.
Hollander, J. A., Lu, Q, Cameron, M. D., et al. Insular 
hypocretin transmission regulates nicotine reward. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
2008, 105, 19480–19485.
Hollis, J. H., McKinley, M. J., D’Souze, M., Kampe, J., 
et al. The trajectory of sensory pathways from the 
lamina terminalis to the insular and cingulate cortex: 
A neuroanatomical framework for the generation  
of thirst. American Journal of Physiology, 2008, 294, 
R1390–R1401.
Holmes, G. The cerebellum of man. Brain, 1939, 62, 
21–30.

	
References	
671
Huszar, D., Lynch, C. A., Fairchild-Huntress, V., 
Dunmore, J. H., et al. Targeted disruption of the 
melanocortin-4 receptor results in obesity in mice. 
Cell, 1997, 88, 131–141.
Hwa, J. J., Ghibaudi, L., Gao, J., and Parker, E. M. 
Central melanocortin system modulates energy 
intake and expenditure of obese and lean Zucker 
rats. American Journal of Physiology, 2001, 281,  
R444–R451.
Hyman, S. E., and Malenka, R. C. Addiction and the 
brain: The neurobiology of compulsion and its persis-
tence. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2001, 2, 695–703.
Iacoboni, M., and Dapretto, M. The mirror neuron sys-
tem and the consequences of its dysfunction. Nature 
Reviews: Neuroscience, 2006, 7, 942–951.
Iacoboni, M., Molnar-Szakacs, I., Gallese, V., Buccino, 
G., et al. Grasping the intentions of others with one’s 
own mirror neuron system. PLoS Biology, 2005, 3, e79.
Iacoboni, M., Woods, R. P., Brass, M., Bekkering, H., 
et al. Cortical mechanisms of human imitation. 
Science, 1999, 286, 2526–2528.
Iaria, G., Petrides, M., Dagher, A., Pike, B., et al. 
Cognitive strategies dependent on the hippocampus 
and caudate nucleus in human navigation: Variability 
and change with practice. Journal of Neuroscience, 2003, 
23, 5945–5952.
Ibuka, N., and Kawamura, H. Loss of circadian rhythm 
in sleep-wakefulness cycle in the rat by suprachias-
matic nucleus lesions. Brain Research, 1975, 96, 76–81.
Ikoma, A., Steinhoff, M., Ständer, S., Yosipovitch, 
G., et al. The neurobiology of itch. Nature Reviews: 
Neuroscience, 2006, 7, 535–547.
Ikonomidou, C., Bittigau, P., Ishimaru, M. J., Wozniak, 
D. F., et al. Ethanol-induced apoptotic neurodegener-
ation and fetal alcohol syndrome. Science, 2000, 287, 
1056–1060.
Imperato, A., and Di Chiara, G. Preferential stimula-
tion of dopamine-release in the accumbens of freely 
moving rats by ethanol. Journal of Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics, 1986, 239, 219–228.
Insel, T. R. A neurobiological basis of social attachment. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 1997, 154, 726–735.
Insel, T. R., Wang, Z. X., and Ferris, C. F. Patterns of 
brain vasopressin receptor distribution associated 
with social organization in microtine rodents. Journal 
of Neuroscience, 1994, 14, 5381–5392.
Ishizuka, T., Murotani, T., and Yamatodani, A. Moda­
finil activates the histaminergic system through the 
orexinergic neurons. Neuroscience Letters, 2010, 483, 
193–196.
Ito, M., Ishihara, A., Gokori, A., et al. Mechanism of  
the anti-obesity effects induced by a novel melanin-
con­centrating hormone 1-receptor antagonist in mice. 
British Journal of Pharmacology, 2010, 159, 374–383.
Huang, A. L., Chen, X., Hoon, M. A., Chandrashekar, 
J., et al. The cells and logic for mammalian sour taste 
detection. Nature, 2006, 442, 934–938.
Huang, H., Xu, Y., and van den Pol, A. N. Nicotine 
excites hypothalamic arcuate anorexigenic proopi-
omelanocortin neurons and orexigenic neuropeptide 
Y neurons: similarities and differences. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 2011, 106, 1191–1202.
Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. Functional architecture 
of macaque monkey visual cortex. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London B, 1977, 198, 1–59.
Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. Brain mechanisms of 
vision. Scientific American, 1979, 241, 150–162.
Huber, R., Ghilardi, M. F., Massimini, M., Ferrarelli, F.,  
et al. Arm immobilization causes cortical plastic 
changes and locally decreases sleep slow wave activity. 
Nature Neuroscience. 2006, 9, 1169–1176.
Huber, R., Ghilardi, M. F., Massimini, M., and Tononi, 
G. Local sleep and learning. Nature, 2004,430, 78–81.
Hublin, C. Narcolepsy: Current drug-treatment options. 
CNS Drugs, 1996, 5, 426–436.
Hublin, C., Kaprio, J., Partinen, M., Heikkila, K., et al. 
Prevalence and genetics of sleepwalking: A popula-
tion-based twin study. Neurology, 1997, 48, 177–181.
Hudspeth, A. J., and Gillespie, P. G. Pulling springs to 
tune transduction: Adaptation by hair cells. Neuron, 
1994, 12, 1–9.
Huestis, M. A., Gorelick, D. A., Heishman, S. J., Preston,  
K. L., et al. Blockade of effects of smoked marijuana 
by the CB1-selective cannabinoid receptor antagonist 
SR131716. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2001, 58, 322–328.
Hughes, J., Smith, T. W., Kosterlitz, H. W., Fothergill, L. A.,  
et al. Identification of two related pentapeptides from 
the brain with potent opiate agonist activity. Nature, 
1975, 258, 577–579.
Hughes, J. R., Gust, S. W., Skoog, K., Keenan, R. M., 
et al. Symptoms of tobacco withdrawal: A replication 
and extension. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1989, 14, 
577–580.
Hull, E., and Dominguez, J. M. Sexual behavior in male 
rodents. Hormones and Behavior, 2007, 52, 45–55.
Hulshoff-Pol, H. E., Schnack, H. G., Bertens, M. G., van 
Haren, N. E., et al. Volume changes in gray matter 
in patients with schizophrenia. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 2002, 159, 244–250.
Humphrey, A. L., and Hendrickson, A. E. Radial zones 
of high metabolic activity in squirrel monkey striate 
cortex. Society for Neuroscience Abstracts, 1980, 6, 315.
Hunt, D. M., Dulai, K. S., Cowing, J. A., Julliot, C., et al. 
Molecular evolution of trichromacy in primates. 
Vision Research, 1998, 38, 3299–3306.
Hussey, E., and Safford, A. Perception of facial expres-
sion in somatosensory cortex supports simulationist 
models. Journal of Neuroscience, 2009, 29, 301–302.

672	
References
dopamine dysfunction in monkeys after long-term 
administration of phencyclidine. Science, 1997, 277, 
953–955.
Jeon, T.-I., Zhu, B., Larson, J. L., and Osborne, T. F. 
SREBP-2 regulates gut peptide secretion through 
intestinal bitter taste receptor signaling in mice. 
Journal of Clinical Investigation, 2008, 118, 3693–3700.
Jeste, D. V., Del Carmen, R., Lohr, J. B., and Wyatt,  
R. J. Did schizophrenia exist before the eighteenth 
century? Comprehensive Psychiatry, 1985, 26, 493–503.
Jewett, D. C., Cleary, J., Levine, A. S., Schaal, D. W., et al. 
Effects of neuropeptide Y on food-reinforced behavior 
in satiated rats. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and Behavior, 
1992, 42, 207–212.
Jo, Y.-H., Wiedl, D., and Role, L. W. Cholinergic modu-
lation of appetite-related synapses in mouse lateral 
hypothalamic slice. Journal of Neuroscience, 2005, 25, 
11133–11144.
Jobard, G., Crivello, F., and Tzourio-Mazoyer, N. 
Evaluation of the dual route theory of reading: A 
metaanalysis of 35 neuroimaging studies. NeuroImage, 
2003, 20, 693–712.
Jobst, E. E., Enriori, P. J., and Cowley, M. A. The electro-
physiology of feeding circuits. Trends in Endocrinology 
and Metabolism, 2004, 15, 488–499.
Johanek, L. M., Meyer, R. A., Hartke, T., Hobelmann, 
J. G., et al. Psychophysical and physiological evidence 
for parallel afferent pathways mediating the sensation 
of itch. Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 7490–7497.
Johansson, G. Visual perception of biological motion and 
a model for its analysis. Perception and Psychophysics, 
1973, 14, 201–211.
Johansson, R. S., and Flanagan, J. R. Coding and 
use of tactile signals from the fingertips in object 
manipulation tasks. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2009, 
10, 345–359.
Johnson, B. A., and Leon, M. Chemotopic odorant 
coding in a mammalian olfactory system. Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 2007, 503, 1–34.
Johnson, M. A. Subcortical face processing. Nature 
Reviews: Neuroscience, 2005, 6, 766–774.
Johnson, M. K., Kim, J. K., and Risse, G. Do alcoholic 
Korsakoff’s syndrome patients acquire affective reac-
tions? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 1985, 11, 22–36.
Jonas, P., Bischofberger, J., and Sandkühler, J. 
Corelease of two fast neurotransmitters at a central 
synapse. Science, 1998, 281, 419–523.
Jones, B. E. Influence of the brainstem reticular 
formation, including intrinsic monoaminergic and 
cholinergic neurons, on forebrain mechanisms of 
sleep and waking. In The Diencephalon and Sleep, 
edited by M. Mancia and G. Marini. New York: Raven 
Press, 1990.
Ito, T., Tiede, M., and Ostry, D. J. Somatosensory func-
tion in speech perception. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2009, 106, 1245–1248.
Iversen, L. Cannabis and the brain. Brain, 2003, 126, 
1252–1270.
Iwata, M. Kanji versus Kana: Neuropsychological cor-
relates of the Japanese writing system. Trends in 
Neurosciences, 1984, 7, 290–293.
Izard, C. E. The Face of Emotion. New York: Appleton-
Century-Crofts, 1971.
Jackson, M. E., Frost, A. S., and Moghaddam, B. 
Stimulation of prefrontal cortex at physiologically 
relevant frequencies inhibits dopamine release in the 
nucleus accumbens. Journal of Neurochemistry, 2001, 
78, 920–923.
Jacob, S., and McClintock, M. K. Psychological state and 
mood effects of steroidal chemosignals in women and 
men. Hormones and Behavior, 2000, 37, 57–78.
Jacobs, B. L., and Fornal, C. A. Activity of serotonergic 
neurons in behaving animals. Neuropsychopharmacology, 
1999, 21, 9S–15S.
Jacobs, B. L., and McGinty, D. J. Participation of the 
amygdala in complex stimulus recognition and behav-
ioral inhibition: Evidence from unit studies. Brain 
Research, 1972, 36, 431–436.
Jacobs, G. H. Primate photopigments and primate color 
vision. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 1996, 93, 577–581.
Jacobsen, C. F., Wolfe, J. B., and Jackson, T. A. An 
experimental analysis of the functions of the frontal 
association areas in primates. Journal of Nervous and 
Mental Disorders, 1935, 82, 1–14.
Jakobson, L. S., Archibald, Y. M., Carey, D., and Goodale, 
M. A. A kinematic analysis of reaching and grasping 
movements in a patient recovering from optic ataxia. 
Neuropsychologia, 1991, 29, 803–809.
James, T. W., Culham, J., Humphrey, G. K., Milner, A. 
D., et al. Ventral occipital lesions impair object rec-
ognition but not object-directed grasping: An fMRI 
study. Brain, 2003, 126, 2463–2475.
James, W. What is an emotion? Mind, 1884, 9, 188–205.
Jaramillo, F. Signal transduction in hair cells and its 
­regulation by calcium. Neuron, 1995, 15, 1227–1230.
Jaynes, J. The problem of animate motion in the seven-
teenth century. Journal of the History of Ideas, 1970, 6, 
219–234.
Jeffress, L. A. A place theory of sound localization. Journal 
of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 1948, 41, 35–39.
Jensen, T., Genefke, I., and Hyldebrandt, N. Cerebral 
atrophy in young torture victims. New England Journal 
of Medicine, 1982, 307, 1341.
Jentsch, J. D., Redmond, D. E., Elsworth, J. D., Taylor, 
J. R., et al. Enduring cognitive deficits and cortical 

	
References	
673
heart rate conditioning in the rabbit. Physiology and 
Behavior, 1979, 23, 1109–1117.
Karacan, I., Salis, P. J., and Williams, R. L. The role of 
the sleep laboratory in diagnosis and treatment of 
impotence. In Sleep Disorders: Diagnosis and Treatment, 
edited by R. J. Williams and I. Karacan. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, 1978.
Karacan, I., Williams, R. L., Finley, W. W., and Hursch, 
C. J. The effects of naps on nocturnal sleep: 
Influence on the need for stage 1 REM and stage 4 
sleep. Biological Psychiatry, 1970, 2, 391–399.
Karlsgodt, K. H., Kochunov, P, Winkler, A. M., et al. A 
multimodal assessment of the genetic control over 
working memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 2010, 30, 
8197–8202.
Karlson, P., and Luscher, M. “Pheromones”: A new term 
for a class of biologically active substances. Nature, 
1959, 183, 55–56.
Karlsson, M. P., and Frank, L. M. Awake replay of 
remote experiences in the hippocampus. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2009, 12, 913–918.
Karnath, H.-O., Rüter, J., Mandler, A., and 
Himmelbach, M. The anatomy of object recognition–
visual form ­agnosia caused by medial occipitotempo-
ral stroke. Journal of Neuroscience, 2009, 29, 5854–5862.
Kartsounis, L. D., Rudge, P., and Stevens, J. M. Bilateral 
lesions of CA1 and CA2 fields of the hippocampus 
are sufficient to cause a severe amnesic syndrome 
in humans. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and 
Psychiatry, 1995, 59, 95–98.
Katanoda, K., Yoshikawa, K., and Sugishita, M. A func-
tional MRI study on the neural substrates for writing. 
Human Brain Mapping, 2001, 13, 34–42.
Katzman, D. K., Christensen, B., Young, A. T., and 
Zipursky, R. B. Starving the brain: Structural abnor-
malities and cognitive impairment in adolescents with 
anorexia nervosa. Seminars in Clinical Neuropsychiatry, 
2001, 2, 146–152.
Kauer, J. A., and Malenka, R. C. Synaptic plasticity and 
addiction. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2007, 8, 844–858.
Kawahara, Y., Ito, K., Sun, H., Aizawa, H., et al. RNA edit-
ing and death of motor neurons. Nature, 2004, 427, 801.
Kawai, K., Sugimoto, K., Nakashima,, et al. Leptin 
as a ­modulator of sweet taste sensitivities in mice. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
2000, 97, 11044–11049.
Kawauchi, H., Kawazoe, I., Tsubokawa, M., Kishida, M., 
et al. Characterization of melanin-concentrating hor-
mone in chum salmon pituitaries. Nature, 1983, 305, 
321–323.
Kayama, Y., Ohta, M., and Jodo, E. Firing of “possibly” 
cholinergic neurons in the rat laterodorsal tegmental 
nucleus ­during sleep and wakefulness. Brain Research, 
1992, 569, 210–220.
Jones, D. T., and Reed, R. R. Golf: An olfactory neuron 
specific-G protein involved in odorant signal trans-
duction. Science, 1989, 244, 790–795.
Jones, S. S., Collins, K., and Hong, H.-W. An audience 
effect on smile production in 10-month-old infants. 
Psychological Science, 1991, 2, 45–49.
Jope, R. S., Song, L., Li, P. P., Young, L. T., et al. 
The phosphoinositide signal transduction system is 
impaired in bipolar affective disorder brain. Journal of 
Neurochemistry, 1996, 66, 2402–2409.
Jornales, V. E., Jakob, M., Zamani, A., and Vaina,  
L. M. Deficits on complex motion perception, spa-
tial ­discrimination and eye-movements in a patient 
with ­bilateral occipital-parietal lesions. Investigative 
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, 1997, 38, S72.
Jouvet, M. The role of monoamines and acetylcholine-
containing neurons in the regulation of the sleep-
waking cycle. Ergebnisse der Physiologie, 1972, 64, 166–307.
Jouvet-Mounier, D., Astic, L., and Lacote, D. 
Ontogenesis of the states of sleep in rat, cat, 
and guinea pig during the first postnatal month. 
Developmental Psychobiology, 1970, 2, 216–239.
Kaas, J. H., and Collins, C. E. The organization of 
­sensory cortex. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 2001, 
11, 498–504.
Kaas, J. H., Hackett, T. A., and Tramo, M. J. Auditory 
processing in primate cerebral cortex. Current Opinion 
in Neurobiology, 1999, 9, 164–170.
Kales, A., Tan, T.-L., Kollar, E. J., Naitoh, P., et al. Sleep 
patterns following 205 hours of sleep deprivation. 
Psychosomatic Medicine, 1970, 32, 189–200.
Kalin, N. H., Sherman, J. E., and Takahashi, L. K. 
Antagonism of endogenous CRG systems attenuates 
stress-induced freezing behavior in rats. Brain Research, 
1988, 457, 130–135.
Kalivas, P. W., Peters, J., and Knackstedt, L. Animal 
models and brain circuits in drug addiction. Molecular 
Interventions, 2006, 6, 339–344.
Kane, M. D., Lipinski, W. J., Callahan, M. J., et al. 
Evidence for seeding of b-amyloid by intracerebral 
infusion of Alzheimer brain extracts in b-amyloid pre-
cursor protein-transgenic mice. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2000, 20, 3606–3611.
Kang, C., and Drayna, D. Genetics of speech and 
language disorders. Annual Review of Genomics and 
Human Genetics, 2011, 12, 145–164.
Kanner, L. Autistic disturbances of affective contact. The 
Nervous Child, 1943, 2, 217–250.
Kanwisher, N., and Yovel, G. The fusiform face area: 
A cortical region specialized for the perception of 
faces. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London B, 2006, 361, 2109–2128.
Kaplitt, M. G., Feigin, A., Tang, C., Fitzsimons, H. L.,  
et al. Amygdala central nucleus lesions: Effect on 

674	
References
Schizophrenia, edited by D. Rosenthal and S. S. Kety. 
New York: Pergamon Press, 1968.
Kety, S. S., Wender, P. H., Jacobsen, B., Ingraham, L. J.,  
et al. Mental illness in the biological and adoptive rel-
atives of schizophrenic adoptees: Replication of the 
Copenhagen Study in the rest of Denmark. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 1994, 51, 442–455.
Kew, J. J. M., Ridding, M. C., Rothwell, J. C., 
Passingham, R. E., et al. Reorganization of cortical 
blood flow and transcranial magnetic stimulation 
maps in human subjects after upper limb amputation. 
Journal of Neurophysiology, 1994, 72, 2517–2524.
Keys, A., Brozek, J., Henschel, A., Mickelsen, O., 
and Taylor, H. L. The Biology of Human Starvation. 
Minneapolis, Minn.: University of Minnesota Press, 1950.
Khateb, A., Fort, P., Pegna, A., Jones, B. E., and et al. 
Cholinergic nucleus basalis neurons are excited by 
histamine in vitro. Neuroscience, 1995, 69, 495–506.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. Stress-related immune suppression: 
Health implications. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 
1987, 1, 7–20.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Glaser, R., Shuttleworth, E. C., et al. 
Chronic stress and immunity in family caregivers of 
Alzheimer’s disease victims. Psychosomatic Medicine, 
1987, 49, 523–535.
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Marucha, P. T., Malarkey, W. B., 
Mercado, A. M., et al. Slowing of wound healing by 
psychological stress. Lancet, 1995, 346, 1194–1196.
Kim, J. Y., Duian, X., Liu, C. Y., et al. DISC1 regulates 
new neuron development in the adult brain via mod-
ulation of AKT-mTOR signaling through KIAA1212. 
Neuron, 2009, 63, 761–773.
King, S., St-Hilaire, A., and Heidkamp, D. Prenatal fac-
tors in schizophrenia. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 2010, 19, 209–213.
Kingston, K., Szmukler, G., Andrewes, D., Tress, B., 
et al. Neuropsychological and structural brain 
changes in anorexia nervosa before and after 
refeeding. Psychological Medicine, 1996, 26, 15–28.
Kinnamon, S. C., and Cummings, T. A. Chemosensory 
transduction mechanisms in taste. Annual Review of 
Physiology, 1992, 54, 715–731.
Kinsley, C. H., and Bridges, R. S. Morphine treatment 
and reproductive condition alter olfactory prefer-
ences for pup and adult male odors in female rats. 
Developmental Psychobiology, 1990, 23, 331–347.
Kirkpatrick, B., Kim, J. W., and Insel, T. R. Limbic sys-
tem fos expression associated with paternal behavior. 
Brain Research, 1994, 658, 112–118.
Kitada, T., Asakawa, S., Hattori, N., Matsumine, H., et al. 
Mutations in the parkin gene cause autosomal recessive 
juvenile parkinsonism. Nature, 1998, 392, 605–608.
Kito, S., Hasegawa, T., and Koga, Y. Neuroanatomical 
correlates of therapeutic efficacy of low-frequency 
Kawikova, I., Grady, P. B. X., Tobiasova, Z., et al. 
Children with Tourette’s syndrome may suffer immu-
noglobulin A dysgammaglobulinemia: Prelimary 
report. Biological Psychiatry, 2010, 67, 679–683.
Kaye, W. H., Nagata, T., Weltzin, T. E., Hsu, G., et al. 
Double-blind placebo-controlled administration of 
fluoxetine in restricting- and restricting-purging-
type anorexia nervosa. Biological Psychiatry, 2001, 49, 
644–652.
Keller, S. E., Weiss, J. M., Schleifer, S. J., Miller, N. E., 
et al. Stress-induced suppression of immunity in adre-
nalectomized rats. Science, 1983, 221, 1301–1304.
Kelso, S. R., Ganong, A. H., and Brown, T. H. Hebbian 
synapses in hippocampus. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 1986, 83, 5326–5330.
Kempermann, G., Wiskott, L., and Gage, F. H. Func­
tional significance of adult neurogenesis. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology, 2004, 13, 186–191.
Kendell, R. E., and Adams, W. Unexplained fluctuations 
in the risk for schizophrenia by month and year of 
birth. British Journal of Psychiatry, 1991, 158, 758–763.
Kendler, K. S., Jacobson, K. C., Prescott, C. A., and 
Neale, M. C. Specificity of genetic and environmental 
risk factors for use and abuse/dependence of 
cannabis, cocaine, hallucinogens, sedatives, stimu­
lants, and opiates in male twins. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 2003, 160, 687–695.
Kennedy, S. H., Konarski, J. Z., Segal, Z. V., et al. 
Differences in brain glucose metabolism between 
responders to CBT and venlafaxine in a 16-week ran-
domized controlled trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
2007, 164, 778–788.
Kenney, P. J. Tobacco dependence, the insular cor-
tex and the hypocretin connection. Pharmacology, 
Biochemistry and Behavior, 2011, 97, 700–707.
Keonigs, M., Young, L., Adolphs, R., et al. Damage to 
the prefrontal cortex increases utilitarian moral judg-
ments. Nature, 2007, 446, 708–911.
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., et al. 
The epidemiology of major depressive disorder: 
Results from the National Comorbidity Survey 
Replication (NCS-R), JAMA, 2003, 289, 3095–3105.
Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Bromet, E., Hughes, M., 
et al. Posttraumatic stress disorder in the National 
Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
1995, 52, 1048–1060.
Kestler, L. P., Walker, E., and Vega, E. M. Dopamine 
receptors in the brains of schizophrenia patients: A 
meta-analysis of the findings. Behavioral Pharmacology, 
2001, 12, 355–371.
Kety, S. S., Rosenthal, D., Wender, P. H., and 
Schulsinger, K. F. The types and prevalence of men-
tal illness in the ­biological and adoptive families 
of adopted schizophrenics. In The Transmission of 

	
References	
675
Kohler, E., Keysers, C., Umiltà, M. A., Fogassi, L., et al. 
Hearing sounds, understanding actions: Action rep-
resentation in mirror neurons. Science, 2002, 297, 
846–848.
Kojima, M., Hosoda, H., Date, Y., Nakazato, M., et al. 
Ghrelin is a growth-hormone–releasing acylated pep-
tide from stomach. Nature, 1999, 402, 656–660.
Kolassa, I. T., Kolassa, S., Ertl, V., et al. The risk of 
­posttraumatic stress disorder after trauma depends on 
traumatic load and the catechol-o-methyltransferase 
Val(158)Met ­polymorphism. Biological Psychiatry, 2010, 
67, 304–308.
Komisaruk, B. R., and Larsson, K. Suppression of a 
spinal and a cranial nerve reflex by vaginal or rectal 
probing in rats. Brain Research, 1971, 35, 231–235.
Komisaruk, B. R., and Steinman, J. L. Genital stimula-
tion as a trigger for neuroendocrine and behavioral 
control of reproduction. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences, 1987, 474, 64–75.
Kong, J., Shepel, N., Holden, C. P., Mackiewicz, M., 
et al. Brain glycogen decreases with increased peri-
ods of wakefulness: Implications for homeostatic 
drive to sleep. Journal of Neuroscience, 2002, 22, 
5581–5587.
Koob, G. F. Drug addiction: The yin and yang of 
hedonic homeostasis. Neuron, 1996, 16, 893–896.
Koob, G. F., Thatcher-Britton, K., Britton, D., Roberts, 
D. C. S., et al. Destruction of the locus coeruleus or 
the dorsal NE bundle does not alter the release of 
punished responding by ethanol and chlordiazepox-
ide. Physiology and Behavior, 1984, 33, 479–485.
Kordower, J. H., Dodiya, H. B., Kordower, A. M., et al. 
Transfer of host-derived alpha synuclein to grafter 
dopaminergic neurons in rat. Neurobiology of disease, 
2011, 43, 552–557.
Kornhuber, H. H. Cerebral cortex, cerebellum, and 
basal ganglia: An introduction to their motor func-
tions. In The Neurosciences: Third Study Program, edited 
by F. O. Schmitt and F. G. Worden. Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 1974.
Koroshetz, W. J., and Moskowitz, M. A. Emerging treat-
ments for stroke in humans. Trends in Pharmacological 
Sciences, 1996, 17, 227–233.
Kortegaard, L. S., Hoerder, K., Joergensen, J., Gillberg, 
C., et al. A preliminary population-based twin study 
of self-reported eating disorder. Psychological Medicine, 
2001, 31, 361–365.
Kosfeld, M., Heinrichs, M., Zak, P. J., Fischbacher, U., 
et al. Oxytocin increases trust in humans. Nature, 2005, 
433, 673–676.
Kosten, T., Miserendino, M. J. D., and Kehoe, P. 
Enhanced acquisition of cocaine self-administration 
in adult rats with neonatal isolation stress experience. 
Brain Research, 2000, 875, 44–50.
right prefrontal transcranial magnetic stimulation in 
treatment-resistant depression. Psychiatry and Clinical 
Neuroscience, 2011, 65, 175–182.
Klaur, J., Zhao, Z., Klein, G. M., Lo, E. H., et al. The 
neurotoxicity of tissue plasminogen activator. Journal of 
Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 2004, 24, 945–963.
Klein, D. A., and Walsh, B. T. Eating disorders: Clinical 
features and pathophysiology. Physiology and Behavior, 
2004, 81, 359–374.
Klinge, C., Eippert, F., Röder, B., and Büchel, C. 
Corticocortical connections mediate primary visual 
cortex responses to auditory stimulation in the blind. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2010, 30, 12798–12805.
Klunk, W. E., Engler, H., Nordberg, A., Bacskai, B. J., 
et al. Imaging the pathology of Alzheimer’s disease: 
Amyloid-imaging with positron emission tomogra-
phy. Neuroimaging Clinics of North America, 2003, 13, 
781–789.
Knapp, P. H., Levy, E. M., Giorgi, R. G., Black, P. H., 
et al. Short-term immunological effects of induced 
emotion. Psychosomatic Medicine, 1992, 54, 133–148.
Knebelmann, B., Boussin, L., Guerrier, D., Legeai, L., 
et al. Anti-Muellerian hormone Bruxelles: A nonsense 
mutation associated with the persistent Muellerian duct 
syndrome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 1991, 88, 3767–3771.
Knecht, S., Breitenstein, C., Bushuven, S., Wailke, S., 
et al. Levodopa: Faster and better word learning in 
normal humans. Annals of Neurology, 2004, 56, 20–26.
Knecht, S., Drager, B., Deppe, M., Bobe, L., et al. 
Handedness and hemispheric language dominance 
in healthy humans. Brain, 2000, 123, 2512–2518.
Knickmeyer, R. C., Baron-Cohen, S., and Fane, B. A. 
Androgens and autistic traits: A study of individuals 
with congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Hormones and 
Behavior, 2006, 48, 1007–1008.
Knutson, B., Adams, C. M., Fong, G. W., and Hommer, 
D. Anticipation of increasing monetary reward 
selectively recruits nucleus accumbens. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2001, 21, RC159 (1–5).
Knutson, B., and Adcock, R. A. Remembrance of 
rewards past. Neuron, 2005, 45, 331–332.
Kobatake, E., Tanaka, K., and Tamori, Y. Long-term 
learning changes the stimulus selectivity of cells in the 
inferotemporal cortex of adult monkeys. Neuroscience 
Research, 1992, S17, S237.
Koenen, K. C., Harley, R., Lyons, M. J., Wolfe, J., et al. 
A twin registry study of familial and individual risk 
factors for trauma exposure and posttraumatic stress 
disorder. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 2002, 
190, 209–218.
Koenigs, M., Young, L., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D., et al. 
Damage to the prefrontal cortex increases utilitarian 
moral judgments. Nature, 2007, 446, 908–911.

676	
References
to chronic unilateral earplugging in humans. Journal 
of Neuroscience, 2010, 30, 4883–4894.
Kunos, G., and Batkai, S. Novel physiologic functions of 
endocannabinoids as revealed through the use of mutant 
mice. Neurochemical Research, 2001, 26, 1015–1021.
Kunugi, H., Nanko, S., and Murray, R. M. Obstetric com-
plications and schizophrenia: Prenatal underdevelop-
ment and subsequent neurodevelopmental impair-
ment. British Journal of Psychiatry, 2001, 40, s25–s29.
Kupfer, D. J. REM latency: A psychobiologic marker for 
primary depressive disease. Biological Psychiatry, 1976, 
11, 159–174.
Kurata, K., and Hoffman, D. S. Differential effects of 
muscimol microinjection into dorsal and ventral 
aspects of the premotor cortex of monkeys. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 1994, 71, 1151–1164.
Kurihara, K. Recent progress in taste receptor mecha-
nisms. In Umami: A Basic Taste, edited by Y. Kawamura 
and M. R. Kare. New York: Dekker, 1987.
Kuriki, S., Mori, T., and Hirata, Y. Motor planning 
center for speech articulation in the normal human 
brain. Neuroreport, 1999, 10, 765–769.
Kuryatov, A., Berrettini, W., and Lindstrom, J. 
Acetylcholine receptor (AChR) a5 subunit variant 
associated with risk for nicotine dependence and 
lung cancer reduces (a4b2)2a5 AChR function. 
Molecular Pharmacology, 2011, 79, 119–125.
LaBar, K. S., LeDoux, J. E., Spencer, D. D., and 
Phelps, E. A. Impaired fear conditioning following 
unilateral temporal lobectomy in humans. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 1995, 15, 6846–6855.
Lahti, A. C., Weiler, M. A., Michaelidis, T., Parwani, A., 
et al. Effects of ketamine in normal and schizophrenic 
volunteers. Neuropsychopharmacology, 2001, 25, 455–467.
Lai, E. C., Jankovic, J., Krauss, J. K., Ondo, W. G., et al. 
Long-term efficacy of posteroventral pallidotomy in 
the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. Neurology, 2000, 
55, 1218–1222.
Lai, Y.-Y., Kodama, T., Schenkel, E., and Siegel, J. M. 
Behavioral response and transmitter release dur-
ing ­atonia ­elicited by medial medullary stimulation. 
Journal of Neurophysiology, 2010, 104, 2024–2033.
Laitinen, L. V., Bergenheim, A. T., and Hariz, M. I. 
Leksell’s posteroventral pallidotomy in the treatment 
of Parkinson’s disease. Journal of Neurosurgery, 1992, 
76, 53–61.
Lambon Ralph, M. A., and Patterson, K. Generalization 
and differentiation in semantic memory. Annals of the 
New York Academy of Science, 2008, 1124, 61–76.
Landsness, E. C., Goldstein, M. R., Peterson, M. J., et 
al. Antidepressant effects of selective slow wave sleep 
deprivation in major depression: A high-density EEG 
investigation. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 2011, 45, 
1019–1026.
Kourtzi, A., and Kanwisher, N. Activation in human 
MT/MST by static images with implied motion. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2000, 12, 48–55.
Kovács, G., Vogels, R., and Orban, G. A. Selectivity of 
macaque inferior temporal neurons for partially 
occluded shapes. Journal of Neuroscience, 1995, 15, 
1984–1997.
Koylu, E. O., Couceyro, P. R., Lambert, P. D., and 
Kuhar, M. J. Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated 
transcript ­peptide immunohistochemical localization 
in the rat brain. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 1998, 
391, 115–132.
Kozlowski, L. T., and Cutting, J. E. Recognizing the 
sex of a walker from a dynamic point-light display. 
Perception and Psychophysics, 1977, 21, 575–580.
Kramer, F. M., Jeffery, R. W., Forster, J. L., and Snell, 
M. K. Long-term follow-up of behavioral treatment 
for obesity: Patterns of weight regain among men 
and women. International Journal of Obesity, 1989, 13, 
123–136.
Kraut, R. E., and Johnston, R. Social and emotional 
messages of smiling: An ethological approach. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 1979, 37, 1539–1553.
Kravitz, A. V., Freeze, B. S., Parker, P. R. L., et al. 
Regulation of parkinsonian motor behaviours by 
optogenetic control of basal ganglia circuitry. Nature, 
2010, 466, 622–626.
Kress, M., and Zeilhofer, H. U. Capsaicin, protons and 
heat: New excitement about nociceptors. Trends in 
Pharmacological Science, 1999, 20, 112–118.
Kristensen, P., Judge, M. E., Thim, L., Ribel, U., et al. 
Hypothalamic CART is a new anorectic peptide regu-
lated by leptin. Nature, 1998, 393, 72–76.
Krolak-Salmon, P., Hénaff, M.-A., Vighetto, A., 
Bertrand, O., et al. Early amygdala reaction to fear 
spreading in occipital, temporal, and frontal cortex: 
A depth electrode ERP study in humans. Neuron, 
2004, 42, 665–676.
Kruijver, F. P. M., Zhou, J.-N., Pool, C. W., Hofman, M. A.,  
et al. Male-to-female transsexuals have female neuron 
numbers in a limbic nucleus. Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 2000, 85, 2034–2041.
Kuffler, S. W. Neurons in the retina: Organization, 
inhibition and excitation problems. Cold Spring Harbor 
Symposium on Quantitative Biology, 1952, 17, 281–292.
Kuffler, S. W. Discharge patterns and functional organi-
zation of mammalian retina. Journal of Neurophysiology, 
1953, 16, 37–68.
Kumar, K., Wyant, G. M., and Nath, R. Deep brain 
stimulation for control of intractable pain in humans, 
present and future: A ten-year follow-up. Neurosurgery, 
1990, 26, 774–782.
Kumpik, D. P., Kacelnik, O., and King, A. J. Adaptive 
reweighting of auditory localization cues in response 

	
References	
677
­tomography study. Biological Psychiatry, 2010, 68, 
1016–1022.
LeDoux, J. E. Brain mechanisms of emotion and emo-
tional learning. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 1992, 
2, 191–197.
Lee, A., Clancy, S., and Fleming, A. S. Mother rats bar-
press for pups: Effects of lesions of the mpoa and lim-
bic sites on maternal behavior and operant respond-
ing for pup-reinforcement. Behavioural Brain Research, 
2000, 108, 15–31.
Lee, A. W., and Brown, R. E. Comparison of medial 
­preoptic, amygdala, and nucleus accumbens lesions 
on parental behavior in California mice (Peromyscus 
californicus). Physiology and Behavior, 2007, 92, 617–628.
Lee, M. S., Lee, H. Y., Lee, H. J., and Ryu, S. H. 
Serotonin transporter promoter gene polymorphism 
and long-term outcome of antidepressant treatment. 
Psychiatric Genetics, 2004, 14, 111–115.
Lee, S. J., Desplats, P., Sigurdson, C., et al. Cell-to-cell 
­transmission of non-prior protein aggregates. Nature 
Reviews: Neuroscience, 2010, 6, 702–706.
Lee, S.-J., Lim, H.-S., Masliah, E., and Lee, H.-J. Protein 
aggregate spreading in neurodegenerative diseases: 
Problems and perspectives. Neuroscience Research, 2011, 
70, 339–348.
Lehman, M. N., Silver, R., Gladstone, W. R., Kahn, R. M., 
et al. Circadian rhythmicity restored by neural trans-
plant: Immunocytochemical characterization with the 
host brain. Journal of Neuroscience, 1987, 7, 1626–1638.
Lehman, M. N., and Winans, S. S. Vomeronasal and 
olfactory pathways to the amygdala controlling male 
hamster sexual behavior: Autoradiographic and 
behavioral analyses. Brain Research, 1982, 240, 27–41.
Leibenluft, E., Moul, D.E., Schwartz, P. J., et al. A clini-
cal trial of sleep deprivation in combination with 
antidepressant medication. Psychiatry Research, 1993, 
46, 213–227.
Leiguarda, R. C., and Marsden, C. D. Limb apraxias: 
Higher-order disorders of sensorimotor integration. 
Brain, 2000, 123, 860–879.
Leonard, C. M., Rolls, E. T., Wilson, F. A. W., and Baylis, 
G. C. Neurons in the amygdala of the monkey with 
responses selective for faces. Behavioral Brain Research, 
1985, 15, 159–176.
Leonard, H. L., Lenane, M. C., Swedo, S. E., Rettew, 
D. C., et al. Tics and Tourette’s disorder: A 2- to 
7-year follow-up of 54 obsessive-compulsive children. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 1992a, 149, 1244–1251.
Leonard, H. L., Lenane, M. C., Swedo, S. E., Rettew, D. C.,  
et al. Tourette syndrome and obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. Advances in Neurology, 1992b, 58, 83–93.
Lesser, R. Selective preservation of oral spelling without 
semantics in a case of multi-infarct dementia. Cortex, 
1989, 25, 239–250.
Landisman, C. E., and Ts’o, D. Y. Color processing in 
macaque striate cortex: Relationships to ocular domi-
nance, cytochrome oxidase, and orientation. Journal 
of Neurophysiology, 2002, 87, 3126–3137.
Lange, C. G. Über Gemüthsbewegungen. Leipzig, Germany: 
T. Thomas, 1887.
Langen, M., Durston, S., Staal, W. G., Palmen, S. J. M. C.,  
et al. Caudate nucleus is enlarged in high-functioning 
medication-naïve subjects with autism. Biological 
Psychiatry, 2007, 62, 262–266.
Langston, J. W., Ballard, P., Tetrud, J., and Irwin, I. 
Chronic parkinsonism in humans due to a product 
of meperidine-analog synthesis. Science, 1983, 219, 
979–980.
Larson, P. S. Deep brain stimulation for psychiatric 
­disorders. Neurotherapeutics, 2008, 5, 50–58.
Laruelle, M., Abi-Dargham, A., Van Dyck, C. H., Gil, R., 
et al. Single photon emission computerized tomog-
raphy imaging of amphetamine-induced dopamine 
release in drug-free schizophrenic subjects. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 1996, 93, 
9235–9240.
Laschet, U. Antiandrogen in the treatment of sex offend-
ers: Mode of action and therapeutic outcome. In 
Contemporary Sexual Behavior: Critical Issues in the 1970s, 
edited by J. Zubin and J. Money. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1973.
Lau, H. C., Rogers, R. D., Haggard, P., and Passingham,  
R. E. Attention to intention. Science, 2004, 303, 1208–1210.
Lavoie, B., and Parent, A. Immunohistochemical study 
of the serotoninergic innervation of the basal gan-
glia in the squirrel monkey. Journal of Comparative 
Neurology, 1990, 299, 1–16.
Lavond, D. G., Kim, J. J., and Thompson, R. F. 
Mammalian brain substrates of aversive classical 
conditioning. Annual Review of Psychology, 1993, 44, 
317–342.
Lê, S., Cardebat, D., Boulanouar, K., Hénaff, M. A., 
et al. Seeing, since childhood, without ventral stream: 
A behavioural study. Brain, 2002, 125, 58–74.
Le Bec, P.-Y., Fatséas, M., Denis, C., et al. Cannabis et 
­psychose: Recherche d’un lien de causalité à partir 
d’une revue critique systématique de la literature. 
L’Encéphale, 2009, 35, 377–385.
Le Grand, R., Mondloch, C. J., Maurer, D., and Brent, H. P. 
Early visual experience and face processing. Nature, 2001, 
410, 890.
Le Grand, R., Mondloch, C. J., Maurer, D., and Brent,  
H. P. Expert face processing requires visual input to the 
right hemisphere during infancy. Nature Neuroscience, 
2003, 6, 1108–1112.
Le Jeune, F., Vérin, M., N’Diaye, K., et al. Decrease of 
­prefrontal metabolism after subthalamic stimulation 
in obsessive-compulsive disorder: A positron emission 

678	
References
Li, S., Cullen, W. K., Anwyl, R., and Rowan, M. J. 
­Dopamine-dependent facilitation of LTP induction 
in hippocampal CA1 by exposure to spatial novelty. 
Nature Neuroscience, 2003, 5, 526–531.
Li, X., Li, W., Wang, H., Cao, J., et al. Pseudogenization 
of a sweet-receptor gene accounts for cats’ indiffer-
ence toward sugar. PLoS Genetics, 2005, 1, 27–35.
Li, Y. C., Kellendonk, C., Simpson, E. H., et al. D2 recep-
tor overexpression in the striatum leads to a deficit 
in inhibitory transmission and dopamine sensitivity 
in mouse prefrontal cortex. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2011, 108, 12107–12012.
Lidberg, L., Asberg, M., and Sundqvist-Stensman, U. B. 
5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid levels in attempted suicides 
who have killed their children. Lancet, 1984, 2, 928.
Lidberg, L., Tuck, J. R., Asberg, M., Scalia-Tomba, G. P.,  
et al. Homicide, suicide and CSF 5-HIAA. Acta 
Psychiatrica Scandanavica, 1985, 71, 230–236.
Lieberman, J. A. Dopamine partial agonists: A new class 
of antipsychotic. CNS Drugs, 2004, 18, 251–267.
Liepert, J., Bauder, H., Wolfgang, H. R., Miltner, W. H., 
et al. Treatment-induced cortical reorganization after 
stroke in humans. Stroke, 2000, 31, 1210–1216.
Liljequist, S. The competitive NMDA receptor antago-
nist, CGP 39551, inhibits ethanol withdrawal seizures. 
European Journal of Pharmacology, 1991, 192, 197–198.
Lim, M. M., Wang, Z., Olazábal, D. E., Ren, X., et al. 
Enhanced partner preference in a promiscuous spe-
cies by manipulating the expression of a single gene. 
Nature, 2004, 429, 754–757.
Lim, M. M., and Young, L. F. Vasopressin-dependent 
­neuronal circuits underlying pair bond formation in 
the monogamous prairie vole. Neuroscience. 2004, 125, 
35–45.
Lin, J. S., Sakai, K., and Jouvet, M. Evidence for hista-
minergic arousal mechanisms in the hypothalamus of 
cat. Neuropharmacology, 1998, 27, 111–122.
Lin, L., Faraco, J., Li, R., Kadotani, H., et al. The sleep 
­disorder canine narcolepsy is caused by a mutation 
in the hypocretin (orexin) receptor 2. Cell, 1999, 98, 
365–376.
Lindauer, R. J. L., Olff, M., van Meijel, E. P. M., Carlier,  
I. V. E., et al. Cortisol, learning, memory, and attention 
in relation to smaller hippocampal volume in police 
officers with posttraumatic stress disorder. Biological 
Psychiatry, 2005, 59, 171–177.
Lisk, R. D., Pretlow, R. A., and Friedman, S. Hormonal 
stimulation necessary for elicitation of maternal 
nest-building in the mouse (Mus musculus). Animal 
Behaviour, 1969, 17, 730–737.
Lisman, J. A mechanism for the Hebb and the anti-
Hebb processes underlying learning and memory. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
1989, 86, 9574–9578.
Letchworth, S. R., Nader, M. A., Smith, H. R., Friedman, 
D. P., et al. Progression of changes in dopamine 
transporter binding site density as a result of cocaine 
self-administration in rhesus monkeys. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2001, 21, 2799–2807.
LeVay, S. A difference in hypothalamic structure 
between heterosexual and homosexual men. Science, 
1991, 253, 1034–1037.
Levenson, R. W., Ekman, P., and Friesen, W. V. 
Voluntary facial action generates emotion-specific 
autonomic nervous system activity. Psychophysiology, 
1990, 27, 363–384.
Levine, J. A., Eberhardt, N. L., and Jensen, M. D. Role 
of nonexercise activity thermogenesis in resistance to 
fat gain in humans. Science, 1999, 283, 212–214.
Levine, J. A., Lanningham-Foster, L. M., McCrady, S. K., 
Krizan, A. C., et al. Interindividual variation in posture 
allocation: Possible role in human obesity. Science, 2005, 
307, 584–586.
Levine, M. S., Cepeda, C., and André, V. M. Location, 
location, location: Contrasting roles of synaptic and 
extrasynaptic NMDA receptors in Huntington’s 
disease. Neuron, 2010, 65, 145–147.
Levy, R. M., and Bredesen, D. E. Controversies 
in HIV-related central nervous system disease: 
Neuropsychological aspects of HIV-1 infection. In 
AIDS Clinical Review 1989, edited by P. Volberding, 
and M. A. Jacobson. New York: Marcel Dekker, 1989.
Lewis, D. A., Hashimoto, T., and Volk, D. W. Cortical 
­inhibitory neurons and schizophrenia. Nature Reviews: 
Neuroscience, 2005, 6, 312–324.
Lewis, D. A., and Smith, R. E. Steroid-induced psychiatric 
syndromes: A report of 14 cases and a review of the lit-
erature. Journal of the Affective Disorders, 1983, 5, 19–32.
Lewis, E. B. Clusters of master control genes regulate 
the development of higher organisms. Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 1992, 267, 1524–1531.
Lewis, M. B., and Bowler, P. J. Botulinum toxin cos-
metic therapy correlates with a more positive mood. 
Journal of Cosmetic Dermatology, 2009, 8, 24–26.
LeWitt, P. A., Rezai, A. R., Leehey, M. A., et al. AAV2-
GAD gene therapy for advanced Parkinson’s disease: 
A double-blind, sham-surgery controlled, randomized 
trial. Lancet Neurology, 2011, 10, 309–319.
Lewy, A. K., Lefler, B. J., Emens, J. S., and Bauer, V. K. 
The circadian basis of winter depression. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2006, 103, 
7414–7419.
Li, A.-J., and Ritter, S. Glucoprivation increases expres-
sion of neuropeptide Y mRNA in hindbrain neurons 
that innervate the hypothalamus. European Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2004, 19, 2147–2154.
Li, M. R., and Cheung, B. M. Rise and fall of anti-obesity 
drugs. World Journal of Diabetes, 2011, 15, 19–23.

	
References	
679
Luigjes, J., van den Brink, W., Feenstra, M., et al. Deep 
brain stimulation in addiction: a review of potential 
brain targets. Molecular Psychiatry, 2011, Epub ahead 
of print.
Luo, M., Fee, M. S., and Katz, L. C. Encoding phero-
monal signals in the accessory olfactory bulb of 
behaving mice. Science, 2003, 299, 1196–1201.
Lupien, S., Lecours, A. R., Schwartz, G., Sharma, S., 
et al. Longitudinal study of basal cortixol levels in 
healthy elderly subjects: Evidence for subgroups. 
Neurobiology of Aging, 1996, 17, 95–105.
Lüscher, C., Xia, H., Beattie, E. C., Carroll, R. C., et al. 
Role of AMPA receptor cycling in synaptic transmis-
sion and ­plasticity. Neuron, 1999, 24, 649–658.
Luzzi, S., Pucci, E., Di Bella, P., and Piccirilli, M. 
Topographical disorientation consequent to amnesia 
of ­spatial location in a patient with right parahippo-
campal damage. Cortex, 2000, 36, 427–434.
Lydon, J. P., DeMayo, F. J., Funk, C. R., Mani, S. K., et al. 
Mice lacking progesterone receptor exhibit pleitropic 
reproductive abnormalities. Genes and Development, 
1995, 15, 2266–2278.
Lynch, G., Larson, J., Kelso, S., Barrionuevo, G., et al. 
Intracellular injections of EGTA block induction of 
­long-term potentiation. Nature, 1984, 305, 719–721.
Lytton, W. W., and Brust, J. C. M. Direct dyslexia: 
Preserved oral reading of real words in Wernicke’s 
aphasia. Brain, 1989, 112, 583–594.
Ma, W., Miao, Z., and Novotny, M. Induction of estrus 
in grouped female mice (Mus domesticus) by synthetic 
analogs of preputial gland constituents. Chemical 
Senses, 1999, 24, 289–293.
Ma, X., Zubcevic, L., Brüning, J. C., Ashcroft, F. M.,  
et al. Electrical inhibition of identified anorexigenic 
POMC ­neurons by orexin/hypocretin. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 1529–1533.
MacDonald, A. W., Carter, C. S., Kerns, J. G., Ursu, S., 
et al. Specificity of prefrontal dysfunction and context 
processing deficits to schizophrenia in never-medi-
cated patients with first-episode psychosis. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 2005, 162, 475–484.
MacLean, H. E., Warne, G. L., and Zajac, J. D. Defects 
of androgen receptor function: From sex reversal 
to ­motor-neuron disease. Molecular and Cellular 
Endocrinology, 1995, 112, 133–141.
MacLean, P. D. Psychosomatic disease and the “visceral 
brain”: Recent developments bearing on the Papez 
theory of emotion. Psychosomatic Medicine, 1949, 11, 
338–353.
MacSweeney, M., Capek, C. M., Campbell, R., and Woll, 
B. The signing brain: The neurobiology of sign lan-
guage. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2008a, 12, 432–440.
MacSweeney, M., Waters, D., Brammer, M. J., et al. 
Phonological processing in deaf signers and the impact 
Liu, C., Zhang, W.-T., Tang, Y.-Y., Mai, X.-Q., et al. 
The visual word form area: Evidence from an fMRI 
study of implicit processing of Chinese characters. 
NeuroImage, 2008, 40, 1350–1361.
Liu, L., Wong, T. P., Pozza, M. F., Lingenhoehl, K., et al. 
Role of NMDA receptor subtypes in governing the 
direction of hippocampal synaptic plasticity. Science, 
2004, 304, 1021–1023.
Liuzzi, F. J., and Lasek, R. J. Astrocytes block axonal 
regeneration in mammals by activating the physiolog-
ical stop pathway. Science, 1987, 237, 642–645.
Livingstone, M. S., and Hubel, D. H. Anatomy and 
­physiology of a color system in the primate visual cor-
tex. Journal of Neuroscience, 1984, 4, 309–356.
Lledo, P. M., Hjelmstad, G. O., Mukherji, S., Soderling, 
T. R., et al. Calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase II 
and long-term potentiation enhance synaptic transmis-
sion by the same mechanism. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 1995, 92, 11175–11179.
Logothetis, N. K., Pauls, J., and Poggio, T. Shape 
­representation in the inferior temporal cortex of 
monkeys. Current Biology, 1995, 5, 552–563.
Löken, L. S., Wessberg, J., Morrison, I., McGlone, F., 
et al. Coding of pleasant touch by unmyelinated affer-
ents in humans. Nature Neuroscience, 2009, 12, 547–548.
Lomber, S. G., and Malhotra, S. Double dissociation 
of “what” and “where” processing in auditory cortex. 
Nature Neuroscience, 2008, 11, 609–616.
Lømo, T. Frequency potentiation of excitatory synaptic 
­activity in the dentate area of the hippocampal forma-
tion. Acta Physiologica Scandinavica, 1966, 68 (Suppl. 
227), 128.
Longcamp, M., Anton, J.-L., Roth, M., and Velay, J.-L. 
Premotor activations in response to visually presented 
single letters depend on the hand used to write: A study 
on ­left-handers. Neuropsychologia, 2005, 43, 1801–1809.
Lozano, A. M., Mayberg, H. S., Giacobbe, P., Hamani, 
C., et al. Subcallosal cingulate gyrus deep brain stimu-
lation for treatment-resistant depression. Biological 
Psychiatry, 2008, 64, 461–467.
Lu, J., Greco, M. A., Shiromani, P., and Saper, C. B. 
Effect of lesions of the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus 
on NREM and REM sleep. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2000, 20, 3830–3842.
Lu, J., Zhang, Y.-H., Chou, T. C., Gaus, S. E., et al. 
Contrasting effects of ibotenate lesions of the para-
ventricular nucleus and subparaventricular zone on 
sleep-wake cycle and temperature regulation. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2001, 21, 4864–4874.
Ludwig, D. S, Tritos, N. A., Mastaitis, J. W., Kulkarni, R., 
et al. Melanin-concentrating hormone overexpres-
sion in transgenic mice leads to obesity and insulin 
resistance. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 2001, 107, 
379–386.

680	
References
Mallow, G. K. The relationship between aggression and 
cycle stage in adult female rhesus monkeys (Macaca 
mulatta). Dissertation Abstracts, 1979, 39, 3194.
Mallucci, G., Dickinson, A., Linehan, J., Klöhn, P. C., 
et al. Depleting neuronal PrP in prion infections pre-
vents disease and reverses spongiosis. Science, 2003, 
302, 871–874.
Malnic, B., Godfrey, P. A., and Buck, L. B. The human 
­olfactory receptor gene family. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2004, 101,  
2584–2589.
Malnic, B., Hirono, J, Sato, T., and Buck, L. B. 
Combinatorial receptor codes for odors. Cell, 1999, 
96, 713–723.
Malsbury, C. W. Facilitation of male rat copulatory 
­behavior by electrical stimulation of the medial pre-
optic area. Physiology and Behavior, 1971, 7, 797–805.
Mameli, M., Halbout, B., Creton, C., et al. Cocaine-
evoked synaptic plasticity: Persistence in the VTA 
triggers adaptations in the NAC. Nature Neuroscience, 
2009, 12, 1039–1041.
Mancuso, K., Hauswirth, W. W., Li, Q., et al. Gene ther-
apy for red-green colour blindness in adult primates. 
Nature, 2009, 461, 784–787.
Mandiyan, V. S., Coats, J. K., and Shah, N. M. Deficits 
in ­sexual and aggressive behaviors in Cnga2 mutant 
mice. Nature Neuroscience, 2005, 8, 1660–1662.
Manji, H. K., Moore, G. J., and Chen, G. Bipolar disor-
der: Leads from the molecular and cellular mecha-
nisms of action of mood stabilisers. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 2001, 178 (Suppl 41), S107–S109.
Manley, R. S., O’Brien, K. M., and Samuels, S. Fitness 
instructors’ recognition of eating disorders and atten-
dant ethical/liability issued. Eating Disorders, 2008, 16, 
103–116.
Mann, J. J., Malone, K. M., Diehl, D. J., Perel, J., et al. 
Positron emission tomographic imaging of serotonin 
activation effects on prefrontal cortex in healthy 
volunteers. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism, 
1996, 16, 418–426.
Manning, L., and Campbell, R. Optic aphasia with 
spared action naming: A description and possible loci 
of impairment. Neuropsychologia, 1992, 30, 587–592.
Manns, J. R., Hopkins, R. O., and Squire, L. R. Semantic 
memory and the human hippocampus. Neuron, 2003, 
38, 127–133.
Mantione, M., van de Brink, W., Schuurman, P. R., 
and Denys, D. Smoking cessation and weight loss 
after chronic deep brain stimulation of the nucleus 
accumbens: Therapeutic and research implications: 
Case report. Neurosurgery, 2010, 66, E218.
Mantyh, P. W. Connections of midbrain periaqueductal 
gray in the monkey. II: Descending efferent projec-
tions. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1983, 49, 582–594.
of age of first language acquisition. NeuroImage, 2008b, 
40, 1369–1379.
Madden, P. A. F., Heath, A. C., Rosenthal, N. E., and 
Martin, N. G. Seasonal changes in mood and behav-
ior: The role of genetic factors. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 1996, 53, 47–55.
Madsen, P. L., Holm, S., Vorstrup, S., Friberg, L., et al. 
Human regional cerebral blood flow during rapid-
eye-movement sleep. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and 
Metabolism, 1991, 11, 502–507.
Magee, J. C., and Johnston, D. A synaptically controlled, 
associative signal for Hebbian plasticity in hippocam-
pal ­neurons. Science, 1997, 275, 209–213.
Maggard, M. A., Shugarman, L. R., Suttorp, M., 
Maglione, M., et al. Meta-analysis: Surgical treatment 
of obesity. Annals of Internal Medicine, 2005, 142, 
547–559.
Maguire, E. A., Frackowiak, R. S. J., and Frith, C. D. 
Recalling routes around London: Activation of 
the right hippocampus in taxi drivers. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 1997, 17, 7103–7110.
Maguire, E. A., Gadian, D. G., Johnsrude, I. S., Good,  
C. D., et al. Navigation-related structural change in the 
hippocampi of taxi drivers. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2000, 97, 4398–4403.
Mahowald, M. W., and Schenck, C. H. Insights from 
studying human sleep disorders. Nature, 2005, 437, 
1279–1285.
Maj, M. Organic mental disorders in HIV-1 infection. 
AIDS, 1990, 4, 831–840.
Mak, G. K., Enwere, E. K., Gregg, C., Pakarainen, T., 
et al. Male pheromone-stimulated neurogenesis in 
the adult female brain: Possible role in mating behav-
ior. Nature Neuroscience, 2007, 10, 1003–1011.
Makino, H., and Malinow, R. AMPA receptor incor-
poration into synapses during LTP: The role of 
lateral movement and exocytosis. Neuron, 2009, 64, 
381–390.
Maldonado, R., and Koob, G. F. Destruction of the 
locus coeruleus decreases physical signs of opiate 
withdrawal. Brain Research, 1993, 605, 128–138.
Maldonado, R., and Rodriguez de Fonseca, F. 
Cannabinoid addiction: Behavioral models and 
neural correlates. Journal of Neuroscience, 2002, 22, 
3326–3331.
Maldonado, R., Stinus, L., Gold, L. H., and Koob, G. F. 
Role of different brain structures in the expression of 
the physical morphine-withdrawal syndrome. Journal 
of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 1992, 
261, 669–677.
Malhotra, A. K., Adler, C. M., Kennison, S. D., Elman, 
I., et al. Clozapine blunts N-methyl-D-aspartate 
antagonist-induced psychosis: a study with ketamine. 
Biological Psychiatry, 1997, 42, 664–668.

	
References	
681
Marson, L, and Murphy, A. Z. Identification of neu-
ral ­circuits involved in female genital responses in 
the rat: A dual virus and anterograde tracing study. 
American Journal of Physiology, 2006, 291, 419–428.
Martinez, M., Campion, D., Babron, M. C., and 
Clergetdarpous, F. Is a single mutation at the same 
locus responsible for all affected cases in a large 
Alzheimer ­pedigree (Fad4)? Genetic Epidemiology, 
1993, 10, 431–435.
Martins, I. J., Hone, E., Foster, J. K., Sünram-Lea, S. I.,  
et al. Aoplipoprotein E, cholesterol metabolism, 
diabetes, and the convergence of risk factors for 
Alzheimer’s disease and cardiovascular disease. 
Molecular Psychiatry, 2006, 11, 721–736.
Mas, M. Neurobiological correlates of masculine sexual 
behavior. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 1995, 
19, 261–277.
Masland, R. H. Neuronal diversity in the retina. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology, 2001, 11, 431–436.
Mathalon, D. H., Pfefferbaum, A., Lim, K. O., 
Rosenbloom, M. J., et al. Compounded brain volume 
deficits in ­schizophrenia-alcoholism comorbidity. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 2003, 60, 245–252.
Mathers, C. D., and Loncar, D. Projections of global 
­mortality and burden of disease from 2002 to 2030. 
PLoS Medicine, 2006, 3, e442.
Mathis, C. A., Klunk, W. E., Price, J. C., and DeKosky,  
S. T. Imaging technology for neurodegenerative diseases. 
Archives of Neurology, 2005, 62, 196–200.
Matsuda, L. A., Lolait, S. J., Brownstein, M. J., Young, 
A. C., and Bonner, T. I. Structure of a cannabinoid 
receptor and functional expression of the cloned 
cDNA. Nature, 1990, 346, 561–564.
Matsumoto, D., and Willingham, B. Spontaneous facial 
expressions of emotion of congenitally and noncon-
genitally blind individuals. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 2009, 96, 1–10.
Matsunami, H., Montmayeur, J.-P., and Buck, L. B.  
A family of candidate taste receptors in human and 
mouse. Nature, 2000, 404, 601–604.
Mattay, V. S., Goldberg, T. E., Fera, F., Hariri, A. R., et al. 
Catechol O-methyltransferase val159-met genotype and 
individual variation in the brain response to amphet-
amine. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 2003, 100, 6186–6191.
Matteo, S., and Rissman, E. F. Increased sexual activity 
­during the midcycle portion of the human menstrual 
cycle. Hormones and Behavior, 1984, 18, 249–255.
Matthes, H. W. D., Maldonado, R., Simonin, F., Valverde, 
O., et al. Loss of morphine-induced analgesia, reward 
effect and withdrawal symptoms in mice lacking the 
Mu-opioid-receptor gene. Nature, 1996, 383, 819–823.
Matthews, D. B., Simson, P. E., and Best, P. J. Ethanol 
alters spatial processing of hippocampal place cells: 
Mao-Draayer, Y., and Panitch, H. Alexia without 
agraphia in multiple sclerosis: Case report with mag-
netic resonance imaging localization. Multiple Sclerosis, 
2004, 10, 705–707.
Maquet, P. Sleep function(s) and cerebral metabolism. 
Behavioural Brain Research, 1995, 69, 75–83.
Maquet, P., Dive, D., Salmon, E., Sadzot, B, et al. 
Cerebral glucose utilization during sleep-wake cycle 
in man determined by positron emission tomography 
and [18F]2-fluro-2-deoxy-D-glucose method. Brain 
Research, 1990, 413, 136–143.
Margolin, D. I., and Goodman-Schulman, R. Oral 
and ­written spelling impairments. In Cognitive 
Neuropsychology in Clinical Practice, edited by D. I. 
Margolin. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Margolin, D. I., Marcel, A. J., and Carlson, N. R. 
Common mechanisms in dysnomia and post-semantic 
surface ­dyslexia: Processing deficits and selective atten-
tion. In Surface Dyslexia: Neuropsychological and Cognitive 
Studies of Phonological Reading, edited by M. Coltheart. 
London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1985.
Margolin, D. I., and Walker, J. A. Personal communication, 
1981.
Margolskee, R. G., Dyer, J., Kokrashvili, Z., et al. T1R3 
and gustducin in gut sense sugars to regulate expres-
sion of Na+-glucose cotransporter 1. Proceedings  
of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2007, 104, 
15075–15080.
Marinkovic, K., Dhond, R. P., Dale, A. M., Glessner, M., 
et al. Spatiotemporal dynamics of modality-specific 
and supramodal word processing. Neuron, 2003, 38, 
487–497.
Marrosu, F., Portas, C., Mascia, M. S., Casu, M. A., et al. 
Microdialysis measurement of cortical and hippocam-
pal ­acetylcholine release during sleep–wake cycle in 
freely moving cats. Brain Research, 1995, 671, 329–332.
Marshall, B. E., and Longnecker, D. E. General anes-
thetics. In The Pharmacological Basis of Therapeutics, 
edited by L. S. Goodman, A. Gilman, T. W. Rall, A. S. 
Nies, and P. Taylor. New York: Pergamon Press, 1990.
Marshall, L., and Born, J. The contribution of sleep 
to hippocampus-dependent memory consolidation. 
Trends in Cognitive Science, 2007, 11, 442–450.
Marson, L. Central nervous system neurons identified 
after injection of pseudorabies virus into the rat clito-
ris. Neuroscience Letters, 1995, 190, 41–44.
Marson, L, and McKenna, K. E. A role for 5-hydroxy-
tryptamine in descending inhibition of spinal sexual 
reflexes. Experimental Brain Research, 1992, 88, 313–320.
Marson, L., and McKenna, K. E. CNS cell groups 
involved in the control of the ischiocavernosus and 
bulbospongiosus muscles: A transneuronal tracing 
study using pseudorabies virus. Journal of Comparative 
Neurology, 1996, 374, 161–179.

682	
References
McClintock, M. K., and Adler, N. T. The role of the 
female during copulation in wild and domestic 
Norway rats (Rattus norvegicus). Behaviour, 1978, 67, 
67–96.
McEwen, B. S., and Sapolsky, R. M. Stress and cognitive 
function. Current Biology, 1995, 5, 205–216.
McFarland, K., Lapish, C. C., and Kalivas, P. W. 
Prefrontal glutamate release in the core of the 
nucleus accumbens mediates cocaine-induced 
reinstatement of drug-seeking behavior. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2003, 23, 3531–3537.
McGrath, C. L., Glatt, S. J., Sklar, P., et al. Evidence for 
genetic association of RORB with bipolar disorder. 
BMC Psychiatry, 2009, 9, 70.
McGrath, J., Welham, J., and Pemberton, M. Month of 
birth, hemisphere of birth and schizophrenia. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 1995, 167, 783–785.
McIver, B., Connacher, A., Whittle, I., Baylis, P., et al. 
Adipsic hypothalamic diabetes insipidus after clipping 
of anterior communicating artery aneurysm. British 
Medical Journal, 1991, 303, 1465–1467.
McKinley, M. J., Cairns, M. J., Denton, D. A., Egan, G., 
et al. Physiological and pathophysiological influences 
on thirst. Physiology and Behavior, 2004, 81, 795–803.
McKinley, M. J., Walker, L. L., Alexiou, T., et al. 
Osmoregulatory fluid intake but not hypovolemic 
thirst is intact in mice lacking angiotensin. American 
Journal of Physiology, 2008, 294, R1533–R1543.
McLaughlin, S. K., McKinnon, P. J., Robichon, A., et al. 
Gustducin and transducin: A tale of two G proteins. 
Ciba Foundation Symposiums, 1993, 179, 196–200.
Mechoulam, R., Ben-Shabat, S., Hanus, L., Ligumsky, M., 
et al. Identification of an endogenous 2-monoglycer-
ide, present in canine gut, that binds to cannabinoid 
receptors. Biochemical Pharmacology, 1995, 50, 83–90.
Medcalf, R. Plasminogen activation-based thrombolysis 
for ischaemic stroke: The diversity of targets may 
demand new approaches. Current Drug Targets, 2011, 
Epub ahead of print.
Mednick, S. A., Machon, R. A., and Huttunen, M. O. An 
update on the Helsinki influenza project. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 1990, 47, 292.
Mednick, S., Nakayama, K., and Stickgold, R. Sleep-
dependent learning: A nap is as good as a night. 
Nature Neuroscience, 2003, 6, 697–698.
Melges, F. T. Time and the Inner Future: A Temporal 
Approach to Psychiatric Disorders. New York: John  
Wiley & Sons, 1982.
Melzak, R. Phantom limbs. Scientific American, 1992, 266, 
120–126.
Menco, B. P. M., Bruch, R. C., Dau, B., and Danho, W. 
Ultrastructural localization of olfactory transduction 
­components: The G protein subunit Golf and type III 
­adenylyl cyclase. Neuron, 1992, 8, 441–453.
A mechanism for impaired navigation when intoxi-
cated. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research, 
1996, 20, 404–407.
Mattick, J. S. The hidden genetic program of complex 
organisms. Scientific American, 2004, 291, 60–67.
Mattson, M. P., Haughey, N. J., and Nath, A. Cell death 
in HIV dementia. Cell Death and Differentiation, 2005, 
12, 893–904.
Maviel, T., Durkin, T. P., Menzaghi, F., and Bontempi, 
B. Sites of neocortical reorganization critical for 
remote spatial memory. Science, 2004, 305, 96–99.
Mayberg, H. S. Targeted electrode-based modulation 
of neural circuits for depression. Journal of Clinical 
Investigation, 2009, 119, 717–725.
Mayberg, H. S., Lozano, A. M., Voon, V., McNeely,  
H. E., et al. Deep brain stimulation for treatment-
resistant ­depression. Neuron, 2005, 45, 651–660.
Mayberg, H. S., Silva, J. A., Branna, S. K., et al. The 
­functional neuroanatomy of the placebo effect. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 2002, 159, 728–737.
Mayer, D. J., and Liebeskind, J. C. Pain reduction by 
focal electrical stimulation of the brain: An anatomi-
cal and ­behavioral analysis. Brain Research, 1974, 68, 
73–93.
Mayers, A. G., and Baldwin, D. S. Antidepressants and 
their effect on sleep. Human Psychopharmacology, 2005, 
20, 533–559.
Mazur, A. Hormones, aggression, and dominance in 
humans. In Hormones and Aggressive Behavior, edited 
by B. B. Svare. New York: Plenum Press, 1983.
Mazur, A., and Booth, A. Testosterone and dominance in 
men. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1998, 21, 353–397.
Mazur, A., and Lamb, T. Testosterone, status, and 
mood in human males. Hormones and Behavior, 1980, 
14, 236–246.
McCann, U. D., Wong, D. F., Yokoi, F., Villemagne, V., 
et al. Reduced striatal dopamine transporter density 
in abstinent methamphetamine and methcathinone 
users: Evidence from positron emission tomography 
studies with [11C]WIN-35,428. Journal of Neuroscience, 
1998, 18, 8417–8422.
McCarley, R. W., and Hobson, J. A. The form of  
dreams and the biology of sleep. In Handbook of 
Dreams: Research, Theory, and Applications, edited by  
B. Wolman. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1979.
McCaul, K. D., Gladue, B. A., and Joppa, M. Winning, 
losing, mood, and testosterone. Hormones and 
Behavior, 1992, 26, 486–504.
McCleod, P., Dittrich, W., Driver, J., Perret, D., et al.  
Preserved and impaired detection of structure from 
motion by a “motion blind” patient. Vision and 
Cognition, 1996, 3, 363–391.
McClintock, M. K. Menstrual synchrony and suppres-
sion. Nature, 1971, 229, 244–245.

	
References	
683
Mignot, E. Genetic and familial aspects of narcolepsy. 
Neurology, 1998, 50, S16–S22.
Migues, P. V., Hardt, O., Wu, D. C., et al. PKMz main-
tains memories by regulating GluR2-dependent 
AMPA receptor trafficking. Nature Neuroscience, 2010, 
13, 630–634.
Milad, M. R., Vidal-Gonzalez, I., and Quirk, G. J. 
Electrical stimulation of medial prefrontal cortex 
reduces conditioned fear in a temporally specific 
manner. Behavioral Neuroscience, 2004, 118, 389–394.
Milani, P., Gagliardi, S., Cova, E., and Cereda, C. SOD1 
transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation and 
its potential implications in ALS. Neurology Research 
International, 2011, Epub ahead of print.
Mileykovskiy, B. Y., Kiyashchenko, L. I., and Siegel, J. M. 
Behavioral correlates of activity in identified hypocretin/
orexin neurons. Neuron, 2005, 46, 787–798.
Millar, R. P. Roseweir, A. K., Tello, J. A., et al. 
Kisspeptin antagonists: Unraveling the role of 
kisspeptin in reproductive physiology. Brain Research, 
2010, 1364, 81–89.
Miller, G. Neurodegeneration: Could they all be prion 
diseases? Science, 2009, 326, 1337–1339.
Miller, J., Arrasate, M., Shaby, B. A., et al. Quantitative 
relationships between huntingtin levels, poly­
glutamine length, inclusion body formation, and  
neuronal death provide novel insight into Huntington’s 
disease molecular pathogenesis. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2010, 30, 10541–10550.
Miller, N. E. Understanding the use of animals in 
behavioral research: Some critical issues. Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences, 1983, 406, 113–118.
Miller, R. G., Mitchell, J. D., Lyon, M., and Moore, D. H. 
Riluzole for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/motor 
neuron disease (MND). Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and 
Other Motor Neuron Disorders, 2003, 4, 191–206.
Miller, V. M., and Best, P. J. Spatial correlates of 
hippocampal unit activity are altered by lesions of the 
fornix and entorhinal cortex. Brain Research, 1980, 
194, 311–323.
Milner, A. D., Perrett, D. I., Johnston, R. S., and 
Benson, P. J. Perception and action in “visual form 
agnosia.” Brain, 1991, 114, 405–428.
Milner, B. Memory and the temporal regions of the 
brain. In Biology of Memory, edited by K. H. Pribram 
and D. E. Broadbent. New York: Academic Press, 1970.
Milner, B., Corkin, S., and Teuber, H.-L. Further analysis 
of the hippocampal amnesic syndrome: 14-year follow-
up study of H. M. Neuropsychologia, 1968, 6, 317–338.
Mindus, P., Rasmussen, S. A., and Lindquist, C. 
Neurosurgical treatment for refractory obsessive-com-
pulsive disorder: Implications for understanding fron-
tal lobe function. Journal of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical 
Neurosciences, 1994, 6, 467–477.
Menon, V., and Desmond, J. E. Left superior parietal 
­cortex involvement in writing: Integrating fMRI with 
lesion ­evidence. Cognitive Brain Research, 2001, 12, 
337–340.
Meredith, M. Chronic recording of vomeronasal pump 
­activation in awake behaving hamsters. Physiology and 
Behavior, 1994, 56, 345–354.
Meredith, M., and O’Connell, R. J. Efferent control of 
stimulus access to the hamster vomeronasal organ. 
Journal of Physiology, 1979, 286, 301–316.
Meeren, H. K., van Heignsbergen, C. C., and de Gelder, 
B. Rapid perceptual integration of facial expres-
sion and ­emotional body language. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2005, 102,  
16518–16523.
Mereu, G., Yoon, K.-W. P., Boi, V., Gessa, G. L., et al. 
Preferential stimulation of ventral tegmental area 
­dopaminergic neurons by nicotine. European Journal 
of Pharmacology, 1987, 141, 395–400.
Merikangas, K. R., and Low, N. C. Genetic epidemiol-
ogy of anxiety disorders. Handbook of Experimental 
Pharmacology, 2005, 169, 163–179.
Mesches, M. H., Fleshner, M., Heman, K. L., Rose,  
G. M., et al. Exposing rats to a predator blocks primed 
burst ­potentiation in the hippocampus in vitro. Journal 
of Neuroscience, 1999, 19, RC18 (1–5).
Meyer, M., Alter, K., Friederici, A. D., Lohmann, G., 
et al. FMRI reveals brain regions mediating slow pro-
sodic ­modulations in spoken sentences. Human Brain 
Mapping, 2002, 17, 73–88.
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L., Dolezal, C., Baker, S. W., and 
New, M. I. Sexual orientation in women with classi-
cal or non-­classical congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
as a function of degree of prenatal androgen excess. 
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 2008, 37, 85–99.
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L. Psychoendocrine research on 
­sexual orientation: Current status and future options. 
Progress in Brain Research, 1984, 63, 375–398.
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L. Gender and sexuality in clas-
sic congenital adrenal hyperplasia. Endocrinology and 
Metabolism Clinics of North America, 2001, 30, 155–171.
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L. Gender identity outcome in 
female-raised 46, XY persons with penile agenesis, 
cloacal exstrophy of the bladder, or penile ablation. 
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 2005, 34, 423–438.
Michel, L., Derkinderen, P., Laplaud, D., Daumas-
Duport, B., et al. Emotional facial palsy follow-
ing striato-capsular infarction. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 2008, 79, 193–194.
Mieda, M., Williams, S. C., Sinton, C. M., Richardson, 
J. A., et al. Orexin neurons function in an efferent 
pathway of a food-entrainable circadian oscillator in 
eliciting food-­anticipatory activity and wakefulness. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2004, 24, 10493–10501.

684	
References
Mollon, J. D. “Tho’ she kneel’d in that place where they 
grew. . .”: The uses and origins of primate colour 
vision. Journal of Experimental Biology, 1989, 146, 21–38.
Mombaerts, P. Molecular biology of odorant receptors 
in vertebrates. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 1999, 22, 
487–510.
Monaghan, D. T., and Cotman, C. W. Distribution of 
NMDA-sensitive L-3H-glutamate binding sites in rat 
brain as determined by quantitative autoradiography. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 1985, 5, 2909–2919.
Money, J., and Ehrhardt, A. Man & Woman, Boy & Girl. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1972.
Monk, C. S., Telzer, E. H., Mogg, K., Bradley, B. P., 
et al. Amygdala and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex 
activation to masked angry faces in children and ado-
lescents with ­generalized anxiety disorder. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 2008, 65, 568–576.
Monsonego, A., and Weiner, H. L. Immunotherapeutic 
approaches to Alzheimer’s disease. Science, 2003, 302, 
834–838.
Montagna, P., Gambetti, P., Cortelli, P., and Lugaresi, 
E. Familial and sporadic fatal insomnia. The Lancet 
Neurology, 2003, 2, 167–176.
Montero, S., Fuentes, J. A., and Fernandez-Tome, P. 
Lesions of the ventral noradrenergic bundle pre-
vent the rise in blood pressure induced by social 
deprivation stress in the rat. Cellular and Molecular 
Neurobiology, 1990, 10, 497–505.
Moore, D. J., West, A. B., Dawson, V. L., and Dawson,  
T. M. Molecular pathophysiology of Parkinson’s disease. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 2005, 28, 57–87.
Moore, D. R., and Shannon, R. V. Beyond cochlear 
implants: Awakening the deafened brain. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2009, 12, 686–691.
Moore, G. J., Bebchuk, J. M., Wilds, I. B., Chen, G., 
et al. Lithium-induced increase in human brain grey 
matter. Lancet, 2000, 356, 1241–1242.
Moore, R. Y., and Eichler, V. B. Loss of a circadian adre-
nal corticosterone rhythm following suprachiasmatic 
lesions in the rat. Brain Research, 1972, 42, 201–206.
Moore, R. Y., Speh, J. C., and Leak, R. K. Supra­
chiasmatic nucleus organization. Cell Tissue Research, 
2002, 309, 89–98.
Moore, T. H. M., Zammit, S., Lingford-Hughes, A., 
Barnes, T. R. E., et al. Cannabis use and risk of psy-
chotic or affective mental health outcomes: A system-
atic review. Lancet, 2007, 370, 319–328.
Moran, T. H. Gut peptides in the control of food 
intake. International Journal of Obesity, 2009, 33,  
S7–S10.
Moran, T. H., Shnayder, L., Hostetler, A. M., and 
McHugh, P. R. Pylorectomy reduces the satiety action 
of cholecystokinin. American Journal of Physiology, 1989, 
255, R1059–R1063.
Minozzi, S., Davoli, M., Bargagli, A. M., et al. An over-
view of systematic reviews on cannabis and psychosis: 
discussing apparently conflicting results. Drug and 
Alcohol Review, 2010, 29, 304–317.
Mirenowicz, J., and Schultz, W. Importance of unpre-
dictability for reward responses in primate dopamine 
neurons. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1994, 72,  
1024–1027.
Mirenowicz, J., and Schultz, W. Preferential activation 
of midbrain dopamine neurons by appetitive rather 
than ­aversive stimuli. Nature, 1996, 379, 449–451.
Misanin, J. R., Miller, R. R., and Lewis, D. J. Retrograde 
­amnesia produced by electroconvulsive shock after 
reactivation of a consolidated memory trace. Science, 
1968, 160, 554–555.
Mishkin, M. Visual mechanisms beyond the striate cor-
tex. In Frontiers in Physiological Psychology, edited by  
R. W. Russell. New York: Academic Press, 1966.
Mitchell, J. E. Psychopharmacology of eating disorders. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1989, 575, 
41–49.
Mitler, M. M. Evaluation of treatment with stimulants in 
­narcolepsy. Sleep, 1994, 17, S103–S106.
Mittal, V. A., Ellman, L. M., and Cannon, T. D. 
Gene-environment interaction and covatiation in 
schizophrenia: The role of obstetric complications. 
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 2008, 34, 1083–1094.
Miyashita, Y. Cognitive memory: Cellular and network 
machineries and their top-down control. Science, 2004, 
306, 435–440.
Mizrahi, A., Crowley, J. C., Shtoyerman, E., and Katz,  
L. C. High-resolution in vivo imaging of hippocampal 
dendrites and spines. Journal of Neuroscience, 2004, 2, 
3147–3151.
Mizuno, Y., Kondo, T., Kuno, S., et al. Early addition  
of ­selegiline to L-DOPA treatment is beneficial  
for patients with Parkinson disease. Clinical Neuro­
pharmacology, 2010, 33, 1–4.
Mochizuki, T., Crocker, A., McCormack, S., 
Yanagisawa, M., et al. Behavioral state instability in 
orexin knock-out mice. Journal of Neuroscience, 2004, 
24, 6291–6300.
Modahl, C., Green, L., Fein, D., et al. Plasma oxytocin 
levels in autistic children. Biological Psychiatry, 1988, 
43, 270–277.
Moghaddam, B., and Bunney, B. S. Differential effect 
of cocaine on extracellular dopamine levels in rat 
medial prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens: 
Comparison to amphetamine. Synapse, 1989, 4,  
156–161.
Molko, N., Cohen, L., Mangin, J. F., et al. Visualizing the 
­neural bases of a disconnection syndrome with diffu-
sion ­tensor imaging. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
2002, 14, 629–636.

	
References	
685
Murre, J. M. J., Graham, K. S., and Hodges, J. R. 
Semantic dementia: Relevance to connectionist mod-
els of long-term memory. Brain, 2001, 124, 647–675.
Museo, G., and Wise, R. A. Place preference condition-
ing with ventral tegmental injections of cystine. Life 
Sciences, 1994, 55, 1179–1186.
Mushiake, H., Inase, M., and Tanji, J. Neuronal activ-
ity in the primate premotor, supplementary, and 
precentral motor cortex during visually guided and 
internally determined sequential movements. Journal 
of Neurophysiology, 1991, 66, 705–718.
Myers, R. D., Wooten, M. H., Ames, C. D., and Nyce,  
J. W. Anorexic action of a new potential neuropeptide 
Y ­antagonist [D-Tyr27,36, D-Thr32]-NPY (27–36) 
infused into the hypothalamus of the rat. Brain 
Research Bulletin, 1995, 37, 237–245.
Nachev, P., Kennard, C., and Husain, M. Functional role 
of the supplementary and pre-supplementary motor 
areas. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2008, 9, 856–869.
Nadeau, S. E. Impaired grammar with normal fluency 
and phonology. Brain, 1988, 111, 1111–1137.
Nader, K. Memory traces unbound. Trends in Neuroscience, 
2003, 26, 65–72.
Naeser, M. A., Palumbo, C. L., Helm-Estabrooks, N., 
Stiassny-Eder, D., et al. Severe nonfluency in aphasia: 
Role of the medial subcallosal fasciculus and other 
white matter pathways in recovery of spontaneous 
speech. Brain, 1989, 112, 1–38.
Nägerl, U. V., Köstinger, G., Anderson, J. C., Martin,  
K. A. C., et al. Protracted synaptogenesis after activity-
dependent spinogenesis in hippocampal neurons. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 8149–8156.
Nair, S. G., Adams-Deutsch, R., Epstein, D. H., and 
Shaham, Y. The neuropharmacology of relapse to 
food seeking: Methodology, main findings, and 
comparison with relapse to drug seeking. Progress in 
Neurobiology, 2009, 89, 18–45.
Nakahara, D., Ozaki, N., Miura, Y., Miura, H., et al. 
Increased dopamine and serotonin metabolism in 
rat ­nucleus accumbens produced by intracranial self-
stimulation of medial forebrain bundle as measured 
by in vivo ­microdialysis. Brain Research, 1989, 495, 
178–181.
Nakamura, J., Endo, K., Sumida, T., and Hasegawa, T. 
Bilateral tactile agnosia: A case report. Cortex, 1998, 
34, 375–388.
Nakamura, K., Honda, M., Okada, T., Hanakawa, T., 
et al. Participation of the left posterior inferior tem-
poral cortex in writing and mental recall of kanji 
orthography: A functional MRI study. Brain, 2000, 
123, 954–967.
Nakamura, T., and Gold, G. A cyclic nucleotide-gated 
conductance in olfactory receptor cilia. Nature, 1987, 
325, 442–444.
Moretto, G., Làdavas, E., Mattioli, F., and di 
Pellegrino, G. A psychophysiological investigation 
of moral judgment after ventromedial prefrontal 
damage. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2009, 22, 
1888–1899.
Morgan, C. J. A., Freeman, T. P., Schafer, G. L., and 
Curran, H. V. Camnnabidiol attenuates the appetitive 
effects of Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol in humans smok-
ing their chosen cannabis. Neuropsychopharmacology, 
2010, 35, 1879–1885.
Mori, E., Ikeda, M., Hirono, N., Kitagaki, H., et al. 
Amygdalar volume and emotional memory in 
Alzheimer’s disease. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
1999, 156, 216–222.
Morris, J. A., Gobrogge, K. L., Jordan, C. L., and 
Breedlove, S. M. Brain aromatase: Dyed-in-the-wool 
homosexuality. Endocrinology, 2004, 145, 475–477.
Morris, J. S., Frith, C. D., Perrett, D. I., Rowland, D., 
et al. A differential neural response in the human 
amygdala to fearful and happy facial expressions. 
Nature, 1996, 383, 812–815.
Morris, N. M., Udry, J. R., Khan-Dawood, F., and 
Dawood, M. Y. Marital sex frequency and midcycle 
female ­testosterone. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 1987, 
16, 27–37.
Morris, R. G. M., Garrud, P., Rawlins, J. N. P., and 
O’Keefe, J. Place navigation impaired in rats with hip-
pocampal lesions. Nature, 1982, 297, 681–683.
Moscovitch, M., and Olds, J. Asymmetries in emotional 
facial expressions and their possible relation to hemi-
spheric s­pecialization. Neuropsychologia, 1982, 20, 
71–81.
Moscovitch, M., Winocur, G., and Behrmann, M. What 
is ­special about face recognition? Nineteen experi-
ments on a person with visual object agnosia and dys-
lexia but normal face recognition. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 1997, 9, 555–604.
Mosharov, E. V., Larsen, K. R., Kanter, E., et al. Interplay 
between cytosolic dopamine, calcium, and a-synuclein 
causes selective death of substantia nigra neurons. 
Neuron, 2009, 62, 218–229.
Mountcastle, V. B. Modality and topographic proper-
ties of single neurons of cat’s somatic sensory cortex. 
Journal of Neurophysiology, 1957, 20, 408–434.
Mukhametov, L. M. Sleep in marine mammals. In Sleep 
Mechanisms, edited by A. A. Borbély and J. L. Valatx. 
Munich: Springer-Verlag, 1984.
Münch, C., and Bertolotti, A. Self-propagation and 
transmission of misfolded mutant SOD1: Prion or 
prion-like phenomenon? Cell Cycle, 2011, 10, 1711.
Murray, S. O., Boyaci, H., and Kersten, D. The 
representation of perceived angular size in human 
primary visual cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 2006, 9, 
429–434.

686	
References
Nestor, P. J., Graham, N. L., Fryer, T. D., Williams, B. G., 
et al. Progressive non-fluent aphasia is associated with 
­hypometabolism centered on the left anterior insula. 
Brain, 2003, 126, 2406–2418.
Neumann, K., Preibisch, C., Euler, H. A., von 
Gudenberg, A. W., et al. Cortical plasticity associated 
with stuttering ­therapy. Journal of Fluency Disorders, 
2005, 30, 23–39.
Neumeister, A., Konstantinidis, A., Stastny, J., Schrarz, 
M. J., et al. Association between serotonin trans-
porter gene ­promotor polymorphism (5HTTLPR) 
and behavioral responses to tryptophan depletion 
in healthy women with and without family history 
of depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2002, 59, 
613–620.
Neumeister, A., Nugent, A. C., Waldeck, T., Geraci, M., 
et al. Neural and behavioral responses to tryptophan 
depletion in unmedicated patients with remitted 
major depressive disorder and controls. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 2004, 61, 765–773.
New, A. S., Hazlett, E. A., Buchsbaum, M. S., 
Goodman, M., et al. Blunted prefrontal cortical 
18fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography 
response to meta-chlorophenylpiperazine in 
impulsive aggression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
2002, 59, 621–629.
Newman, A. J., Supalla, T., Hauser, P. C., et al. 
Prosodic and narrative processing in American Sign 
Language: An fMRI study. NeuroImage, 2010, 52, 
669–676.
Nichelli, P., Grafman, J., Pietrini, P., Clark, K., et al. 
Where the brain appreciates the moral of a story. 
NeuroReport, 1995, 6, 2309–2313.
Nicholl, C. S., and Russell, R. M. Analysis of animal 
rights literature reveals the underlying motives of the 
movement: Ammunition for counter offensive by sci-
entists. Endocrinology, 1990, 127, 985–989.
Nicoll, J. A. R., Wilkinson, D., Holmes, C., Steart, P., 
et al. Neuropathology of human Alzheimer disease 
after ­immunization with amyloid-b peptide: A case 
report. Nature Medicine, 2003, 9, 448–452.
Nicoll, R. A., Alger, B. E., and Jahr, C. E. Enkephalin 
blocks inhibitory pathways in the vertebrate CNS. 
Nature, 1980, 287, 22–25.
Nicoll, R. A., and Malenka, R. C. A tale of two transmit-
ters. Science, 1998, 281, 360–361.
Nides, M., Oncken, C., Gonzales, D., Rennard, S., et al. 
Smoking cessation with varenicline, a selective a4b2 
­nicotinic receptor partial agonist: Results from a 
7-week, randomized, placebo- and bupropion- 
controlled trial with 1-year follow-up. Archives of 
Internal Medicine, 2006, 166, 1561–1568.
Nili, U., Goldberg, H., Weizman, A., and Dudai, Y. Fear 
thou not: Activity of frontal and temporal circuits 
Nakazato, M., Mauakami, N., Date, Y., Kojima, M., et al. 
A role for ghrelin in the central regulation of feed-
ing. Nature, 2001, 409, 194–198.
Nambu, A. Seven problems on the basal ganglia. Current 
Opinion in Neurobiology, 2008, 18, 595–604.
Nambu, A., Tokuno, H., and Takada, M. Functional 
significance of the cortico-subthalamo-pallidal 
“hyperdirect” pathway. Neuroscience Research, 2002, 43, 
111–117.
Nambu, T., Sakurai, T., Mizukami, K., Hosoya, Y., et al. 
Distribution of orexin neurons in the adult rat brain. 
Brain Research, 1999, 827, 243–260.
Naqvi, N. H., and Bechara, A. The airway sensory 
impact of nicotine contributes to the conditioned 
reinforcing effects of individual puffs from cigarettes. 
Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior, 2005, 81, 
821–829.
Naqvi, N. H., Rudrauf, D., Damasio, H., and Bechara, A. 
Damage to the insula disrupts addiction to cigarette 
smoking. Science, 2007, 315, 531–534.
Nasir, J., Floresco, S. B., O’Kusky, J. R., et al. Targeted 
disruption of the Huntington’s disease gene results in 
embryonic lethality and behavioral and morphological 
changes in heterozygotes. Cell, 1995, 81, 811–823.
Nassi, J. J., and Callaway, E. M. Parallel processing strat-
egies of the primate visual system. Nature Reviews: 
Neuroscience, 2009, 10, 360–372.
Nathans, J. The evolution and physiology of human 
color vision: Insights from molecular genetic studies 
of visual pigments. Neuron, 1999, 24, 299–312.
Nauta, W. J. H. Hypothalamic regulation of sleep in 
rats: Experimental study. Journal of Neurophysiology, 
1946, 9, 285–316.
Nauta, W. J. H. Some efferent connections of the pre-
frontal cortex in the monkey. In The Frontal Granular 
Cortex and Behavior, edited by J. M. Warren and K. 
Akert. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964.
Navakkode, S., Sajikuman, S., Sacktor, T. C., and Frey, 
J. U. Protein kinase Mz is essential for the induction 
and maintenance of dopamine-induced long-term 
potentiation in apical CA1 dendrites. Learning and 
Memory, 2010, 17, 605–611.
Nazir, T. A., Jacobs, A. M., and O’Regan, J. K. Letter 
legibility and visual word recognition. Memory and 
Cognition, 1998, 26, 810–821.
Nef, P., Hermansborgmeyer, I., Artierespin, H., Beasley, 
L., et al. Spatial pattern of receptor expression in 
the olfactory epithelium. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 1992, 89, 8948–8952.
Nergårdh, R., Ammar, A., Brodin, U., Bergström, J.,  
et al. Neuropeptide Y facilitates activity-based anorexia. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 2007, 32, 493–502.
Nestler, E. J. Under siege: The brain on opiates. Neuron, 
1996, 16, 897–900.

	
References	
687
associating with the major urinary protein. Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of London B, 1999, 266, 2017–2022.
Nowak, D. A., Berner, J., Herrnberger, B., et al. 
Continuous theta-burst stimulation over the dorsal 
premotor cortex interferes with associative learning 
during object lifting. Cortex, 2009, 45, 473–482.
Nugent, N. R., Amstadter, A. B., and Koenen, K. C. 
Genetics of post-traumatic stress disorder: Informing 
clinical conceptualizations and promoting future 
research. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part C, 
2008, 148C, 127–132.
Numan, M. Medial preoptic area and maternal behav-
ior in the female rat. Journal of Comparative and 
Physiological Psychology, 1974, 87, 746–759.
Numan, M. Motivational systems and the neural cir-
cuitry of maternal behavior in the rat. Developmental 
Psychobiology, 2007, 49, 12–21.
Numan, M., and Numan, M. J. Projection sites of medial 
preoptic area and ventral bed nucleus of the stria 
terminalis neurons that express Fos during maternal 
behavior in female rats. Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 
1997, 9, 369–384.
Nutt, D. J., Glue, P., Lawson, C. W., and Wilson, S. 
Flumazenil provocation of panic attacks: Evidence 
for altered benzodiazepine receptor sensitivity in 
panic ­disorders. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1990, 47, 
917–925.
Oaknin, S., Rodriguez del Castillo, A., Guerra, M., 
Battaner, E., et al. Change in forebrain Na, K-ATPase 
activity and serum hormone levels during sexual 
behavior in male rats. Physiology and Behavior, 1989, 
45, 407–410.
Oberman, L. M., Winkielman, P., and Ramachandran, 
V. S. Face to face: Blocking facial mimicry can selec-
tively impair recognition of emotional expressions. 
Social Neuroscience, 2007, 2, 167–178.
Obler, L. K., and Gjerlow, K. Language and the Brain. 
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 
1999.
O’Brien, C. P., Volpicelli, L. A., and Volpicelli, J. R. 
Naltrexone in the treatment of alcoholism: A clinical 
review. Alcohol, 1996, 13, 35–39.
Ockleford, E. M., Vince, M. A., Layton, C., and Reader, 
M. R. Responses of neonates to parents’ and others’ 
voices. Early Human Development, 1988, 18, 27–36.
Oertel, D., and Young, E. D. What’s a cerebellar circuit 
doing in the auditory system? Trends in Neuroscience, 
2004, 27, 104–110.
Ogawa, S., Olazabal, U. E., Parhar, I. S., and Pfaff, D. 
W. Effects of intrahypothalamic administration of 
antisense DNA for progesterone receptor mRNA on 
reproductive behavior and progesterone receptor 
immunoreactivity in female rat. Journal of Neuroscience, 
1994, 14, 1766–1774.
in moments of real-life courage. Neuron, 2010, 66, 
949–962.
Nilius, B., Owsianik, G., Voets, T., and Peters, J. A. 
Transient receptor potential cation channels in dis-
ease. Physiological Review, 2007, 87, 165–217.
Nilsson, H. J., Levinsson, A., and Schouenborg, J. 
Cutaneous field stimulation (CFS): A new powerful 
method to combat itch. Pain, 1997, 71, 49–55.
NINDS. Tissue plasminogen activator for acute isch-
emic stroke. The National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke RT-PA stroke study group. 
New England Journal of Medicine, 1995, 333,  
1189–1191.
Nisell, M., Nomikos, G. G., and Svensson, T. H. Systemic 
nicotine-induced dopamine release in the rat nucleus 
accumbens is regulated by nicotinic receptors in the 
ventral tegmental area. Synapse, 1994, 16, 36–44.
Nishino, S. Clinical and neurobiological aspects of 
­narcolepsy. Sleep Medicine, 2007, 8, 373–399.
Nishino, S., Ripley, B., Overeem, S., Lammers, G. J., 
et al. Hypocretin (orexin) deficiency in human nar-
colepsy. Lancet, 2000, 355, 39–40.
Nissant, A., Bardy, C., Katagiri, H., et al. Adult neuro-
genesis promotes synaptic plasticity in the olfactory 
bulb. Nature Neuroscience, 2009, 12, 728–730.
Niwa, M., Kamiya, A., Murai, R., et al. Knockdown of 
DISC1 by in utero gene transfer disturbs postnatal 
dopaminergic maturation in the frontal cortex and 
leads to adult ­behavioral deficits. Neuron, 2010, 65, 
480–489.
Nobler, M. S., Oquendo, M. A., Kegeles, L. S., Malone,  
K. M., et al. Deceased regional brain metabolism 
after ECT. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2001, 158, 
305–308.
Norgren, R., and Grill, H. Brain-stem control of inges-
tive behavior. In The Physiological Mechanisms of 
Motivation, edited by D. W. Pfaff. New York: Springer-
Verlag, 1982.
Normandin, J., and Murphy, A. Z. Nucleus paragi-
gantocellularis afferents in male and female rats: 
Organization, gonadal steroid receptor expression, 
and activation during sexual behavior. Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 2008, 508, 771–794.
Nothdurfter, C., Rammes, G., Baghai, T. C., et al. 
TSPO (18 kDa) as a target for novel anxiolyt-
ics with a favourable side-effect profile. Journal of 
Neuroendocrinology, 2011, Epub ahead of print.
Novin, D., VanderWeele, D. A., and Rezek, M. Hepatic-
portal 2-deoxy-D-glucose infusion causes eating: 
Evidence for peripheral glucoreceptors. Science, 1973, 
181, 858–860.
Novotny, M. V., Ma, W., Wiesler, D., and Zidek, L. 
Positive identification of the puberty-accelerating 
pheromone of the house mouse: The volatile ligands 

688	
References
Osaka, N., Osaka, M., Morishita, M., Kondo, H., et al.  
A word expressing affective pain activates the anterior 
­cingulate cortex in the human brain: an fMRI study. 
Behavioural Brain Research, 2004, 153, 123–127.
Ossebaard, C. A., Polet, I. A., and Smith, D. V. 
Amiloride effects on taste quality: Comparison of 
single and multiple response category procedures. 
Chemical Senses, 1997, 22, 267–275.
Ostrowsky, K., Magnin, M., Tyvlin, P., Isnard, J., et al. 
Representation of pain and somatic sensation in the 
human insula: A study of responses to direct elec-
trical cortical ­stimulation. Cerebral Cortex, 2002, 12, 
376–385.
Otsuki, M., Soma, Y., Arai, T., Otsuka, A., et al. Pure 
apraxic agraphia with abnormal writing stroke 
sequences: Report of a Japenese patient with a left 
superior parietal haemorrhage. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 1999, 66, 233–237.
Otsuki, M., Soma, Y., Arihiro, S., Watanabe, Y., et al. 
Dystypia: Isolated typing impairment without apha-
sia, ­apraxia or visuospatial impairment. European 
Neurology, 2002, 47, 136–140.
Otto, M. W., Tolin, D. F., Simon, N. M., et al. Efficacy 
of D-cycloserine for enhancing response to cogni-
tive-behavior therapy for panic disorder. Biological 
Psychiatry, 2010, 67, 365–370.
Overduin, J., Frayo, R. S., Grill, H. J., Kaplan, J. M., et al. 
Role of the duodenum and macronutrient type in 
ghrelin regulation. Encodrinology, 2005, 146, 845–850.
Owen, A. M., James, M., Leigh, P. N., Summers, B. A.,  
et al. Fronto-striatal cognitive deficits at different 
stages of Parkinson’s disease. Brain, 1992, 115,  
1727–1751.
Ozonoff, S., Young, G. S., Carter, A., et al. Recurrence 
risk for autism spectrum disorders: A baby siblings 
research ­consortium study. Pediatrics, 2011, 238,  
e1–e8.
Packard, M. G., and Teather, L. A. Double dissociation 
of hippocampal and dorsal-striatal memory systems 
by posttraining intracerebral injections of 2-amino-
5-phosphonopentanoic acid. Behavioral Neuroscience, 
1997, 111, 543–551.
Padberg, F., and Moller, H. J. Repetitive transcranial 
­magnetic stimulation: Does it have potential in the 
­treatment of depression? CNS Drugs, 2003, 17,  
383–403.
Pallast, E. G. M., Jongbloet, P. H., Straatman, H. M., 
and Zeilhuis, G. A. Excess of seasonality of births 
among patients with schizophrenia and seasonal ovo-
pathy. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 1994, 20, 269–276.
Papadimitriou, G. N., Christodoulou, G. N., Katsouyanni, 
K., and Stefanis, C. N. Therapy and prevention of 
affective illness by total sleep deprivation. Journal  
of the Affective Disorders, 1993, 27, 107–116.
Ogden, C. L., Carroll, M. D., and Flegal, K. M. 
Epidemiologic trends in overweight and obesity. 
Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America, 
2003, 32, 741–760.
O’Keefe, J., and Bouma, H. Complex sensory properties 
of certain amygadala units in the freely moving cat. 
Experimental Neurology, 1969, 23, 384–98.
O’Keefe, J., and Dostrovsky, T. The hippocampus as a spa-
tial map: Preliminary evidence from unit activity in the 
freely moving rat. Brain Research, 1971, 34, 171–175.
Olanow, C. W., Goetz, C. G., Kordower, J. H., Stoessl, 
A. J., et al. A double-blind controlled trial of bilateral 
fetal nigral transplantation in Parkinson’s disease. 
Annals of Neurology, 2003, 54, 403–414.
Olausson, H., Lamarre, Y., Backlund, H., Morin, C., 
et al. Unmyelinated tactile afferents signal touch and 
project to insular cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 2002, 5, 
900–904.
Olds, J. Commentary. In Brain Stimulation and Motivation, 
edited by E. S. Valenstein. Glenview, Ill.: Scott, 
Foresman, 1973.
Oleksenko, A. I., Mukhametov, L. M., Polyakova, I. G., 
Supin, A. Y., et al. Unihemispheric sleep deprivation 
in bottlenose dolphins. Journal of Sleep Research, 1992, 
1, 40–44.
Oliveri, M., Turriziani, P., Carlesimo, G. A., Koch, G., 
et al. Parieto-frontal interactions in visual-object 
and visual-spatial working memory: Evidence from 
transcranial magnetic stimulation. Cerebral Cortex, 
2001, 11, 606–618.
Olsson, A., Nearing, K. I., and Phelps, E. A. Learning 
fears by observing others: The neural systems of social 
fear transmission. SCAN, 2007, 2, 3–11.
Olszewski, P. K., Fredriksson, R., Olszewska, A. M., et al. 
Hypothalamic FTO is associated with the regulation of 
energy intake not feeding reward. BMC Neuroscience, 
2009, 10, 129.
Omura, K., Tsukamoto, T., Kotani, Y., Ohgami, Y., et al. 
Neural correlates of phoneme-to-grapheme conver-
sion. Neuroreport, 2004, 15, 949–953.
O’Neill, J., Pleydell-Vouverie, B., Dupret, D., and 
Csicsvari, J. Play it again: Reactivation of waking 
experience and memory. Trends in Neuroscience, 2010, 
33, 220–229.
Opitz, B., and Friederici, A. D. Interactions of the 
hippocampal system and the prefrontal cortex in 
learning language-like rules. NeuroImage, 2003, 19, 
1730–1737.
Opitz, B., and Friederici, A. D. Neural basis of process-
ing sequential and hierarchical syntactic structures. 
Human Brain Mapping, 2007, 28, 585–592.
Orzel-Gryglewska, J. Consequences of sleep depriva-
tion. International Journal of Occupational Medicine and 
Environmental Health, 2010, 23, 95–114.

	
References	
689
and insula by lorazepam during emotion processing. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 2005, 62, 282–288.
Pazzaglia, M., Smania, N., Corato, E., and Aglioti, S. M.  
Neural underpinnings of gesture discrimination in 
patients with limb apraxia. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2008, 28, ­3030–3041.
Peck, B. K., and Vanderwolf, C. H. Effects of raphe 
­stimulation on hippocampal and neocortical activity  
and behaviour. Brain Research, 1991, 568, 244–252.
Pedersen, C. B., and Mortensen, P. B. Evidence of a 
dose-response relationship between urbanicity during 
upbringing and schizophrenia risk. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 2001, 58, 1039–1046.
Pedersen-Bjergaard, U., Host, U., Kelbaek, H., Schifter, 
S., et al. Influence of meal composition on postpran-
dial ­peripheral plasma concentrations of vasoactive 
peptides in man. Scandanavian Journal of Clinical and 
Laboratory Investigation, 1996, 56, 497–503.
Peigneux, P., Laureys, S., Fuchs, S., Collette, F., et al. 
Are spatial memories strengthened in the human hip-
pocampus during slow wave sleep? Neuron, 2004, 44, 
535–545.
Pellerin, L., Bouzier-Sore, A.-K., Aubert, A., Serres, 
S., et al. Activity-dependent regulation of energy 
metabolism by ­astrocytes: An update. Glia, 2007, 55, 
1251–1262.
Pelleymounter, M. A., Cullen, M. J., Baker, M. B., 
Hecht, R., et al. Effects of the obese gene product on 
body weight regulation in ob/ob mice. Science, 1995, 
269, 540–543.
Pelphrey, K. A., Morris, J. P., Michelich, C. R., 
Allison, T., et al. Functional anatomy of biological 
motion ­perception in posterior temporal cortex: 
An fMRI study of eye, mouth and hand movements. 
Cerebral Cortex, 2005, 15, 1866–1876.
Pelphrey, K. A., Sasson, N. J., Reznick, J. S., Paul, G., 
et al. Visual scanning of faces in autism. Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 2002, 32, 249–261.
Pelphrey, K. A., Singerman, J. D., Allison, T., and 
McCarthy, G. Brain activation evoked by percep-
tion of gaze shifts: The influence of context. 
Neuropsychologia, 2003, 41, 156–170.
Penfield, W., and Perot, P. The brain’s record of audi-
tory and visual experience: A final summary and dis-
cussion. Brain, 1963, 86, 595–697.
Penfield, W., and Rasmussen, T. The Cerebral Cortex of 
Man: A Clinical Study of Localization. Boston: Little, 
Brown & Co., 1950.
Perani, D., Saccuman, M. C., Scifo, P., et al. Functional 
specializations for music processing in the human 
newborn brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, USA, 2010, 107, 4758–4763.
Pereira, A. C., Huddleston, D. E., Brickman, A. M.,  
Sosunov, A. A., et al. In in vivo correlate of ­exercise- 
Papassotiropoulos, A., Wollmer, M. A., Aguzzi, A., Hock, 
C., et al. The prion gene is associated with human 
long-term memory. Human Molecular Genetics, 2005, 
14, 2241–2246.
Papez, J. W. A proposed mechanism of emotion. 
Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry, 1937, 38, 725–744.
Pardo, J. V., Sheikh, S. A., Schwindt, G. C., Lee, J. T., 
et al. Chronic vagus nerve stimulation for treatment-
resistant depression decreases resting ventromedial 
prefrontal ­glucose metabolism. NeuroImage, 2008, 42, 
879–889.
Paré, D., Quirk, G. J., and LeDoux, J. E. New vistas on 
­amygdala networks in conditioned fear. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 2004, 92, 1–9.
Park, Y.-U., Jeong, J., Lee, H., et al. Disrupted-in-
schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) plays essential roles in mito-
chondria in ­collaboration with mitofilin. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2010, 107, 
17785–17790.
Parker, A. J. Binocular depth perception and the cere-
bral cortex. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2007, 8, 
379–391.
Parmentier, R., Ohtsu, H., Djebbara-Hannas, Z., Valatx, 
J.-L., et al. Anatomical, physiological, and pharma-
cological characteristics of histidine decarboxylase 
knock-out mice: Evidence for the role of brain hista-
mine in behavioral and sleep-wake control. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2002, 22, 7695–7711.
Pascoe, J. P., and Kapp, B. S. Electrophysiological 
­characteristics of amygdaloid central nucleus neurons 
during Pavlovian fear conditioning in the rabbit. 
Behavioural Brain Research, 1985, 16, 117–133.
Pasterski, V. L., Geffner, M. E., Brain, C., Hindmarsh,  
P., et al. Prenatal hormones and postnatal socializ-
tion by parents as determinants of male-typical toy 
play in girls with congenital adrenal hyperplasia.  
Child Development, 2005, 76, 264–278.
Pattatucci, A. M. L., and Hamer, D. H. Development 
and familiality of sexual orientation in females. 
Behavior Genetics, 1995, 25, 407–420.
Paulesu, E., Démonet, J.-F., Fazio, F., McCrory, E., et al. 
Dyslexia: Cultural diversity and biological unity. 
Science, 2001, 291, 2165–2167.
Pauls, D. L., and Leckman, J. F. The inheritance of 
Gilles de la Tourette’s syndrome and associated 
behaviors. New England Journal of Medicine, 1986, 315, 
993–997.
Pauls, D. L., Towbin, K. E., Leckman, J. F., Zahner, 
G. E., et al. Gilles de la Tourette’s syndrome and 
obsessive-compulsive disorder: Evidence supporting 
a genetic relationship. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
1986, 43, 1180–1182.
Paulus, M. P., Feinstein, J. S., Castillo, G., et al. Dose- 
dependent decrease of activation in bilateral amygdala 

690	
References
review and ­meta-analysis. Neurophysiology Clinics, 2000, 
30, 263–288.
Pfaff, D. W., and Sakuma, Y. Deficit in the lordosis 
reflex of female rats caused by lesions in the ven-
tromedial nucleus of the hypothalamus. Journal of 
Physiology, 1979, 288, 203–210.
Pfaus, J. G., Kleopoulos, S. P., Mobbs, C. V., Gibbs, 
R. B., et al. Sexual stimulation activates c-fos within 
estrogen-­concentrating regions of the female rat fore-
brain. Brain Research, 1993, 624, 253–267.
Pfeifer, J. H., Iacoboni, M., Mazziotta, J. C., and 
Dapretto, M. Mirroring others’ emotions relates to 
empathy and ­interpersonal competence in children. 
NeuroImage, 2008, 39, 2076–2085.
Pfleiderer, B., Zinkirciran, S., Arolt, V., Heindel, W.,  
et al. fMRI amygdala activation during a spontaneous 
panic attack in a patient with panic disorder. World 
Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 2007, 8, 269–272.
Pfister, E. L., Kennington, L., Straubhaar, J., et al. Five 
siRNAs targeting three SNPs may provide therapy 
for ­three-quarters of Huntington’s disease patients. 
Current Biology, 2009, 19, 774–778.
Phan, K. L., Fitzgerald, D. A., Nathan, P. J., and Tancer, 
M. E. Association between amygdala hyperactivity 
to harsh faces and severity of social anxiety in gen-
eralized social phobia. Biological Psychiatry, 2005, 59, 
424–429.
Phelps, E. A., Delgado, M. R., Nearing, K. I., and 
LeDoux, J. E. Extinction learning in humans: Role 
of the amygdala and vmPFC. Neuron, 2004, 43, 
897–905.
Phiel, C. J., and Klein, P. S. Molecular targets of lithium 
action. Annual Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology, 
2001, 41, 789–813.
Phillips, M. I., and Felix, D. Specific angiotensin II 
receptive neurons in the cat subfornical organ. Brain 
Research, 1976, 109, 531–540.
Phillips, R. G., and LeDoux, J. E. Differential contri-
bution of amygdala and hippocampus to cued and 
contextual fear conditioning. Behavioral Neuroscience, 
1992, 106, 274–285.
Piccirillo, J. F., Duntley, S., and Schotland, H. Obstruc­
tive sleep apnea. Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 2000, 284, 1492–1494.
Pickles, J. O., and Corey, D. P. Mechanoelectrical trans-
duction by hair cells. Trends in Neuroscience, 1992, 15, 
254–259.
Pijl, S., and Schwarz, D. W. F. Intonation of musical 
intervals by musical intervals by deaf subjects stimu-
lated with single bipolar cochlear implant electrodes. 
Hearing Research, 1995a, 89, 203–211.
Pijl, S., and Schwarz, D. W. F. Melody recognition 
and ­musical interval perception by deaf subjects 
stimulated with electrical pulse trains through single 
induced ­neurogenesis in the adult dentate gyrus. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
2007, 104, 5638–5643.
Peretz, I., Blood, A. J., Penhune, V., and Zatorre, R. 
Cortical deafness to dissonance. Brain, 2001, 124, 
928–940.
Peretz, I., Cummings, S., and Dubé, M. P. The genetics 
of congenital amusia (tone deafness): A family-aggre-
gation study. American Journal of Human Genetics, 2007, 
81, 582–588.
Peretz, I., Gagnon, L., and Bouchard, B. Music and 
emotion: Perceptual determinants, immediacy, and 
isolation after brain damage. Cognition, 1998, 68, 
111–141.
Peretz, I., and Zatorre, R. J. Brain organization for 
music processing. Annual Review of Psychology, 2005, 
56, 89–114.
Perez, M. A., Tanaka, S., Wise, S. P., et al. Time-specific 
­contribution of the supplementary motor area to 
­intermanual transfer of procedural knowledge. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2008, 28, 9664–9669.
Perlmutter, S. J., Garvey, M. A., Castellanos, X., et al. A 
case of pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disor-
ders associated with streptococcal infections. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 1998, 155, 1592–1598.
Perrett, D. I., Hietanen, J. K., Oram, M. W., and Benson, 
P. J. Organization and functions of cells responsive to 
faces in the temporal cortex. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London B, 1992, 335, 23–30.
Pert, C. B., Snowman, A. M., and Snyder, S. H. 
Localization of opiate receptor binding in presynap-
tic membranes of rat brain. Brain Research, 1974, 70, 
184–188.
Peters, J., LaLumiere, R. T., and Kalivas, P. W. 
Infralimbic prefrontal cortex is responsible for inhib-
iting cocaine ­seeking in extinguished rats. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2008, 28, 6046–6053.
Petersen, S. E., Miezin, F. M., and Allman, J. M. 
Transient and sustained responses in four extrastri-
ate visual areas of the owl monkey. Experimental Brain 
Research, 1988, 70, 55–60.
Petkov, C. I., Kayser, C., Augath, M., and Logothetis, 
N. K. Functional imaging reveals nuberous fields in 
the monkey auditory cortex. PLoS Biology, 2006, 4, 
1213–1226.
Peuskens, H., Sunaert, S., Dupont, P., Van Hecke, P., 
et al. Human brain regions involved in heading esti-
mation. Journal of Neuroscience, 2001, 21, 2451–2461.
Peyrache, A., Khamassi, M., Benchenane, K., et al. 
Replay of rule-learning related neural patterns in the 
prefrontal cortex during sleep. Nature Neuroscience, 
2009, 12, 919–926.
Peyron, R., Laurent, B., and Garcia-Larrea, L. 
Functional imaging of brain responses to pain: A 

	
References	
691
Pompili, M., Mancinelli, I., Girardi, P., Ruberto, A., 
et al. Suicide in anorexia nervosa: A meta-analysis. 
International Journal of Eating Disorders, 2004, 36, 
99–103.
Popko, B. Myelin maintenance: Axonal support 
required. Nature Neuroscience, 2010, 13, 275–277.
Popova, N. K. From genes to aggressive behavior: The 
role of serotonergic system. BioEssays, 2006, 28,  
495–503.
Poremba, A., Saunders, R. C., Crane, A. M., Cook, M., 
et al. Functional mapping of the primate auditory  
system. Science, 2003, 299, 568–572.
Porkka-Heiskanen, T., Strecker, R. E., and McCarley, 
R. W. Brain site-specificity of extracellular adenosine 
­concentration changes during sleep deprivation and 
spontaneous sleep: An in vivo microdialysis study. 
Neuroscience, 2000, 99, 507–517.
Porrino, L. J., Lyons, D., Smith, H. R., Daunais, J. B., 
et al. Cocaine self-administration produces a progres-
sive ­involvement of limbic, association, and senso-
rimotor striatal domains. Journal of Neuroscience, 2004, 
24, 3554–3562.
Porrino, L. J., Smith, H. R., Nader, M. A., and 
Beveridge, T. J. The effects of cocaine: a shift-
ing target over the course of addiction. Progress in 
Neuropsychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 2007, 
31, 1593–1600.
Porter, J., Craven, B., Khan, R. M., Chang, S.-J., et al. 
Mechanisms of scent-tracking in humans. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2007, 10, 27–29.
Posmontier, B. Sleep quality in women with and witout 
postpartum depression. Journal of Obstetric, Gynecoloic, 
and Neonatal Nursing, 2008, 37, 722–735.
Preti, G., Wysocki, C. J., Barnhart, K. T., Sondheimer, 
S. J., et al. Male axillary extracts contain phero-
mones that affect pulsitile secretion of luteinizing 
hormone and mood in women recipients. Biology of 
Reproduction, 2003, 68, 2107–2113.
Price, E. O., Katz, L. S., Wallach, S. J. R., and Zenchak, 
J. J. The relationship of male–male mounting to the 
sexual ­preferences of young rams. Applied Animal 
Behavior Science, 1988, 21, 347–352.
Price, D. B. Psychological and neural mechanisms of 
the affective dimension of pain. Science, 2000, 288, 
1769–1772.
Price, L. H., and Heninger, G. R. Drug therapy: 
Lithium in the treatment of mood disorders. New 
England Journal of Medicine, 1994, 331, 591–598.
Pritchard, T. C., Hamilton, R. B., Morse, J. R., and 
Norgren, R. Projections of thalamic gustatory and lin-
gual areas in the monkey, Macaca fascicularis. Journal 
of Comparative Neurology, 1986, 244, 213–228.
Proctor, W. R., Soldo, B. L., Allan, A. M., and 
Dunwiddie, T. V. Ethanol enhances synaptically 
cochlear implant ­electrodes. Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America, 1995b, 98, 886–895.
Pike, K. M., Walsh, B. T., Vitousek, K., Wilson, G. T., 
et al. Cognitive behavior therapy in the posthospi-
talization ­treatment of anorexia nervosa. American 
Journal of Psychiatry, 2003, 160, 2046–2049.
Pinkham, A. E., Brenhsinger, C., Kohler, C., et al. 
Actively paranoid patients with schizophrenia over 
attribute anger to neutral faces. Schizophrenia Research, 
2011, 125, 174–178.
Pitcher, D., Garrido, L., Walsh, V., and Duchaine, B. C.  
Transcranial magnetic stimulation disrupts the 
perception and embodiment of facial expressions. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2008, 28, 8929–8933.
Pitkänen, A., Savander, V., and LeDoux, J. E. 
Organization of intra-amygdaloid circuits: An 
emerging framework for understanding functions 
of the amygdala. Trends in Neuroscience, 1997, 20, 
517–523.
Pleim, E. T., and Barfield, R. J. Progesterone versus 
­estrogen facilitation of female sexual behavior by 
intracranial ­administration to female rats. Hormones 
and Behavior, 1988, 22, 150–159.
Ploeger, A., Raijmakers, M. E. J., van der Maas, H. L. 
J., and Galis, F. The association between autism and 
errors in early embryogenesis: What is the causal 
mechanism? Biological Psychiatry, 2010, 67, 602–607.
Pobric, G., Jefferies, E., and Lambon Ralph, M. A. 
Anterior temporal lobes mediate semantic represen-
tation: Mimicking semantic dementia by using rTMS 
in normal participants. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2007, 104, 20137–20141.
Pobric, G., Mashal, N., Faust, M., and Lavidor, M. The 
role of the right cerebral hemisphere in proced-
ding novel ­metaphoric expressions: A transcranial 
magnetic stimulation study. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 2008, 20, 1–12.
Poeppel, D. Pure word deafness and the bilateral pro-
cessing of the speech code. Cognitive Science, 2001, 25, 
679–693.
Poggio, G. F., and Poggio, T. The analysis of stereopsis. 
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 1984, 7, 379–412.
Poizner, H., Feldman, A. G., Levin, M. F., Berkinblit, 
M. B., et al. The timing of arm-trunk coordination 
is deficient and vision-dependent in Parkinson’s 
patients during reaching movements. Experimental 
Brain Research, 2000, 133, 279–292.
Polymeropoulos, M. H., Higgins, J. J., Golbe, L. I.,  
Johnson, W. G., et al. Mapping of a gene for 
Parkinson’s disease to chromosome 4q21-q23. Science, 
1996, 274, 1197–1199.
Pomp, D., and Nielsen, M. K. Quantitative genetics of 
energy balance: Lessons from animal models. Obesity 
Research, 1999, 7, 106–110.

692	
References
Ramesh, V., Thakkar, M. M., Strecker, R. E., Basheer, 
R., et al. Wakefulness-inducing effects of histamine in 
the basal forebrain of freely moving rats. Behavioural 
Brain Research, 2004, 152, 271–278.
Ramirez, I. Why do sugars taste good? Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 1990, 14, 125–134.
Ramus, F., Rosen, S., Dakin, S. C., Day, B. L., et al. 
Theories of developmental dyslexia: Insights from 
a multiple case study of dyslexic adults. Brain, 2003, 
126, 841–865.
Ranganath, C., DeGutis, J., and D’Esposito, M. 
­Category-specific modulation of inferior tempo-
ral ­activity during working memory encoding and 
maintenance. Cognitive Brain Research, 2004, 20, 
37–45.
Rapcsak, S. Z., and Beeson, P. M. The role of the 
left ­posterior inferior temporal cortex in spelling. 
Neurology, 2004, 62, 2221–2229.
Rapin, I. Autism in search of a home in the brain. 
Neurology, 1999, 52, 902–904.
Rapoport, J. L. Recent advances in obsessive-compulsive 
­disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 1991, 5, 1–10.
Rapoport, J. L., Ryland, D. H., and Kriete, M. Drug 
­treatment of canine acral lick: An animal model 
of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 1992, 49, 517–521.
Rasmusson, D. D., Clow, K., and Szerb, J. C. 
Modification of neocortical acetylcholine release 
and electroencephalogram desynchronization due to 
brain stem stimulation by drugs applied to the basal 
forebrain. Neuroscience, 1994, 60, 665–677.
Rattenborg, N. C., Lima, S. L., and Amlaner, C. J. 
Facultative control of avian unihemispheric sleep 
under the risk of predation. Behavioural Brain 
Research, 1999, 105, 163–172.
Rauch, S. L., Shin, L. M., and Phelps, E. A. 
Neurocircuitry models of posttraumatic stress disor-
der and extinction: Human neuroimaging research—
Past, present, and future. Biological Psychiatry, 2006, 
60, 376–382.
Rausch, J. L., Johnson, M. E., Fei, Y. J., Li, J. Q., et al. 
Initial conditions of serotonin transporter kinetics 
and genotype: Influence on SSRI treatment trial 
outcome. Biological Psychiatry, 2002, 51, 723–732.
Raupach, T., and van Schayck, C. P. Pharmacotherapy 
for smoking cessation, CNS Drugs, 2011, 26, 371–382.
Rauschecker, J. P., and Scott, S. K. Maps and streams in 
the auditory cortex: Nonhuman primates illuminate 
human speech processing. Nature Neuroscience, 2009, 
12, 718–724.
Rauschecker, J. P., and Tian, B. Mechanisms and 
streams for processing of “what” and “where” in 
auditory cortex. Proceecings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, USA, 2000, 97, 11800–11806.
evoked GABAA ­receptor-mediated responses in 
cerebral cortical neurons in rat brain slices. Brain 
Research, 1992, 595, 220–227.
Provencio, I., Rodriguez, I. R., Jiang, G., Hayes, W. P.,  
et al. A novel human opsin in the inner retinal 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2000, 20, 600–605.
Prusiner, S. B. Novel proteinaceous infectious particles 
cause scrapie. Science, 1982, 216, 136–144.
Pulvermüller, F., and Fadiga, L. Active perception: 
Sensorimotor circuits as a cortical basis for lan-
guage. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2010, 11,  
351–360.
Pulvermüller, F., Huss, M., Kherif, F., et al. Motor 
cortex maps articulatory features of speech sounds. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
2006, 103, ­7865–7870.
Qu, D., Ludwig, D. S., Gammeltoft, S., Piper, M., et al. 
A role for melanin concentrating hormone in the 
central ­regulation of feeding behaviour. Nature, 1996, 
380, 243–247.
Quirk, G. J., Muller, R. U., Kubie, J. L., and Ranck, J. B. 
The positional firing properties of medial entorhinal 
neurons: Description and comparison with hippo-
campal place cells. Journal of Neuroscience, 1992, 12, 
1945–1963.
Rahman, Q., and Hull, M. S. An empirical test of the 
kin selection hypothesis for male homosexuality. 
Archives of Sex Behavior, 2005, 34, 461–467.
Raine, A., Meloy, J. R., Bihrle, S., Stoddard, J., et al. 
Reduced prefrontal and increased subcortical brain 
functioning assessed using positron emission tomog-
raphy in predatory and affective murderers. Behavioral 
Science and the Law, 1998, 16, 319–332.
Rainville, P., Duncan, G. H., Price, D. D., et al. Pain 
affect encoded in human anterior cingulate but not 
somatosensory cortex. Science, 1997, 277, 968–971.
Rakic, P. Specification of cerebral cortical areas. Science, 
1988, 241, 170–176.
Rakic, P. Evolution of the neocortex: A perspec-
tive from developmental biology. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 2009, 10, 724–735.
Ramachandran, V. S., and Hirstein, W. The perception 
of phantom limbs. Brain, 1998, 121, 1603–1630.
Ralph, M. R., and Lehman, M. N. Transplantation: A 
new tool in the analysis of the mammalian hypotha-
lamic circadian pacemaker. Trends in Neurosciences, 
1991, 14, 362–366.
Ramakrishnan, K., and Scheid, D. C. Treatment options 
for insomnia. American Family Physician, 2007, 76, 
517–526.
Ramanathan, L., Gulyani, S., Nienhuis, R., and Siegel, 
J. M. Sleep deprivation decreases superoxide dis-
mutase activity in rat hippocampus and brainstem. 
Neuroreport, 2002, 13, 1387–1390.

	
References	
693
Reid, L. D. Endogenous opioids and alcohol 
dependence: Opioid alkaloids and the propensity 
to drink alcoholic beverages. Alcohol, 1996, 13, 
5–11.
Reinehr, T., Roth, C. L., Schernthaner, G. H., Kopp, 
H. P., et al. Peptide YY and glucagon-like peptide-1 
in morbidly obese patients before and after surgi-
cally induced weight loss. Obesity Surgery, 2007, 17, 
1571–1577.
Reiner, W. G. Gender identity and sex-of-rearing in chil-
dren with disorders of sexual differentiation. Journal 
of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, 2005, 18, 
549–553.
Rempe, M. J., Best, J., and Terman, D. A mathematical 
model of the sleep/wake cycle. Journal of Mathematical 
Biology, 2010, 60, 615–644.
Rempel-Clower, N. L., Zola, S. M., Squire, L. R., and 
Amaral, D. G. Three cases of enduring memory 
impairment after bilateral damage limited to the hip-
pocampal formation. Journal of Neuroscience, 1996, 16, 
5233–5255.
Ren, Y., Whattard, J., Higuera-Matas, A., et al. 
Cannabidiol, a nonpsychotropic component of 
cannabis, inhibits cue-induced heroin seeking and 
­normalizes discrete mesolimbic neuronal ­disturbances. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2009, 29, 14764–14769.
Renthal, W., Kumar, A., Xiao, G., et al. Genome-wide 
analysis of chromatin regulation by cocaine reveals a 
role for sirtuins. Neuron, 2009, 62, 335–348.
Ressler, K. J., and Mayberg, H. S. Targeting abnormal 
neural circuits in mood and anxiety disorders: From 
the laboratory to the clinic. Nature Neuroscience, 2007, 
10, ­1116–1124.
Ressler, K. J., Rothbaum, M. O., Tannenbaum, L., 
Anderson, P., et al. Cognitive enhancers as adjuncts 
to psychotherapy: Use of D-cycloserine in phobic 
individuals to facilitate extinction of fear. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 2004, 61, 1136–1134.
Ressler, K. J., Sullivan, S. L., and Buck, L. A molecular 
­dissection of spatial patterning in the olfactory sys-
tem. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 1994, 4, 588–596.
Rétey, J. V., Adam, M., Honneger, E., et al. A functional 
genetic variation of adenosine deaminase affects 
the ­duration and intensity of deep sleep in humans. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
2005, 102, 15676–15681.
Reynolds, D. V. Surgery in the rat during electrical 
­analgesia induced by focal brain stimulation. Science, 
1969, 164, ­444–445.
Rhees, R. W., Shryne, J. E., and Gorski, R. A. Onset of 
the hormone-sensitive perinatal period for sexual dif-
ferentiation of the sexually dimorphic nucleus of the 
preoptic area in female rats. Journal of Neurobiology, 
1990a, 21, 781–786.
Ravussin, E., Valencia, M. E., Esparza, J., Bennett, P. H.,  
et al. Effects of a traditional lifestyle on obesity in 
Pima Indians. Diabetes Care, 1994, 17, 1067–1074.
Reber, P. J., and Squire, L. R. Encapsulation of implicit 
and explicit memory in sequence learning. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 1998, 10, 248–263.
Recer, P. Study: English is a factor in dyslexia. 
Washington, D.C.: Associated Press, 16 March 2001.
Rechtschaffen, A., and Bergmann, B. M. Sleep depri-
vation in the rat by the disk-over-water method. 
Behavioural Brain Research, 1995, 69, 55–63.
Rechtschaffen, A., and Bergmann, B. M. Sleep depriva-
tion in the rat: An update of the 1989 paper. Sleep, 
2002, 25, 18–24.
Rechtschaffen, A., Bergmann, B. M., Everson, C. A., 
Kushida, C. A., et al. Sleep deprivation in the rat. 
X: Integration and discussion of the findings. Sleep, 
1989, 12, 68–87.
Rechtschaffen, A., Gilliland, M. A., Bergmann, B. M., 
and Winter, J. B. Physiological correlates of pro-
longed sleep deprivation in rats. Science, 1983, 221, 
182–184.
Reddrop, C., Moldrich, R. X., Beart, P. M., Farso, M., 
et al. Vampire bat salivary plasminogen activator 
(desmoteplase) inhibits tissue-type plasminogen 
activator-induced potentiation of excitotoxic injury. 
Stroke, 2005, 36, 1241–1246.
Redgrave, P., Rodriguez, M., Smith, Y., et al. Goal-
directed and habitual control in the basal ganglia: 
Implications for Parkinson’s disease. Nature Reviews: 
Neuroscience, 2010, 11, 760–772.
Reed, C. L., Caselli, R. J., and Farah, M. J. Tactile 
­agnosia: Underlying impairment and implications for 
normal tactile object recognition. Brain, 1996, 119, 
875–888.
Reed, J. M., and Squire, L. R. Retrograde amnesia 
for facts and events: Findings from four new cases. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 1998, 18, 3943–3954.
Regan, B. C., Julliot, C., Simmen, B., Vienot, F., et al. 
Fruits, foliage and the evolution of primate colour 
vision. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London B, 2001, 356, 229–283.
Rehn, A. E., Van Den Buuse, M., Copolov, D., Briscoe, 
T., et al. An animal model of chronic placental insuf-
ficiency: Relevance to neurodevelopmental disorders 
including schizophrenia. Neuroscience, 2004, 129, 
381–391.
Reid, C. A., Dixon, D. B., Takahashi, M., Bliss, T. V. P.,  
et al. Optical quantal analysis indicates that long-
term potentiation at single hippocampal mossy fiber 
synapses is expressed through increased release prob-
ability, recruitment of new release sites, and activa-
tion of silent synapses. Journal of Neuroscience, 2004, 
243, 3618–3626.

694	
References
and imitation of action. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 
2001, 2, 661–670.
Rizzoli, S. O., and Betz, W. J. Synaptic vesicle pools. 
Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2005, 6, 57–69.
Robbins, L. N., Helzer, J. E., Weissman, M. M., 
Orvaschel, H., et al. Lifetime prevalence of specific 
psychiatric disorders in three sites. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 1984, 41, 949–958.
Roberts, S. C., Havlicek, J., Flegr, J., Mruskova, M., et al. 
Female facial attractiveness increases during the fer-
tile phase of the menstrual cycle. Biology Letters, 2004, 
271, S270–S272.
Robertson, G. S., Pfaus, J. G., Atkinson, L. J., 
Matsumura, H., et al. Sexual behavior increases c-fos 
expression in the forebrain of the male rat. Brain 
Research, 1991, 564, 352–357.
Robinson, D., Wu, H., Munne, R. A., Ashtari, M., et al. 
Reduced caudate nucleus volume in obsessive-com-
pulsive disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1995, 
52, 393–398.
Robinson, F. R. Role of the cerebellum in move-
ment ­control and adaptation. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology, 1995, 5, 755–762.
Rodman, H. R., Gross, C. G., and Albright, T. D. 
Afferent basis of visual response properties in area 
MT of the macaque. I: Effects of striate cortex 
removal. Journal of Neuroscience, 1989, 9, 2033–2050.
Rodman, H. R., Gross, C. G., and Albright, T. D. 
Afferent basis of visual response properties in area 
MT of the macaque. II: Effects of superior col-
liculus removal. Journal of Neuroscience, 1990, 10, 
1154–1164.
Roe, A. W., Parker, A. J., Born, R. T., and DeAngelis, 
G. C. Disparity channels in early vision. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 11820–11831.
Roeltgen, D. P., Rothi, L. H., and Heilman, K. M. 
Linguistic semantic apraphia: A dissociation of the 
lexical spelling system from semantics. Brain and 
Language, 1986, 27, 257–280.
Roffwarg, H. P., Dement, W. C., Muzio, J. N., and 
Fisher, C. Dream imagery: Relation to rapid eye 
movements of sleep. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
1962, 7, 235–258.
Roffwarg, H. P., Muzio, J. N., and Dement, W. C. 
Ontogenetic development of human sleep-dream 
cycle. Science, 1966, 152, 604–619.
Rogawski, M. A., and Wenk, G. L. The neuropharma-
cological basis for the use of memantine in the treat-
ment of Alzheimer’s disease. CNS Drug Reviews, 2003, 
9, 275–308.
Roland, P. E. Metabolic measurements of the working 
­frontal cortex in man. Trends in Neurosciences, 1984, 7, 
­430–435.
Rhees, R. W., Shryne, J. E., and Gorski, R. A. 
Termination of the hormone-sensitive period for dif-
ferentiation of the sexually dimorphic nucleus of the 
preoptic area in male and female rats. Developmental 
Brain Research, 1990b, 52, 17–23.
Rice, N. J., Valyear, K. F., Goodale, M. A., Milner, A. D.,  
et al. Orientation sensitivity to graspable objects: 
An fMRI adaptation study. NeuroImage, 2007, 36,  
T87–T93.
Riemann, D., Wiegand, M., and Berger, M. Are there 
­predictors for sleep deprivation response in depres-
sive patients? Biological Psychiatry, 1991, 29, 707–710.
Rijntjes, M., Dettmers, C., Buchel, C., Kiebel, S., et al. A 
blueprint for movement: Functional and anatomical 
representations in the human motor system. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 1999, 19, 8043–8048.
Riley, E. P., Infante, M. A., and Warren, K. R. Fetal alco-
hol spectrum disorders: An overview. Neuropsychology 
Review, 2011, 21, 73–80.
Rilling, J. K., Glasser, M. F., Preuss, T. M., et al. The 
­evolution of the arcuate fasciculus revealed with com-
parative DTI. Nature Neuroscience, 2008, 11, 426–428.
Risch, N., Herrell, R., Lehner, T., et al. Interaction 
between the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR), 
stressful life events, and risk of depression: A meta-
analysis. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
2009, 301, 2462–2471.
Rissman, E. F., Early, A. H., Taylor, J. A., Korach, K. 
S., et al. Estrogen receptors are essential for female 
­sexual receptivity. Endocrinology, 1997, 138, 507–510.
Ritter, R. C., Brenner, L., and Yox, D. P. Participation 
of vagal sensory neurons in putative satiety signals 
from the upper gastrointestinal tract. In Neuroanatomy 
and Physiology of Abdominal Vagal Afferents, edited by 
S. Ritter, R. C. Ritter, and C. D. Barnes. Boca Raton, 
Fla.: CRC Press, 1992.
Ritter, S., Dinh, T. T., and Friedman, M. I. Induction of 
­Fos-like immunoreactivity (Fos-li) and stimulation of 
­feeding by 2,5-anhydro-D-mannitol (2,5-AM) require 
the vagus nerve. Brain Research, 1994, 646, 53–64.
Ritter, S., Dinh, T. T., and Zhang, Y. Localization of 
­hindbrain glucoreceptive sites controlling food intake 
and blood glucose. Brain Research, 2000, 856, 37–47.
Ritter, S., and Taylor, J. S. Vagal sensory neurons are 
required for lipoprivic but not glucoprivic feeding in 
rats. American Journal of Physiology, 1990, 258, R1395–
R1401.
Rizzolatti, G., and Sinigaglia, C. The functional role of 
the parieto-frontal mirror circuit: Interpretations and 
misinterpretations. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2010, 
11, 264–274.
Rizzolatti, R., Fogassi, L., and Gallese, V. Neurophysio­
logical mechanisms underlying the understanding 

	
References	
695
Rösner, S., Hackl-Herrwerth, A., Leucht, S., et al. 
Acamprosate for alcohol dependence. Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2010, Issue 9.
Roth, M., Decery, J., Raybaudi, M., Massarelli, R., et al. 
Possible involvement of primary motor cortex in 
mentally simulated movement: A functional mag-
netic resonance imaging study. Neuroreport, 1996, 7, 
1280–1284.
Rothbaum, B. O., and Davis, M. Applying learning 
principles to the treatment of post-trauma reactions. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Science, 2003, 1008, 
112–121.
Rothman, S. M., and Olney, J. W. Excitotoxicity and 
the NMDA receptor. Trends in Neurosciences, 1987, 10, 
299–302.
Rubia, K., Overmeyer, S., Taylor, E., Brammer, M., et al. 
Hypofrontality in attention deficit hyperactivity disor-
der during higher-order motor control: A study with 
functional MRI. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1999, 
156, 891–896.
Rubin, B. S., and Barfield, R. J. Priming of estrous 
responsiveness by implants of 17B-estradiol in the 
ventromedial hypothalamic nucleus of female rats. 
Endocrinology, 1980, 106, 504–509.
Rubin, L. L., and Staddon, J. M. The cell biology of the 
blood–brain barrier. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 
1999, 22, 11–28.
Rück, C., Karlsson, A., Steele, J. D., Edman, G., et al. 
Capsulotomy for obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 2008, 65, 914–922.
Rumpel, S., LeDoux, J., Zador, A., and Malinow, R. 
Postsynaptic receptor trafficking underlying a form of 
­associative learning. Science, 2005, 308, 83–88.
Rusak, B., and Morin, L. P. Testicular responses to 
photoperiod are blocked by lesions of the supra-
chiasmatic nuclei in golden hamsters. Biology of 
Reproduction, 1976, 15, 366–374.
Russchen, F. T., Amaral, D. G., and Price, J. L. The 
afferent connections of the substantia innominata in 
the monkey, Macaca fascicularis. Journal of Comparative 
Neurology, 1986, 242, 1–27.
Russell, G. F. M., and Treasure, J. The modern history 
of anorexia nervosa: An interpretation of why the 
illness has changed. Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences, 1989, 575, 13–30.
Russell, M. J. Human olfactory communication. Nature, 
1976, 260, 520–522.
Russell, M. J., Switz, G. M., and Thompson, K. Olfactory 
influences on the human menstrual cycle. Pharmacology, 
Biochemistry and Behavior, 1980, 13, 737–738.
Rutter, M. Cognitive deficits in the pathogenesis of 
autism. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 1983, 
24, 513–531.
Rolls, E. T. Feeding and reward. In The Neural Basis 
of Feeding and Reward, edited by B. G. Hobel and D. 
Novin. Brunswick, Me.: Haer Institute, 1982.
Rolls, E. T. Learning mechanisms in the temporal lobe 
­visual cortex. Behavioural Brain Research, 1995, 66, 
177–185.
Rolls, E. T., and Baylis, G. C. Size and contrast have 
only small effects on the responses to faces of neu-
rons in the cortex of the superior temporal sulcus 
of the monkey. Experimental Brain Research, 1986, 65, 
38–48.
Rolls, E. T., Murzi, E., Yaxley, S., Thorpe, S. J., et al. 
Brain Research, 1986, 368, 79–86.
Rolls, E. T., Yaxley, S., and Sienkiewicz, Z. J. Gustatory 
responses of single neurons in the orbitofrontal cor-
tex of the macaque monkey. Journal of Neurophysiology, 
1990, 64, 1055–1066.
Romanovsky, A. A. Thermoregulation: Some concepts 
have changed. Functional architecture of the thermo-
regulatory system. American Journal of Physiology, 2007, 
292, R37–R46.
Rosa, R. R., and Bonnet, M. H. Reported chronic 
insomnia is independent of poor sleep as measured 
by electroencephalography. Psychosomatic Medicine, 
2000, 62, 474–482.
Rose, J. D. Changes in hypothalamic neuronal func-
tion related to hormonal induction of lordosis in 
behaving ­hamsters. Physiology and Behavior, 1990, 47, 
1201–1212.
Rose, J. E. Nicotine and nonnicotine factors in cigarette 
addiction. Psychopharmacology, 2006, 184, 274–285.
Roselli, C. E., Larkin, K., Resko, J. A., Stellflug, J. N., 
et al. The volume of a sexually dimorphic nucleus 
in the ovine medial preoptic area/anterior hypo-
thalamus varies with sexual partner preference. 
Endocrinology, 2004, 145, ­478–483.
Rosenblatt, J. S., Hazelwood, S., and Poole, J. Maternal 
behavior in male rats: Effects of medial preoptic 
area lesions and presence of maternal aggression. 
Hormones and Behavior, 1996, 30, 201–215.
Rosenthal, D. A program of research on heredity in 
­schizophrenia. Behavioral Science, 1971, 16, 191–201.
Rosenthal, N. E., Sack, D. A., Gillin, C., Lewy, A. J., et al. 
Seasonal affective disorder: A description of the syn-
drome and preliminary findings with light therapy. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 1984, 41, 72–80.
Rosenthal, N. E., Sack, D. A., James, S. P., Parry, B. L., 
et al. Seasonal affective disorder and phototherapy. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1985, 453, 
260–269.
Roses, A. D. A model for susceptibility polymor-
phisms for complex diseases: Apolipoprotein E and 
Alzheimer disease. Neurogenetics, 1997, 1, 3–11.

696	
References
Sakai, F., Meyer, J. S., Karacan, I., Derman, S., et al. 
Normal human sleep: Regional cerebral haemody-
namics. Annals of Neurology, 1979, 7, 471–478.
Sakai, K. L., Noguchi, Y., Takeuchi, T., and Watanabe, E.  
Selective priming of syntactic processing by event-
related transcranial magnet stimulation of Broca’s 
area. Neuron, 2002, 35, 1177–1182.
Sakuma, Y., and Pfaff, D. W. Facilitation of female 
­reproductive behavior from mesencephalic central 
grey in the rat. American Journal of Physiology, 1979a, 
237, R279–R284.
Sakuma, Y., and Pfaff, D. W. Mesencephalic mecha-
nisms for integration of female reproductive behavior 
in the rat. American Journal of Physiology, 1979b, 237, 
R285–R290.
Sakuma, Y., and Pfaff, D. W. Convergent effects of 
­lordosis-relevant somatosensory and hypothalamic 
influences on central gray cells in the rat mesenceph-
alon. Experimental Neurology, 1980a, 70, 269–281.
Sakuma, Y., and Pfaff, D. W. Excitability of female rat 
central gray cells with medullary projections: Changes 
produced by hypothalamic stimulation and estro-
gen treatment. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1980b, 44, 
1012–1023.
Sakurai, T. The neural circuit of orexin (hypocretin): 
Maintaining sleep and wakefulness. Nature Reviews: 
Neuroscience, 2007, 8, 171–181.
Sakurai, T., Amemiya, A., Ishii, M., Matsuzaki, I., et al. 
Orexins and orexin receptors: A family of hypotha-
lamic ­neuropeptides and G protein-coupled recep-
tors that ­regulate feeding behavior. Cell, 1998, 20, 
573–585.
Sakurai, Y., Ichikawa, Y., and Mannen, T. Pure alexia 
from a posterior occipital lesion. Neurology, 2001, 56, 
778–781.
Sakurai, Y., Momose, T., Iwata, M., Sudo, Y., et al. 
Different cortical activity in reading of Kanji words, 
Kana words and Kana nonwords. Cognitive Brain 
Research, 2000, 9, 111–115.
Sakurai, Y., Sakai, K., Sakuta, M., and Iwata, M. Naming 
difficulties in alexia with agraphia for kanji after a left 
posterior inferior temporal lesion. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 1994, 57, 609–613.
Salamone, J. D. Complex motor and sensorimotor 
function of striatal and accumbens dopamine: 
Involvement in instrumental behavior processes. 
Psychopharmacology, 1992, 107, 160–174.
Salas, J. C. T., Iwasaki, H., Jodo, E., Schmidt, M. H.,  
et al. Penile erection and micturition events triggered 
by electrical stimulation of the mesopontine 
tegmental area. American Journal of Physiology, 2007, 
294, R102–R111.
Salm, A. K., Pavelko, M., Krouse, E. M., Webster, W., 
et al. Lateral amygdaloid nucleus expansion in adult 
Ryba, N. J., and Tirindelli, R. A new multigene family 
of putative pheromone receptors. Neuron, 1997, 19, 
371–392.
Ryback, R. S., and Lewis, O. F. Effects of prolonged bed 
rest on EEG sleep patterns in young, healthy volun-
teers. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 
1971, 31, 395–399.
Saal, D., Dong, Y., Bonci, A., and Malenka, R. C. Drugs 
of abuse and stress trigger a common synaptic 
adaptation in dopamine neurons. Neuron, 2003, 37, 
577–582.
Saayman, G. S. Aggressive behaviour in free-ranging 
chacma baboons (Papio ursinus). Journal of Behavioral 
Science, 1971, 1, 77–83.
Sachar, E. J., and Baron, M. The biology of affective 
­disorders. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 1979, 2, 
505–518.
Sackeim, H. A., Decina, P., Prohovnik, I., Malitz, S., 
et al. Anticonvulsant and antidepressant properties of 
electroconvulsive therapy: A proposed mechanism of 
action. Biological Psychiatry, 1983, 18, 1301–1310.
Sackeim, H. A., and Gur, R. C. Lateral asymmetry in 
­intensity of emotional expression. Neuropsychologia, 
1978, 16, 473–482.
Sacktor, T. C. PINing for things past. Science Signaling, 
2010, 3, pe9.
Sacktor, T. C. How does PKMz maintain long-term 
memory? Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2011, 12, 9–15.
Sadato, N., Pascualleone, A., Grafman, J., Ibanez, V.,  
et al. Activation of the primary visual cortex by Braille 
reading in blind subjects. Nature, 1996, 380, 526–528.
Saffran, E. M., Marin, O. S. M., and Yeni-Komshian, G. H.  
An analysis of speech perception in word deafness. 
Brain and Language, 1976, 3, 209–228.
Saffran, E. M., Schwartz, M. F., and Marin, O. S. M. 
Evidence from aphasia: Isolating the components of a 
production model. In Language Production, edited by 
B. Butterworth. London: Academic Press, 1980.
Sagvolden, T., Aase, H., Zeiner, P., and Berger, D. 
Altered reinforcement mechanisms in attention-defi-
cit/hyperactivity disorder. Behavioural Brain Research, 
1998, 94, 61–71.
Sagvolden, T., Johansen, E. B., Aase, H., and Russell,  
V. A. A dynamic developmental theory of attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) predominantly 
hyperactive/impulsive and combined subtypes. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2005, 28, 397–419.
Sagvolden, T., and Sergeant, J. A. Attention deficit/­
hyperactivity disorder: From brain dysfunctions to 
­behaviour. Behavioural Brain Research, 1998, 94, 1–10.
Sahu, A., Kalra, P. S., and Kalra, S. P. Food deprivation 
and ingestion induce reciprocal changes in neu-
ropeptide Y ­concentrations in the paraventricular 
nucleus. Peptides, 1988, 9, 83–86.

	
References	
697
men. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 2005, 102, 7356–7361.
Savic, I., Hedén-Blomqvist, E., and Berglund, H. 
Pheromone signal transduction in humans: what can 
be learned from olfactory loss. Human Brain Mapping, 
2009, 30, 3057–3065.
Sawchenko, P. E. Toward a new neurobiology of energy 
­balance, appetite, and obesity: The anatomists weigh 
in. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 1998, 402,  
435–441.
Saxena, S., Brody, A. L., Schwartz, J. M., and Baxter, 
L. R. Neuroimaging and frontal-subcortical circuitry 
in ­obsessive-compulsive disorder. British Journal of 
Psychiatry, 1998, 173, 26–37.
Saxton, T. K., Lyndon, A. C., Little, A. C., and Roberts, 
S. C. Evidence that androstadienone, a putative 
human ­chemosignal, modulates women’s attributions 
of men’s attractiveness. Hormones and Behavior, 2008, 
54, 597–601.
Scammell, T. E., Estabrooke, I. V., McCarthy, M. T., 
Chemelli, R. M., el al. Hypothalamic arousal regions 
are activated during modafinil-induced wakefulness. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2000, 20, 8620–8628.
Scammell, T. E., Gerashchenko, D. Y., Mochizuki, 
T., McCarthy, M. T., et al. An adenosine A2a 
agonist increases sleep and induces Fos in ventro-
lateral preoptic neurons. Neuroscience, 2001, 107, 
653–663.
Schaller, G., Schmidt, A., Pleiner, J., Woloszczuk, W., 
et al. Plasma ghrelin concentrations are not regu-
lated by glucose or insulin: A double-blind, placebo-
controlled crossover clamp study. Diabetes, 2003, 52, 
16–20.
Scharf, R., Sarhan, M., and DiLeone, R. J. Role of 
orexin/hypocretin in dependence and addiction. 
Brain Research, 2010, 1314, 130–138.
Schein, S. J., and Desimone, R. Spectral properties of 
V4 neurons in the macaque. Journal of Neuroscience, 
1990, 10, 3369–3389.
Schenck, C. H., Bundlie, S. R., Ettinger, M. G., and 
Mahowald, M. W. Chronic behavioral disorders of 
human REM sleep: A new category of parasomnia. 
Sleep, 1986, 9, 293–308.
Schenck, C. H., Hurwitz, T. D., Bundlie, S. R., and 
Mahowald, M. W. Sleep-related eating disorders: 
Polysomnographic correlates of a heterogeneous syn-
drome distinct from daytime eating disorders. Sleep, 
1991, 14, 419–431.
Schenck, C. H., Hurwitz, T. D., and Mahowald, M. W. 
REM-sleep behavior disorder: An update on a series 
of 96 patients and a review of the world literature. 
Journal of Sleep Research, 1993, 2, 224–231.
Schenck, C. H., and Mahowald, M. W. Motor dyscon-
trol in narcolepsy: Rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep 
rats is associated with exposure to prenatal stress. 
Developmental Brain Research, 2004, 148, 159–167.
Salmelin, R., Schnitzler, A., Schmitz, F., and Freund, 
H. J. Single word reading in developmental stutterers 
and fluent speakers. Brain, 2000, 123, 1184–1202.
Samson, H. H., Hodge, C. W., Tolliver, G. A., and 
Haraguchi, M. Effect of dopamine agonists and 
antagonists on ethanol reinforced behavior: The 
involvement of the nucleus accumbens. Brain Research 
Bulletin, 1993, 30, 133–141.
Samuels, B. A., and Hen, R. Neurogenesis and affective 
­disorders. European Journal of Neuroscience, 2011, 35, 
1152–1159.
Sanacora, G., Gueorguieva, R., Epperson, C. N., Wu, 
Y. T., et al. Subtype-specific alterations of gamma-
aminobutyric acid and glutamate in patients with 
major depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2004, 
61, 705–713.
Saper, C. B., Chou, T. C., and Scammell, T. E. The 
sleep switch: Hypothalamic control of sleep and wake-
fulness. Trends in Neurosciences, 2001, 24, 726–731.
Saper, C. B., Fuller, P. M., Pedersen, N. P., et al. Sleep 
state switching. Neuron, 2010, 68, 1023–1042.
Saper, C. B., Scammell, T. E., and Lu, J. Hypothalamic 
­regulation of sleep and circadian rhythms. Nature, 
2005, 437, 1257–1263.
Sapolsky, R. M. Stress, the Aging Brain and the Mechanisms 
of Neuron Death. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992.
Sapolsky, R. M. Social subordinance as a marker of 
­hypercortisolism: Some unexpected subtleties. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1995, 771, 
626–639.
Sassenrath, E. N., Powell, T. E., and Hendrickx, A. G. 
Perimenstrual aggression in groups of female rhesus 
­monkeys. Journal of Reproduction and Fertility, 1973, 34, 
509–511.
Sato, N., Sakata, H., Tanaka, Y. L., and Taira, M. 
Navigation-associated medial parietal neurons in 
monkeys. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 2006, 103, 17001–17006.
Satterlee, J. S., Barbee, S., Jin, P., Krichevsky, A., et al. 
Noncoding RNAs in the brain. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2007, 27, 11856–11859.
Sauter, D. A., Eisner, F., Ekman, P., and Scott, S. K. 
Cross-cultural recognition of basic emotions through 
nonverbal emotional vocalizations. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2010, 107,  
2408–2412.
Savic, I., Berglund, H., Gulyas, B., and Roland, P. 
Smelling of odorous sex hormone-like compounds 
causes sex-­differentiated hypothalamic activations in 
humans. Neuron, 2001, 31, 661–668.
Savic, I., Berglund, H., and Lindström, P. Brain 
response to putative pheromones in homosexual 

698	
References
cance. Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports, 2004, 
4, 170–178.
Schmidt, M. H., Valatx, J.-L., Sakai, K., Fort, P., et al. 
Role of the lateral preoptic area in sleep-related 
erectile ­mechanisms and sleep generation in the rat. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2000, 20, 6640–6647.
Schneider, B., Muller, M. J., and Philipp, M. Mortality 
in affective disorders. Journal of the Affective Disorders, 
2001, 65, 263–274.
Schneider, P., Scherg, M., Dosch, H. G., Specht, H. L., 
et al. Morphology of Heschl’s gyrus reflects enhanced 
activation in the auditory cortex of musicians. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2002, 5, 688–694.
Schoenfeld, M. A., Neuer, G., Tempelmann, C., 
Schüssler, K., et al. Functional magnetic resonance 
tomography correlates of taste perception in the 
human primary taste cortex. Neuroscience, 2004, 127, 
347–353.
Schultz, R. T. Developmental deficits in social percep-
tion in autism: The role of the amygdala and fusi-
form face area. International Journal of Developmental 
Neuroscience, 2005, 23, 125–141.
Schumacher, J., Kristensen, A. S., Wendland, J. R., et al. 
The genetics of panic disorder. Medical Genetics, 2011, 
48, 361–368.
Schumacher, J., Laje, G., Abou Jamra, R. et al. The 
DISC locus and schizophrenia: evidence from an 
association study in a central European sample 
and from a meta-analysis across different European 
populations. Human Molecular Genetics, 2009, 18, 
2719–2727.
Schumann, C. M., and Amaral, D. G. Stereological anal-
ysis of amygdala neuron number in autism. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2006, 26, 7674–7679.
Schwartz, M. F., Marin, O. S. M., and Saffran, E. M. 
Dissociations of language function in dementia: A 
case study. Brain and Language, 1979, 7, 277–306.
Schwartz, M. F., Saffran, E. M., and Marin, O. S. 
M. The word order problem in agrammatism. I: 
Comprehension. Brain and Language, 1980, 10,  
249–262.
Schwartz, S., Ponz, A., Poryazova, R., Werth, E., et al. 
Abnormal activity in hypothalamus and amygdala 
during humour processing in human narcolepsy with 
cataplexy. Brain, 2008, 131, 514–522.
Schwartz, W. J., and Gainer, H. Suprachiasmatic nucleus: 
Use of 14C-labelled deoxyglucose uptake as a func-
tional marker. Science, 1977, 197, 1089–1091.
Schwarzlose, R. F., Baker, C. I., and Kanwisher, N. 
Separate face and body selectivity on the fusiform 
gyrus. Journal of Neuroscience. 2005, 25, 11055–11059.
Scott, K. The sweet and the bitter of mammalian taste. 
Current Opinions in Neurobiology, 2004, 14, 423–427.
without ­atonia and REM sleep behavior disorder. 
Annals of Neurology, 1992, 32, 3–10.
Schenk, D., Barbour, R., Dunn, W., et al. Immunization 
with amyloid-beta attenuates Alzheimer-disease-like 
pathology in the PDAPP mouse. Nature, 1999, 400, 
173–177.
Schenkein, J., and Montagna, P. Self management 
of fatal familial insomnia. 1: What is FFI? Medscape 
General Medicine, 2006a, 8, 65.
Schenkein, J., and Montagna, P. Self management 
of fatal familial insomnia. 2: Case report. Medscape 
General Medicine, 2006b, 8, 66.
Scherschlicht, R., Polc, P., Schneeberger, J., Steiner, 
M., et al. Selective suppression of rapid eye move-
ment sleep (REMS) in cats by typical and atypical 
antidepressants. In Typical and Atypical Antidepressants: 
Molecular Mechanisms, edited by E. Costa and G. 
Racagni. New York: Raven Press, 1982.
Schiffman, J., Ekstrom, M., LaBrie, J., Schulsinger, F., 
et al. Minor physical anomalies and schizophrenia 
spectrum disorders: A prospective investigation. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 2002, 159, 238–243.
Schiffman, J., Walker, E., Ekstrom, M., Schulsinger, F., 
et al. Childhood videotaped social and neuromotor 
precursors of schizophrenia: A prospective investiga-
tion, American Journal of Psychiatry, 2004, 161,  
2021–2027.
Schiffman, S. S., Lockhead, E., and Maes, F. W. 
Amiloride reduces the taste intensity of Na+ and Li+ 
salts and ­sweeteners. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, USA, 1983, 80, 6136–6140.
Schiller, P. H. The ON and OFF channels of the visual 
­system. Trends in Neuroscience, 1992, 15, 86–92.
Schiller, P. H., and Malpeli, J. G. Properties and tectal 
projections of monkey retinal ganglion cells. Journal 
of Neurophysiology, 1977, 40, 428–445.
Schiller, P. H., Sandell, J. H., and Maunsell, J. H. R. 
Functions of the ON and OFF channels of the visual 
system. Nature, 1986, 322, 824–825.
Schleifer, S. J., Keller, S. E., Camerino, M., Thornton,  
J. C., et al. Suppression of lymphocyte stimulation  
following bereavement. Journal of the American  
Medical Association, 1983, 15, 374–377.
Schloegl, H., Percik, R., Horstmann, A, et al. Peptide 
hormones regulating appetite—Focus on neuroimag-
ing studies in humans. Diabetes/Metabolism Research and 
Reviews, 2011, 27, 104–112.
Schmid, D., Held, K., Ising, M., Uhr, M., et al. Ghrelin 
stimulates appetite, imagination of food, GH, ACTH, 
and cortisol, but does not affect leptin in normal con-
trols. Neuropsychopharmacology, 2005, 30, 1187–1192.
Schmidt, M. H., and Schmidt, H. S. Sleep-related 
­erections: Neural mechanisms and clinical signifi-

	
References	
699
Shammi, P., and Stuss, D. T. Humor appreciation: A 
role of the right frontal lobe. Brain, 1999, 122,  
657–666.
Shannon, R. V. Understanding hearing through deaf-
ness. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 2007, 104, 6883–6884.
Shapiro, L. E., Leonard, C. M., Sessions, C. E., 
Dewsbury, D. A., and Insel, T. R. Comparative 
neuroanatomy of the sexually dimorphic hypo­
thalamus in monogamous and polygamous voles. 
Brain Research, 1991, 541, 232–240.
Sharp, D. J., Scott, S. K., and Wise, R. J. S. Retrieving 
­meaning after temporal lobe infarction: The role of 
the basal language area. Annals of Neurology, 2004, 56, 
836–846.
Shaw, P., Eckstrand, K., Sharp, W., Blumenthal, J., et al. 
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is character-
ized by a delay in cortical maturation. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2007, 10, 19649–19654.
Shaywitz, B. A., Shaywitz, S. E., Pugh, K. R., Mencl, W. E.,  
et al. Disruption of posterior brain systems for read-
ing in children with developmental dyslexia. Biological 
Psychiatry, 2002, 52, 101–110.
Shema, R., Haramati, S., Ron, S., et al. Enhancement 
of ­consolidated long-term memory by overexpression 
of protein kinase Mz in the neocortex. Science, 2011, 
331, 1207–1210.
Shen, K., and Meyer, T. Dynamic control of CaMKII 
­translocation and localization in hippocampal 
neurons by NMDA stimulation. Science, 1999, 284, 
162–166.
Shepherd, G. M. Discrimination of molecular signals 
by the olfactory receptor neuron. Neuron, 1994, 13, 
771–790.
Sher, A. E. Surgery for obstructive sleep apnea. Progress 
in Clinical Biology Research, 1990, 345, 407–415.
Sherin, J. E., Elmquist, J. K., Torrealba, F., and Saper, 
C. B. Innervation of histaminergic tuberomammillary 
neurons by GABAergic and galaninergic neurons in 
the ventrolateral preoptic nucleus of the rat. Journal 
of Neuroscience, 1998, 18, 4705–4721.
Sherry, D. F., Jacobs, L. F., and Gaulin, S. J. C. Spatial 
­memory and adaptive specialization of the hippocam-
pus. Trends in Neuroscience, 1992, 15, 298–303.
Shi, S.-H., Hayashi, Y., Petralia, R. S., Zaman, S. H., 
et al. Rapid spine delivery and redistribution of 
AMPA receptors after synaptic NMDA receptor activa-
tion. Science, 1999, 284, 1811–1816.
Shifren, J. L., Braunstein, G. D., Simon, J. A., Casson, 
P. R., et al. Transdermal testosterone treatment in 
women with impaired sexual function after oopho-
rectomy. New England Journal of Medicine, 2000, 343, 
682–688.
Scott, S. K., Blank, E. C., Rosen, S., and Wise, R. J. S. 
Identification of a pathway for intelligible speech in 
the left temporal lobe. Brain, 2000, 123, 2400–2406.
Scott, T. R., and Plata-Salaman, C. R. Coding of taste 
­quality. In Smell and Taste in Health and Disease, edited 
by T. N. Getchell. New York: Raven Press, 1991.
Scoville, W. B., and Milner, B. Loss of recent mem-
ory after bilateral hippocampal lesions. Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 1957, 20, 11–21.
Seagraves, M. A., Goldberg, M. E., Deny, S., Bruce, C. J., 
et al. The role of striate cortex in the guidance of eye 
­movements in the monkey. The Journal of Neuroscience, 
1987, 7, 3040–3058.
Sears, L. L., Vest, C., Mohamed, S., Bailey, J., et al. An 
MRI study of the basal ganglia in autism. Progress in 
Neuro-Psychopharmacology and Biological Psychiatry, 1999, 
23, 613–624.
Sebat, J., Lakshmi, B., Malhotra, D., Troge, J., et al. 
Strong association of de novo copy number muta-
tions with autism. Science, 2007, 316, 445–449.
Seidman, L. J., Biederman, J., Weber, W., Hatch, M., 
et al. Neuropsychological function in adults with 
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder. Biological 
Psychiatry, 1998, 44, 260–268.
Selye, H. The Stress of Life. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1976.
Semenza, C., and Zettin, M. Evidence from aphasia for 
the role of proper names as pure referring expres-
sions. Nature, 1989, 342, 678–679.
Senju, A., Maeda, M., Kikuchi, Y., Hasegawa, T., et al. 
Absence of contagious yawning in children with autism 
­spectrum disorder, Biology Letters, 2007, 3, 706–708.
Serrano, P., Friedman, E. L., Kenney, J., et al. PKMz 
maintains spatial, instrumental, and classically 
conditioned long-term memories. PLoS Biology, 2008, 
23, 2698–2706.
Sforza, E., Montagna, P., Tinuper, P., Cortelli, P., 
et al. Sleep-wake cycle abnormalities in fatal familial 
insomnia: Evidence of the role of the thalamus in 
sleep regulation. Electroencephalography and Clinical 
Neurophysiology, 1995, 94, 398–405.
Shafto, M. A., Burke, D. M., Stamatakis, E. A., Tam, 
P. P., et al. On the tip-of-the-tongue: Neural correlates 
of increased word-finding failures in normal aging. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2007, 19, 2060–2070.
Shalev, U., Erb, S., and Shaham, Y. Role of CRF and 
other neuropeptides in stress-induced reinstatement 
of drug ­seeking. Brain Research, 2010, 1314, 15–28.
Shallice, T. Phonological agraphia and the lexical route 
in writing. Brain, 1981, 104, 413–429.
Sham, P. C., O’Callaghan, E., Takei, N., Murray, G. K., 
el al. Schizophrenia following pre-natal exposure to 
influenza ­epidemics between 1939 and 1960. British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 1992, 160, 461–466.

700	
References
Silva, A. J., Paylor, R., Wehner, J. M., and Tonegawa, S. 
Impaired spatial learning in alpha-calcium-calmodu-
lin kinase II mutant mice. Science, 1992a, 257,  
206–211.
Silver, R., LeSauter, J., Tresco, P. A., and Lehman, M. N.  
A diffusible coupling signal from the transplanted 
suprachiasmatic nucleus controlling circadian loco-
motor rhythms. Nature, 1996, 382, 810–813.
Silveri, M. C. Peripheral aspects of writing can be 
differentially affected by sensorial and attentional 
defect: Evidence from a patient with afferent 
dysgraphia and case dissociation. Cortex, 1996, 32, 
155–172.
Silverman, J.L., Yang, M., Lord, C., and Crawley, J. N. 
Behavioural phenotyping assays for mouse models 
of autism. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2010, 11, 
490–501.
Simpson, J. B., Epstein, A. N., and Camardo, J. S. The 
localization of dipsogenic receptors for angiotensin 
II in the subfornical organ. Journal of Comparative and 
Physiological Psychology, 1978, 92, 581–608.
Sincich, L. C., Jocson, C. M., and Horton, J. C. V1 inter-
patch projections to V2 thick stripes and pale stripes. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2010, 30, 6963-6974.
Sindelar, D. K., Ste. Marie, L., Miura, G. I., Palmiter, R. D., 
et al. Neuropeptide Y is required for hyperphagic feed-
ing in response to neuroglucopenia. Endocrinology, 2004, 
145, 3363–3368.
Singer, C., and Weiner, W. J. Male sexual dysfunction. 
Neurologist, 1996, 2, 119–129.
Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J., Kaube, H., 
et al. Empathy for pain involves the affective but 
not sensory ­components of pain. Science, 2004, 303, 
1157–1162.
Singh, D., and Bronstad, P. M. Female body odour is 
a potential cue to ovulation. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B, 2001, 268, 797–801.
Sipos, A., Rasmussen, F., Harrison, G., Tynelius, P., 
et al. Paternal age and schizophrenia: A population 
based cohort study. British Medical Journal, 2004, 330, 
147–148.
Sipos, M. L., and Nyby, J. G. Concurrent androgenic 
stimulation of the ventral tegmental area and medial 
preoptic area: Synergistic effects on male-typical 
reproductive behaviors in house mice. Brain Research, 
1996, 729, 29–44.
Sirigu, A., Deprati, E., Ciancia, S., Giraux, P., et al. 
Altered awareness of voluntary action after damage 
to the parietal cortex. Nature Neuroscience, 2004, 7, 
80–84.
Skaggs, W. E., and McNaughton, B. L. Spatial firing 
properties of hippocampal CA1 populations in an 
environment containing two visually identical regions. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 1998, 18, 8455–8466.
Shik, M. L., and Orlovsky, G. N. Neurophysiology of 
locomotor automatism. Physiological Review, 1976, 56, 
465–501.
Shima, K., and Tanji, J. Both supplementary and 
­presupplementary motor areas are crucial for the 
­temporal organization of multiple movements. 
Journal of Neurophysiology, 1998, 80, 3247–3260.
Shima, K., and Tanji, J. Neuronal activity in the 
supplementary and presupplementary motor areas 
for temporal organization of multiple movements. 
Journal of Neurophysiology, 2000, 84, 2148–2160.
Shimada, M., Tritos, N. A., Lowell, B. B., Flier, J. S., 
et al. Mice lacking melanin-concentrating hormone 
are hypophagic and lean. Nature, 1998, 396, 670–674.
Shimura, T., Yamamoto, T., and Shimokochi, M. The 
medial preoptic area is involved in both sexual 
arousal and ­performance in male rats: Re-evaluation 
of neuron activity in freely moving animals. Brain 
Research, 1994, 640, 215–222.
Shin, A. C., Zheng, H., Pistell, P. J., and Berthoud, H.-R. 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery changes food reward 
in rats. International Journal of Obesity, 2011, 35, 642–651.
Shin, L. M., Wright, C. I., Cannistraro, P. A., Wedig, 
M. M., et al. A functional magnetic resonance imag-
ing study of amygdala and medial prefrontal cortex 
responses to overtly presented fearful faces in post-
traumatic stress disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
2005, 62, 273–281.
Shipley, M. T., and Ennis, M. Functional organization 
of the olfactory system. Journal of Neurobiology, 1996, 
30, 123–176.
Shmuelof, L, and Zohary, E. Dissociation between 
­ventral and dorsal fMRI activation during object and 
action ­recognition. Neuron, 2005, 47, 457–470.
Shors, T. J. Saving new brain cells. Scientific American, 
2009, 100, 46–54.
Shuto, Y., Shibasaki, T., Otagiri, A., Kuriyama, H., et al. 
Hypothalamic growth hormone secretagogue recep-
tor regulates growth hormone secretion, feeding, and 
adiposity. Journal of Clinical Investigation, 2002, 109, 
1429–1436.
Sidman, M., Stoddard, L. T., and Mohr, J. P. Some 
­additional quantitative observations of immediate 
memory in a patient with bilateral hippocampal 
lesions. Neuropsychologia, 1968, 6, 245–254.
Siegel, J. Clues to the functions of mammalian sleep. 
Nature, 2005, 437, 1264–1271.
Siegel, J. M., and McGinty, D. J. Pontine reticular for-
mation neurons: Relationship of discharge to motor 
activity. Science, 1977, 196, 678–680.
Siegel, R. M., and Andersen, R. A. Motion perceptual 
­deficits following ibotenic acid lesions of the middle 
­temporal area (MT) in the behaving monkey. Society 
for Neuroscience Abstracts, 1986, 12, 1183.

	
References	
701
Solyom, L., Turnbull, I. M., and Wilensky, M. A case of 
self-inflicted leucotomy. British Journal of Psychiatry, 
1987, 151, 855–857.
Son, G. H., Geum, D., Chung, S., Kim, E. J., et al. 
Maternal stress produces learning deficits associ-
ated with impairment of NMDA receptor-mediated 
synaptic plasticity. Journal of Neuroscience, 2006, 26, 
3309–3318.
Soon, C. S., Brass, M., Heinze, H.-J., and Haynes, 
J.-D. Unconscious determinants of free decisions 
in the human brain. Nature Neuroscience, 2008, 11, 
543–545.
Soria, G., Mendizabal, V., Rourino, C., Robledo, P, et al.  
Lack of CB1 cannabinoid receptor impairs cocaine 
self-administration. Neuropsychopharmacology, 2005, 30,  
1670–1680.
Sormani, M. P., Bruzzi, P., Comi, G., and Filippi, M. 
The distribution of the magnetic resonance imaging 
response to glatiramer acetate in multiple sclerosis. 
Multiple Sclerosis, 2005, 11, 447–449.
Sotillo, M., Carretié, L., Hinojosa, J. A., Tapia, M., et al. 
Neural activity associated with metaphor comprehen-
sion: Spatial analysis. Neuroscience Letters, 2005, 373, 
5–9.
Sotres-Bayon, F., and Quirk, G. J. Prefrontal control of 
fear: More than just extinction, Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology, 2010, 20, 231–235.
Sotthibundhu, A., Sykes, A. M., Fox, B., Underwood, 
C. K., et al. b-Amyloid1–42 induces neuronal death 
through the p75 neurotrophin receptor. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2008, 28, 3941–3946.
South, E. H., and Ritter, R. C. Capsaicin application 
to central or peripheral vagal fibers attenuates CCK 
­satiety. Peptides, 1988, 9, 601–612.
Southwell, A. L., Ko, J., and Patterson, P. H. Intrabody 
gene therapy ameliorates motor, cognitive, and neu-
ropathological symptoms in multiple mouse models of 
Huntington’s ­disease. Journal of Neuroscience, 2009, 29, 
13589–13602.
Sperry, R. W. Brain bisection and consciousness. In 
Brain and Conscious Experience, edited by J. Eccles. New 
York: Springer-Verlag, 1966.
Spezio, M. L., Huang, P.-Y. S., Castelli, F., and Adolphs, 
R. Amygdala damage impairs eye contact during 
conversations with real people. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2007, 27, 3994–3997.
Spiers, H. J., Maguire, E. A., and Burgess, N. Hippo­
campal amnesia. Neurocase, 2001, 7, 357–382.
Sprengelmeyer, R., Young, A. W., Calder, A. J., Karnat, 
A., et al. Loss of disgust: Perception of faces and 
emotions in Huntington’s disease. Brain, 1996, 119, 
1647–1665.
Sprengelmeyer, R., Young, A. W., Pundt, I., 
Sprengelmeyer, A., et al. Disgust implicated in 
Skene, D. J., Lockley, S. W., and Arendt, J. Melatonin 
in circadian sleep disorders in the blind. Biological 
Signals and Receptors, 1999, 8, 90–95.
Skutella, T., Criswell, H., Moy, S., Probst, J. C., et al. 
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) antisense 
oligodeoxynucleotide induces anxiolytic effects in rat. 
Neuroreport, 1994, 5, 2181–2185.
Slater, M., Perez-Marcos, D., Ehrsson, H. H., and 
Sanchez-Vives, M. V. Inducing illusory ownership 
of a virtual body. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 2009, 3, 
214–220.
Slotkin, T. A. Fetal nicotine or cocaine exposure: Which 
one is worse? Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics, 1998, 22, 521–527.
Smith, C. N., and Squire, L. R. Medial temporal lobe 
activity during retrieval of semantic memory is related 
to the age of the memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2009. 29, 930–938.
Smith, G. P. Animal models of human eating disorders. 
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1989, 16, 
219–237.
Smith, J. T., Acohido, B. V., Clifton, D. K., and Steiner, 
R. A. KiSS-1 neurones are direct targets for leptin in 
the ob/ob mouse. Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 2006, 
18, 298–303.
Smith, M. D., Patterson, E., Wahed, A. S., et al. 
Relationship between surgeon volume and adverse 
outcomes after RYGB in Longitudinal Assessment of 
Bariatric Surgery (LABS) study. Surgery for Obesity and 
Related Disorders, 2010, 6, 118–125.
Snyder, L. H., Batista, A. P., and Andersen, R. A. 
Intention-related activity in the posterior parietal cor-
tex: A review. Vision Research, 2000, 40, 1433–1441.
Snyder, S. H. Madness and the Brain. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1974.
Soares, J. C., and Gershon, S. The lithium ion: A 
foundation for psychopharmacological specificity. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 1998, 19, 167–182.
Södersten, P., Bergh, C., and Zandian, M. Under­
standing eating disorders. Hormones and Behavior, 
2006, 50, 572–578.
Södersten, P., Nergårdh, R., Bergh, C., et al. Behavioral 
neuroendocrinology and treatment of anorexia ner-
vosa. Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology, 2008, 29, 445–462.
Soliman, F., Glatt, C. E., Bath, K. G., et al. A genetic 
variant BDNF polymorphism alters extinction 
learning in both mouse and human. Science, 2010, 
327, 863–866.
Solomon, S. G., and Lennie, P. The machinery of 
colour vision. Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2007, 8, 
276–286.
Solstad, T., Boccara, C. N., Kropff, E., et al. Represen­
tation of geometric borders in the entorhinal cortex. 
Science, 2008, 322, 1865–1868.

702	
References
the left hemisphere. Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society, 2005, 11, 456–470.
Stein, M. B., Jang, K. L., Taylor, S., Vernon, P. A., et al. 
Genetic and environmental influences on trauma 
exposure and posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms: 
A twin study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2002, 159, 
1675–1681.
Stein, M. B., Simmons, A. N., Feinstein, J. S., and Paulus, 
M. P. Increased amygdala and insula activation dur-
ing emotion processing in anxiety-prone subjects. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 2007, 164, 318–327.
Stein, M. B., and Uhde, T. W. The biology of anxiety 
disorders. In American Psychiatric Press Textbook of 
Psychopharmacology. Washington, D.C.: American 
Psychiatric Press, 1995.
Steinhausen, H. C. The outcome of anorexia nervosa in 
the 20th century. American Journal of Psychiatry, 2002, 
159, 1284–1293.
Steininger, R. L., Alam, M. N., Szymusiak, R., and 
McGinty, D. State dependent discharge of ruber-
omammillary neurons in the rat hypothalamus. Sleep 
Research, 1996, 25, 28.
Stephan, F. K., and Nuñez, A. A. Elimination of 
circadian rhythms in drinking activity, sleep, and 
temperature by isolation of the suprachiasmatic 
nuclei. Behavioral Biology, 1977, 20, 1–16.
Stephan, F. K., and Zucker, I. Circadian rhythms in 
drinking behavior and locomotor activity of rats are 
eliminated by hypothalamic lesion. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 1972, 69, 1583–1586.
Steriade, M. Arousal: Revisiting the reticular activating 
­system. Science, 1996, 272, 225–226.
Steriade, M. The corticothalamic system in sleep. 
Frontiers in Bioscience, 2003, 8, d878–d899.
Steriade, M. Grouping of brain rhythms in corticotha-
lamic systems. Neuroscience, 2006, 137, 1087–1106.
Steriade, M., Paré, D., Datta, S., Oakson, G., et al. 
Different cellular types in mesopontine cholinergic 
nuclei related to ponto-geniculo-occipital waves. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 1990, 8, 2560–2579.
Sterman, M. B., and Clemente, C. D. Forebrain inhibi-
tory mechanisms: Cortical synchronization induced 
by basal ­forebrain stimulation. Experimental Neurology, 
1962a, 6, 91–102.
Sterman, M. B., and Clemente, C. D. Forebrain inhibitory 
­mechanisms: Sleep patterns induced by basal forebrain 
stimulation in the behaving cat. Experimental Neurology, 
1962b, 6, 103–117.
Stern, K., and McClintock, M. K. Regulation of 
­ovulation by human pheromones. Nature, 1998, 392, 
177–178.
Stewart, L. Fractionating the musical mind: Insights 
from congenital amusia. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology, 2008, 18, 127–130.
­obsessive-compulsive ­disorder. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B, 1997, 264, 1767–1773.
Squire, L. R. Stable impairment in remote memory 
­following electroconvulsive therapy. Neuropsychologia, 
1974, 13, 51–58.
Squire, L. R. Memory and the hippocampus: A synthe-
sis from findings with rats, monkeys, and humans. 
Psychological Review, 1992, 99, 195–231.
Squire, L. R., Shimamura, A. P., and Amaral, D. G. 
Memory and the hippocampus. In Neural Models of 
Plasticity: Experimental and Theoretical Approaches, edited 
by J. H. Byrne and W. O. Berry. San Diego: Academic 
Press, 1989.
St. George-Hyslop, P. H., Tanzi, R. E., Polinsky, R. J., 
Haines, J. L., et al. The genetic defect causing familial 
Alzheimer’s disease maps on chromosome 21. Science, 
1987, 235, 885–890.
Stahl, S. M., Grady, M. M., Moret, C., and Briley, M. 
SNRIs: Their pharmacology, clinical efficacy, and 
tolerability in comparison with other classes of antide-
pressants. CNS Spectrums, 2005, 10, 732–747.
Standing, L. Learning 10,000 pictures. Quarterly Journal 
of Experimental Psychology, 1973, 25, 207–222.
Stanislavsky, C. An Actor Prepares. New York: Theater 
Arts/Routledge, 1936.
Starkey, S. J., Walker, M. P., Beresford, I. J. M., and 
Hagan, R. M. Modulation of the rat suprachiasmatic 
circadian clock by melatonin in-vitro. Neuroreport, 
1995, 6, 1947–1951.
Staubli, U., Larson, J., and Lynch, G. Mossy fiber poten-
tiation and long-term potentiation involve different 
expression mechanisms. Synapse, 1990, 5, 333–335.
Stebbins, W. C., Miller, J. M., Johnsson, L.-G., and 
Hawkins, J. E. Ototoxic hearing loss and cochlear 
pathology in the monkey. Annals of Otology, Rhinology 
and Laryngology, 1969, 78, 1007–1026.
Steele, A. D., Emsley, J. G., Ozdinler, P. H., Lindquist, 
S., et al. Prion protein (PrPc) positively regulates 
neural precursor proliferation during developmental 
and adult mammalian neurogenesis. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2006, 203, 3416–3421.
Steeves, J. K. E., Humphrey, G. K., Culham, J. C., 
Menon, R. A., et al. Behavioral and neuroimaging 
evidence for a contribution of color and texture 
information to scene classification in a patient with 
visual form agnosia. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
2004, 16, 955–965.
Stefanacci, L., and Amaral, D. G. Topographic organi-
zation of cortical inputs to the lateral nucleus of the 
macaque monkey amygdala: A retrograde ­tracing 
study. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 2000, 22, 
52–79.
Stefanatos, G. A., Gershkoff, A., and Madigan, S. 
On pure word deafness, temporal processing, and 

	
References	
703
The New England Journal of Medicine, 1990, 322,  
789–794.
Sulik, K. K. Genesis of alcohol-induced craniofacial 
dysmorphism. Experimental Biology and Medicine, 2005, 
230, 366–375.
Sun, Y., Ahmed, S., and Smith, R. G. Deletion of ghrelin 
impairs neither growth nor appetite. Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, 2003, 23, 7973–7981.
Sun, Y., Wang, P., Zheng, H., and Smith, R. G. Ghrelin 
stimulation of growth hormone release and appetite is 
mediated through the growth hormone secretagogue 
receptor. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 2004,101, 4679–4684.
Suntsova, N., Guzman-Marin, R., Kumar, S., Alam, 
M. N., et al. The median preoptic nucleus recip-
rocally modulates activity of arousal-related and 
sleep-related neurons in the perifornical lateral 
hypothalamus. Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 
1616–1630.
Susser, E. S., and Lin, S. P. Schizophrenia after prenatal 
exposure to the Dutch Hunger Winter of 1944–1945. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 1992, 49, 983–988.
Susser, E. S., Neugebauer, R., Hoek, H. W., Brown, A. S.,  
el al. Schizophrenia after prenatal famine: Further 
evidence. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1996, 53, 
25–31.
Sutherland, R. J., McDonald, R. J., and Savage, D. D. 
Prenatal exposure to moderate levels of ethanol can 
have long-lasting effects on hippocampal synaptic 
plasticity in adult offspring. Hippocampus, 1997, 7, 
232–238.
Suzdak, P. D., Glowa, J. R., Crawley, J. N., Schwartz, 
R. D., et al. A selective imidazobenzodiazepine 
antagonist of ­ethanol in the rat. Science, 1986, 234, 
1243–1247.
Suzuki, S., Ramos, E. J., Goncalves, C. G., Chen, C., 
et al. Changes in GI hormones and their effect on 
gastric ­emptying and transit times after Roux-en-Y 
gastric bypass in rat model. Surgery, 2005, 138,  
283–290.
Svennilson, E., Torvik, A., Lowe, R., and Leksell, L. 
Treatment of Parkinsonism by stereotactic thermole-
sions in the pallidal region. Neurologica Scandanavica, 
1960, 35, 358–377.
Swaab, D. F., Gooren, L. J. G., and Hofman, M. A. Brain 
research, gender, and sexual orientation. Journal of 
Homosexuality, 1995, 28, 283–301.
Swaab, D. F., and Hofman, M. A. An enlarged suprachi-
asmatic nucleus in homosexual men. Brain Research, 
1990, 537, 141–148.
Swanson, L. W., Köhler, C., and Björklund, A. The 
­limbic region. I: The septohippocampal system. In 
Handbook of Chemical Neuroanatomy, Vol. 5: Integrated 
Systems of the CNS, Part I, edited by A. Björklund,  
Stewart, L., Walsh, V., Frith, U., and Rothwell, J. C. TMS 
­produces two dissociable types of speech disruption. 
Neuroimage, 2001, 13, 472–478.
Stinson, D., and Thompson, C. Clinical experience with 
photo­therapy. Journal of the Affective Disorders, 1990, 18, 
129–135.
Stoeckel, L. E., Weller, R. E., Giddings, M., and Cox, 
J. E. Peptide YY levels are associated with appetite 
suppression in response to long-chain fatty acids. 
Physiology and Behavior, 2008, 93, 289–295.
Stolerman, I. P., and Jarvis, M. J. The scientific case that 
nicotine is addictive. Psychopharmacology, 1995, 117, 
2–10.
Stone, A. A., Reed, B. R., and Neale, J. M. Changes in 
daily event frequency precede episodes of physical 
symptoms. Journal of Human Stress, 1987, 13, 70–74.
Stone, J. M., Morrison, P. D., and Pilowsky, L. S. 
Glutamate and dopamine dysregulation in schizo-
phrenia: A synthesis and selective review. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology, 2007, 21, 440–452.
Storz, G., Altuvia, S., and Wassarman, K. M. An abundance 
of RNA regulators. Annual Review of Biochemistry, 2005, 
74, 199–217.
Stowe, G. N., Vendruscolo, L. F., Edwards, S., et al. A 
vaccine strategy that induces protective immunity 
against heroin. Journal of Medical Chemistry, 2011, 54, 
5195–5204.
Stowers, L., Holy, T. E., Meister, M., Dulac, C., et al. 
Loss of sex discrimination of male-male aggression in 
mice deficient for TRP2. Science, 2002, 295,  
1493–1500.
Stowers, L., and Marton, T. F. What is a pheromone? 
Mammalian pheromones reconsidered. Neuron, 2005, 46, 
699–702.
Strange, P. G. Antipsychotic drug action: Antagonism, 
inverse agonism or partial agonism. Trends in 
Pharmacological Science, 2008, 29, 314–321.
Stumpf, R. M., and Boesch, C. Does promiscuous mating 
preclude female choice? Female sexual strategies in 
­chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus) of the Taï National 
Park, Côte d’Ivoire. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 
2005, 57, 511–524.
Sturgis, J. D., and Bridges, R. S. N-methyl-DL-aspartic 
acid lesions of the medial preoptic area disrupt ongo-
ing ­parental behavior in male rats. Physiology and 
Behavior, 1997, 62, 305–310.
Sturup, G. K. Correctional treatment and the criminal 
­sexual offender. Canadian Journal of Correction, 1961, 
3, 250–265.
Styron, W. Darkness Visible: A Memoir of Madness. New 
York: Random House, 1990.
Suddath, R. L., Christison, G. W., Torrey, E. F., Casanova, 
M. F., et al. Anatomical abnormalities in the brains  
of ­monozygotic twins discordant for schizophrenia. 

704	
References
Taub, E., Uswatte, F., King, D. K., Morris, D., et al.  
A placebo-­controlled trial of constraint-induced move-
ment therapy for upper extremity after stroke. Stroke, 
2006, 37, 1045–1049.
Tavera-Mendoza, L. E., and White, J. H. Cell defenses 
and the sunshine vitamin. Scientific American, 2007, 
297, 62–72.
Taxidis, J., Coombes, S., Mason, R., and Owen, M. R. 
Modeling sharp wave-ripple complexes through a 
CA3-CA1 network model with chemical synapses. 
Hippocampus, 2011, DOI: 10.1002/hipo.20930.
Taylor, M. J., Sen, S., and Bhagwagar, Z. Antidepressant 
response and the serotonin transporter gene-linked 
polymorphic region. Biological Psychiatry, 2010, 68, 
536–543.
Teff, K. L., Elliott, S. S., Tschöp, M., et al. Dietary 
fructose reduces circulating insulin and leptin, 
attenuates postprandial suppression of ghrelin, and 
increases triglycerides in women. Journal of Clinical 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 2004, 89, 2963–2972.
Teitelbaum, P., and Stellar, E. Recovery from the fail-
ure to eat produced by hypothalamic lesions. Science, 
1954, 120, 894–895.
Teng, E., and Squire, L. R. Memory for places learned 
long ago is intact after hippocampal damage. Nature, 
1999, 400, 675–677.
Terenius, L., and Wahlström, A. Morphine-like ligand 
for opiate receptors in human CSF. Life Sciences, 1975, 
16, 1759–1764.
Terman, M. Evolving applications of light therapy. Sleep 
Medicine Reviews, 2007, 11, 497–507.
Terracciano, A., Tanaka, T., Sutin, A. R., et al. Genome-
wide association scan of trait depression. Biological 
Psychiatry, 2010, 68, 811–817.
Terry, R. D., and Davies, P. Dementia of the Alzheimer 
type. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 1980, 3, 77–96.
Tetel, M. J., Celentano, D. C., and Blaustein, J. D. 
Intraneuronal convergence of tactile and hormonal 
stimuli associated with female reproduction in rats. 
Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 1994, 6, 211–216.
Tetel, M. J., Getzinger, M. J., and Blaustein, J. D. Fos 
expression in the rat brain following vaginal-cervical 
stimulation by mating and manual probing. Journal of 
Neuroendocrinology, 1993, 5, 397–404.
Thach, W. T. Correlation of neural discharge with pattern 
and force of muscular activity, joint position, and direc-
tion of intended movement in motor cortex and cere­
bellum. Journal of Neurophysiology, 1978, 41, 654–676.
Thaker, G. K., and Carpenter, W. T. Advances in 
schizophrenia. Nature Medicine, 2001, 7, 667–671.
Thakkar, M. M., Winston, S., and McCarley, R. W. 
Orexin neurons of the hypothalamus express 
adenosine A1 receptors. Brain Research, 2002, 944, 
190–194.
T. Hökfelt, and L. W. Swanson. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 
1987.
Sweet, W. H. Participant in brain stimulation in behav-
ing subjects. Neurosciences Research Program 
Workshop, 1966.
Swerdlow, N. R. Are we studying and treating schizo-
phrenia correctly? Schizophrenia Research, 2011, 130, 
1–10.
Swerdlow, N. R., Geyer, M. A., Vale, W. W., and Koob, 
G. F. Corticotropin-releasing factor potentiates acous-
tic startle in rats: Blockade by chlordiazepoxide. 
Psychopharmacology, 1986, 88, 147–152.
Szwed, M., Cohen, L, Qiao, E., and Dehaene, S. The role 
of invariant line junctions in object and visual word 
recognition. Vision Research, 2009, 49, 718–725.
Szymanski, M., Barciszewska, M. Z., Zywicki M., and 
Barciszewski, J. Noncoding RNA transcripts. Journal of 
Applied Genetics, 2003, 44, 1–19.
Takahashi, K., Lin, J.-S., and Sakai, K. Characterization 
and mapping of sleep–waking specific neurons in the 
basal ­forebrain and preoptic hypothalamus in mice. 
Neuroscience, 2009, 161, 269–292.
Takahashi, K., Lin, J.-S., and Sakai, K. Neuronal activity of 
histaminergic tuberomammillary neurons during wake–
sleep states in the mouse. Journal of Neuroscience, 2006, 
26, 10292–10298.
Takahashi, L. K. Hormonal regulation of sociosexual 
­behavior in female mammals. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 1990, 14, 403–413.
Takahashi, Y. K., Nagayma, S., and Mori, K. Detection 
and masking of spoiled food smells by odor maps in 
the olfactory bulb. Journal of Neuroscience, 2004, 24, 
8690–8694.
Tamietto, M., Castelli, L., Vighetti, S., et al. Unseen 
facial and bodily expressions trigger fast emotional 
reactions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 2009, 106, 17661–17666.
Tamm, L., Menon, V., Ringel, J., and Reiss, A. L. Event-
related fMRI evidence of frontotempotal involvement 
in aberrant response inhibition and task switching 
in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of 
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
2004, 43, 1430–1440.
Tan, L. H., Laird, A. R., Li, K., and Fox, P. T. Neuro­
anatomical correlates of phonological processing of 
Chinese characters and alphabetic words: A meta-
analysis. Human Brain Mapping, 2005, 25, 83–91.
Tarr, M. J., and Gauthier, I. FFA: A flexible fusiform area 
for subordinate-level visual processing automatized by 
expertise. Nature Neuroscience, 2000, 3, 764–769.
Tarter, R. E., Kirisci, L., Mezzich, A., Cornelius, J. R., 
et al. Neurobehavioral disinhibition in childhood 
predicts early age at onset of substance use disorder. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 2003, 160, 1078–1085.

	
References	
705
eral and dorsomedial striatal loops during learning. 
Neuron, 2010, 66, 781–795.
Thrasher, T. N. Role of forebrain circumventricu-
lar organs in body fluid balance. Acta Physiologica 
Scandanavica, 1989, 136 (Suppl. 583), 141–150.
Thuy, D. H. D., Matsuo, K., Nakamura, K., Toma, 
K., et al. Implicit and explicit processing of kanji 
and kana words and non-words studied with fMRI. 
Neuroimage, 2004, 23, 878–889.
Timmann, D., Watts, S., and Hore, J. Failure of cerebel-
lar patients to time finger opening precisely causes 
ball high-low inaccuracy in overarm throws. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 1999, 82, 103–114.
Tizzano, M., Gulbransen, B. D., Vanderbeuch, A., et al. 
Nasal chemosensory cells use bitter taste signaling 
to detect irritants and bacterial signals. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2010, 107, 
3210–3215.
Toh, K. L., Jones, C. R., He, Y., Eide, E. J., et al. An 
hPer2 phosphorylation site mutation in familial 
advanced sleep phase syndrome. Science, 2001, 291, 
1040–1043.
Tootell, R. B. H., Tsao, D., and Vanduffel, W. Neuro­
imaging weighs in: Humans meet macaques in “primate” 
visual ­cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 2003, 23,  
3981–3989.
Topper, R., Kosinski, C., and Mull, M. Volitional type of 
facial palsy associated with pontine ischemia. Journal 
of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 1995, 58, 
732–734.
Tordoff, M. G., and Friedman, M. I. Hepatic control 
of feeding: Effect of glucose, fructose, and mannitol. 
American Journal of Physiology, 1988, 254, R969–R976.
Tordoff, M. G., Hopfenbeck, J., and Novin, D. Hepatic 
­vagotomy (partial hepatic denervation) does not alter 
ingestive responses to metabolic challenges. Physiology 
and Behavior, 1982, 28, 417–424.
Tracy, J. L., and Robbins, R. W. The automaticity of 
emotion recognition. Emotion, 2008, 8, 81–95.
Triarhou, L. C. The percipient observations of 
Constantin von Economo on encephalitis lethar-
gica and sleep disruption and their lasting impact 
on ­contemporary sleep research. Brain Research 
Bulletin, 2006, 69, 244–258.
Tronel, S., Fabre, An., Charrier, V., et al. Spatial learning 
sculpts the dendritic arbor of adult-born hippocampal 
­neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
USA, 2010, 107, 7963–7968.
Trulson, M. E., and Jacobs, B. L. Raphe unit activity in 
freely moving cats: Correlation with level of behav-
ioral arousal. Brain Research, 1979, 163, 135–150.
Trussell, L. O. Synaptic mechanisms for coding timing 
in auditory neurons. Annual Review of Physiology, 1999, 
61, 477–496.
Thapar, A., O’Donovan, M., and Owen, M. J. The genet-
ics of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Human 
Molecular Genetics, 2005, 14, R275–R282.
Thase, M. E. Treatment issues related to sleep and 
depression. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 2000, 61, 
46–50.
Theorell, T., Leymann, H., Jodko, M., Konarski, 
K., et al. “Person under train” incidents: Medical 
­consequences for subway drivers. Psychosomatic 
Medicine, 1992, 54, 480–488.
Thiels, E., Xie, X. P., Yeckel, M. F., Barrionuevo, G., 
et al. NMDA receptor-dependent LTD in differ-
ent subfields of hippocampus in vivo and in vitro. 
Hippocampus, 1996, 6, 43–51.
Thielscher, A., and Pessoa, L. Neural correlates of 
perceptual choice and decision making during fear–
disgust discrimination. Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 
27, 2908–2917.
Thier, P., Haarmeier, T., Chakraborty, S., Lindner, A., 
et al. Cortical substrates of perceptual stability during 
eye movements. Neuroimage, 2001, 14, S33–S39.
Thomas, A. C., Allen, F. L., Phillips, H., and Karantzas, 
G. Gaming machine addiction: The role of avoidance, 
accessibility and social support. Psychology of Addictive 
Behaviors, 2011. Epub ahead of print.
Thomas, O., Avidan, G., Humphreys, K., et al. Reduced 
structural connectivity in ventral visual cortex in con-
genital prosopagnosia. Nature Neuroscience, 2009, 12, 
29–31.
Thomas, R. M., Hotsenpiller, G., and Peterson, D. A. 
Acute psychosocial stress reduces cell survival in 
adult hippocampal neurogenesis without altering 
proliferation. Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27,  
2734–2743.
Thompson, P. M., Hayashi, K. M., Simon, S. L., Geaga, 
J. A., el al. Structural abnormalities in the brains of 
human subjects who use methamphetamine. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2004, 24, 6028–6036.
Thompson, P. M., Vidal, C., Giedd, J. N., Gochman, 
P., et al. Mapping adolescent brain change reveals 
dynamic wave of accelerated gray matter loss in 
very early-onset schizophrenia. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2001, 98,  
11650–11655.
Thompson, S. M., Fortunato, C., McKinney, R. A., 
Müller, M., et al. Mechanisms underlying the 
neuropathological consequences of epileptic activity 
in the rat hippocampus in vitro. Journal of Comparative 
Neurology, 1996, 372, 515–528.
Thomson, J. J. Rights, Restitution, and Risk: Essays in 
Moral Theory. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University 
Press, 1986.
Thorn, C. A., Atallah, H., Howe, M., and Graybiel, A. M. 
Differential dynamics of activity changes in dorsolat-

706	
References
Urban, P. P., Wicht, S., Marx, J., Mitrovic, S., et al. 
Isolated voluntary facial paresis due to pontine isch-
emia. Neurology, 1998, 50, 1859–1862.
Urgesi, C., Berlucchi, G., and Aglioti, S. M. Magnetic 
stimulation of extrastriate body area impairs visual 
processing of nonfacial body parts. Current Biology, 
2004, 13, 2130–2134.
Vaidya, C. J., Bunge, S. A., Dudukovic, N. M., Zalecki, 
C. A., et al. Altered neural substrates of cognitive con-
trol in childhood ADHD: Evidence from functional 
magnetic resonance imaging. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 2005, 162, 1605–1613.
Vaina, L. M. Complex motion perception and its defi-
cits. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 1998, 8, 494–502.
Valcour, V., Sithinamsuwan, P., Letendre, S., and Ances, 
B. Pathogenesis of HIV in the central nervous system. 
Current HIV/AIDS, 2011, 8, 54–61.
Valenstein, E. S. Great and Desperate Cures: The Rise and 
Decline of Psychosurgery and Other Radical Treatments for 
Mental Illness. New York: Basic Books, 1986.
Valenza, N., Ptak, R., Zimine, I., Badan, M., et al. 
Dissociated active and passive tactile shape recogni-
tion: A case study of pure tactile apraxia. Brain, 2001, 
124, 2287–2298.
Valyear, K. F., Culham, J. C., Sharif, N., Westwood, D., 
et al. A double dissociation between sensitivity to 
changes in object identity and object orientation in 
the ventral and dorsal visual streams: A human fMRI 
study. Neuropsychologia, 2006, 44, 218–228.
Van Bockstaele, E. J., Bajic, D., Proudfit, H., and 
Valentino, R. J. Topographic architecture of stress-
related pathways targeting the noradrenergic locus 
coeruleus. Physiology and Behavior, 2001, 73,  
273–283.
van de Poll, N. E., Taminiau, M. S., Endert, E., and 
Louwerse, A. L. Gonadal steroid influence upon 
sexual and aggressive behavior of female rats. 
International Journal of Neuroscience, 1988, 41, 271–286.
Van den Top, M., Lee, K., Whyment, A. D., Blanks, A. M.,  
et al. Orexigen-sensitive NPY/AGRP pacemaker  
neurons in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2004, 7, 493–494.
van der Lee, S., and Boot, L. M. Spontaneous pseudo-
pregnancy in mice. Acta Physiologica et Pharmacologica 
Neerlandica, 1955, 4, 442–444.
Van Goozen, S., Wiegant, V., Endert, E., Helmond, F., 
et al. Psychoendrocrinological assessments of the 
menstrual cycle: The relationship between hormones, 
sexuality, and mood. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 1997, 
26, 359–382.
van Harmelen, A. L., van Tol, M. J., van der Wee, N. J., 
et al. Reduced medial prefrontal cortex volume in 
adults reporting childhood emotional maltreatment. 
Biological Psychiatry, 2010, 68, 832–838.
Tsacopoulos, M., and Magistretti, P. J. Metabolic 
coupling between glia and neurons. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 1996, 16, 877–885.
Tsai, H.-C., Zhang, F., Adamantidis, A., et al. Phasic 
­firing in dopaminergic neurons is sufficient for 
behavioral ­conditioning. Science, 2009, 324,  
1080–1084.
Tsankova, N., Renthal, W., Kuman, A., and Nestler, E. J. 
Epigenetic regulation in psychiatric disorders. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2007, 8, 355–367.
Tsao, D. Y., Freiwald, W. A., Tootell, R. B. H., and 
Livingstone, M. S. A cortical region consisting entirely 
of face-selective cells. Science, 2006, 311, 670–674.
Tsao, D. Y., Vanduffel, W., Sasaki, Y., Fize, D., et al. 
Stereopsis activates V3A and caudal intraparietal 
areas in macaques and humans. Neuron, 2003, 39, 
555–568.
Tsuang, M. T., Gilbertson, M. W., and Faraone, S. V. 
The genetics of schizophrenia: Current knowledge 
and future directions. Schizophrenia Research, 1991, 4, 
157–171.
Tsuang, M. T., Lyons, M. J., Meyer, J. M., Doyle, T., et al.  
Co-occurrence of abuse of different drugs in men: 
The role of drug-specific and shared vulnerabilities. 
Archives of General Psychiatry, 1998, 55, 967–972.
Tucker, M. A., Hirota, Y., Wamsley, E. J., Lau, H., et al.  
A daytime nap containing solely non-REM sleep 
enhances declarative but not procedural memory. 
Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, 2006, 86, 241–247.
Tunik, E., Frey, S. H., and Grafton, S. T. Virtual lesions 
of the anterior intraparietal area disrupt goal- 
dependent on-line adjustments of grasp. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2005, 8, 505–511.
Turner, S. M., Beidel, D. C., and Nathan, R. S. 
Biological ­factors in obsessive-compulsive disorders. 
Psychological Bulletin, 1985, 97, 430–450.
Tye, K. M., Prakash, R., Kim, S.-Y., et al. Amygdala 
­circuitry mediating reversible and bidirectional con-
trol of anxiety. Nature, 2011, 471, 358–362.
Tyrell, J. B., and Baxter, J. D. Glucocorticoid therapy. In 
Endocrinology and Metabolism, edited by P. Felig, J. D. 
Baxter, A. E. Broadus, and L. A. Frohman. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1981.
Unger, J., McNeill, T. H., Moxley, R. T., White, M., et al. 
Distribution of insulin receptor-like immunoreactivity 
in the rat forebrain. Neuroscience, 1989, 31, 143–157.
Ungerleider, L. G., and Mishkin, M. Two cortical visual 
­systems. In Analysis of Visual Behavior, edited by  
D. J. Ingle, M. A. Goodale, and R. J. W. Mansfield. 
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1982.
Uno, H., Tarara, R., Else, J. G., Suleman, M. A., and 
Sapolsky, R. M. Hippocampal damage associated 
with ­prolonged and fatal stress in primates. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 1989, 9, 1705–1711.

	
References	
707
attempts among violent offenders and impulsive 
fire setters. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1989, 46, 
604–606.
Viviani, R., Sim, E. J., Lo, H., et al. Baseline brain perfu-
sion and the serotonin transporter promoter poly-
morphism. Biological Psychiatry, 2010, 67, 317–322.
Vocci, F. J., Acri, J., and Elkashef, A. Medication devel-
opment for addictive disorders: The state of the 
science. American Journal of Psyuchiatry, 2005, 162, 
1431–1440.
Vogel, G. W., Buffenstein, A., Minter, K., and Hennessey, 
A. Drug effects on REM sleep and on endogenous 
depression. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 
1990, 14, 49–63.
Vogel, G. W., Thurmond, A., Gibbons, P., Sloan, K., 
et al. REM sleep reduction effects on depression 
syndromes. Archives of General Psychiatry, 1975, 32, 
765–777.
Vogel, G. W., Vogel, F., McAbee, R. S., and Thurmond, 
A. J. Improvement of depression by REM sleep depri-
vation: New findings and a theory. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 1980, 37, 247–253.
Volkow, N., and Li, T. K. The neuroscience of addic-
tion. Nature Neuroscience, 2005, 8, 1429–1430.
Volkow, N. D., Hitzemann, R., Wang, G.-J., Fowler, J. S., 
et al. Long-term frontal brain metabolic changes in 
cocaine abusers. Synapse, 1992, 11, 184–190.
Volkow, N. D., Wang, G.-J., Fowler, J. S., et al. 
Addiction: Beyond dopamine reward circuitry. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
2011, 108, 15037–15042.
Volpe, B. T., LeDoux, J. E., and Gazzaniga, M. S. 
Information processing of visual stimuli in an 
­“extinguished” field. Nature, 1979, 282, 722–724.
vom Saal, F. S. Models of early hormonal effects 
on ­intrasex aggression in mice. In Hormones and 
Aggressive Behavior, ­edited by B. B. Svare. New York: 
Plenum Press, 1983.
vom Saal, F. S., and Bronson, F. H. Sexual characteristics 
of adult female mice are correlated with their blood 
­testosterone levels during prenatal development. 
Science, 1980, 208, 597–599.
von Békésy, G. Experiments in Hearing. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1960.
von Kriegstein, K., Eger, E. Kleinschmidt, A., and 
Giraud, A. L. Modulation of neural responses to 
speech by directing attention to voices or verbal con-
tent. Cognitive Brain Research, 2003, 17, 48–55.
Vuilleumier, P., Armony, J. L., Driver, J., and Dolan, R. J.  
Distinct spatial frequency sensitivities for processing 
faces and emotional expressions. Nature Neuroscience, 
2003, 6, 624–631.
Waber, R. L., Shiv, B., Carmon, Z., and Ariely, D. 
Commercial features of placebo and therapeutic  
van Leengoed, E., Kerker, E., and Swanson, H. H. 
Inhibition of post-partum maternal behaviour in 
the rat by injecting an oxytocin antagonist into the 
cerebral ventricles. Journal of Endocrinology, 1987, 112, 
275–282.
Vandenbergh, J. G., Whitsett, J. M., and Lombardi, J. R. 
Partial isolation of a pheromone accelerating puberty 
in female mice. Journal of Reproductive Fertility, 1975, 
43, 515–523.
Vandenbulcke, M., Peeters, R., Fannes, K., and 
Vandenberghe, R. Knowledge of visual attributes in 
the right hemisphere. Nature Neuroscience, 2006, 9, 
964–970.
Vanderschuren, L. J. M. J., Di Ciano, P., and Everitt, 
B. J. Involvement of the dorsal striatum in cue-­
controlled cocaine seeking. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2005, 25, 8665–8670.
Vanderwolf, C. H. The electrocorticogram in relation  
to ­physiology and behavior: A new analysis. Electro­
encephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 1992, 82, 
165–175.
Vangipuram, S. D., and Lyman, W. D. Ethanol alters 
cell fate of fetal human brain-derived stem and pro-
genitor cells. Alcohol Clinics: Experimental Research, 
2010, 34, 1574–1583.
Vassar, R., Ngai, J., and Axel, R. Spatial segregation 
of odorant receptor expression in the mammalian 
olfactory epithelium. Cell, 1993, 74, 309–318.
Vergnes, M., Depaulis, A., Boehrer, A., and Kempf, E. 
Selective increase of offensive behavior in the rat fol-
lowing intrahypothalamic 5,7-DHT-induced serotonin 
depletion. Brain Research, 1988, 29, 85–91.
Verney, E. B. The antidiuretic hormone and the factors 
which determine its release. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London B, 1947, 135, 25–106.
Vgontzas, A. N., and Kales, A. Sleep and its disorders. 
Annual Review of Medicine, 1999, 50, 387–400.
Viding, E., Blair, R. J. R., Moffitt, T. E., and Plomin, R. 
Evidence for substantial genetic risk for psychopathy 
in 7-year olds. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 
2005, 46, 592–597.
Viding, E., Jones, A. P., Frick, P. J., et al. Heritability 
of ­antisocial behaviour at 0: Do callous-unemotional 
traits ­matter? Developmental Science, 2008, 11, 17–22.
Victor, M., and Agamanolis, J. Amnesia due to lesions 
­confined to the hippocampus: A clinical-pathological 
study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 1990, 2,  
246–257.
Vinckier, F., Dehaene, S., Jobert, A., Dubus, J. P., et al. 
Hierarchical coding of letter strings in the ventral 
stream: Dissecting the inner organization of the visual 
word-form system. Neurons, 2007, 55, 143–156.
Virkkunen, M., De Jong, J., Bartko, J., and Linnoila, M. 
Psychobiological concomitants of history of suicide 

708	
References
Walsh, V., Carden, D., Butler, S. R., and Kulikowski, J. J.  
The effects of V4 lesions on the visual abilities of 
macaques: Hue discrimination and color constancy. 
Behavioural Brain Research, 1993, 53, 51–62.
Walsh, V., Ellison, A., Battelli, L., and Cowey, A. Task-
specific impairments and enhancements induced 
by magnetic stimulation of human visual area V5. 
Proceedings in Biological Sciences, 1998, 265, 537–543.
Walters, E. E., and Kendler, K. S. Anorexia nervosa and 
anorexic-like syndromes in a population-based female 
twin sample. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1995, 152, 
64–71.
Wandell, B. A., Dumoulin, S. O., and Brewer, A. A. 
Visual field maps in human cortex. Neuron, 2007, 56, 
366–383.
Wang, Q., Charych, E. I., Pulito, V. L., et al. The psychi-
atric disease risk factors DISC1 and TNIK interact to 
regulate synapse composition and function. Molecular 
Psychiatry, 2010, 16, 1006–1023.
Wang, Z., Faith, M., Patterson, F., Tang, K., et al. Neural 
­substrates of abstinence-induced cigarette cravings 
in chronic smokers. Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 
14035–14040.
Wang, Z., Sindreu, C. B., Li, V., Nudelman, A., et al. 
Pheromone detection in male mice depends on 
­signaling through type 3 adenylyl cyclase in the main 
olfactory ­epithelium. Journal of Neuroscience, 2006, 26, 
7375–7379.
Ward, H. E., Johnson, E. A., Salm, A. K., and Birkle,  
D. L. Effects of prenatal stress on defensive withdrawal 
behavior and corticotrophin releasing factor sys-
tems in rat brain. Physiology and Behavior, 2000, 70, 
359–366.
Ward, L., Wright, E., and McMahon, S. B. A comparison 
of the effects of noxious and innocuous counterstimuli 
on experimentally induced itch and pain. Pain, 1996, 
64, 129–138.
Warne, G. L., and Zajac, J. D. Disorders of sexual differ-
entiation. Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North 
America, 1998, 27, 945–967.
Warren, J. E., Sauter, D. A., Eisner, F., Wiland, J., et al. 
Positive emotions preferentially engage an auditory–
motor “mirror” system. Journal of Neuroscience, 2006, 
26, 13067–13075.
Watkins, K. E., Dronkers, N. F., and Vargha-Khadem, F. 
Behavioural analysis of an inherited speech and lan-
guage disorder: Comparison with acquired aphasia. 
Brain, 2002a, 125, 452–464.
Watkins, K. E., Smith, S. M., Davis, S., and Howell, P. 
Structural and functional abnormalities of the motor 
system in developmental stuttering. Brain, 2008, 131, 
50–59.
Watkins, K. E., Vargha-Khadem, F., Ashburner, J., 
Passingham, R. E., et al. MRI analysis of an ­inherited 
efficacy. Journal of the American Medical Association, 
2008, 299, 1016–1017.
Wager, T. D., Rilling, J. K., Smith, E. E., Sokolik, A.,  
et al. Placebo-induced changes in fMRI in the antici-
pation and experience of pain. Science, 2004, 303, 
1162–1166.
Wagner, F. A., and Anthony, J. C. From first drug use to 
drug dependence: Developmental periods of risk for 
dependence upon marijuana, cocaine, and alcohol. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 2002, 26, 479–488.
Wahl, M., Lauterbach-Soon, B., Juing, P., et al. Human 
motor corpus callosum: Topography, somatotopy, 
and link between microstructure and function. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 12132–12138.
Wahlbeck, K., Forsén, T., Osmond, C., Barker, D. J. P., 
et al. Association of schizophrenia with low maternal 
body mass index, small size at birth, and thinness during 
childhood. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2001. 58, 48–52.
Walker, D. L., Ressler, K. J., Lu, K. T., and Davis, M. 
Facilitation of conditioned fear extinction by sys-
temic administration or intra-amygdala infusions of 
D-cycloserine as assessed with fear-potentiated startle 
in rats. Journal of Neuroscience, 2002, 22, 2343–2351.
Walker, E. F., Lewine, R. R. J., and Neumann, C. 
Childhood behavioral characteristics and adult brain 
morphology in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 
1996, 22, 93–101.
Walker, E. F., Savoie, T., and Davis, D. Neuromotor pre-
cursors of schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 1994, 
20, 441–451.
Walker, P. A., and Meyer, W. J. Medroxyprogesterone 
acetate treatment for paraphiliac sex offenders. In 
Violence and the Violent Individual, edited by J. R. Hays, 
T. K. Roberts, and T. S. Solway. New York: SP Medical 
and Scientific Books, 1981.
Wallen, K. Desire and ability: Hormones and the 
regulation of female sexual behavior. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 1990, 14, 233–241.
Wallen, K. Sex and context: Hormones and primate 
sexual motivation. Hormones and Behavior, 2001, 40, 
339–357.
Wallen, K., Eisler, J. A., Tannenbaum, P. L., Nagell, K. M.,  
et al. Antide (Nal-Lys GnRH antagonist) suppression 
of pituitary-testicular function and sexual behavior in 
group-living rhesus monkeys. Physiology and Behavior, 
1991, 50, 429–435.
Wamsley, E. J., Tucker, M., Payne, J. D., et al. Dreaming 
of a learning task is associated with enhanced sleep-
dependent memory consolidation. Current Biology, 
2010, 20, 1–6.
Walsh, T., McClellan, J. M., McCarthy, S. E., et al. Rare 
­structural variants disrupt multiple genes in neurode-
velopmental pathways in schizophrenia. Science, 2008, 
320, 539–543.

	
References	
709
White, J. Autonomic discharge from stimulation of 
the hypothalamus in man. Association for Research in 
Nervous and Mental Disorders, 1940, 20, 854–863.
Whiteside, S. P., Port, J. D., and Abramowitz, J. S. A meta- 
analysis of functional neuroimaging in obsessive-
compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 
2004, 132, 69–79.
Whitten, W. K. Occurrence of anestrus in mice caged in 
groups. Journal of Endocrinology, 1959, 18, 102–107.
Whittle, S., Yap, M. B. H., Yücel, M., Fornita, A., et al. 
Prefrontal and amygdala volumes are related to ado-
lescents’ affective behaviors during parent-adolescent 
interactions. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 2008, 105, 3652–3657.
Wickelgren, I. Drug may suppress the craving for nico-
tine. Science, 1998, 282, 1797–1798.
Wicker, B., Keysers, C., Plailly, J., Royet, J. P., et al. Both of 
us disgusted in My insula: The common neural basis of 
­seeing and feeling disgust. Neuron, 2003, 40, 655–664.
Wiesner, B. P., and Sheard, N. Maternal Behaviour in the 
Rat. London: Oliver and Brody, 1933.
Wigren, H. K., Schepens, M., Matto, V. et al. 
Glutamatergic stimulation of the basal forebrain 
­elevates extracellular adenosine and increases the 
subsequent sleep. Neuroscience, 2007, 147, 811–823.
Wilhelm, S., Buhlmann, U., Tolin, D. F., et al. 
Augmentation of behavior therapy with D-cycloserine 
for obsessive-­compulsive disorder. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 2008, 165, 335–341.
Willer, C. J., Speliotes, E. K., Loos, R. J. F., et al. Six 
new loci associated with body mass index highlight a 
neuronal ­influence on body weight regulation. Nature 
Genetics, 2009, 41, 25–34.
Willesen, M. G., Kristensen, P., and Romer, J. Co- 
localization of growth hormone secretagogue recep-
tor and NPY mRNA in the arcuate nucleus of the rat. 
Neuroendocrinology, 1999, 70, 306–316.
Williams, D. L., Cummings, D. E., Grill, H. J., and 
Kaplan, J. M. Meal-related ghrelin suppression 
requires postgastric feedback. Endocrinology, 2003, 
144, 2765–2767.
Williams, J. R., Insel, T. R., Harbaugh, C. R., and Carter, 
C. S. Oxytocin centrally administered facilitates for-
mation of a partner preference in female prairie voles 
(Microtus ochrogaster). Journal of Neuroendocrinology, 
1994, 6, 247–250.
Williams, R. Slowing the decline. Nature, 2010, 466, 
s13–s14.
Williams, Z. M., and Eskandar, E. N. Selective enhance-
ment of associative learning by microstimulation of the 
anterior caudate. Nature Neuroscience, 2006, 9, 562–568.
Willingham, D. G., and Koroshetz, W. J. Evidence for 
­dissociable motor skills in Huntington’s disease 
patients. Psychobiology,1993, 21, 173–182.
speech and language disorder: Structural brain 
abnormalities. Brain, 2002b, 125, 465–478.
Webster, H. H., and Jones, B. E. Neurotoxic lesions of 
the dorsolateral pontomesencephalic tegmentum-
cholinergic cell area in the cat. II: Effects upon sleep-
waking states. Brain Research, 1988, 458, 285–302.
Weinberger, D. R. Schizophrenia and the frontal lobe. 
Trends in Neurosciences, 1988, 11, 367–370.
Weinberger, D. R., and Wyatt, R. J. Brain morphology 
in schizophrenia: In vivo studies. In Schizophrenia 
as a Brain Disease, edited by F. A. Henn and H. A. 
Nasrallah. New York: Oxford University Press, 1982.
Weiner, R. D., and Krystal, A. D. The present use of 
­electroconvulsive therapy. Annual Review of Medicine, 
1994, 45, 273–281.
Weintraub, S., Mesulam, M.-M., and Kramer, L. 
Disturbances in prosody: A right-hemisphere con-
tribution to language. Archives of Neurology, 1981, 38, 
742–744.
Weiser, M., Reichenberg, A., Grotto, I., Yasvitzky, R., 
et al. Higher rates of cigarette smoking in male  
adolescents before the onset of schizophrenia: A  
historical-prospective cohort study. American Journal  
of Psychiatry, 2004, 161, 1219–1223.
Weiskrantz, L., Warrington, E. K., Sanders, M. D., and 
Marshall, J. Visual capacity in the hemianopic field 
following a restricted occipital ablation. Brain, 1974, 
97, 709–728.
Welsh, D. K., Logothetis, D. E., Meister, M., and 
Reppert, S. M. Individual neurons dissociated from 
rat suprachiasmatic ­nucleus express independently 
phased circadian firing rhythms. Neuron, 1995, 14, 
697–706.
Weltzin, T. E., Hsu, L. K. G., Pollice, C., and Kaye,  
W. H. Feeding patterns in bulimia nervosa. Biological 
Psychiatry, 1991, 30, 1093–1110.
Wernicke, C. Der Aphasische Symptomenkomplex. Breslau, 
Poland: Cohn & Weigert, 1874.
Westmark, P. R., Westmark, C. J., Wang, S., et al. Pin1 
and PKMzeta sequentially control dendritic protein 
synthesis. Science Signaling, 2010, 3, ra18.
Whalen, P. J., Kagan, J., Cook, R. G., Davis, F. C., et al. 
Human amygdala responsivity to masked fearful eye 
whites. Science, 2004, 306, 2061.
Whalen, P. J., Rauch, S. L., Etcoff, N. L., McInerney, S. C., 
et al. Masked presentations of emotional facial expres-
sions modulate amygdala activity without explicit 
knowledge. Journal of Neuroscience, 1998, 18, 411–418.
Whipple, B., and Komisaruk, B. R. Analgesia produced 
in women by genital self-stimulation. Journal of Sex 
Research, 1988, 24, 130–140.
White, F. J. Synaptic regulation of mesocorticolimbic 
­dopamine neurons. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 
1996, 19, 405–436.

710	
References
Wong-Riley, M. T. Personal communication, 1978. Cited 
by Livingstone, M. S., and Hubel, D. H. Thalamic 
inputs to cytochrome oxidase-rich regions in monkey 
visual cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, USA, 1982, 79, 6098–6101.
Wood, E. R., Dudchenko, P. A., Robitsek, R. J., and 
Eichenbaum, H. Hippocampal neurons encode infor-
mation about different types of memory episodes 
occurring in the same location. Neuron, 2000, 27, 
623–633.
Wood, R. I., and Newman, S. W. Mating activates andro-
gen receptor-containing neurons in chemosensory 
pathways of the male Syrian hamster brain. Brain 
Research, 1993, 614, 65–77.
Woodruff-Pak, D. S. Eyeblink classical conditioning 
in H. M.: Delay and trace paradigms. Behavioral 
Neuroscience, 1993, 107, 911–925.
Woods, B. T. Is schizophrenia a progressive neurodevel-
opmental disorder? Toward a unitary pathogenetic 
mechanism. American Journal of Psychiatry, 1998, 155, 
1661–1670.
Woods, S. C., Lotter, E. C., McKay, L. D., and Porte, 
D. Chronic intracerebroventricular infusion of insu-
lin reduces food intake and body weight of baboons. 
Nature, 1979, 282, 503–505.
Woods, S. C., Lutz, T. A., Geary, N., and Langhans, 
W. Pancreatic signals controlling food intake: Insulin, 
glucagon and amylin. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society B, 2006, 361, 1219–1235.
Woodworth, R. S., and Schlosberg, H. Experimental 
Psychology. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1954.
Wooley, S. C., and Garner, D. M. Controversies in 
management: Should obesity be treated? Dietary 
treatments for obesity are ineffective. British Medical 
Journal, 1994, 309, 655–656.
Woolfe, A., Goodson, M., Goode, D. K., Snell, P., et al. 
Highly conserved non-coding sequences are associated 
with vertebrate development. PLoS Biology, 2005, 3, e7.
Wu, J. C., and Bunney, W. E. The biological basis of 
an antidepressant response to sleep deprivation and 
relapse: Review and hypothesis. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 1990, 147, 14–21.
Wulff, K., Gatti, S., Wettstein, J. G., and Foster, R. G. 
Sleep and circadian rhythm disruption in psychiat-
ric and ­neurodegenerative disease. Nature Reviews: 
Neuroscience, 2010, 11, 1–11.
Wyart, C., Webster, W. W., Chen, J. H., Wilson, S. R.,  
et al. Smelling a single component of male  
sweat alters levels of cortisol in women. Journal  
of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 1261–1265.
Wyatt, R. D. Pheromones and signature mixtures: 
Defining species-wide signals and variable cues for 
identity in both invertebrates and vertebrates. Journal 
of Comparative Physiology A. 2010, 196, 685–700.
Wilson, B. E., Meyer, G. E., Cleveland, J. C., and Weigle, 
D. S. Identification of candidate genes for a factor 
regulating body weight in primates. American Journal 
of Physiology, 1990, 259, R1149–R1155.
Wilson, E. O. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Cambridge, 
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1975.
Winans, E. Aripiprazole. American Journal of Health-System 
Pharmacy, 2003, 60, 2437–2445.
Winslow, J. T., Ellingoe, J., and Miczek, J. A. Effects 
of alcohol on aggressive behavior in squirrel mon-
keys: Influence of testosterone and social context. 
Psychopharmacology, 1988, 95, 356–363.
Winslow, J. T., and Miczek, K. A. Social status as deter-
minants of alcohol effects on aggressive behavior in 
squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciureus). Psychopharmacology, 
1985, 85, 167–172.
Winslow, J. T., and Miczek, K. A. Androgen depen-
dency of alcohol effects on aggressive behavior: A 
seasonal rhythm in high-ranking squirrel monkeys. 
Psychopharmacology, 1988, 95, 92–98.
Wirz-Justice, A., Graw, P., Kraeuchi, K., Sarrafzadeh, 
A., et al. “Natural” light treatment of seasonal affec-
tive disorder. Journal of Affective Disorders, 1996, 37, 
109–120.
Wirz-Justice, A., and Van den Hoofdakker, R. H. Sleep 
­deprivation in depression: What do we know, where 
do we go? Biological Psychiatry, 1999, 46, 445–453.
Wise, M. S. Narcolepsy and other disorders of excessive 
sleepiness. Medical Clinics of North America, 2004, 99, 
597–610.
Wise, R. A., Leone, P., Rivest, R., and Leeb, K. 
Elevations of nucleus accumbens dopamine and 
DOPAC levels during intravenous heroin self-admin-
istration. Synapse, 1995, 21, 140–148.
Wise, R. J., Greene, J., Buchel, C., and Scott, S. K. Brain 
regions involved in articulation. Lancet, 1999, 353, 
1057–1061.
Wise, S. P., and Rapoport, J. L. Obsessive compul-
sive ­disorder: Is it a basal ganglia dysfunction? 
Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 1988, 24, 380–384.
Wissinger, B., and Sharpe, L. T. New aspects of an  
old theme: The genetic basis of human color vision. 
American Journal of Human Genetics, 1998, 63,  
1257–1262.
Witten, I., Lin, S.-C., Brodsky, M., et al. Cholinergic 
interneurons control local circuit activity and cocaine 
conditioning. Science, 2010, 330, 1677–1681.
Wolpaw, J. R., and McFarland, D. J. Control of a two-­
dimensional movement signal by a noninvasive brain–
computer interface in humans. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2004, 101, 17849–17854.
Wong, G. T., Gannon, K. S., and Margolskee, R. F. 
Transduction of bitter and sweet taste by gustducin. 
Nature, 1996, 381, 796–800.

	
References	
711
Yilmaz, A., Schultz, D., Aksoy, A., and Canbeyli, R. 
Prolonged effect of an anesthetic dose of ketamine 
on behavioral despair. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and 
Behavior, 2002, 71, 341–344.
Yin, H. H., Mulcare, S. P., Hilário, M. R. F., et al. 
Dynamic reorganization of striatal circuits during 
the acquisition and consolidation of a skill. Nature 
Neuroscience, 2009, 12, 333–341.
Yokoo, H., Tanaka, M., Yoshida, M., Tsuda, A., et al. 
Direct evidence of conditioned fear-elicited enhance-
ment of noradrenaline release in the rat hypothala-
mus assessed by intracranial microdialysis. Brain 
Research, 1990, 536, 305–308.
Yost, W. A. Auditory image perception and analysis: The 
basis for hearing. Hearing Research, 1991, 56, 8–18.
Young, A. W., Aggleton, J. P., Hellawell, D. J., Johnson, 
M., et al. Face processing impairments after amygda-
lotomy. Brain, 1995, 118, 15–24.
Young, S. N., and Leyton, M. The role of serotonin in 
human mood and social interaction: Insight from 
altered tryptophan levels. Pharmacology, Biochemistry 
and Behavior, 2002, 71, 857–865.
Youngren, K. D., Inglis, F. M., Pivirotto, P. J., Jedema, 
H. P., et al. Clozapine preferentially increases 
dopamine release in the rhesus monkey prefron-
tal cortex compared with the caudate nucleus. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 1999, 20, 403–412.
Yu, H., Wang, Y., Pattwell, S., et al. Variant BDNF 
Val66Met polymorphism affects extinction of condi-
tioned aversive memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 2009, 
29, 4056–4064.
Yurgelun-Todd, D. Emoptional and cognitive changes 
during adolescence. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 
2007, 17, 251–257.
Zammit, S., Thomas, K., Thompson, A., et al. 
Maternal tobacco, cannabis and alcohol use during 
pregnancy and risk of adolescent psychotic symp-
toms in offspring. British Journal of Psychiatry, 209, 
195, 294–300.
Zandian, M., Ioakimidis, I., Bergh, C., and Södersten, P. 
Cause and treatment of anorexia nervosa. Physiology 
and Behavior, 2007, 92, 293–290.
Zarate, C. A., Jaskaran, B. S., Carlson, P. J., Brutsche, 
N. E., et al. A randomized trial of a N-methyl-D-
aspartate ­antagonist in treatment-resistant major 
depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 2006, 63, 
856–864.
Zayfert, C., Dums, A. R., Ferguson, R. J., and Hegel, 
M. T. Health functioning impairments associated 
with posttraumatic stress disorder, anxiety disorders, 
and depression. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 
2002, 190, 233–240.
Zeki, S. The representation of colours in the cerebral 
cortex. Nature, 1980, 284, 412–418.
Wynne, K., Stanley, S., McGowan, B., and Bloom, S. 
Appetite control. Journal of Endocrinology, 2005, 184, 
291–318.
Wysocki, C. J. Neurobehavioral evidence for the involve-
ment of the vomeronasal system in mammalian 
reproduction. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 
1979, 3, 301–341.
Xiao, Z., Lee, T., Zhang, J. X., Wu, Q., et al. Thirsty 
heroin addicts show different fMRI activations when 
exposed to water-related and drug-related cues. Drug 
and Alcohol Dependence, 2006, 83, 157–162.
Xu, Y. Revisiting the role of the fusiform face area in 
visual expertise. Cerebral Cortex, 2005, 15, 1234–1242.
Yadav, J. S., Wholey, M. H., Kuntz, R. E., Fayad, P., et al.  
Protected carotid-artery stenting versus endarter-
ectomy in high-risk patients. New England Journal of 
Medicine, 2004, 351, 1493–1501.
Yamanaka, A., Beuckmann, C. T., Willie, J. T., Hara, J., 
et al. Hypothalamic orexin neurons regulate arousal 
according to energy balance in mice. Neuron, 2003, 
38, 701–713.
Yan, L., and Silver, R. Resetting the brain clock: Time 
course and localization of mPER1 and mPER2 pro-
tein expression in suprachiasmatic nucleus during 
phase shifts. European Journal of Neuroscience, 2004, 19, 
1105–1109.
Yang, L., Scott, K. A., Hyun, J., et al. Role of dorso­
medial hypothalamic neuropeptide Y in modulating  
food intake and energy balance. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2009, 29, 179–190.
Yang, T., and Maunsell, J. H. R. The effect of perceptual 
learning on neuronal responses in monkey visual 
area V4. Journal of Neuroscience, 2004, 24, 1617–1626.
Yang, T. T., Gallen, C. C., Ramachandran, V. S., Cobb, 
S., et al. Noninvasive detection of cerebral plasticity 
in adult human somatosensory cortex. Neuroreport, 
1994, 5, 701–704.
Yao, Y., Kelly, M. T., Sajikumar, S., et al. PKM 
zeta maintains late long-term potentiation by 
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor/GluR2-dependent 
trafficking of postsynaptic AMPA receptors. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 2008, 28, 7820–7827.
Yates, W. R., Perry, P., and Murray, S. Aggression and 
hostility in anabolic steroid users. Biological Psychiatry, 
1992, 31, 1232–1234.
Yehuda, R., and LeDoux, J. Response variation following 
trauma: A translational neuroscience approach to 
understanding PTSD. Neuron, 2007, 56, 19–32.
Yeo, J. A. G., and Keverne, E. B. The importance of 
vaginal-cervical stimulation for maternal behaviour in 
the rat. Physiology and Behavior, 1986, 37, 23–26.
Yildiz, A., Tomishige, M., Vale, R. D., and Selvin, P. R. 
Kinesin walks hand-over-hand. Science, 2004, 303, 
676–678.

712	
References
Zigman, J. M., Nakano, Y., Coppari, R., Balthasar, N., 
et al. Mice lacking ghrelin receptors resist the devel-
opment of diet-induced obesity. Journal of Clinical 
Investigation, 2005, 115, 3564–3572.
Zihl, J., Von Cramon, D., Mai, N., and Schmid, C. 
Disturbance of movement vision after bilateral pos-
terior brain damage. Further evidence and follow up 
observations. Brain, 1991, 114, 2235–2252.
Zinman, L., and Cudkowicz, M. Emerging targets and 
treatments in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Lancet 
Neurology, 2011, 10, 481–490.
Zlokovic, B. V. The blood–brain barrier in health and 
chronic neurodegenerative disorders. Neuron, 2008, 
57, 178–201.
Zola-Morgan, S., Squire, L. R., and Amaral, D. G. 
Human amnesia and the medial temporal region: 
Enduring memory impairment following a bilateral 
lesion limited to field CA1 of the hippocampus. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 1986, 6, 2950–2967.
Zorrilla, E. P., Iwasaki, S., Moss, J. A., Chang, J., et al. 
Vaccination against weight gain. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 2006, 103,  
12961–12962.
Zou, Z., Horowitz, L. F., Montmayeur, J.-P., Snapper, 
S., et al. Genetic tracing reveals a stereotyped sen-
sory map in the olfactory cortex. Nature, 2001, 414, 
173–179.
Zubieta, J.-K., Bueller, J. A., Jackson, L. R., Scott, D. J., 
et al. Placebo effects mediated by endogenous opioid 
activity on μ-opioid receptors. Journal of Neuroscience, 
2005, 25, 7754–7762.
Zumpe, D., Bonsall, R. W., Kutner, M. H., and Michael, 
R. P. Medroxyprogesterone acetate, aggression, 
and sexual behavior in male cynomolgus monkeys 
(Macaca fascicularis). Hormones and Behavior, 1991, 
25, 394–409.
Zwiers, M. P., Van Opstal, A. J., and Cruysberg, J. R. M.  
A spatial hearing deficit in early-blind humans. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2001, 21, RC142 (1–5).
Zeki, S., Aglioti, S., McKeefry, D., and Berlucchi, G. The 
neurological basis of conscious color perception in 
a blind patient. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, USA, 1999, 96, 13594–13596.
Zenner, H.-P., Zimmermann, U., and Schmitt, U. 
Reversible contraction of isolated mammalian cochlear 
hair cells. Hearing Research, 1985, 18, 127–133.
Zentner, M., and Kagan, J. Infants’ perception of 
consonance and dissonance in music. Infant Behavior 
and Development, 1998, 21, 483–492.
Zhang, A., Kindrat, A. N., Sharif-Naeini, R., and Bourque, 
C. W. Actin filaments mediate mechanical gating dur-
ing osmosensory transduction in rat supraoptic nucleus 
neurons. Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 4008–4013.
Zhang, C., Truong, K. K., and Zhou, Q.-Y. Efferent projec-
tions of prokineticin 2 expressing neurons in the mouse 
suprachiasmatic nucleus. PLoS ONE, 2009, 4, e7151.
Zhang, F., Wang, L.-P., Brauner, M., Liewald, J. F., et al. 
Multimodal fast optical interrogation of neural cir-
cuitry. Nature, 2007, 446, 633–639.
Zhang, G. C., Mao, L. M., Liu, X. Y., and Wang, J. Q.  
Long-lasting up-regulation of orexin receptor 
type 2 protein levels in the rat nucleus accumbens 
after chronic cocaine administration. Journal of 
Neurochemistry, 2007, 103, 400–407.
Zhang, X., Salmeron, B. J., Ross, T. J., et al. Factors 
underlying prefrontal and insula structural alterations 
in smokers. NeuroImage, 2011, 54, 42–48.
Zhao, Y. J., Wee, H. L., Au, W. L., et al. Selegiline 
use is associated with a slower progression in early 
Parkinson’s disease as evaluated by Hoehn and 
Yahr stage transition times. Parkinsonism and Related 
disorders, 2011, 17, 194–197.
Zhong, C.-B., and Liljenquist, K. Washing away your 
sins: Threatened morality and physical cleansing. 
Science, 2006, 313, 1451–1452.
Zhou, F. C., Zhang, J. K., Lumeng, L., and Li, T. K. 
Mesolimbic dopamine system in alcohol-preferring 
rats. Alcohol, 1995, 12, 403–412.

Abbas, A. I., 70
Abelson, J. L., 591
Abizaid, A., 417
Abramowitz, J. S., 590
Abrevalo, E., 529
Accola, R., 247
Acri, J., 638
Adair, J. C., 6
Adamantidis, A., 308
Adams, D. B., 338
Adams, H. P., 482
Adams, R. B., 381
Adams, R. D., 547
Adams, W., 560
Adamson, K. L., 628
Adcock, R. A., 457
Adey, W. R., 301
Adkins, R. E., 337
Adler, C. M., 565
Adler, N. T., 334
Adolphs, R., 378, 379, 381, 382
Advokat, C., 431
Aflalo, T. N., 266
Agamanolis, J., 465
Aghajanian, G. K., 626
Aglioti, S. M., 195
Aharon, L., 457
Ahmed, S., 408
Aktas, O., 546
Alain, C., 224
Albrecht, D. G., 182, 183
Albright, T. D., 198
Alexander, G. M., 341
Alexander, M. P., 511
Alger, B. E., 240
Allebrandt, K. V., 319
Allen, L. S., 348
Allison, T., 595
Allman, J., 198
Allman, J. M., 78
Altschuler, H. L., 633
Altuvia, S., 34
Amano, T., 363
Amaral, D. G., 247, 361, 362, 
462, 464, 595
Amiaz, R., 639
Amlaner, C. J., 299
Amstadter, A. B., 607
Anand, B. K., 415
Ancoli-Israel, S., 294
Andari, E., 596
Anders, S., 379
Andersen, R. A., 198, 201, 275
Anderson, A. K., 379, 387
Anderson, S., 368
André, V. M., 539
Andreasen, N. C., 554
Annese, J., 199
Anthony, J. C., 617
Anubhuti, 415
Anzai, A., 188
Apkarian, A. V., 606
Arancio, O., 445
Archer, J., 374
Arendt, J., 321
Aristotle, 11
Arnason, B. G., 546
Arnott, S. T., 224
Arnsten, A. F., 599, 601
Aron, A. R., 599
Arora, 415
Arrasate, M., 539
Arroyo, S., 385
Artmann, H., 429
Aschoff, J., 315, 319
Aslin, R. N., 79
Asnis, G. M., 588
Astafiev, S. V., 201
Astic, L., 302
Aston-Jones, G., 306, 307, 581, 
620
Attia, E., 431
Aurora, R. N., 297
Auyeung, B., 597
Avenet, P., 245
Avila, M. T., 565
Axel, R., 250, 251, 335
Aziz-Zadeh, L., 493
Baddeley, A. D., 493
Bagatell, C. J., 339
Bai, F. L., 417
Baier, B., 451
Bailey, C. H., 532
Bailey, J. M., 344
Baizer, J. S., 189
Bak, T. H., 494
Baker, C. I., 192, 194
Baker, M., 153
Baldessarini, R. J., 557
Baldo, J. V., 484
Baldwin, D. S., 579
Ballantine, H. T., 590
Bandell, M., 234
Bandmann, O., 539
Banks, M. S., 79
Baram, T. Z., 605
Barbazanges, A., 605
Barclay, C. D., 200
Bard, F., 544
Barfield, R. J., 348, 349
Baron, M., 575
Baron-Cohen, S., 596, 597
Barrett, A. M., 6
Bartels, A., 348, 356
Bartness, T. J., 320
Basbaum, A. I., 240
Basheer, R., 305
Bassetti, C. L., 311
Batista, A. P., 201
Batkai, S., 635
Battelli, L., 200
Batterham, R. L., 411, 419
Bautista, D. M., 234, 235
Baxter, J. D., 603
Bayley, P. J., 463, 466, 467
Baylis, G. C., 192
Beamer, W., 333
Bean, N. J., 372
Bear, M. F., 447
Beauvois, M. D., 512
Beauvois, M. F., 504
Bechara, A., 364, 640
Beckstead, R. M., 246
Bédard, C., 497
Beecher, H. K., 237
Beeman, E. A., 371
Beeson, P. M., 512
Behrman, M., 192, 193, 194
Beidel, D. C., 589
Beidler, L. M., 244
Beitz, A. J., 240
Belichenko, N. P., 530
Belin, D., 618
Belin, P., 497
Bell, A. H., 192
Bell, A. P., 340, 344
Bellocchio, L., 417
Belnoue, L., 476
Beltramo, M., 633
Ben Mamou, C., 474, 475
Ben-Tovin, D. I., 431
Benchenane, K., 524
Bendor, D., 225
Benington, J. H., 305
Bennett, D. A., 544
Benowitz, L. I., 526
Benson, D. L., 79
Berchtold, N. C., 526
Berenbaum, S. A., 341, 373
Bergasa, N. V., 235
Berger, M., 580
Berggenheim, A. T., 536
Bergh, C., 431
Berglund, H., 338, 343
Bergmann, B. M., 300
Berkovic, S. F., 522
Berlucchi, G., 195
Bermant, G., 333
Bernard, C., 394
Bernhardt, P. C., 374
Berns, G. S., 457
Berrettini, W., 637
Berridge, C. W., 599, 600
Berson, D. M., 316
Bertelsen, A., 555
Berthier, M., 238, 590
Berthoud, H. R., 425
Bertolotti, A., 545
Best, J., 310
Best, P. J., 471, 472, 632
Betancur, C., 594
Bettelheim, B., 594
Betz, W. J., 55
Beversdorf, D. Q., 505
Bewernick, B. H., 573
Bhagwagar, Z., 576
Bierut, L. J., 637
Billings, L. M., 544
Bingman, V. P., 469
Bini, L., 572
Bischofberger, J., 123
Bisiach, E., 8
Blackwood, D. H., 556
Blair, R. J. R., 381
Blake, R., 200
Blanchard, R., 344
Blaustein, J. D., 334, 348, 349
Blest, A. D., 15
Bleuler, E., 554
Blier, P., 591
Bliss, T. V., 440
Bloom, F. E., 306, 307
Blundell, J. E., 426
Bodner, S. M., 590
Boesch, C., 339
Boeve, B. F., 297
Bogaert, A. F., 344
Boggio, P. S., 608
Bohbot, V. D., 468
Boksa, P., 562
Bolla, K., 622
Bolwig, T. G., 573
Bonnet, M. H., 294
Boot, L. M., 335
Booth, A., 374
Booth, F. W., 422
Born, J., 302
Born, R. T., 185
Bornstein, B., 195
Borod, J. C., 386
Bors, E., 301
Bossy-Wetzel, E., 543, 545
Bouchard, B., 225
Bouchard, C., 423
Boulos, Z., 321
Bouma, H., 361
Bourne, J., 444
713
Name Index

714	
Name Index
Bourque, C. W., 399
Boussaoud, D., 192
Bouvier, S. E., 191
Bowers, D., 378
Bowler, P. J., 390
Boyaci, H., 187
Boyden, E. S., 153
Bozarth, M. A., 626, 627
Bracha, H. S., 561, 564
Brackett, N. L., 346
Bradley, D. C., 199
Brady, K. T., 622
Brandon, N. J., 556, 575
Braun, A. R., 293
Braun, S., 529
Bray, G. A., 422
Bredel, M., 519
Breedlove, S. M., 334, 342
Breier, A., 557
Brem, S., 506
Bremner, J. D., 608
Brennan, P. A., 336
Brenner, L., 409, 410
Brewer, A. A., 166, 187
Brickner, R. M., 585
Bridges, R. S., 354, 355, 356
Britten, K. H., 199
Britton, D. R., 603
Brobeck, J. R., 415
Broberger, C., 417
Broca, P., 13
Brolin, R. E., 425
Bronson, F. H., 372
Bronstad, P. M., 337
Brown, A. M., 36, 561
Brown, A. S., 556, 560, 561
Brown, R. E., 307
Brown, S., 497, 498
Brown, T. H., 441, 442
Brown, V. J., 573
Brownell, H. H., 490
Brownell, W. E., 217
Bruce, H.M., 335
Brüning, J. C., 412
Bruno, J. P., 353
Brunson, K. L., 604
Brust, J. C. M., 509
Bu, G., 543
Buccino, G., 273, 494
Buchsbaum, M. S., 300
Buck, L. B., 245, 249, 250, 251
Buckner, R. L., 543
Budka, H., 301
Bueler, H., 532
Buhmann, C., 536
Bunney, B. S., 456
Bunney, W. E., 580
Burgess, N., 461
Burt, A. D., 338
Burt, D. R., 557
Burt, R. K., 546
Busskamp, V., 154
Buxbaum, J. D., 594
Buxbaum, L. J., 193
Buzsáki, G., 474
Byne, W., 342
Cabanac, M., 412
Cadet, J. L., 627
Cahill, L., 364
Calder, A. J., 378, 383
Callaway, E. M., 185
Calvo-Merino, B., 274
Camardo, J. S., 401
Campbell, C. S., 410
Campbell, R., 382, 494
Campeau, S., 361
Camperio-Ciani, A., 344
Campfield, L. A., 412
Cannon, M., 562
Cannon, T. D., 561, 564
Cannon, W., 389, 601
Cape, E. G., 306
Capeda, C., 539
Capiluppi, C., 344
Carew, T. J., 452
Carleton, A., 247
Carlson, N. R., 493
Carmichael, M. S., 333
Carmichael, S. T., 526
Carpenter, C. R., 372
Carpenter, W. T., 554
Carr, C. E., 220, 221
Carr, L., 383
Carrera, M. R., 639
Carroll, F. L., 639
Carroll, M. D., 421
Carroll, R. C., 447
Carter, C. S., 333, 334, 351
Carter, M. C., 308
Carter, M. E., 306
Cartoni, C., 244
Caselli, R. J., 236
Cash, S. S., 291
Caspi, A., 575
Castelli, F., 595
Catani, M., 492
Caterina, M. J., 235
Cavaco, S., 462
Cecil, J. E., 410
Celentano, D. C., 349
Cerletti, U., 572
Cerny, E. H., 639
Cerny, T., 639
Chaix, Y., 510
Chamberlain, M. C., 519
Chambers, R. A., 619
Chaminade, T., 277
Chan, J. L., 425
Chandler, L. J., 632
Changizi, M. A., 509
Chatterjee, S., 185
Chemelli, R. M., 296
Chen, A. J.-W., 526
Chen, G., 570, 574
Chen, J., 633
Chen, Y., 605
Chen, Y.-C., 269
Chen, Y. W., 570
Cheung, B. M., 426
Chikahisa, S., 306
Cho, M. M., 351
Chou, I.-H., 628
Chou, T. C., 309
Christensen, R., 426
Christie, L.-A., 526
Chubb, J. E., 556
Ciocchi, S., 363
Cipolotti, L., 512
Cippitelli, A., 620
Clancy, S., 355
Clark, J. T., 416
Clarke, S., 224
Clegg, M. T., 333
Clemente, C. D., 309
Clow, K., 306
Cnattingius, S., 430
Coats, K. L., 337
Cobb, S., 603
Coccaro, E. F., 367
Coen, K. M., 628
Cohen, C., 629
Cohen, E. A., 603
Cohen, N. J., 462
Cohen, S., 612
Cohen-Bendahan, C. C., 341, 
373
Colapinto, J., 324
Cole, B. J., 603
Cole, J., 383
Collins, C. E., 185
Colman, D. R., 79
Conner, R., 372
Connolly, J. D., 275
Conway, B. R., 191
Coolen, L. M., 346, 347, 348
Coolidge, C., 333
Cooper, J. A., 75
Coover, G. D., 362
Copeland, B. J., 217
Corey, D. P., 212
Corkin, S., 460
Corna, F., 344
Corrigall, W. A., 628
Corwin, J. T., 218
Coslett, H. B., 193
Cossu, G., 634
Cotman, C. W., 448, 526
Cottingham, S. L., 347
Cottone, P., 424
Couceyro, P., 418
Courchesne, E., 595
Court, J., 431
Covington, H. E., 623
Cowan, W. M., 316
Cowey, A., 4, 191, 382
Cowley, M. A., 418, 420
Cox, A., 594
Cox, D., 193
Cox, J. J., 237
Crane, G. E., 571
Creese, I., 557
Crews, F. T., 632
Criado, J. R., 532
Crivello, F., 505
Crockett, M. J., 371
Crow, T. J., 555
Cruysberg, J. R. M., 222
Csiba, L., 524
Cubelli, R., 511
Cudkowicz, M., 545
Culebras, A., 297
Culham, J. C., 201
Culotta, E., 126
Cummings, D. E., 407
Cummings, S., 226
Cummings, T. A., 245
Cunningham, J. T., 402
Cutting, J. E., 200
Daban, C., 573
Dabbs, J. M., 374
Dai, S. S., 527
Dallos, P., 213
Damasio, A. R., 191, 195, 368, 
390, 491, 494, 501
Damasio, H., 195, 368, 482, 491, 
501
Damsma, G., 628
Dani, J. A., 622, 628, 629
Daniele, A., 494
Daniels, D., 142, 349
Dapretto, M., 596
Darwin, C., 14, 15, 377
Davidson, D., 633, 640
Davidson, J. M., 333
Davidson, R. J., 384
Davidson, S., 235
Davies, G., 560
Davies, P., 540
Davis, D., 562
Davis, J. D., 410
Davis, J. O., 561, 564
Davis, M., 362, 607
Daw, N. W., 178
Dawson, T. M., 535
Dawson, V. L., 535
Day, J., 628
Day, J. J., 457
De Biasi, M., 629
De Castro, J. M., 410
De Gelder, B., 379
De Kloet, E. R., 603
De Lecea, L., 308
De Ocampo, J., 298
De Ruiter, M. B., 622
De Strooper, B., 543
De Valois, K. K., 183
De Valois, R. L., 182, 183
De Vries, T. J., 629
De Wit, H., 632
Deacon, S., 321
Deadwyler, S. A., 635
Dealberto, M. J., 561
Dean, P., 192
Debanne, D., 447
Debiec, J., 475
Decety, J., 277
DeGutis, J., 451
Dehaene, S., 505, 508, 509
Dejerine, J., 501, 502
Del Cerro, M. C. R., 354
Delay, J., 556
Delgado, P. L., 575
DeLoache, J. S., 202

	
Name Index	
715
DeLong, G. R., 595
DelParigi, A., 407
Dement, W. C., 295, 299, 301, 
302
Démonet, J.-F., 510
Deng, X., 627
Deniker, P., 556
Deol, M. S., 213
Derdikman, D., 470, 472
Derkits, E. J., 560, 561
Dérouesné, J., 504, 512
Descartes, R., 11, 12, 14
Desimone, R., 189, 190, 191, 
192
Desmond, J. E., 511
D’Esposito, M., 451, 526
Deurveilher, S., 317
Deutsch, J. A., 410
Devilbiss, D. M., 600
Devine, D. P., 625
Dhaka, A., 235
Di Chiara, G., 617, 632
Di Ciano, P., 627
Di Marzo, V., 417, 426
Di Tomaso, E., 633
Diamond, D. M., 604
Diamond, I. T., 184
Diamond, M., 324
Diana, M., 632
Diba, K., 474
DiFiglia, M., 540
Dijk, D. J., 321
DiLeone, R. J., 620
Dilsaver, S. C., 570
Dinh, T. T., 408, 414
Dixon, A. K., 372
Doetsch, F., 79
Dolan, R. J., 252, 386
Dolan, R. P., 175
Döme, P., 571
Dominguez, J. M., 332, 347
Donny, E. C., 628
Dorries, K. M., 337
Dostrovsky, T., 470
Doty, R. L., 338
Dougherty, D. D., 590
Douglass, J., 418
Down, J. L., 530
Downing, P. E., 192, 194
Drake, C. L., 320
Drayna, D., 510
Dronkers, N. F., 484
Dube, M. G., 416
Dubé, M. P., 226
Ducci, F., 637
Duchenne, G.-B., 384
Dudek, S. M., 447
Dukelow, S. P., 199
Dulac, C., 335
Dumoulin, S. O., 166, 187
Dunn, A. L., 582
Dunn, F. A., 316
Duntley, S., 295
Dupret, D., 474
Durie, D. J., 299
Durston, S., 601
Duvarci, S., 363
Dwyer, C., 593
Dykes, R. W., 236
Eaton, W. W., 560
Eberhardt, N. L., 422
Ebisawa, T., 319
Eden, G. F., 510
Edwards, D. P., 185, 186
Egan, G., 399
Ehrhardt, A., 324, 327, 340
Ehrsson, H. H., 8
Eichenbaum, H., 462, 469
Eichler, V. B., 316
Eippert, F., 240
Eisele, Y. S., 544
Ekman, P., 377, 384, 390, 391
El Mansari, M., 311, 591
Elbert, T., 79, 233
Elias, C. F., 417, 419
Elias, M., 374
Elkashef, A., 638
Ellingoe, J., 374
Ellman, L. M., 561
Elmquist, J. K., 419
Elsworth, J. D., 566
Endoh, M., 445
Engel, S. A., 191
Enggasser, J. L., 632
Ennis, M., 249
Enriori, P. J., 418
Epstein, A. N., 401
Erb, S., 623
Ernst, M., 598
Ernulf, K. E., 344
Ersche, K. D., 622
Ertelt, D., 526
Eskandar, E. N., 454
Eslinger, P., 368, 482
Esselink, R. A., 538
Everitt, B. J., 618
Everson, C. A., 300
Fadiga, L., 487
Fane, B. A., 597
Farah, M. J., 236
Faraone, S. V., 555
Farber, N. B., 568
Farina, C., 546
Farooqi, I. S., 423
Farrell, M. J., 400
Farroni, T., 196
Fecteau, S., 497
Feder, H. H., 334, 349
Fee, M. S., 336
Feinhandler, D. A., 633
Feinle, C., 410
Felix, D., 401
Fenoglio, K. A., 605
Fernandez-Ruiz, J., 454
Fernandez-Tome, P., 602
Ferris, C. F., 351, 355
Fettiplace, R., 217
Ffytche, D. H., 492
Fibiger, H. C., 557, 628
Field, T., 390
Fields, H. L., 240
Fietz, S. A., 78
Fieve, R. R., 574
Finger, S., 11
Finger, T. E., 244
Firestein, S., 250
Fischer, H., 587
Fisher, C., 292, 293
Fisher, S. E., 497
Fiske, A. P., 589
Fitz, E., 633, 640
Fitzgerald, P., 573
Fitzpatrick, D., 184
Flanagan, J. R., 231
Flanagan-Cato, L. M., 142, 349
Flaum, M., 554
Flegal, K. M., 421
Fleming, A. S., 354, 355, 356
Flier, J. S., 423
Flock, A., 211
Flood, J. F., 417
Flores, R., 575
Flourens, P., 13
Flynn, F. W., 414
Fogassi, L., 274
Fogel, S. M., 290
Fombonne, E., 595
Fontana, A., 296
Fornal, C. A., 306
Forno, L. S., 534
Fort, O., 311
Foster, D. L., 329
Foundas, A. L., 498
Fowler, C., 631
Frackowiak, R. S. J., 468
Francis, J., 410
Frank, L. M., 474
Frankle, W. G., 371
Franklin, T. R., 622
Frascino, J. C., 463
Frederici, A. D., 483
Freed, C. R., 536
Freedman, M. S., 316
Freedman, R., 561
Frendl, A., 524
Frenette, E., 297
Freud, S., 628
Freund, H. J., 273
Frey, S. H., 201, 276
Fridriksson, F., 487
Fried, I., 8, 272
Friedman, M. I., 353, 409, 411, 
414
Friedman, S., 354
Friesen, W. V., 377, 390
Frisch, G., 13
Frisch, R. E., 330
Frith, C. D., 468, 510
Frith, U., 594
Fry, J. M., 297
Frydenberg, M., 560
Fu, H. J., 545
Fudala, P. J., 638
Fuentes, J. A., 602
Fukuwatari, T., 244
Fullerton, C. S., 607
Fulton, J. F., 585
Funkiewiez, A., 538
Gaffan, D., 191
Gage, F. H., 475
Gage, P., 368
Gagliardo, A., 469
Gagnon, L., 225
Gähwiler, B. H., 447
Gaillard, R., 508
Gainer, H., 318
Gajdusek, D. C., 532
Galen, 11
Gallassi, R., 300
Gallese, V., 273, 274
Galvani, L., 12, 13, 14
Gamache, K., 474
Gangestad, S. W., 339
Gannon, K. S., 245
Ganong, A. H., 441
Garavan, H., 622
Garcia-Falgueras, A., 343
Garcia-Larrea, L., 8
Garcia-Velasco, J., 338
Gardner, H., 481
Gariano, R. F., 458
Garner, D. M., 424
Garrido, L., 497
Gastfriend, D. T., 641
Gaulin, S. J. C., 469
Gauthier, I., 195, 197
Gazzaniga, M. S., 6, 7, 199
Geary, N., 627
Genefke, I., 605
Gentili, B., 245
Gentilucci, M., 494
George, M. S., 378
Gerashchenko, D., 296, 307
Gerbino, L., 574
Gerfen, C. R., 280
Gerhand, S., 509
Gerloff, C., 271
Gershkoff, A., 487
Gershon, E. S., 571
Gershon, S., 571, 574
Geschwind, N., 489
Gessa, G. L., 632
Getchell, T. V., 418
Getz, L. L., 351
Getzinger, M. J., 348
Ghilardi, J. R., 235
Giedd, J. N., 590
Giesler, G. J., 235
Gil, M., 347
Gilbertson, M. W., 555, 608
Gillespie, P. G., 212
Gillette, M. U., 321
Girardeau, G., 474
Givens, B., 632
Gjerlow, K., 481
Gladue, B. A., 374
Glaser, R., 610, 611
Glaum, S. R., 418
Gloor, P., 364
Glosser, G., 193
Gluecksohn-Waelsch, S., 213

716	
Name Index
Goate, A. M., 543
Godfrey, P. A., 250
Goeders, N. E., 625
Goedert, M., 534, 543
Goel, V., 386
Golarai, G., 196, 197
Golby, A. J., 196
Gold, A. R., 338
Gold, G., 250
Goldberg, R. F., 450
Goldman, D., 637
Golgi, C., 35, 36
Golombek, D. A., 319
Gonzalez, M. F., 410
González, M. M., 581
Goodale, M. A., 202, 205, 275
Goodglass, H., 496
Goodman, W. K., 591
Goodman-Schulman, R., 511
Gooley, J. J., 316
Gooren, L., 342, 344
Gordon, H. W., 6
Gordon, I., 356
Gorski, R. A., 347, 348
Gosselin, N., 364
Gottesman, I. I., 555
Gottfried, J. A., 252
Gotti, C., 628
Gould, E., 475
Gouras, P., 178
Graber, G. C., 353
Gradinaru, V., 538
Grados, M. A., 590
Grady, C., 224
Grafton, S. T., 276, 536
Graham, K. S., 467, 468
Graybiel, A. M., 536
Graziano, M. S. A., 266
Gréco, B., 348
Greene, J. D., 369
Gregg, T. R., 365
Grelotti, D. J., 197, 596
Griebal, G., 629
Grill, H. J., 414
Grill-Spector, K., 187, 192, 193
Gross, C. G., 192, 198
Gross, J., 292
Grossman, E. D., 200
Groves, D. A., 573
Groves, P. M., 458
Grundy, D., 410
Grunhaus, L., 579
Guastella, A. J., 596
Guehl, D., 590
Guilleminault, C., 295
Gulevich, G., 299
Gur, R. C., 386
Gurd, J. M., 504
Guridi, J., 536
Gurvits, T. V., 608
Gutiérrez-Galve, L., 559
Gutin, B., 426
Gvilia, I., 309
Haarmeier, T., 201
Haas, H. L., 307
Haas, R. H., 547
Habib, M., 510
Hacke, W., 524
Hackett, R. A., 215
Hackett, T. A., 215
Hackney, C. M., 217
Hadjikhani, N., 191, 379, 596
Hadjipanayis, C. G., 518
Hague, S. M., 539
Hainer, V., 423
Hajak, G., 295
Halaas, J. L., 412
Halassa, M. M., 305
Halford, J. C. G., 426
Halgren, E., 364
Halpern, B. P., 337
Halpern, M., 335
Halsband, U., 273
Hamer, D. H., 344
Hamet, P., 571
Hamilton, L. D., 340
Hammersmith, S. K., 340
Hampson, R. E., 635
Handel, G. F., 570
Hansen, D. V., 78
Hari, R., 510
Hariz, M. I., 536
Harmelen, 608
Harmon, L. D., 183
Harris, G. W., 329
Harris, K. M., 444
Harris, R. A., 622, 628, 632
Harrison, Y., 300
Hart, B. L., 346
Hartline, H. K., 174
Hartung, H.-P., 546
Harvey, S. M., 339
Hasegawa, T., 573
Hashimoto, T., 566
Haslam, N., 589
Haslinger, B., 274
Hattar, S., 316
Haubensak, W., 363
Haug, H.-J., 580
Haughey, N. J., 549, 550
Hauk, O., 494
Hauser, M. D., 386
Haverkamp, S., 177
Hawke, C., 373
Hawkins, R. D., 445
Hazelwood, S., 356
He, J., 336
He, W., 245
He, Y., 224
Hebb, D. O., 436, 437
Heckler, M. M., 637
Hedén-Bloomqvist, E., 338
Heeb, M. M., 348
Heffner, H. E., 223
Heffner, R. S., 223
Hefzy, H., 630
Heidkamp, D., 560
Heilman, K. M., 277, 378, 513
Heimer, L., 347
Heinrichs, M., 351
Heinrichs, S. C., 603
Heinz, A., 633
Helenius, P., 510
Heller, H. C., 305
Helmuth, L., 510
Hen, R., 79, 577
Hendrickson, A. E., 184, 316
Hendrickx, A. G., 373
Hendry, S. H. C., 185
Heninger, G. R., 574
Henke, P. G., 362
Hennessey, A. C., 349
Henningfield, J. E., 640
Henry, M. L., 512
Henter, I. D., 570
Herbert, M. R., 595
Herculano-Houzel, S., 20
Herholz, K., 429
Hering, E., 176
Hertz, H., 209
Hetherington, A. W., 415
Hettema, J. M., 586, 589
Heywood, C. A., 191, 382
Hickok, G., 495, 503
Hicks, M. J., 639
Hideyama, T., 545
Hikosaka, O., 270
Hill, J. O., 426
Hill, J. P., 426
Hillis, A. E., 484
Hines, M., 341, 348
Hippocrates, 11, 520
Hirata, Y., 484
Hirstein, W., 239
Hitzig, E., 13
Hobson, J. A., 293, 297
Hochberg, L. R., 526
Hock, C., 544
Hodge, C. W., 632
Hodges, J. R., 467, 468
Hoeft, F., 510
Hofbauer, R. K., 238
Hoffman, D. S., 273
Hofman, M. A., 342
Hohman, G. W., 389, 391
Holden, C., 366, 367
Hollander, E., 590, 597
Hollis, J. H., 400
Holmes, G., 284
Holsboer, R., 603
Holstege, G., 348, 350
Holtzheimer, P. E., 573, 576
Hong, C. C. H., 293
Hopf, H. C., 385
Hopf, N. J., 385
Hopfenbeck, J., 409
Hopkins, R. O., 466, 467
Hoppe, C., 520
Hore, J., 284
Horn, C. C., 409
Horne, J. A., 299, 300, 301
Horowitz, R. M., 245
Horowitz, T. S., 321
Horton, J. C., 184, 188
Hotsenpiller, G., 604
Houchi, H., 634
Howard, J. D., 252
Howell, M. J., 298
Howell, S., 366
Hu, W.-P., 318
Huang, A. L., 245
Huang, H., 631
Hubel, D. H., 181, 184, 185
Huber, R., 301
Hublin, C., 297
Hudspeth, A. J., 212
Huestis, M. A., 633
Hughes, J., 124
Hughes, J. R., 629
Hull, E. M., 332, 347
Hull, M. S., 344
Hulshoff-Pol, H. E., 559
Humphrey, A. L., 184
Hunt, D. M., 176
Huntley, G. W., 79
Hurwitz, T. D., 297
Husain, M., 280
Hussey, E., 383
Huszar, D., 419
Huttunen, M. O., 561
Hwa, J. J., 419
Hyldebrandt, N., 605
Hyman, S. E., 628
Iacoboni, M., 275, 494, 596
Iaria, G., 468
Ibn Abbas, A., 70
Ibuka, N., 316
Ichikawa, Y., 505
Ikoma, A., 235
Ikonomidou, C., 631
Imperato, A., 632
Inase, M., 269
Infante, M. A., 528
Innala, S. M., 344
Insel, T. R., 351, 354, 356
Ioalé, P., 469
Ishizuka, T., 308
Ito, M., 416
Ito, T., 487
Itoh, K., 184
Iwata, M., 505
Izard, C. E., 377
Jackson, T. A., 585
Jacob, S., 337
Jacobs, B. L., 306, 307, 361
Jacobs, G. H., 176
Jacobs, L. F., 469
Jacobsen, C. F., 585
Jacobsohn, D., 329
Jahr, C. E., 240
Jakobson, L. S., 202
James, T. W., 202
James, W., 388, 389, 390, 391
Jaramillo, F., 212
Jarvis, M. J., 628
Jayanthi, S., 627
Jaynes, J., 12
Jeffress, L. A., 220
Jeffries, E., 468
Jellestad, F. K., 362
Jensen, M. D., 422

	
Name Index	
717
Jensen, T., 605
Jentsch, J. D., 565
Jeon, T.-I., 246
Jeste, D. V., 554
Jewett, D. C., 417
Ji, H., 409
Jo, Y.-H., 631
Jobard, G., 505
Jobst, E. E., 418
Jocson, C. M., 188
Jodo, E., 311
Joëls, M., 603
Johanek, L. M., 235
Johansson, G., 200
Johansson, R. S., 231
Johnson, B. A., 251
Johnson, L., 299
Johnson, M. A., 196
Johnson, M. K., 461, 462
Johnsrued, I., 494
Johnston, D., 442
Johnston, R., 378
Jonas, P., 123
Jones, B. E., 305, 306, 314
Jones, D. K., 492
Jones, D. T., 250
Jones, P. B., 562
Jones, S. S., 378
Jope, R. S., 574
Joppa, M., 374
Jornales, V. E., 199
Jouvet, M., 307, 311, 313
Jouvet-Mounier, D., 302
Julesz, B., 183
Kaas, J. H., 185, 215
Kacelnik, O., 223
Kagan, J., 226
Kales, A., 297, 300
Kalin, N. H., 603
Kalivas, P. W., 621
Kalra, P. S., 416, 417
Kalra, S. P., 416, 417
Kandel, E. R., 445, 532
Kane, M. D., 544
Kang, C., 510
Kanner, L., 593
Kanwisher, N., 193, 194, 196, 
201, 450
Kaplan, E., 185, 186, 496
Kaplan, J. M., 414
Kaplitt, M. G., 538
Kapp, B. S., 361
Karacan, I., 292, 304
Karlsgodt, K. H., 452
Karlson, P., 335
Karlsson, M. P., 474
Karnath, H.-O., 193
Kartsounis, L. D., 465
Katanoda, K., 511
Katz, L. C., 336
Katzman, D. K., 429
Kauer, J. A., 617
Kavoussi, R. J., 367
Kawahara, Y., 545
Kawai, K., 418
Kawamura, H., 316
Kawauchi, H., 415
Kawikova, I., 590
Kayama, Y., 311
Kaye, W. H., 431
Kehoe, P., 623
Keiseier, B., 546
Keller, S. E., 610
Kelso, S. R., 441
Kempermann, G., 475
Kendell, R. E., 560
Kendler, K. S., 430, 586, 589, 
637
Kennard, C., 280
Kenney, P. J., 620
Kentridge, R. W., 191
Kerker, E., 354
Kersten, D., 187
Kertesz, A., 277, 485
Kessler, R. C., 570, 607
Kestler, L. P., 557
Kety, S. S., 555
Keverne, E. B., 336, 353
Kew, J. J. M., 79
Keys, A., 429, 430
Khateb, A., 307
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., 604, 610
Kim, J. J., 452
Kim, J. K., 461, 462
Kim, J. W., 356
Kim, J. Y., 556
King, A. J., 223
King, S., 560
Kingston, K., 429
Kinnamon, S. C., 245
Kinsley, C. H., 355
Kirkpatrick, B., 356
Kitada, T., 534
Kito, S., 573
Kiyaschchenko, L. I., 308
Klaffke, S., 539
Klaur, J., 524
Kleck, R. E., 381
Klein, D. A., 429, 430
Klein, P. S., 574
Klinge, C., 224
Klunk, W. E., 542
Knackstedt, L., 621
Knapp, P. H., 610
Knebelmann, B., 328
Knecht, S., 458, 481
Knickmeyer, R. C., 597
Knouf, N., 193
Knutson, B., 456, 457
Ko, J., 540
Kobatake, E., 192
Kodali, S. K., 305
Kodas, E., 629
Koenen, K. C., 607
Koenigs, M., 369
Koga, Y., 573
Kogan, J. H., 626
Kohler, E., 274
Kojima, M., 407
Kolassa, I. T., 607
Komisaruk, B. R., 241
Kong, J., 305
Konishi, M., 220, 221
Koob, G. F., 603, 626, 632
Kordower, J. H., 536
Kornhuber, H. H., 284
Koroshetz, W. J., 463, 523
Korsakoff, S., 460
Kortegaard, L. S., 430
Kosfeld, M., 351
Koshland, D. E., 126
Kosinski, C., 385
Kosten, T., 623
Kourtzi, A., 450
Kovács, G., 192
Koylu, E. O., 419
Kozlowski, L. T., 200
Kraepelin, E., 562
Kramer, F. M., 424
Kramer, L., 496
Kraut, R. E., 378
Kravitz, A. V., 536
Kress, M., 235
Kriete, M., 592
Kristal, M. B., 353
Kristensen, P., 417, 419
Krolak-Salmon, P., 380
Kruijver, F. P. M., 343
Krystal, A. D., 572
Kuffler, S. W., 174
Kumar, K., 240
Kumpik, D. P., 223
Kunos, G., 635
Kunugi, H., 561
Kupfer, D. J., 578
Kurata, K., 273
Kurihara, K., 243
Kuriki, S., 484
Kuryatov, A., 637
Kutlesic, V., 431
LaBar, K. S., 364
Laborit, H., 556
Lacote, D., 302
Lafrance, L., 412
Lahti, A. C., 565
Lai, E. C., 536
Lai, Y.-Y., 313
Laitinen, L. V., 536
LaLumiere, R. T., 621
Lamb, T., 374
Lambon Ralph, M. A., 467,  
468
Landisman, C. E., 185
Landsness, E. C., 579
Lane, J. D., 625
Lange, C., 388, 391
Langen, M., 597
Lapish, C. C., 621
Larson, J., 448
Larson, P. S., 591
Larsson, K., 241, 347
Laruelle, M., 557
Laschet, U., 373
Lasek, R. J., 39
Lau, H. C., 272
Laurent, B., 8
Lavoie, B., 591
Lavond, D. G., 452
Lê, S., 200
Le Bec, P.-Y., 635
Le Jeune, F., 591
Leak, R. K., 316
Leckman, J. F., 589
LeDoux, J. E., 6, 7, 361, 362, 
363, 607, 608
Lee, A., 355
Lee, M. S., 306, 576
Lee, S. J., 533, 536
LeGrand, R., 197
Lehman, M. N., 317, 320, 348
Leibenluft, E., 580
Leiguarda, R., 238, 276
Leksell, 536
Lennie, P., 177
Leon, M., 251
Leonard, C. M., 361
Leonard, H. L., 590, 591
Leslie, A. M., 594
Lesser, R., 513
Letchworth, S. R., 618
Letson, R. D., 79
LeVay, S., 342
Levenson, R. W., 390
Levine, J. A., 422
Levine, M. S., 539
Levinsson, A., 235
Lewine, R. R. J., 562
Lewis, D. A., 566, 603
Lewis, D. J., 474
Lewis, E. B., 78
Lewis, M. B., 390
Lewis, O. F., 301
LeWitt, P. A., 538
Lewy, A. K., 581
Leyton, M., 575
Li, 539
Li, A.-J., 417
Li, B.-M., 601
Li, M. R., 426
Li, T. K., 619
Li, Y. C., 567
Lidberg, L., 367
Lieberman, J. A., 567
Liebeskind, J. C., 239
Liepert, J., 526
Liljenquist, K., 589
Liljequist, S., 632
Lim, M. M., 351
Lima, S. L., 299
Lin, J.-S., 307, 309
Lin, L., 296
Lin, S. P., 561
Lincoln, A., 183
Lindemann, B., 245
Lindquist, C., 590
Lindstrom, J., 637
Lindström, P., 343
Lipton, S. A., 543, 545
Lisk, R. D., 354
Lisman, J. A., 448
Liu, C., 505
Liu, L., 448

718	
Name Index
Liuzzi, F. J., 39
Livingstone, M. S., 185
Lledo, P. M., 444
Lockhead, E., 245
Lockley, S. W., 321
Logothetis, N. K., 192
Löken, L. S., 233
Lombardi, J. R., 335
Lomber, S. G., 224
Lomo, T., 439, 440
Loncar, D., 628
Longcamp, M., 511
Longnecker, D. E., 568
Low, N. C., 586
Lozano, 573
Lu, J., 309, 317, 417
Ludwig, D. S., 416
Luigjes, J., 639
Luo, M., 336
Lupien, S., 604
Luppi, P. H., 311
Lüscher, C., 447
Luscher, M., 335
Luzzatti, C., 8
Luzzi, S., 468
Lydon, J. P., 334
Lyman, W. D., 529
Lynch, G., 442, 448
Lytton, W. W., 509
Ma, W., 335
Ma, X., 420
MacDonald, A. W., 565
Machon, R. A., 561
Mackintosh, J. H., 372
MacLean, H. E., 327
MacLean, P. D., 85
Macpherson, L. J., 234
MacSweeney, M., 495
Madden, P. A. F., 580
Madigan, S., 487
Madsen, P. L., 293
Maes, F. W., 245
Magee, J. C., 442
Maggard, M. A., 425
Magistretti, P. J., 36
Maguire, E. A., 461, 468
Mahowald, M. W., 296, 297
Maiese, K., 445
Maj, M., 549
Mak, G. K., 337
Makino, H., 444
Malach, R., 187, 192
Maldonado, R., 625, 626, 634
Malenka, R. C., 123, 617, 628
Malhotra, A. K., 566
Malhotra, S., 224
Malinow, R., 444
Mallow, G. K., 373
Mallucci, G., 532, 533
Malnic, B., 250, 251
Malpeli, J. G., 174
Malsbury, C. W., 347
Mameli, M., 618
Mancuso, K., 178
Mandiyan, V. S., 337
Manji, H. K., 570, 574
Manley, R. S., 429
Mann, J. J., 371
Mannen, T., 505
Manning, L., 494
Manns, J. R., 467
Mantione, M., 639
Mantyh, P. W., 240
Mao-Draayer, Y., 502
Maquet, P., 300, 311
Marcel, A. J., 493
Margolin, D. I., 491, 493, 511
Margolskee, R., 245, 246
Marin, O. S. M., 483, 486, 509
Marinkovic, K., 505
Marrosu, F., 305
Marsden, C. D., 276
Marshall, B. E., 568
Marshall, J. C., 504
Marshall, L., 302
Marson, L., 348, 349
Martinez, M., 542
Martins, I. J., 543
Marton, T. F., 335
Mas, M., 347
Masland, R. H., 169
Mathalon, D. H., 622
Mathers, C. D., 628
Mathis, C. A., 542
Matias, I., 417, 426
Matsumoto, D., 377
Matsunami, H., 245
Mattay, V. S., 600
Matteo, S., 338
Matthes, H. W. D., 625
Matthews, D. B., 632
Mattick, J. S., 33
Mattson, M. P., 549, 550
Maunsell, J. H. R., 175, 450
Maviel, T., 473
Mayberg, H. S., 573, 576, 577, 
588
Mayer, D. J., 239
Mayers, A. G., 579
Mazur, A., 373, 374
McArthur, A. J., 321
McCann, U. D., 627
McCarley, R. W., 293, 297, 310
McCarthy, G., 595
McCaul, K. D., 374
McCleod, P., 200
McClintock, M. K., 334, 337
McDonald, R. J., 529
McEwen, B. S., 604
McFarland, D. J., 526
McFarland, K., 621
McGinty, D. J., 285, 361
McGrath, C. L., 571
McGrath, J., 560
McGurk, S. R., 554
McIver, B., 402
McKenna, K. E., 348
McKinley, M. J., 400
McKinzie, A. A., 418
McLaughlin, S. K., 245
McMahon, K., 632
McMahon, S. B., 235
McNaughton, B. L., 471
Medcalf, R., 524
Mednick, S., 302, 561
Meeren, H. K., 379
Melges, F. T., 293
Meltzoff, A. N., 277
Melzak, R., 239
Menon, V., 511
Meredith, M., 336
Mereu, G., 628
Merikangas, K. R., 586
Mesches, M. H., 604
Meston, C. M., 340
Mesulam, M.-M., 496
Meyer, M., 496
Meyer, T., 444
Meyer, W. J., 373
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L., 340, 
342
Miao, Z., 335
Michel, L., 385
Miczek, K. A., 374, 623
Mieda, M., 416
Miezin, F., 198
Mignot, E., 296
Migues, P. V., 446, 453
Milad, M. R., 608
Mileykovskiy, B. Y., 308
Millar, R. P., 329
Miller, G., 532, 533
Miller, J., 539
Miller, N. E., 22
Miller, R. G., 546
Miller, R. R., 474
Miller, V. M., 472
Milner, A. D., 202
Milner, B., 435, 460, 461
Milner, P., 455, 459
Minai, A., 471
Minard, A., 301
Mindus, P., 590
Minozzi, S., 635
Mirenowicz, J., 457
Misanin, J. R., 474, 475
Miselis, R. R., 142, 349
Miserendino, M. J. D., 623
Mishkin, M., 189, 192, 202
Mitchell, J. E., 431
Mitler, 297
Mittal, V. A., 561
Miyashita, Y., 452
Mizrahi, A., 139
Mizuno, Y., 535
Mochizuki, T., 310
Modahl, C., 596
Moeller, S., 191
Moghaddam, B., 456, 626
Mohr, J. P., 461, 462
Moller, H. J., 573
Mollon, J. D., 176
Mombaerts, P., 250
Monaghan, D. T., 448
Mondragon, M., 338
Money, J., 324, 327, 340
Moniz, E., 585
Monk, C. S., 587
Monsonego, A., 544
Montagna, P., 300
Montero, S., 602
Montmayeur, J.-P., 245
Moore, D. J., 534
Moore, D. R., 217
Moore, G. J., 574
Moore, J. T., 297
Moore, R. Y., 316
Moore, T. H. M., 635
Moran, T. H., 411
Morensen, P. B., 560
Moretto, G., 370
Morgan, C. J. A., 634
Mori, E., 364
Mori, K., 253
Mori, T., 484
Morin, L. P., 320
Morley, J. E., 417
Morris, J. A., 344
Morris, J. S., 378
Morris, N. M., 338
Morris, R., 374
Morris, R. G. M., 469
Morrison, P. D., 557, 568
Morse, J. R., 246
Morshed, S. A., 590
Morton, J., 594
Moscovitch, M., 193, 386
Moser, E. I., 470, 472
Mosharov, E. V., 535
Moskowitz, M. A., 523
Mountcastle, V. B., 236
Mueller-Forell, W., 385
Mueser, K.T., 554
Mukhametov, L. M., 299, 304
Mull, M., 385
Müller, J., 12, 14
Muller, M. J., 570
Münch, C., 545
Munitz, H., 195
Murison, R., 362
Murotani, T., 308
Murphy, A. Z., 348, 349
Murray, R. M., 561, 562
Murray, S., 374
Murray, S. O., 187
Murre, J. M. J., 467, 468
Museo, G., 628
Mushiake, H., 269
Muzio, J. N., 302
Myers, E., 193
Myers, R. D., 417
Nachev, P., 280
Nadeau, S. E., 482
Nader, K., 474, 475
Naeser, M. A., 482
Nagatani, S., 329
Nagayama, S., 253
Nägerl, U. V., 444
Nair, S. G., 424
Nakahara, D., 456
Nakamura, J., 236
Nakamura, K., 512

	
Name Index	
719
Nakamura, T., 250
Nakayama, K., 302
Nakazato, M., 417
Nambu, A., 280
Nambu, T., 416
Nanko, S., 561
Naqvi, N. H., 630, 640
Narasimhan, K., 628
Nasir, J., 539
Nassi, J. J., 185
Nath, A., 549, 550
Nath, R., 240
Nathan, R. S., 589
Nathans, J., 177
Nauta, W. J. H., 247
Navakkode, S., 458
Nazir, T. A., 507
Neale, J. M., 611
Neale, M. C., 586, 589
Nearing, K. I., 364
Nef, P., 251
Nergårdh, R., 430
Nestler, E. J., 626
Nestor, P. J., 484
Neufer, P. D., 422
Neumann, C., 562
Neumann, K., 498
Neumeister, A., 575, 576
New, A. S., 371
Newman, A. J., 495
Newman, S. W., 347
Ngai, J., 251
Nichelli, P., 490
Nicholl, C. S., 23
Nicoll, R. A., 123, 240
Nides, M., 640
Nielsen, M. K., 423
Nielsen, S. J., 422
Nili, U., 368
Nilius, B., 235
Nilsson, H. J., 235
Nisell, M., 628
Nishino, S., 296, 297
Nissant, A, 476
Nissl, F., 137
Niwa, M., 566, 567
Nobler, M. S., 573
Nomikos, G. G., 628
Norgren, R., 246, 414
Normandin, J., 348
Nothdurfter, C., 587
Novin, D., 408, 409
Novotny, M., 335
Nowak, D. A., 273
Nugent, N. R., 607
Numan, M., 354, 355, 356
Numan, M. J., 355
Nuñez, A. A., 316
Nutt, D. J., 587
Nyby, J. G., 347
Oaknin, S., 347
Oberman, L. M., 383
Obeso, J. A., 536
Obler, L. K., 481
O’Brien, C. P., 641
O’Brien, K. M., 429
Ockleford, E. M., 497
O’Connell, R. J., 336
O’Donovan, M., 599
Oertel, D., 221
Ogawa, S., 349
Ogden, C. L., 421
Ohta, M., 311
O’Keefe, J., 361, 470
Olanow, C. W., 536
Olausson, H., 232, 233
Olds, J., 386, 455, 459
Oleksenko, A. I., 304
Oleshansky, M., 574
Oliveri, M., 451
Olney, J. W., 465
Olson, C. R., 192
Olsson, A., 364
Olster, D. H., 334
Olszewski, P. K., 423
Omura, K., 512
O’Neill, J., 303
Opitz, B., 483
O’Rahilly, S., 423
Orban, G. A., 192
Orlovsky, G. N., 285
Oroszi, G., 637
Orzel-Gryglewska, J., 295
Osaka, N., 238
Ossebaard, C. A., 245
Ostrowsky, K., 238
Ostry, D. J., 487
Otsuki, M., 512
Otto, T., 462
Overduin, 408
Owen, A. M., 463
Owen, M. J., 599
Ozonoff, S., 594
Packard, M. G., 455
Padberg, F., 573
Pallast, E. G. M., 560
Panitch, H., 502
Papadimitriou, G. N., 580
Papez, J. W., 85
Paré, D., 363
Parent, A., 591
Park, Y.-U., 556
Parker, A. J., 190
Parmentier, R., 307
Pascoe, J. P., 361
Pascual-Leone, A., 200
Passingham, R. E., 8
Pasterski, V. L., 341
Patapoutian, A., 234
Pattatucci, A. M. L., 344
Patterson, K., 467
Patterson, P. H., 540
Paulesu, E., 510
Pauls, D. L., 589
Pauls, J., 192
Paulus, M. P., 587
Pavlov, I., 363
Pazzaglia, M., 277
Pedersen, C. B., 560
Pedersen-Bjergaard, U., 411
Peigneux, P., 303
Pellerin, L., 36
Pelleymounter, M. A., 412
Pelphrey, K. A., 200, 382, 596
Penfield, W., 450
Peng, X., 188
Perani, D., 225
Pereira, A. C., 578
Peretz, I., 225, 226, 364
Perez, M. A., 271
Perfetti, C. A., 450
Perlmutter, S. J., 590
Perot, P., 450
Perrett, D. I., 381
Perry, P., 374
Pert, C. B., 123
Pessoa, L., 383
Peters, J., 621
Petersen, S., 198
Peterson, B. S., 590
Peterson, D. A., 604
Petkov, C. I., 215
Peuskens, H., 199
Peyrache, A., 474
Peyron, R., 8, 296
Pfaff, D. W., 347, 348, 349
Pfaus, J. G., 348
Pfeifer, J. H., 391
Pfister, E. L., 540
Pfleiderer, B., 587
Phan, K. L., 587
Phelps, E. A., 364, 379, 387,  
608
Phelps, J. A., 564
Phiel, C. J., 574
Philipp, M., 570
Phillips, M. I., 401
Phillips, P. E., 633
Phillips, R. G., 456
Piccirillo, J. F., 295
Pickles, J. O., 212
Pijl, S., 218
Pike, K. M., 431
Pillard, R. C., 344
Pillsbury, H. C., 217
Pilowsky, L. S., 557, 568
Pinkham, A. E., 557
Piomelli, D., 633
Pitcher, D., 383
Pitkänen, A., 361
Plata-Salaman, C. R., 243
Pleim, E. T., 348
Ploeger, A., 595
Pobric, G., 468, 491
Poeppel, D., 487
Poggio, G. F., 79, 184
Poggio, T., 79, 184, 192
Poizner, H., 280
Poldrack, R. A., 599
Polet, I. A., 245
Polymeropoulos, M. H., 534
Pomp, D., 423
Pompili, M., 429
Poole, J., 356
Popa, D., 363
Popkin, B. M., 422
Popko, B., 532
Popova, N. K., 366
Poremba, A., 215
Porkka-Heiskanen, T., 310
Porrino, L. J., 618
Port, J. D., 590
Porter, J., 248
Porter, R. W., 301
Posmontier, B., 578
Potenza, M. N., 619
Powell, T. E., 373
Preti, G., 337
Pretlow, R. A., 354
Preuss, T. M., 215
Price, D. B., 237
Price, E. O., 343
Price, J. L., 247
Price, L. H., 574
Pritchard, T. C., 246
Proctor, W. R., 633
Provencio, I., 316
Prusiner, S. B., 532
Puce, A., 595
Pulvermüller, F., 487, 494
Purpura, K. P., 185, 186
Qu, D., 416
Quadfasel, F. A., 489
Quirk, G. J., 363, 472, 608
Rahman, Q., 344
Raine, A., 371
Rainville, P., 238
Rakic, P., 75, 78
Ralph, M. R., 320
Ramachandran, V. S., 239
Ramakrishnan, K., 295
Ramanathan, A., 300
Ramesh, V., 307
Ramirez, I., 243
Ramus, F., 510
Ranganath, C., 451
Ransom, B. R., 36
Ranson, S. W., 415
Rapcsak, S. Z., 512
Rapin, I., 595
Rapoport, J. L., 589, 592
Rasmussen, S. A., 590
Rasmusson, D. D., 306
Rattenborg, N. C., 299
Rauch, S. L., 608
Raupach, T., 640
Rausch, J. L., 576
Rauschecker, J. P., 216, 223
Ravussin, E., 423
Read, N. W., 410
Reber, P. J., 461
Recer, P., 510
Rechtschaffen, A., 300
Reddrop, C., 524
Redgrave, P., 280
Reed, B. R., 611
Reed, C. L., 236
Reed, J. M., 466
Reed, R. R., 250
Regan, B. C., 176

720	
Name Index
Rehn, A. E., 562
Reid, C. A., 448
Reid, L. D., 633
Reinehr, T., 425
Reiner, W. G., 342
Rempe, M. J., 310
Rempel-Clower, N. L., 465
Ren, Y., 634
Renthal, W., 637
Resnick, S. M., 373
Ressler, K. J., 251, 588
Rétey, J. V., 305
Reynolds, D. V., 239
Rezek, M., 408
Rhees, R. W., 347
Rice, N. J., 202
Riemann, D., 580
Rijntjes, M., 511
Riley, E. P., 528
Rilling, J. K., 491
Risch, N., 576
Risse, G., 461, 462
Rissman, E. F., 334, 338
Ritter, R. C., 409, 411
Ritter, S., 408, 409, 410, 414, 
417
Rizzolatti, G., 273
Rizzolatti, R., 274
Rizzoli, S. O., 55
Robbins, L. N., 589
Robbins, R. W., 378
Robbins, T. W., 599
Roberts, S. C., 334
Robertson, G. S., 347
Robinson, D., 590
Rodman, H. R., 198
Rodriguez de Fonseca, F., 634
Roe, A. W., 190
Roeltgen, D. P., 513
Roffwarg, H. P., 293, 302
Rogawski, M. A., 544
Roland, P. E., 301
Role, L. W., 631
Rolls, E. T., 192, 246, 247, 361, 
449
Romanovsky, A. A., 234
Romer, J., 417
Rosa, R. R., 294
Rose, J. D., 349
Rose, J. E., 640
Rose, R. M., 603
Roselli, C. E., 343
Rosenblatt, J. S., 354, 356
Rosengren, K. S., 202
Rosenstein, R. E., 319
Rosenthal, N. E., 580, 581
Roses, A. D., 543
Rösner, S., 641
Rot, A. H., 574
Roth, M., 268
Roth, T., 294
Rothbaum, B. O., 607
Rothi, L., 277, 513
Rothman, S. M., 465
Rubia, K., 601
Rubin, B. S., 348
Rubin, L. L., 39
Rück, C., 591
Rudge, P., 465
Rumpel, S., 453
Rusak, B., 320
Russchen, F. T., 247
Russell, G. F. M., 430
Russell, M. J., 337, 338
Russell, R. M., 23
Rutter, M., 594
Ryba, N. J., 335
Ryback, R. S., 301
Ryland, D. H., 592
Saal, D., 618
Saayman, G. S., 372
Sachar, E. J., 575
Sackeim, A. J., 386
Sackeim, H. A., 573
Sacktor, T. C., 446
Sadato, N., 79
Safford, A., 383
Saffran, E. M., 483, 486, 509
Sagvolden, T., 599
Sahu, A., 417
St. George-Hyslop, P. H., 542
St.-Hilaire, A., 560
Sakai, F., 300
Sakai, K., 307, 309, 311, 483
Saktor, 447
Sakuma, Y., 349
Sakurai, T., 308, 311, 415, 416, 
594
Sakurai, Y., 505
Salamone, J. D., 457, 617
Salas, J. C. T., 314
Salis, P. J., 292
Salm, A. K., 604
Salmelin, R., 498
Samson, H. H., 632
Samuels, B. A., 577
Samuels, S., 429
Sanacora, G., 574
Sandell, J. H., 175
Sandkühler, J., 123
Saper, C. B., 309, 310, 311, 317, 
419
Sapolsky, R. M., 604, 610
Sargeant, J. A., 599
Sarhan, M., 620
Sassenrath, E. N., 373
Sato, N., 472
Satterlee, J. S., 34
Sauter, D. A., 377
Savage, D. D., 529
Savander, V., 361
Savic, I., 338, 343
Savoie, T., 562
Sawchenko, P. E., 416
Saxena, S., 590
Saxton, T. K., 337
Scammell, T. E., 297, 309, 310, 
317
Schaller, G., 407
Scharf, R., 620
Scheid, D. C., 295
Schein, S. J., 190, 191
Schenck, C. H., 296, 297, 298
Schenkein, J., 300
Scherschlicht, R., 579
Schiffman, J., 562
Schiffman, S. S., 245
Schiller, P. H., 174, 175
Schleifer, S. J., 610
Schloegl, H., 411
Schlosberg, H., 377
Schmid, D., 407
Schmidt, H. S., 292
Schmidt, M. H., 292, 314
Schmitt, U., 217
Schneider, B., 570
Schneider, P., 225
Schneider, W., 450
Schoenfeld, M. A., 247
Schoffelmeer, A. N. M., 629
Schotland, H., 295
Schouenborg, J., 235
Schultz, R. T., 197, 595
Schultz, W., 457
Schumacher, J., 556
Schumann, C. M., 595
Schwartz, M. F., 483, 509
Schwartz, S., 313
Schwartz, W. J., 318
Schwarz, D. W. F., 218
Schwarzenbacher, R., 543, 545
Schwarzlose, R. F., 194
Scott, S. K., 216, 486
Scott, T. R., 243
Scoville, W. B., 460
Seagraves, M. A., 198
Sears, L. L., 597
Sebat, J., 594
Segarra, J. M., 489
Seidman, L. J., 598
Sejong, King, 506
Selye, H., 603
Semba, K., 317
Semenza, C., 493
Sen, S., 576
Senju, A., 596
Sequoyah, 506, 507
Serrano, P., 458
Sforza, E., 300
Shafto, M. A., 485
Shah, N. M., 337
Shaham, Y., 623
Shalev, U., 623
Shallice, T., 512
Sham, P. C., 561
Shammi, P., 385
Shannon, R. V., 217
Shapiro, L. E., 356
Sharp, D. J., 486
Sharpe, L. T., 177
Shaw, P., 601
Shaywitz, B. A., 510
Sheard, N., 354
Shema, R., 458
Shen, K., 444
Shenk, D., 544
Shepherd, G. M., 250
Sher, A. E., 295
Sherin, J. E., 309
Sherman, J. E., 603
Sherry, D. F., 469
Shi, S.-H., 443
Shields, J., 555
Shifren, J. L., 339
Shik, M. L., 285
Shima, K., 269, 270
Shimada, M., 416
Shimamura, A. P., 462
Shimokochi, M., 347
Shimura, T., 347
Shin, A. C., 425
Shin, L. M., 608
Shipley, M. T., 249
Shmuelof, L., 276
Shors, T. J., 475
Shryne, J. E., 347
Shuto, Y., 417
Si, K., 532
Sidman, M., 461, 462
Siegel, A., 365
Siegel, J., 300
Siegel, J. M., 285, 308
Siegel, R. M., 198
Sienkiewicz, Z. J., 246
Sigmundson, H. K., 324
Silva, A. J., 444
Silver, B., 630
Silver, R., 317, 319
Silver, R. W., 630
Silveri, M. C., 511
Silverman, J. L., 593
Simon, S. A., 247
Simpson, J. B., 401
Simson, P. E., 632
Sincich, L. C., 188
Sindelar, D. K., 417
Singer, C., 292
Singer, F., 602
Singer, T., 238
Singh, D., 337
Sinha, P., 193
Sinha, R., 622
Sinigaglia, C., 273
Sipos, A., 556
Sipos, M. L., 347
Sirigu, A., 272
Skaggs, W. E., 471
Skene, D. J., 321
Skutella, T., 603
Slater, M., 8
Slotkin, T. A., 628
Smith, A. P., 612
Smith, C. N., 466
Smith, C. T., 290
Smith, D. V., 245
Smith, G. P., 430
Smith, J. E., 625
Smith, M. D., 425
Smith, R. E., 603
Smith, R. G., 408
Snowman, A. M., 123
Snyder, L. H., 201
Snyder, S. H., 124, 556, 557

	
Name Index	
721
Soares, J. C., 571, 574
Södersten, P., 430, 431
Soliman, F., 587
Solomon, S. G., 177
Solstad, T., 472
Solyom, L., 591
Son, G. H., 604
Soon, C. S., 272
Soria, G, 634
Sormani, M. P., 546
Sotillo, M., 491
Sotres-Bayon, F., 363
Sotthibundhu, A., 542
South, E. H., 411
Southwell, A. L., 540
Speh, J. C., 316
Spence, C., 8
Sperry, R., 6
Spezio, M. L., 381
Spiers, H. J., 461
Spillantini, M. G., 543
Sprengelmeyer, R., 383
Squire, L. R., 461, 462, 463, 464, 
466, 467, 573
Staddon, J. M., 39
Stahl, S. M., 572
Standing, L., 449
Stanislavsky, C., 384, 385
Starkey, S. J., 321
Starkstein, S., 238
Staubli, U., 448
Stebbins, W. C., 216
Steele, A. D., 532
Steeves, J. K. E., 195
Stefanacci, L., 361
Stefanatos, G. A., 487
Stein, M. B., 587, 607
Steinhausen, H. C., 431
Steininger, R. L., 307
Steinman, J. L., 241
Stellar, E., 415
Stephan, F. K., 316
Steriade, M., 291, 305, 311
Sterman, M. B., 309
Stern, K., 337
Stevens, D. R., 307
Stevens, J. M., 465
Stewart, C., 469
Stewart, L., 226, 484
Stickgold, R., 302
Stinson, D., 581
Stoddard, L. T., 461, 462
Stoeckel, L. E., 411
Stolerman, I. P., 628
Stone, A. A., 611, 612
Stone, J. M., 557, 568
Storz, G., 34
Stout, J. C., 622
Stowe, G. N., 639
Stowers, L., 335, 337
Strecker, R. E., 310
Stroka, H., 195
Stumpf, R. M., 339
Sturgis, J. D., 356
Sturup, G. K., 373
Stuss, D. T., 385
Styron, W., 570
Suddath, R. L., 562
Sugishita, M. A., 511
Sukuma, Y., 348
Sulik, K. K., 528
Sullivan, S. L., 251
Sun, Y., 408
Suntsova, N., 309
Susser, E. S., 561
Sutherland, R. J., 529
Suzdak, P. D., 633
Svennilson, E., 536
Svensson, T. H., 628
Swaab, D. F., 342, 343
Swanson, H. H., 354
Sweet, W. H., 389
Swerdlow, N. R., 556, 603
Swift, R., 633, 640
Switz, G. M., 337
Szerb, J. C., 306
Szwed, M., 508
Szymanski, M., 34
Takada, M., 280
Takahashi, K., 307, 309
Takahashi, L. K., 334, 603
Takahashi, Y. K., 253
Takao, M., 316
Tamietto, M., 379
Tamm, L., 601
Tamori, Y., 192
Tanaka, K., 192
Tanji, J., 269, 270
Tarr, M. J., 195
Tarter, R. E., 619
Taub, E., 526
Tavera-Mendoza, L. E., 561
Taylor, J. R., 619
Taylor, J. S., 409, 414
Taylor, M. J., 510, 576
Teacher, L. A., 455
Teff, K. L., 422
Teitelbaum, P., 415
Tekkök, S. B., 36
Teng, E., 466
Terenius, L., 124
Terman, D., 310
Terman, M., 581
Terry, R. D., 540
Tetel, M. J., 348, 349
Teuber, H.-L., 460
Thaker, G. K., 554
Thakkar, M. M., 310
Thapar, A., 599
Thase, M. E., 579
Theorell, T., 603
Thiels, E., 447
Thielscher, A., 383
Thier, P., 201
Thomas, A. C., 622
Thomas, O., 194
Thomas, R. M., 604
Thompson, C., 581
Thompson, K., 337
Thompson, P. M., 564, 622
Thompson, R. F., 452
Thompson, S. M., 447, 521
Thomson, J. J., 369
Thorell, L., 182, 183
Thorn, C. A., 455
Thornhill, R., 339
Thrasher, T. N., 402
Thuy, D. H. D., 505
Tian, B., 216, 223
Tiede, M., 487
Timmann, D., 284
Tirindelli, R., 335
Tizzano, M., 246
Toga, A. W., 199
Toh, K. L., 319
Tokuno, H., 280
Tootell, R. B. H., 185, 192
Topper, R., 385
Tordoff, M. G., 409, 411
Tracy, J. L., 378
Tramo, M. J., 215
Tranel, D., 379, 494
Treasure, J., 430
Tremblay, J., 571
Triarhou, L. C., 308
Tronel, S., 475
Trulson, M. E., 307
Truong, K. K., 317
Trussell, L. O., 223
Tsacopoulos, M., 36
Tsai, H.-C., 458
Tsankova, N., 556
Tsao, D. Y., 185, 191, 192, 196, 
201
Tsuang, M. T., 555, 637
Tunik, E., 276
Turnbull, I. M., 591
Turner, S. M., 589
Tye, K. M., 586, 587
Tyrell, J. B., 603
Tyrrell, D. A. J., 612
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N., 505
Uhde, T. W., 587
Unal, C. T., 363
Unger, J., 412
Ungerleider, L. G., 189, 192, 
202
Uno, H., 605
Untela, K., 510
Urban, P. P., 385
Urgesi, C., 195
Uttal, D. H., 202
Vaidya, C. J., 601
Vaina, L. M., 198, 199, 200
Valcour, V., 549
Valenstein, E. S., 585
Valenza, N., 237
Valyear, K. F., 202
Van Bockstaele, E. J., 602
Van de Beek, C., 341
Van de Poll, N. E., 372
Van den Hoofdakker, R. H., 580
Van den Pol, A. N., 631
Van den Top, M., 417
Van der Lee, S., 335
Van Essen, D. C., 188
Van Goozen, S., 338
Van Harmelen, A. L., 605
van Heijnsbergen, C. C., 379
Van Hoesen, G. W., 195
Van Leengoed, E., 354
Van Meir, E. G., 518
Van Opstal, A. J., 222
Van Schayck, C. P., 640
Van Wezel, R. J., 199
Vandenbergh, J. G., 335
Vandenbulcke, M., 450
Vanderschuren, L. J. M. J., 618
VanderWeele, D. A., 408
Vanderwolf, C. H., 305, 306
Vanduffel, W., 192
Vangipuram, S. D., 529
Vassar, R., 251
Vega, E. M., 557
Vergnes, M., 365
Verney, E. B., 398, 399
Vgontzas, A. N., 297
Victor, M., 465
Vidal-Gonzalez, I., 608
Viding, E., 367
Vinckier, F., 507
Virkkunen, M., 367
Vocci, F. J., 638
Vogel, G. W., 578, 579
Vogels, R., 192
Volk, D. W., 566
Volkow, N., 619, 622
Volpe, B. T., 7
Volpicelli, J. R., 641
Volpicelli, L. A., 641
Vom Saal, F. S., 372
Von Békésy, G., 210, 216
Von Economo, C., 308, 309
Von Helmholtz, H., 13, 14
Von Kriegstein, K., 497
Von Meduna, 572
Vovoamo, 576
Vuilleumier, P., 380
Waber, R. L., 240
Wager, T. D., 240
Wagner, F. A., 617
Wagner, J. A., 445
Wagoner, N., 316
Wahl, M., 265
Wahlbeck, K., 561
Wahlström, A., 124
Walker, D. L., 588
Walker, E., 557
Walker, E. F., 562
Walker, J. A., 491
Walker, M., 59
Walker, P. A., 373
Wallen, K., 338, 339, 340
Walsh, B. T., 429, 430
Walsh, T., 555
Walsh, V., 191, 199
Walters, E. E., 430
Wandell, B. A., 166, 187
Wang, B., 623
Wang, Q., 556

722	
Name Index
Wang, X., 225
Wang, Z., 337
Wang, Z. X., 351
Warchol, M. E., 218
Ward, H. E., 605
Ward, L., 235
Warne, G. L., 328
Warne, L. G., 327
Warren, J. E., 383
Warren, K. R., 528
Warrington, E. K., 512
Wassarman, K. M., 34
Watkins, K. E., 482, 497, 498
Watson, R. T., 378
Watts, S., 284
Webster, H. H., 314
Wehr, T. A., 300
Weinberg, M. S., 340, 344
Weinberger, D. R., 559, 565
Weiner, H. L., 544
Weiner, R. D., 572
Weiner, W. J., 292
Weintraub, S., 496
Weiser, M., 622
Weiskrantz, L., 4
Welham, J., 560
Welsh, D. K., 318
Weltzin, T. E., 429
Wenk, G. L., 544
Wernicke, C., 482
Westmark, P. R., 446, 447
Westwood, D. A., 202
Whalen, P. J., 378, 381
Whipple, B., 241
Whitam, F. L., 344
White, A. M., 471
White, F. J., 617
White, J., 364
Whiteside, S. P., 590
Whitsett, J. M., 335
Whitten, W. K., 335
Whittle, S., 370
Wickelgren, I., 641
Wicker, B., 383
Wiedl, D., 631
Wiegand, M., 580
Wiesel, T. N., 181
Wiesner, B. P., 354
Wigren, H. K., 305
Wilensky, M. A., 591
Wilhelm, S., 592
Willer, C. J., 423
Willesen, M. G., 417
Williams, D. L., 407
Williams, J. R., 351
Williams, M., 298
Williams, R., 536
Williams, R. L., 292
Williams, Z. M., 454
Willingham, B., 377
Willingham, D. G., 463
Wilson, B. E., 412
Wilson, E. O., 344
Wilson, R. A., 295
Winans, E., 567
Winans, S. S., 348
Winocur, G., 193
Winslow, J. T., 374
Winston, J. S., 252
Winston, S., 310
Wirz-Justice, A., 580, 582
Wise, M. S., 295
Wise, R. A., 625, 627, 628
Wise, R. J. S., 486
Wise, S. P., 589
Wiskott, L., 475
Wissinger, B., 177
Wolfe, J. B., 585
Wolpaw, J. R., 526
Wong, G. T., 245
Wong-Riley, M. T., 184
Wood, E. R., 473
Wood, R. I., 347
Woodruff-Pak, D. S., 461
Woods, B. T., 564
Woods, S. C., 412
Woodworth, R. S., 377
Wooley, S. C., 424
Woolfe, A., 33
Wright, E., 235
Wu, J. C., 580
Wulff, K., 578, 581
Wundt, W., 9
Wyant, G. M., 240
Wyart, C., 337
Wyatt, R. J., 559
Wynne, K., 419
Wysocki, C. J., 335
Xiao, Z., 400
Xu, Y., 631
Yadav, J. S., 525
Yahr, P., 348
Yamamoto, T., 347
Yamanaka, A., 311, 416
Yamatodani, A., 308
Yan, L., 319
Yang, L., 417
Yang, T., 450
Yang, T. T., 79
Yao, Y., 446
Yates, W. R., 374
Yaxley, S., 246
Yehuda, R., 607, 608
Yeni-Komshian, G. H., 486
Yeo, J. A. G., 353
Yildiz, A., 35
Yilmaz, A., 574
Yin, H. H., 455
Yizhar, O., 306
Yokoo, H., 602
Yoshikawa, K., 511
Yoshioka, T., 185
Yost, W. A., 223
Young, A. W., 378
Young, E. D., 221, 351
Young, S. N., 575
Young, T., 176
Youngren, K. D., 566
Yovel, G., 196
Yox, D. P., 409, 410
Yu, H., 587
Yurgelun-Todd, D., 370
Zajac, J. D., 327, 328
Zandian, M., 429, 431
Zarate, C. A., 574
Zatorre, R., 225
Zayfert, C., 607
Zeffiro, T. A., 510
Zeilhofer, H. U., 235
Zeki, S., 190, 191, 348, 356
Zenner, H.-P., 217
Zentner, M., 226
Zettin, M., 493
Zhang, A., 399
Zhang, C., 317
Zhang, F., 153
Zhang, X., 622, 630
Zhang, Y., 408
Zhao, Y. J., 535
Zheng, H., 425
Zhong, C.-B., 589
Zhou, F. C., 343
Zhou, Q.-Y., 317
Zigman, J. M., 408
Zihl, J., 199, 200
Zimmermann, U., 217
Zinman, L., 545
Zlokovic, B. V., 39
Zohary, E., 276
Zola-Morgan, S., 464
Zorrilla, E. P., 421
Zou, Z., 251
Zubieta, 240
Zuch, J., 292
Zucker, I., 316
Zufall, F., 250
Zumoff, B., 602
Zumpe, D., 373
Zwiers, M. P., 222

Subject Index
Abducens nerve, 95f
Ablation. See Experimental ablation
Absence seizure, 520t
Absence spells, 521, 521
Absorptive phase, of metabolism, 405, 
405–406, 405f
Acamprosate, 641
ACC. See Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
Accessory olfactory bulb, 335, 335–336
Accommodation, of eyes, 168, 168
Acetaminophen (paracetamol), 125
Acetylcholine (ACh), 58, 58–59, 111–113
and arousal, 305–306
biosynthesis of, 111, 112f
components of, 111
deactivation of, 112–113, 113f
localization in brain, 156–157, 157f
postsynaptic potential produced by, 59
secretion of, 98
and sleep, 311
and sleep-waking cycle, 305f
Acetylcholine receptors, nicotinic, 113, 
629, 637
Acetylcholinergic neurons, 111, 112f
and arousal, 305–306
drugs affecting, 112–113
and REM sleep, 311, 311f
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 59, 59, 110, 
112–113, 113f
inhibitors of, 1560
Acetyl-CoA, 111, 111
Achromatopsia, cerebral, 191
Acquired dyslexia, 503
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome 
(AIDS), 549–550
Acral lick dermatitis, 591–592
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Actin, 258, 258
Actin filaments
in auditory cilia, 211
in muscle contraction, 258, 259f
in muscle fiber, 257f
Action potential, 30, 44, 44f, 45
all-or-none law, 49
conduction of, 49–50, 49f
in dendrites, 442
movements of ions during, 47–49, 49f
in muscle contraction, 258, 259f
production of, 47
rate law, 49, 50f
Activational effect, 326, 326
of hormones
on aggressive behavior, 371–373, 372f
on female sexual behavior, 338–339, 340
on male sexual behavior, 338–340
testosterone, 372f
on women’s sexual behavior, 338–339
Acute anterior poliomyelitis (polio), 549, 549
AD mice, 544
Adaptation
to ambient temperature, 234
to pressure, 233
Adaptive traits, 15, 15f
Addiction, 615–624. See also Drug abuse
and craving, 621–623
dopamine release and, 617–618
heredity and, 634–635, 637f
neural mechanisms in, 617–620
neurotransmitters in, 637
overeating as, 424
reinforcement in, 616–621
negative, 620–621
positive, 616–620
therapy for, 638–642
Adenosine, 125, 125–126, 305
and sleep control, 305, 310, 310f
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 34, 34
in sodium-potassium pump, 46
ADHD. See Attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD)
Adipose tissue, 404
leptin and, 418
satiety signals from, 412–413
Adipsia, 402
Adolescents
addiction in, 619
age and, 619
Adoption studies, 161
Adrenal insufficiency, 401
Adrenal medulla, 96, 96
Adrenalin. See Epinephrine
Adrenergic receptors, 118–119
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 
602, 602
Advanced sleep phase syndrome, 319, 319
Affective blindsight, 379, 379
Affective disorders, 570–582
Afferent axons, 92, 92–93, 94f
in cochlear nerve, 213
tracing, 141–142, 142f
Affinity, 104, 104
Afterimage, negative, 179, 179, 180f
Age of onset, of schizophrenia, 564f
Aggressive behavior, 365–376
alcohol and, 374, 374f
in females, 372–373
genetic factors in, 367
heritability of, 367
hormonal control of, 371–374
in males, 371–372
neural control of, 365
serotonin and, 365–371
in animals, 365–366, 366f
in humans, 366–371
Agnosia, 192
for movement, 200
tactile, 236, 237f
visual, 192–195
Agonist(s), 106, 106, 107f
direct, 108, 109f
indirect, 108, 109f
Agoraphobia, 586, 586
Agouti-related protein (AGRP), 417, 417, 428t
Agrammatism, 482, 482–483
assessment in, 483f
Agraphia
alexia without, 501–503
semantic, 513
AGRP. See Agouti-related protein (AGRP)
AIDS, 549–550
AIDS dementia complex (ADC), 549
AIP (anterior intraparietal sulcus), spatial 
perception and, 201
Akinesia, 536
Akinetopsia, 199, 199
Alcohol, 631–633
and aggression, 374, 374f
anxiolytic effect of, 631–632
cultural aspects of, 616
harmful effects of, 631, 632f
prenatal effects of. See Fetal alcohol  
syndrome
reinforcing effects of, 632
seizure cause by, 522
sites of action of, 631, 632
and withdrawal symptoms, 632–633
Alcoholism
gray matter volume in, comorbidity and, 
622
heritability of, 636–637
and Korsakoff’s syndrome, 460, 547–548
treatment of, 640–641, 641f
Alexia
in aphasia, 500
pure, 501, 501–503, 502f, 514t
in multiple sclerosis, 502, 502f
Alleles, 161, 161
All-or-none law, 49, 49
Allostatic control, of sleep, 308, 311
Allylglycine, 122, 122, 128t
Alpha activity, 290, 290, 291f
Alpha motor neurons, 257, 257, 257f
Alzheimer’s disease, 540, 540–545
caretaker stress in, 604
prevention of, 544–545
treatment of, 544
AM1172, 125, 125, 128t
Amacrine cells, 169, 169, 170f
American sign language (ASL), 494–496, 496f
alexia and, 503
Amino acids
lesions produced with, 132–133
as neurotransmitters, 120–123
Amnesia
anterograde, 459–462, 460f
vs. semantic dementia, 468
retrograde, 459, 460f
723
Note: Page numbers in bold refer to pages with definitions. Page numbers 
followed by f and t refer to figures and tables, respectively.

724	
Subject Index
Amniocentesis, 530
AMPA, effect on glutamate receptors, 128t
AMPA receptors, 121, 121, 443, 443–444
and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 545
long-term depression and, 447
long-term potentiation and, 443–444, 444f
Amphetamine, 116–117, 127t, 128t, 
626–627
abuse, treatment for, 639
in ADHD treatment, 599–601, 600f
and dopamine release, 557, 558f
long-term effects on brain, 627
and schizophrenia symptoms, 557
Amphibians, 17
AMPT, 115, 115–116, 127t
Ampulla, 228, 228, 228f
Amusia, 225, 225–226
Amygdala, 85, 85, 86f. See also Medial 
nucleus of amygdala
and aggressive behavior, 365, 366f
and autism, 596
basal nucleus of, 361
central nucleus of, 361–362
and conditioned emotional response, 
362–363
and emotional responses, 362–363
and conditioned emotional response, 
362–363, 453, 453f
damage to
effects of, 364–365
eye fixation after, 381, 381f
and emotional recognition, 378–381
and emotional responses, 361–365
and fear responses, 361–362
in gustatory pathway, 247
lateral nucleus of, 361
and maternal behavior, 355
medial. See Medial nucleus of amygdala
in posttraumatic stress disorder, 607–608, 
609f
prenatal stress and, 604–605, 605f
and sexual behavior, 336
and sexual dimorphism, 348
β-Amyloid
defective form of, 541
immunization against, 544–545, 545f
oligomers of, 543
propagation of, 544
Amyloid deposition, 543, 543f
Amyloid plaques, 540, 540, 541f
β-Amyloid precursor protein (APP), 540, 
541–543, 542f
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 545, 545–546
Anabolic steroids, and aggressiveness, 374
Analgesia, neural circuits producing, 
239–241, 240f
Anandamide, 125, 125
Anapsids, 17, 18f
AND (androstadienone), 330t, 337–338, 343
Androgen(s), 327, 327, 330t
activational effects of, 371–373, 372f
and aggression, 371–373, 371–374, 372f
and autism, 596–597
and female sexual behavior, 339
organizational effects of, 334, 335f, 
371–373, 372f
prenatal, and sexual orientation, 340–341
Androgen insensitivity syndrome, 327, 327, 
327f, 341–342
Androstadienone (AND), 330t, 337–338, 343
Angel dust. See PCP (phencyclidine)
Angiogenesis, in brain tumors, 519
Angiogram, 525f
Angioma, 518t
Angiotensin, 124, 400, 400, 401
effects of, 400
and food-related drinking, 400
receptors, location of, 400
site of action, 401, 402f
Angiotensinogen, 400
Anhedonia, 554
Animal research, ethical issues in, 21–23
Animism, 2
Anions, 45
Anomia, 483, 483, 493–494
fluent, 493
Anomic aphasia, 493–494, 500t
Anorexia nervosa, 428, 428–432
causes of, 429–431
treatment of, 431–432
Anorexigenics, appetite and, 426
Anorexigens, 418–419
Anoxia, and hippocampal damage,  
464–465, 465f
ANS. See Autonomic nervous system (ANS)
Antagonist(s), 106, 106, 107f
direct, 108, 109f
indirect, 108, 109f
Antagonist-precipitated withdrawal, 626, 626
Anterior, 68, 68, 68f
Anterior cingulate cortex (ACC)
and drinking behavior, 399–400
and pain perception, 238, 238f, 241
subgenual
deep brain stimulation of, 573,  
576–577, 577f
in depression, 576–577, 577f, 578f
thirst activating, 400
Anterior commissure, sexual dimorphism 
and, 342
Anterior intraparietal sulcus (AIP), spatial 
perception and, 201
Anterior pituitary gland, 87, 87, 88f
Anterograde, 35
Anterograde amnesia, 459, 459–462, 460f
anatomy of, 464–466
hippocampal damage and, 460–461, 
464–466, 465f
spared learning abilities in, 461–462
vs. semantic dementia, 468
Anterograde axoplasmic transport, 35
Anterograde labeling method, 140, 140, 
140f, 141f, 142f
Antiangioenesis drugs, for brain tumors, 519
Antianxiety agents, 122, 122, 587–588
alcohol as, 631–632
Antibodies, 140, 609, 609
Anticholinergic neurons, in Alzheimer’s 
disease, 542
Anticipatory anxiety, 586, 586–588
Anticoagulants, 524
Anticonvulsive drugs, for seizure disorder, 
522
Antidepressants
delay in effectiveness of, 575
for depression, 571–574, 575
effects on sleep, 579
for narcolepsy, 297
Antigens, 140, 609, 609
Antigravity muscles, 257
Antihistamines, 120
and drowsiness, 307
Anti-Müllerian hormone, 327, 327
Antipsychotic drugs
atypical, 558
problems with, 557–558
Antisense oligonucleotides, 162, 162
Antisocial behavior, serotonin and, 366
Anxiety, anticipatory, 586, 586–588
Anxiety disorders, 586, 586–588
causes of, 586–587
treatment of, 587–588
Anxiolytic(s), 122, 122, 587–588
alcohol as, 631–632
AP5 (2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoate), 
121, 121, 128t, 442, 442, 455
Aphasia(s), 480, 480, 500t
anomic, 493–494, 500t
assessment of, 482, 482f, 483f
Broca’s. See Broca’s aphasia
conduction, 491–493, 491f
in deaf people, 494–496, 496f
fluent, 496
reading and writing in, 500
receptive, 486
transcortical sensory, 489, 489f, 500t
vs. direct dyslexia, 509
Wernicke’s. See Wernicke’s aphasia
Apolipoprotein E (ApoE), 543, 543
Apomorphine, 116, 116, 116f
effects of, 116f
Apoptosis, 78, 78, 533, 539
alcohol exposure and, 631, 632f
APP (β-amyloid precursor protein), 540, 
541–543, 542f
APP gene, 543
Appetite, suppression and stimulation of, 
426
Apraxia, 276, 276–277
constructional, 277, 278f
lesions causing, 277f
limb, 276–277
of speech, 485
tactile, 237
Apraxia of speech, 485, 485
Arachnoid granulations, 72f, 73, 73
Arachnoid membrane, 70, 70, 71f, 94f
Arachnoid trabeculae, 71f
Arcuate fasciculus, 491, 491, 491f–493f
Arcuate nucleus of hypothalamus, 415f, 417
CART neurons in, 418–419
NPY neurons in, 416–417, 418
Area postrema, 40
and hunger signals, 414, 414f
Aripiprazole, 567
Aristotle, 11
Arousal
hypocretins and, 307–308
neural control of, 89, 90, 305–308
Arrival times, of sound waves, 219–220
Articulation difficulty, in Broca’s aphasia, 484
Artificial selection, 16
ASL (American sign language), 494–496, 496f
alexia and, 494–496, 496f
Asperger’s disorder, 593, 597
Aspirin, 104, vs. morphine
Association areas, cortical, 82–84, 83f
Associative long-term depression, 447
Associative long-term potentiation, 440, 
440, 443f

	
Subject Index	
725
Astrocytes (astroglia), 35, 35, 37f
Asymmetrical division, 77, 77
Atherosclerosis, 524
Atherosclerotic plaque, 523f, 525f
Atonic seizure, 520t
ATP. See Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
Atropine, 113, 113, 127t
Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD), 598, 598–601
causes of, 599–601
symptoms of, 598
Attractiveness, 334
Atypical antipsychotic drugs, 558
Audiovisual neurons, 274, 383
Audition, 208–227
ear anatomy, 209–211, 210f
and loudness perception, 218
neural pathway for, 213–216, 215f
and pitch perception, 216–218
reading and, 505–506, 506f
and recognition of emotions, 378
and spatial perception, 219–223
stimulus for, 208–209, 209f
and timbre perception, 218–219
transduction of auditory information, 
211–213, 213f
Auditory association cortex, 83f
music perception and, 224–226, 225f
and speech comprehension, 486
Auditory cilia, 211–212. See also under 
Cilium (cilia)
Auditory cortex. See Auditory association 
cortex; Primary auditory cortex
Auditory hair cells, 210, 210, 211–213.  
See also under Hair cells
connections with cochlear nerve, 213–214
damage to, 216
inner, 213–214, 214f
ion channels in, 212–213, 214f
outer, 213, 214f
transduction apparatus in, 214f
and transduction of auditory information, 
211–213, 214f
Auditory hallucinations, 554
Auditory nerve, 95f, 215f
Aura, 520, 520
Autistic disorder, 593, 593–598
brain pathology in, 594–597
causes of, 594–597
heritability of, 594
and obsessive-compulsive disorder, 597
twin studies in, 594
Autistic spectrum disorders, 593
Autoimmune demyelinating disease, 546–547
Autonomic nervous system (ANS), 94, 
94–96, 97f, 98t
parasympathetic division of, 96–98, 97f
sympathetic division of, 95–96, 97f
Autonomic seizure, 520t
Autoradiography, 149–150, 150f
receptor localization in brain and, 157, 158f
Autoreceptors, 60, 60–61
dendritic, 108, 109f
Axoaxonic synapse, 52, 52f, 62f
Axodendritic synapse, 52, 52f
Axon(s), 30, 30, 30f
afferent, 92–93, 94f
conduction of action potential through, 
49–50, 49f
efferent, 93, 94f
growth of, 78–79
length of, 35
Axonal varicosities, 118, 118
Axoplasm, 35
Axoplasmatic transport, 35, 35, 36f
anterograde, 35
retrograde, 35
Axosomatic synapse, 52, 52f
Azimuth, 219
Barbiturates
effects of, 122
therapeutic index for, 103–104
and withdrawal symptoms, 632
seizure caused by, 522
Bariatric surgery, 425
Basal ganglia, 85, 86, 86f, 277–282
anatomy and function of, 277–280, 279f, 
454–455, 455f
connections of, 537f
direct pathway and, 591
direct pathway in, 278–279
diseases of, 280–282
drug addiction and, 618
and emotional recognition, 383
and Huntington’s disease, 538–540
indirect pathway and, 591
indirect pathway in, 279–280
and instrumental conditioning, 454–455
lesions of, and speech deficits, 482
Basal nucleus of amygdala, 361
Basilar membrane, 210, 210, 211f
pitch coding in, 216f
place coding in, 216–218
and primary auditory cortex, 213, 215
rate coding in, 218
BDNF (brain-derived neurotrophic factor), 
in anxiety disorders, 587
Bed nucleus of stria terminalis (BNST), 
343, 343f
Bedwetting (nocturnal enuresis), 297
Behavioral defeminization, 334
Behavioral masculinization, 334
Behavioral neuroscience, 9–14, 24
careers in, 24
historical perspective of, 11–14
Behavioral neuroscientists, 24, 24
Belladonna alkaloids, 113
Belt region, 215, 215, 216f
Benign tumors, 517, 517
Benzodiazepines, 122, 122, 128t
anxiolytic effects of, 587, 633
effects of, 122
for REM sleep behavior disorder, 297
Bereavement, effect on immune function, 
610
Bernard, Claude, 394
Beta activity, 290, 290, 291f
β-amyloid, 540, 540
defective form of, 541
immunization against, 544–545, 545f
oligomers of, 543
propagation of, 544
β-amyloid precursor protein (APP), 541–543
Bevacizumab, for brain tumors, 519
Bicuculline, 122, 122, 128t
Bilateral medial temporal lobectomy, 460–461
Bile, 411
Binding
competitive, 109f
noncompetitive, 108, 109f
Binding site, 52, 52
Binocular vision, 184
Biological clocks, 315–321
90-minute activity cycle, 292
circadian rhythms, 315–316, 315f
in depression, 580–582
nature of, 318–319
seasonal rhythms, 319–320
suprachiasmatic nucleus and, 316–319
Biopsychology, 24
Bipolar cells, 169, 169, 170f
effect of light on, 170–171, 171f
Bipolar disorder, 570, 570
genetic factors in, 575
treatment of, 571, 574–575
Bipolar neurons, 30, 30, 30f
Birth month
depression and, 571
schizophrenia and, 560–561, 560f, 571
Birth trauma, schizophrenia and, 561–562
Bitterness
receptors for, 243
transduction of, 245–246, 246f, 247f
Black widow spider venom, 112, 112, 127t
Blest, A. D., 15
Bleuler, Eugen, 554
Blind spot, 168
test for, 169f
Blindness
emotional expression/recognition and, 
377–378
word, 501–503
Blindsight, 4, 4, 5f
affective, 379
Blood clot, stroke and, 523, 524
Blood plasma. See Intravascular fluid
Blood supply, to brain, 72f, 73
Blood-brain barrier, 39, 39–40, 40f
in Alzheimer’s research, 542
and clot-dissolving drugs, 524
lipid solubility and, 103
and multiple sclerosis, 546
B-lymphocytes, 609, 609, 610f
BNST (bed nucleus of stria terminalis), 
343, 343f
Body recognition, 194–195, 194f
Body weight
loss of
activity and food restriction in, 429, 430f
approaches to, 424–427
regulation of, 412–413
BOLD imaging, 151
Border cells, 472, 472f
Botox, emotional feedback and, 390
Bottlenose dolphin, sleep in, 299, 299f, 304
Botulinum toxin, 112, 112, 127t
Bouton. See Terminal buttons
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy, 
531–533, 532f
Brain
acetylcholinergic neurons in, 112f
anatomical subdivisions of, 76t
blood supply to, 72f, 73
connections with eyes, 171–172, 172f
convoluted surface of, 78
corpus callosum, 5
Descartes’s theory of, 11–12, 12f
development of, 74–80, 76f
REM sleep and, 301–302

726	
Subject Index
Brain (continued )
and dopaminergic neurons, loss of, 536
dopaminergic neurons in, 115f
drug administration into, 102
extreme male, and autism, 597
feeding circuits in, 416, 416f
functional division of, Müller on, 13
Hippocrates view of, 11
human
evolution of, 18–21
size of, 19–20, 21f, 78
hunger receptors in, 408–409
metabolic activity of, 149–151, 150f, 151f, 
300
models of, 12
and movement control, 86, 270–287
in nervous system, 70
neurological disorders of, 516–550
tumors, 517–519
neurotransmitters in. See 
Neurotransmitter(s)
noradrenergic neurons in, 118f
nutrient detectors in, 408–409
osmoreceptors in, 398, 398
primary function of, 9–10
receptors in, localization of, 157–158, 158f
sexual dimorphism and, 342–344
sexual orientation and, 342–344
sexual responses controlled by, 346–348
female, 350f
size of, 78
body size and, 19–20, 21f, 21f
comparative, 19–20, 21f, 78
stress effect on, 604–606
Brain damage. See also Brain lesions
in AIDS, 549
in Alzheimer’s disease, 543, 544
in bacterial meningitis, 550
facial expression recognition, 382f, 383
infectious diseases causing, 549–550
and Korsakoff’s syndrome, 547–548
in schizophrenia, 559–564, 559f
causes of, 560–564
evidence for, 559–560
seizures causing, 521
stress and, 604–606, 605f, 606f
strokes and, 523–524
traumatic, 526–527
Brain function, vs. behavior, 132
Brain imaging
autoradiography, 149–150, 150f
computerized tomography, 142–143, 143f
diffusion tensor imaging, 144, 144f
functional MRI, 149, 151, 151f
magnetic resonance imaging, 143–144, 144f
magnetoencephalography, 149, 149f
positron emission tomography, 150–151, 
151f, 159f
Brain injury, traumatic, 526–527
in Alzheimer’s disease, 543
Brain lesions
evaluation of behavioral effects of, 132
excitotoxic, 132–133, 133f
histological methods, 135–139
producing, 132–134
radio frequency, 132, 133f
reversible, 134
sham, 133–134
stereotaxic surgery for, 134–135
studies of, 132–145
study methods, 145t–146t
Brain stem, 88, 88–89, 90f
and ingestive behaviors, 414
Brain studies
chemical stimulation, 152–153, 152f
electrical stimulation, 13, 152–153, 238
lesion, 132–145, 145t–146t
of living human brain, 142–144
optogenetic, 153–154, 153f
recording of neural activity, 146–149
split-brain, 5–6, 5f
stimulation of neural activity, 151–154
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), 
154, 154f
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
(BDNF), in anxiety disorders, 587
Bregma, 134, 134, 134f
Brightness, 166, 166–167
Broca, Paul, 13
Broca’s aphasia, 481, 481–485, 500t
brain regions involved in, 484
prosody in, 496
reading and writing in, 500
symptoms of, 481
Broca’s area, 13f, 482, 482, 482f
connection to Wernicke’s area, 489, 489f, 
492–493
and verb production, 494
Broken drawing task, 461f
Brood nest, 353, 353f
Bruce effect, 335, 335
Bulimia nervosa, 428, 428–432
causes of, 429–431
treatment of, 431–432
Buprenorphine, for opiate addiction, 638, 
639f
Butterflies, eyespots on, 15, 16f
Bypass, gastric, 425, 425f, 426f
Caffeine, 126, 126, 128t
food content, 126t
CAH. See Congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
(CAH)
Calcarine fissure, 80, 80, 82f, 171, 171–172
Calcium, in cell death, 524
Calcium channels, 55, 57, 58f
in muscle contraction, 258
Calcium ions
influx into hair cells, 212, 214f
in long-term potentiation, 442
CaM-KII, 444
in long-term potentiation, 444
role in synaptic plasticity, 444
Cannabidiol (CBD), 634–635, 635f
Cannabinoid receptors, 124–125
Cannabis, 633–635. See also Marijuana
Cannibalism, 532
Cannon, Walter, 389, 601
Cannula electrodes, 365
Capsaicin, 235, 411
Capsulotomy, 590–591
Carbon dioxide, and panic attacks, 587
Careers, in behavioral neuroscience, 24
Caretaker stress, 604
Carotid artery, stent placement in,  
525–526, 525f
Carotid endarterectomy, 525–526
CART neurons, 418, 418–419, 428t
in arcuate nucleus, 418–419
connections of, 420f
Caspases, 533, 533
Cataplexy, 295, 295, 296f
Catecholamine(s), 114, 114, 114t. See also 
Dopamine (DA); Epinephrine; 
Norepinephrine (NE)
biosynthesis of, 114f, 117
Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT), 
600, 600f
Cations, 45
Cauda equina, 71f, 91, 91
Caudal, 68, 68, 68f
Caudal block, 91, 91
Caudal intraparietal sulcus (LIP), 201, 201f
Caudate nucleus, 86, 86f, 277, 278, 278, 
279f, 454, 455f
in autistic disorder, 597, 597f, 601
degeneration of, 280–282
in drug addiction, 618
lesions of, and speech deficits, 482
major connections of, 537f
in obsessive-compulsive disorder, 590
CCK (cholecystokinin), 411, 411, 428t
Cell(s)
complex, 182f
hypercomplex, 182f
nerve. See Neurons
progenitor, 76, 79
simple, 182f
supporting, 35–39
target, 63
Cell-body stains, 136–137
Cell-mediated immune reaction, 609, 610f
Central nervous system (CNS), 29, 29, 
74–92. See also Brain; Spinal cord
development of, 74–80
major divisions of, 70t
planes of section of, 69f
regenerative properties of, 39
supporting cells of, 35–39
Central nucleus of amygdala, 361, 361–362
brain regions receiving input from, 362f
and conditioned emotional response, 
362–363
Central sulcus, 80, 80, 82f
Central (foveal) vision, 174, 174f
Cerebellar cortex, 89, 89
Cerebellar peduncles, 89, 89, 90f
Cerebellum, 89–90, 90f
damage to, 89–90
and movement control, 282–285, 283f, 284f
Cerebral achromatopsia, 191, 191
Cerebral aqueduct, 72f, 73, 73
Cerebral cortex, 75, 75, 80–85, 81f
association areas of, 82–84, 83f
development of, 75
sensory areas of, 80–81
specialized regions of, 90f
surface area of, 80
Cerebral hemisphere(s), 6, 6, 80, 80–86, 82f
connection between, 84–86
independent sleep in, 299, 299f
lateralized functions of, 82–85, 480–481
left, 84
damage to, 276–277
speech specialization of, 6, 13, 13f, 
480–481
and olfaction control, 6, 7f
right, 84
and comprehension of figurative 
speech, 495–496
damage to, effects of, 481
and emotional expression, 387f
and emotional recognition, 378, 379f

	
Subject Index	
727
perceptual functions of, 481
and prosody, 496
and speech control, 6
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 70, 70, 71f
obstruction of flow of, 73
production, circulation, and reabsorption 
of, 71–73, 72f
Cerebrovascular accident, 480, 480, 
522–526
brain damage caused by, 523–524
minimizing, 524
hemorrhagic, 522–526
obstructive, 522–526
prevention of, 524
research on, 23
therapy for, 525–526, 525f
Cerletti, Ugo, 572
Cervical vertebrae, 91, 91f
CGP 335348, 123
Channelrhodopsin-2 (ChR2), 153–154, 153f
ChAT. See Choline acetyltransferase
Chemical control, of sleep, 304–305
Chemical stimulation, of brain, 152–153, 152f
Chemically mediated immune reaction, 
609, 610f
Chemicals, toxic, in developmental 
­disorders, 528
Childbirth complications, schizophrenia 
and, 561–562
Childhood disintegrative disorder, 593
Chimerical faces techniques, 386–387, 386f
Chlordiazepoxide (Librium), 122
Chloride channels, 57, 58f
Chloride ions (Cl-), 45, 46f
p-Chlorophenylalanine (PCPA), 119
Chlorpromazine, 117, 117, 127t, 556, 
556–557
antipsychotic effects of, 556–557
Cholecystokinin (CCK), 411, 411, 428t
Cholestatic pruritus, 235
Choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), 111, 111
localization in brain, 157, 157f
Chorda tympani, 246, 246
Choroid plexus, 72f, 73, 73, 73f
Chromosomes, 16, 32, 32
in Down syndrome, 530
human, 325–326
sex, 325
Cilium (cilia), 211–212
auditory, 211–213, 213f
gustatory, 244
ion channels on, 211–213, 214f
olfactory, 250, 250f, 251f
Cimetidine, 120, 128t
Cingulate cortex, and pain perception, 
238, 238f
Cingulate gyrus, 84, 84, 85f
Cingulotomy, 590
Cingulum bundle, 590
Ciproxifan, 120, 128t
Circadian rhythms, 315, 315–316, 315f
changes in, 320–321
in depression, 578–582
per proteins and, 319
suprachiasmatic nucleus and, 316
Circumlocution, 493, 493
Circumstriate cortex. See Extrastriate cortex
Circumvallate papillae, 244
Circumventricular organs, 398–400, 398f
Clasp-knife reflex, 264, 264
Classical conditioning, 10, 362–363, 436, 436
conditioned emotional response,  
362–363, 453f
neural model of, 437f, 452–453
vs. instrumental conditioning, 458
Cloacal exstrophy, 342
Clomipramine, for obsessive-compulsive 
disorder, 591–592
Clonazepam, for REM sleep behavior 
­disorder, 297
Clonic phase, 521, 521
Clozapine, 127t, 558, 558
CNS. See Central nervous system (CNS)
CO (cytochrome oxidase) blobs, 184, 185, 
185f
Cocaine, 117, 127t, 626–627
abuse, treatment for, 639
addictiveness of, 617
concentrations in blood plasma, 102, 103f
effect on neural activity, 618
and gray matter, 622, 623f
long-term effects on brain, 627
and medial prefrontal cortex, 622, 622f
and schizophrenia symptoms, 557
sensitization to, 105
social stress and, 622–623, 623f
Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated  
transcript neurons. See CART neurons
Coccygeal vertebrae, 91, 91f
Cochlea, 209, 209, 210f
cross section of, 211f
frequency detection in, 217–218
uncurled, 212f
Cochlear implants, 216, 216–217, 217f
Cochlear nerve, 213, 213–214
and loudness perception, 218
and perception of complex sounds, 223
Cochlear nerve ganglion, 213
Cochlear nucleus, 214, 215f, 2140
Coenzymes, 111
Cognitive abilities
cannabis use and, 635
and formal education, 544
sleep deprivation and, 299
Cognitive behavior therapy, 431
for anxiety disorders, 588
for obsessive-compulsive disorder, 592
Cognitive neuroscience, 24
Cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia, 554, 
554–555, 555t
Coincidence detector, 220–221, 221f, 222f
Cold sores, 549
Colds, and psychological stress, 611–612, 611f
Color(s)
coding in retina, 178–179, 179f
complementary, 179
dimensions of, 166, 167f
opponent, 176
primary, 176
Color constancy, 190
Color mixing, 176
Color vision, 168, 176–180
evolutionary advantage of, 17
genetic defects in, 177–178
striate cortex and, 184–185
trichromatic theory of, 176
visual association cortex and, 190–191
Commissure, anterior, sexual dimorphism 
and, 342
Communication, 479–514
consciousness and, 3
of emotions, 376–388
neural. See Neural communication
verbal, 480–500. See also Language; 
Speech
Comorbidity, in schizophrenia, 622
Competitive binding, 109f
Complementary colors, 179, 179
Complex cells, 182, 182, 182f
Complex partial seizures, 520, 520, 520t
Complex sounds, perception of, 223–227
Compulsions, 588, 588–589
Computerized tomography (CT), 142, 
142–143, 143f
COMT (catechol-O-methyltransferase), 
600, 600f
Concordance rate, 160–161
Concussions, 526–527
Conditional response (CR), 436, 436
Conditional stimulus (CS), 436, 436
Conditioned emotional response, 362–363, 
452–453, 453f
testing of, 363, 363f
Conditioning. See Classical conditioning; 
Instrumental conditioning
Conduction, of action potential, 49–50, 49f
decremental, 50
saltatory, 50, 50f
Conduction aphasia, 491, 491–493, 500t
brain damage responsible for, 491f, 492f
Cones, 168, 168, 169t, 170f
three types of, 176–177, 177f, 181–182
Confocal laser scanning microscopy, 137, 
137–138, 138f
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), 
340, 340–341
masculinizing effects of, 341
nonclassical, 341
Congenital cataracts, face recognition  
studies and, 197
Congenital prosopagnosia, 193–194
Conjunctiva, 167, 168f
Consciousness, 3–9
blindsight and, 4, 5f
definition of, 3
during sleep, 293
split brains and, 5–6
unilateral neglect and, 6–8
Consolidation, memory, 460, 460–461, 
473–476
hippocampal neurogenesis in, 475–476
Constraint-induced movement therapy, 
526, 526f
Constructional apraxia, 277, 277, 278f
Content words, 481, 481
Contralateral, 69, 69
Contrast, enhancement of, 175, 175f, 176f
Contrecoup injury, 527
Control, delusions of, 554
Convulsion, 519, 519
Coolidge effect, 333, 333
Coolness, sensation of, 234
Coordinated limb movements, 265–266
Core region, of auditory system, 215, 215
Corkscrew device, for embolectomy, 524
Cornea, 168, 168f
Corpus callosum, 5, 5, 6, 84, 84–85, 85f, 86f
function of, 84
posterior, damage to, 501–502
Corpus luteum, 332, 332
Correctional mechanism, 395, 395
Corticobulbar tract, 267f, 268, 268, 270t
Corticorubral tract, 268, 268

728	
Subject Index
Corticospinal tract, 267, 267
lateral, 267, 267f
ventral, 267, 267f
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), 
602, 602–603
and drug craving, 623
Cortisol, 602
Coup injury, 527
CR (conditional response), 436, 436
Crack, 626
Cranial nerves, 71f, 94, 94, 95f
Craniosacral system. See Parasympathetic 
division, of ANS
Craving
addiction and, 621–623
drug abuse and
in alcoholic people, 634f
in alcoholics, 633
reinstatement procedure and, 621f
Cresyl violet, 137, 137f
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 531–533, 532f
CRH (corticotropin-releasing hormone), 
602, 602–603
in drug craving, 623
Cribriform plate, 249, 251f
Cristae, 34
Cross section, 69, 69, 69f
CS (conditional stimulus), 436, 436
CSF. See Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
CT (computerized tomography), 142, 
142–143, 143f
Cupula, 228, 228, 228f
Curare, 113, 113, 127t
Cutaneous senses, 231, 232–235, 2317
Cyclic AMP, 57
in olfactory transduction, 250
production of, dopamine receptors and, 
116
D-Cycloserine
for anxiety disorders, 588, 588f
for obsessive-compulsive disorder, 592
Cyclotron, 151
Cynodonts, 17, 18f
Cytochrome oxidase (CO) blobs, 184, 185, 
185f
Cytokines, 610, 610
Cytoplasm, 32f, 34, 34
Cytoskeleton, 35, 35
D2 receptors, in schizophrenia, 566, 567f
DA. See Dopamine (DA)
Darwin, Charles, 14–16, 14f
on human expressions, 377
DBS. See Deep brain stimulation (DBS)
Deafness
alexia and, 503
aphasia and, 494–496, 496f
Decerebrate, 264, 264
Decerebrate rigidity, 264, 264
Decerebration, 414, 414, 414f
Declarative learning task, slow-wave sleep 
and, 302–303, 303f
Declarative memory, 462, 462–463
hippocampus and, 466–467
vs. relational learning, 462
Declarative memory tasks, examples of, 463t
Decremental conduction, 50
Deep brain stimulation (DBS), 13, 152–153
for addiction, 639
analgesia and, 239–240
for depression, 573
for obsessive-compulsive disorder, 591, 592
pain perception and, 238
for Parkinson’s disease, 538, 538f
and reinforcement, 455–456, 456f
Deep cerebellar nuclei, 89, 89
Defeminizing effect, 327, 327
Defensive behaviors, 365, 365
neural circuitry in, 366f
neural control of, 366f
Degenerative disorders, 531–548
Deiters’s cells, 210, 210
Delay of reinforcement gradient, 599, 599f
Delayed auditory feedback, 498
Delayed matching-to-sample task, 451, 451
Delayed sleep phase syndrome, 319, 319
Delta activity, 291, 291, 291f
Delusions, 554, 554
Dementia, 430, 430, 540–545
AIDS, 549
Alzheimer’s. See Alzheimer’s disease
frontotemporal, 543
semantic, 467
Dendrite(s), 29, 29, 30f
action potentials in, 442
protein synthesis and, 446
synapse on, 30f
Dendritic autoreceptors, 108, 109f
effects of drugs on, 109f
Dendritic spikes, 442, 442, 443f
Dendritic spines, 52, 52, 52f
in field CA1, 444, 445f
growth of, long-term potentiation and, 
444, 445f
Dendrodendritic synapse, 61–62
Dentate gyrus, 439, 440f
neurogenesis in, in memory consolidation, 
475–476
Dentate nucleus, 282, 282, 284f
2-Deoxyglucose (2-DG), 149, 153, 408
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), 32, 32
Depolarization, 44, 44, 44f
Deprenyl, 117, 117, 117f, 127t
in treatment of Parkinson’s disease, 535–536
Depression, 570–582
in bipolar disorder. See Bipolar disorder
circadian rhythms in, 578–582
deep brain stimulation for, 573
exercise and, 582
genetic factors in, 571, 576
long-term. See Long-term depression
monoamine hypothesis of, 575
neurogenesis in, 577–578, 579f
phototherapy for, 581–582
post-partum, 578
prefrontal cortex in, 576–577
seasonal, 580–582, 581f
serotonin in, 575–576, 576f
serotonin (5-HT) transporter in,  
575–576, 576f
sleep deprivation for, 578–580
subgenual ACC in, 576–577, 577f, 578f
treatment of, 571–582
antidepressants in, 571–575. See also 
Antidepressants
electroconvulsive therapy in, 572, 
572–573, 572f
ketamine in, 573–574
treatment-resistant, 572–573
tryptophan depletion procedure and, 575
vagus nerve stimulation for, 573
Depth perception, 79, 184
Dermatitis, acral lick, 591–592
Dermis, 232f
Descartes, René, 11
theory of brain, 11–12, 12f
Desensitization, drug abuse and, 620
Desipramine, effects of, 128t
Desmoteplase, 524, 524f
Desynchrony, neural, 290, 291
Detector(s), 395, 395
of hunger
in brain, 408–409
in liver, 408
Deuteranopia, 178, 178
Developmental disorders, 528–531
Developmental dyslexias, 503, 509, 511–513
2-DG (2-deoxyglucose), 149, 153, 408
Diacetylmorphine. See Heroin
Dialysis, 158–159
Diapsids, 17, 18f
Diazepam (Valium), 122
therapeutic index for, 104
Diencephalon, 75, 76f, 76t, 86, 86–88, 86f
Diet, low-tryptophan, in depression, 575
Diffusion, 45, 45
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), 144, 144, 144f
Dihydromorphine. See Heroin
Dihydrotestosterone, 327, 327, 330t
Dinosaurs, 17
Diphenhydramine, 128t
Direct agonist, 108, 108, 109f
Direct antagonist, 108, 108, 109f
Direct dysgraphia, 513
Direct dyslexia, 509, 509, 514t
Direct pathway, basal ganglia, 278, 278–279
DISC1 gene
in bipolar disorder, 575
in depression, 574–575
in schizophrenia, 555–556, 566, 566f
Disgust, facial expressions of, 383–384, 384f
Distance, perception of, 184, 184f, 187, 188f
Dizygotic (fraternal) twins, 161
DMH (dorsomedial nucleus of  
hypothalamus), 317
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid), 32, 32
Doctrine of specific nerve energies, 13, 13
Dogs, acral lick dermatitis in, 591–592
Dolphins, sleep in, 299, 299f, 304
Dominance, androgens and, 374
Dopamine (DA), 114, 114–117
biosynthesis of, 114, 114f
effects of, 111
in memory, 458
and positive reinforcement, 617–618
in reinforcement, 455–458, 456f
release of
in addiction, 618–619, 619f
alcohol and, 632
cocaine/amphetamine and, 627, 627f
nicotine and, 628, 629f
opiates and, 625
THC and, 633, 634f
supersensitivity to, 558
Dopamine hypothesis, of schizophrenia, 
117, 556–558, 599, 600f
Dopamine receptors, 116
in drug addicts, 617–618
effects of drugs on, 115–117
in schizophrenia, 557, 566, 567f

	
Subject Index	
729
Dopaminergic fetal cell transplant, 536
Dopaminergic neurons, 114–115, 115f
drugs affecting, 115–117
loss of, effect on brain function, 536
mesocortical system of, 115, 115f
mesolimbic system of, 115, 627
overactivity of, and schizophrenia, 117, 557
in Parkinson’s disease, 534, 534f, 535
in reinforcement, 455–457
schizophrenia and, 117
from stem cells, 536
stimulation of, 536–537, 537f
Dorsal, 68, 68, 68f
Dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus, 171, 171, 
172f, 189f
Dorsal lateral tegmental nucleus, and  
emotional response, 362f
Dorsal root(s), 91, 91, 91f, 94f
Dorsal root ganglia, 92, 92, 94f
Dorsal stream, 189, 189, 189f
Dorsal striatum, in addiction, 618–619, 618f
Dorsolateral (DL) striatum, in learning, 455
Dorsomedial nucleus of hypothalamus 
(DMH), 317
Dorsomedial (DM) striatum, in learning,  
455
Dose-response curve, 103, 103, 104f
Down, John Langdon, 530
Down state, in slow-wave sleep, 291, 291
Down syndrome, 530, 530–531, 540, 542
Doxapram, and panic attacks, 587
Dreaming, 292, 293
organophosphates and effects on, 156
Drinking, 396–402
of alcohol. See Alcohol
food-related, 398
neural control of, 401–402, 402f
osmometric thirst and, 397–400
physiological control of, 395f, 396–402. 
See also Thirst
volumetric thirst and, 400
Drug(s). See also specific drugs
addictive, 616t. See also Addiction;  
Drug abuse
discovery of, 616
definition of, 100
dose-response curve for, 103, 104f
effectiveness of, 103–104
effects of, 101, 101
effects on neurotransmitters, 107, 107f
acetylcholinergic, 112–113
dopaminergic, 115–117, 127t
noradrenergic, 118f
serotonergic, 119–120, 128t
effects on receptors, 107f, 108–110, 109f
glutamate, 121–122, 128t
entry into brain, 103
inactivation and excretion of, 103
margin of safety for, 103–104, 104f
repeated administration of, effects of, 
103–105
routes of administration, 101–102
sites of action, 101, 106–110
Drug abuse, 614–642. See also specific drugs
addiction in, 615–624, 616t. See also 
Addiction
age at onset of, 619
and dopamine release, 617–618
heredity and, 634–635, 637f
and meningitis, 550
reinforcement in, 616–621
negative, 620–621
positive, 616–620
therapy for, 638–642
and tolerance and withdrawal, 620
DTI (diffusion tensor imaging), 144, 144, 144f
Dualism, 3, 3, 11
Duchenne de Boulogne, Guillaume-
Benjamin, 384
Duchenne’s muscle, 384
Duodenum, 407, 407–408
osmoreceptors in, 408
satiety receptors in, 410–411
Dura mater, 70, 70, 71f, 94f
Dykinesias, 536
Dynein, 35
Dysgraphia, 511–513, 514t
in aphasia, 500
direct, 513
orthographic, 512
phonological, 512
Dyskinesias, 281
Dyslexia, 514t
acquired, 503
definition of, 503
developmental, 503, 511–513
direct, 509
phonological, 504, 504–505, 504f, 514t
surface, 503, 504f
Dysphoria, 105
Dystonias, 281
Ear, anatomy of, 209–211, 210f
Early long-term potentiation (E-LTP), 
445–447
Eating, 403–413
addictive, 424
brain mechanisms in, 414–421
hunger signals, 406–409, 409f
hypothalamus and, 414–420, 415f
peptide neurotransmitters in, 428t
satiety mechanisms, 410–413
and sleep, 416
and thirst, 398
Eating disorder(s)
anorexia nervosa, 428–432
bulimia nervosa, 428–432
obesity, 421–427
sleep-related, 298
ECT (electroconvulsive therapy), 572, 
572–573, 572f
Education level, Alzheimer’s disease and, 544
EEGs. See Electroencephalograms (EEGs)
Efferent axons, 93, 93, 94f
in cochlear nerve, 213–214
tracing, 139–141, 140f, 142f
Ehrlich, Paul, 39
Ejaculation, 332, 333
Electric ray, 56
Electrical brain stimulation, 13, 152–153. 
See also Deep brain stimulation (DBS)
for depression, 573
Electrical potentials. See also specific potentials
measuring, 43–44
recording, 146–149
Electrical synapses, 62, 62f
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), 572, 
572–573, 572f
Electrode(s), 43, 43, 44f
cannula, 365
Electroencephalograms (EEGs), 147f, 148, 
148, 148f
single-cell activity, 291, 292f
sleep-waking patterns and, 290–292, 291f
Electrolytes, 45, 45
Electromagnetic spectrum, 166, 166f
Electromyogram (EMG), 290, 290
Electron microscopy, 137, 137f
Electro-oculogram (EOG), 290, 290
Electrostatic pressure, 45, 45
Elevation, sound localization and, 221, 222f
Embolus, 523, 523f
stroke and, 523
EMG (electromyogram), 290, 290
Emotion(s), 359–391
amygdala and, 361–365, 378–381
brain structures in, 85
communication of, neural basis of, 
378–387
components of, 360
facial expression of, 377–378, 378f
in blind persons, 377–378
hemispherical specialization for, 
386–387, 387f
neural basis for, 384–388
feelings of, 388–391
imitation of, 390–391, 391f
James-Lange theory of, 388–389, 389f
moral decisions and, 369–370
recognition of, 378–381
in autism, 595–596
as response patterns, 360–376
simulated, feedback from, 390–391
Emotional contagion, 379
Emotional facial paresis, 385, 385, 385f
Emotional response, conditioned,  
362–363, 452–453, 453f
testing of, 363, 363f
Encapsulated tumor, 517
Encephalitis, 549, 549
causes of, 549
experimental allergic, 546
sleep disturbances in, 308–309
symptoms of, 549
Encephalopathy, transmissible spongiform, 
531, 531–533
Endarterectomy, carotid, 525–526
Endocannabinoids, 124, 124–125, 426
Endocrine glands, 62, 62–63
Endocrine system, hypothalamus and, 87
Endogenous opioids, 123, 123–124
alcohol and, 640–641
analgesia produced by, neural circuit 
mediating, 240, 240f
and reinforcement, 625, 640–641
Endolymph, 228, 228f, 229
Endoplasmic reticulum, 34, 34
rough, 34
smooth, 34
Endplate potential, 258, 258
Enkephalins, 124, 124
Entorhinal cortex, 249, 439, 440f, 464, 464f
Enuresis, nocturnal, 297
Environmental factors
for drug abuse, 637
for eating behavior, 406–407
for schizophrenia, 560–561
Environmental sounds, perception of, 
223–224
Enzymatic deactivation, 57–59, 58

730	
Subject Index
Enzymes, 32, 32–33
EOG (electro-oculogram), 290, 290
Ependymoma, 519f
Epidermis, 232f
Epididymis, 326f
Epigenetics, 556
Epilepsy, 519–522
GABA receptors and, 122
split-brain operation for, 5, 5f
Epinephrine, 117, 117–118, 602
secretion of, 95, 96
Episodic learning, 438, 454
Episodic memories, 454
vs. semantic memories, 467, 468
EPSP. See Excitatory postsynaptic potential 
(EPSP)
EST (estratetraene), 338, 343
Estradiol, 330, 330t, 3336
and female sexual behavior, 348–349
and maternal behavior, 354, 355f
and menstrual cycle, 332
Estratetraene (EST), 338, 343
Estrogen(s), 330, 330
effects of, 330t
priming of progesterone receptors with, 
348, 350f
Estrous cycles, 332, 332
Ethical issues, in animal research, 21–23
Evaporation, 397
loss of water through, 397f
Evolution, 17
Darwin’s theory of, 14–16
of humans, 17–21, 19f
of large brains, 18–21
of plants, 17
of vertebrates, 17–21, 18f
Excitation threshold, 44
Excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP), 
57, 57, 61f
population, 439, 440f
Excitatory synapses, 41, 42f, 61f, 537f
Excitotoxic lesions, 132, 132–133, 133f
Exercise
in depression, 582
effects on sleep, 301
neurogenesis and, 578, 579f
in stroke therapy, 526
as therapy for obesity, 425–426
weight loss in, 429, 430f
Exocytosis, 34, 34–35
Exogenous, definition of, 101
Experimental ablation, 13, 13, 132, 132–145
evaluation of behavioral effects, 132
histological methods, 135–139
living human brain studies and, 142–144
production of brain lesions, 132–134
stereotaxic surgery, 134–135
and tracing of neural connections, 139–142
Experimental allergic encephalitis, 546
Experimental neuropsychology, 24
Extension, 257, 257
Extinction
control of, 364f
of stimulus, 363
Extracellular fluid, 45, 45, 396, 396
ions in, 45–46, 46f
relative volume of, 396f
Extrafusal muscle fibers, 257, 257, 257f
Extraocular muscles, 167, 167f
Extrastriate body area (EBA), 194, 194–195
Extrastriate cortex, 187, 187, 188f, 449, 450f
and color perception, 190–191
and movement perception, 198–201
Extreme male brain, and autism, 597
Eye(s)
anatomy of, 167–169, 168f
connections with brain, 171–172, 173f
in emotional recognition, 381, 381f
movements of, 167–168
during REM sleep, 293
vestibular system and, 228–230
Eye fixation, after damage to amygdala, 
381, 381f
FAAH (fatty acid amid hydrolase), 125, 125
Face recognition, 193–197, 194f
in autism, 595–596
congenital cataract studies and, 197
implied faces, 193, 194f
by newborns, 196–197
newborns and, 196f
prosopagnosia and, 193–194, 195–197
composite faces, 197, 197f
“greebles” in studies of, 195, 195f
neural basis of, 378
phonagnosia and, 497
voice recognition and, 497
Facial expression of emotions, 377–378, 
378f
and autism, 595–596
hemispherical specialization for,  
386–387, 387f
neural basis of, 384–388
Facial nerve, 95f
Fallopian tubes, 326f, 332
Fastigial nucleus, 282, 282, 283f
Fasting
reactions to, 431, 431f
weight loss in, 429, 430f
Fasting phase, of metabolism, 405, 405, 405f
Fat reservoir, 404
Fat tissue. See Adipose tissue
Fatal familial insomnia, 300, 300, 301, 
531–533
Fats (triglycerides), 404, 404
Fatty acids, 404, 404
Fear, 361–365
amygdala and, 361–362
Feedback
delayed auditory, 498
negative, 395
Feelings of emotions, 388–391
Females
aggression in, 372–373
autism in, 597
external sex organs in, 328, 328f
genetic, prenatal androgenization of, 
340–341
internal sex organs in, 326f
multiple sclerosis in, 546
onset of puberty in, 329–330
prenatal sexual development in, 326, 328
reproductive cycles in, 332
sexual behavior in
hormonal control of, 333–334, 338–339
neural control of, 348–350, 350f
Fenestration, 211
Fenfluramine, 119, 119
effects on serotonergic synapses, 128t
inhibitory role in aggression, 371
for weight loss, 426
Fertilization, 332
Fetal alcohol syndrome, 528, 528–529, 
529f, 631
Fetal tissue transplant, for Parkinson’s 
­disease, 536
FFA. See Fusiform face area (FFA)
Fibrin, 524
Field CA1, 440f
damage to, amnesia caused by, 465–466, 
465f
Field CA3, 440f
Fight-or-flight response, 601, 601–602
Figurative speech, comprehension of, 491, 
491f, 495–496
Fimbria, 326f
Fissure(s), 80, 80, 81f, 82f
calcarine, 80, 82f
lateral, 80, 82f
Fistula, gastric, 410, 410
Fixative, 136, 136
Flashback episode, 607
Flavor, 243
Flexion, 257, 257
Flip-flop circuit, and sleep-waking cycle, 
309–314, 309f, 312f
REM sleep and, 311–314, 311f
slow-wave sleep and, 309–310, 309f
Flocculonodular lobe, 282, 282, 283f
Flourens, Pierre, 13
Fluent anomia, 493
Fluent aphasias, 496
Fluid(s), body, 396, 396f
extracellular, 45, 396
interstitial, 396, 397–400
intracellular, 45, 396, 397
ions in, 46f
loss of, 397
intravascular (blood plasma), 396
ions in, 45–46, 46f
regulation of volume of, 396–397, 400
Fluid balance, 396
kidneys and, 400
Fluorogold, 141, 141, 142f
Fluoxetine (Prozac), 119, 119, 128t, 572
inhibitory role in aggression, 371
for obsessive-compulsive disorder, 591
Fluvoxamine
for obsessive-compulsive disorder, 591
for panic disorder, 588, 588f
Foliate papillae, 244
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 329, 
329, 330t
Fontanelle, 134
Force feeding, effects of, 412f
Forebrain, 80, 80–88
Forelimb, adaptations in, 15f
Form
perception of, 191–197
visual analysis of, 200f
Form from motion, 199–200
Formalin, 136, 136
Fornix, 85, 85, 86f, 87f
Fos protein, 150, 150f
Fourth ventricle, 72f, 73, 73
Fovea, 168, 168, 169f
Foveal (central) vision, 174, 174f
Fraternal (dizygotic) twins, 161
Free radicals, 524, 524
Freezing, 363
Frequency, of sound
place coding of, 216–218
rate coding of, 218

	
Subject Index	
731
Fritsch, Gustav, 13
Frontal lobe, 81, 81–82, 83f
damage to, and speech deficits, 482
in obsessive-compulsive patients, 590
Frontal section, 69, 69, 69f
Frontopolar cortex, in movement, 272
Frontotemporal dementia, 543, 543
FSH (follicle-stimulating hormone), 329, 
329, 330t
Function words, 481, 481
Functional imaging, 150, 150–151
of emotional expression of disgust, 383
face recognition and, 195, 196, 380, 380f, 
381f
humor and, 386
Functional MRI (fMRI), 149, 151, 151, 151f
complex sounds localization and, 224, 224f
face recognition and, 195, 196, 380, 
380f, 381f
for movement, 200, 200f
striate cortex activation and, 187
visual stimuli and, 193, 193f
Functionalism, 15, 15
Darwin’s theory and, 15–16
Fundamental frequency, 219, 219
Fungiform papillae, 244
Fusaric acid, 118, 118, 128t
Fusiform face area (FFA), 193, 193,  
195–196, 379–380
and autism, 595–596, 596f
and object-memory retrieval, 451
Fusiform gyrus, 193
response to faces, 196, 196f
Fusion pore, 54f, 55
G protein, 57, 57
in olfactory transduction, 250
in taste transduction, 245, 246f
GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid), 111, 
122–123
GABA receptors, 122–123, 123f
in anxiety, 587
effect of alcohol on, 633
GABAergic transmission, in schizophrenia, 
567, 567f
Gage, Phineas, 368, 368f
Galactosemia, 530, 530
Galen, 11
Galvani, Luigi, 12, 13
Gametes, 325, 325–326
Gamma motor neurons, 257f, 258, 258
Gamma motor system, 261–263
Ganglion cells, 169, 169, 170f
center-surround organization of,  
174–175, 175f
color-sensitive
receptive fields of, 178f
types of, 178–179
effect of light on, 171, 171f
and negative afterimages, 179
ON/OFF, 174–175, 175f, 176f
opponent-process coding of color in, 
178–179
Gap junction, 62, 62, 62f
Gastric bypass, 425, 425f, 426f
Gastric fistula, 410, 410
Gastric satiety signals, 410
Gaze, perception of direction of, 381–382, 
382f
Gender. See also Females; Males
autism and, 597
determination of, 325, 325f, 326–328
Gender identity, 343
Gene(s), 32, 32. See also Heritability
Generalization, 10, 10
Generalized anxiety disorder, 586, 586–588
causes of, 586–587
Generalized seizures, 520, 520, 520t
Genetic factors, in seizure disorders, 522
Genetic markers, 161
Genetic methods of research, 160–162
Geniculate nucleus. See Lateral geniculate 
nucleus; Medial geniculate nucleus
Genitalia, external, 328, 328f
Genome, 33, 160, 161
Genomewide association studies, 161
Genomic studies, 161
Gestagens, effects of, 330t
Ghrelin, 407, 407–408, 417, 418, 428t
blood plasma levels of, 407f
Glabrous skin, 231, 231, 232f
mechanoreceptors in, 232t
touch perception in, 233
Glatiramer acetate, for multiple sclerosis, 546
Glia, 35, 35–39
development of, 77–78
Gliomas, 518, 518, 518f, 518t
Globus pallidus, 86, 277, 278, 278, 279f
internal division of, 536
stereotaxic surgery for, 536–538
Glomerulus, olfactory, 249, 249, 251, 251f
and perception of specific odors, 
250–253
Glossopharyngeal nerve, 95f, 246
Glucagon, 404, 404
effects on glucose and glycogen, 404f
Glucocorticoids, 602, 602–603
and acute stress, 604, 605f
harmful effects of, 603
and long-term stress, 603–604, 605
and prenatal stress, 604–605
secretion of, 602–603, 603f
and suppression of immune response, 
610–611
Glucoprivation, 408, 408
Glucose, 404
conversion into glycogen, 404f
entry into cells, 405
Glucose transporters, 405
Glutamate, 110, 121, 121–122, 442
stroke and, 524
Glutamate receptors
drugs affecting, 121–122, 128t
during stroke, 524
Glycerol (glycerine), 404, 404
Glycine, 110, 123, 123
Glycogen, 36, 404, 404
conversion into glucose, 404f
GnRH. See Gonadotropin-releasing 
­hormone (GnRH)
Golf, 250
Golgi apparatus, 34, 34–35
Golgi tendon organ, 259, 259–260
and inhibitory reflex, 263–264, 263f
Gonadotropic hormones, 87–88, 329, 329
Gonadotropin(s)
effects of, 330t
and menstrual cycles, 332
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH), 87–88, 329, 330t
and sexual maturation, 329f
Gonads, 325, 325–326
GPi (internal division of the globus 
­pallidus), 536
stereotaxic surgery for, 536–538
Grand mal seizure, 520, 520
clonic phase of, 520
tonic phase of, 520
Grasping, 275–276
Gray matter, 80, 81f
cocaine and, 622, 623f
periaqueductal. See Periaqueductal gray 
matter
in schizophrenic patients, 559, 564, 565f
in spinal cord, 92
volume in schizophrenics and alcoholics, 
comorbidity and, 622, 623f
Greebles, in face recognition studies, 195, 
195f
Grid cells, 472, 472f
GRM8 gene, in depression, 571
Growth cones, 78
Gustation, 243–253
anatomical structures, 244, 244f
neural coding of taste, 246–247
neural pathways, 246–247, 247f
perception of gustatory information, 
244–246
stimuli for, 243–244
transduction of gustatory information, 247f
Gustatory cortex, primary, 246–247, 247f
Gustducin, 245
Gyrus (gyri), 80, 80, 81f
Hair cells
auditory. See Auditory hair cells
vestibular, 228, 228f, 230f
Hair pulling, compulsive, 591
Hairy skin, 231, 232f
touch perception in, 233
Hallucinations, 554, 554
hypnagogic, 296
during seizure, 521
Hallucinogenic drugs, 625
Handel, George Frideric, 570
Head direction cells, 472–473
Head factors, for satiety, 410
Head trauma, 526–527
in Alzheimer’s disease, 543, 544
Hearing. See Audition
Hebb, Donald, 436
Hebb rule, 436, 437, 437, 440
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 13–14
Hemicholinium, 127t
Hemisphere. See Cerebral hemisphere(s)
Hemorrhagic stoke, 522, 522
Hepatic portal system, 408, 409f
Hepatic portal vein, 408, 408, 409f
Hereditary, vs. congenital, 530
Hereditary leptin deficiency, 423, 424f
Hering, Ewald, 176
Heritability
of affective disorders, 571
of alcoholism, 636–637
in Alzheimer’s disease, 542–543
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 545
of anorexia nervosa, 430
of attention deficit/hyperactivity 
­disorder, 599
of autistic disorder, 594
of drug abuse, 636–637, 637f
estimating, 161
of Huntington’s disease, 539

732	
Subject Index
Heritability (continued )
of metabolic disorders, 529–530
of metabolism efficiency, 423
of obesity, 421
of schizophrenia, 555–556
of sexual orientation, 344–345
Heroin (dihydromorphine)
addiction to, 617
as analgesic, 124
lipid solubility of, 103
tolerance to, 620
vs. morphine, 617
withdrawal effects of, 105
Herpes simplex virus, 141, 141–142, 549, 549
Hertz (Hz), 209, 209
Hertz, Heinrich, 209
Hindbrain, 89, 89–90
Hippocampal formation, 439, 439, 440f
border cells in, 472, 472f
cortical connections of, 464, 464f, 466
and episodic learning, 454
grid cells in, 472, 472f
head direction cells in, 472–473
in memory consolidation, 473–474
place cells in, 470–472
and relational learning, 464–466
subcortical connections of, 465f
Hippocampus, 85, 85, 86f
damage to
and anterograde amnesia, 460–461, 
464–466
PTSD and, 607–608
and stress, 605–606, 606f, 607–608, 
608f, 604–606
and limbic cortex, 468
and marijuana, 635
and memory, 460–461, 464–467, 464f, 
466–467
neurogenesis in, memory consolidation 
and, 475–476, 476f
rabies effect on, 549
and spatial learning, 468–469, 470–472, 473f
Hippocrates, 11
Histamine(s), 120, 122, 307
and arousal, 307
drug effects on, 128t
Histamine release, scratching and, 235
Histaminergic neurons, 307
Histidine, 120, 307
Histological methods, 135–139
Histones, 556
Hitzig, Eduard, 13
HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), 
549–550
Homeostasis, 394, 394
Homeostatic control, of sleep, 308, 311, 316
Hominids, 18
brain size in, 19–21, 21f
DNA similarities among, 17–18, 19f
Homo erectus, 18
brain size in, 21f
Homo neanderthalis, 18
Homo sapiens, 18
brain size in, 21f
migration routes of, 20f
Homosexuality, 340
brain and, 342–344
genetic factors for, 344–345
prenatal androgens and, 340
Homunculus, motor, 265f
Horizontal cells, 169, 169, 170f
Horizontal sections, 69, 69
Hormone(s), 62. See also specific hormones
activational effect of, 326
on aggressive behavior, 371–374, 372f
and aggressive behavior, 371–373
anterior pituitary, 87–88
organizational effect of, 325–326
on aggressive behavior, 371–373
on sexual behavior, 335f
peptide, 124
posterior pituitary, 88
receptors for, 63
sex. See Sex hormones
steroid, 63, 63f
stress, 602
5-HT. See under Serotonin
5-HTP (5-hydroxytryptophan), 119, 119f
Hubel, David, 181
Hue, 166, 166, 167
Human evolution, 17–21, 19f, 21f
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 
549–550
Humor
functional-imaging study or, 386
ventromedial prefrontal cortex damage 
and, 385–386
and violation of social norms, 386, 386f
Hunger
adenosine and, 311f
brain stem and, 414
effects of PYY on, 411f
environmental factors for, 406–407
ghrelin and, 407–408
hypothalamus and, 414–420, 415f
lipoprivic, 409
metabolic signals for, 408–409
orexigenic neurons and, 311, 311f
physiological signals for, 407–409
Huntingtin (Htt), 282, 539, 539, 540f
Huntington’s disease, 161, 281, 281–282, 
281f, 538–540
Hydrocephalus, obstructive, 73, 73
surgical correction of, 72f, 73
5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT).  
See Serotonin (5-HT)
5-Hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), 119, 119f
Hypercomplex cells, 182, 182, 182f
Hyperpolarization, 44, 44
Hypertension, 400
stress and, 603, 603f
Hypertonic solution, 396, 396, 397f
Hypnagogic hallucination, 296, 296
Hypocretin. See Orexin
Hypocretinergic neurons, and arousal, 308f
Hypofrontality, 565, 565, 565f, 566–567
Hypoglossal nerve, 95f
Hypoglycemia, as hunger signal, 408
Hypothalamus, 86f, 87, 87–88
and aggressive behavior, 365, 366f
anterior, maternal behavior and, 355, 356f
arcuate nucleus of. See Arcuate nucleus 
of hypothalamus
dorsomedial nucleus of, 317
and eating behavior, 414–420, 415f
effects of PYY on, 419, 420f
and emotional response, 362f, 363
in gustatory pathway, 247, 247f
hormones of, effects of, 330t
and hunger, 415
lateral, 414–415, 415f. See also Lateral 
hypothalamus
nuclei in, 87f
in olfactory pathway, 249
paraventricular nucleus of.  
See Paraventricular nucleus
peptides in, 415, 416f
suprachiasmatic nucleus of.  
See Suprachiasmatic nucleus
tuberomammillary nucleus of, 307
ventromedial, 415f. See also Ventromedial 
hypothalamus (VMH)
Hypotonic solution, 396, 396, 397f
Hypovolemia, 396, 396, 397, 400
detection of, 401f
ICV (intracerebroventricular) administration, 
102, 102
Idazoxan, 118, 118–119, 128t
Identical twins. See Monozygotic twins
IgA (immunoglobulin A), 612
IL-4, in multiple sclerosis, 546
IM (intramuscular) injection, 101, 101–102
Imitation. See also Mirror neurons
and communication of emotions,  
390–391, 391f
Immune reaction
cell-mediated, 609, 610f
chemically mediated, 609, 610f
stress and, 609–612, 611f
Immune system, 609–612
neural control of, 610–611
Immunization
autism and, 593
against β-amyloid, 544–545, 545f
Immunocytochemical methods, 138, 140, 
140–141
for neurotransmitter localization,  
156–158, 157f
for receptor localization, 157–158
Immunoglobulin(s), 609, 609, 610f
Impotence, testing for, 292–293
Impulsivity, addiction and, 619
Inborn errors of metabolism, 529–530
Inclusion bodies, 539
Incus, 209, 209, 210f
Indirect agonist, 108, 108, 109f
Indirect antagonist, 108, 108, 109f
Indirect pathway, in basal ganglia, 279, 
279–280
Indolamines, 114t
Infectious diseases
disorders caused by, 549–550
prenatal exposure to, and schizophrenia, 
560–561
stress and, 611–612, 611f
Inferior (term), 69
Inferior colliculi, 88, 88, 90f
Inferior temporal cortex, 189, 189, 189f, 450f
color-sensitive region in, 191
and form perception, 191–197
regions of, 191–192
and visual pattern discrimination, 449
Inflammatory reaction, in meningitis, 550
Ingestive behavior, 393–432, 394. See also 
Drinking; Eating
physiological regulatory mechanisms, 
394–395
Inhalation, 102, 102
Inhibition, neural, 41–43, 42f
first evidence for, 264
presynaptic, 61
vs. behavioral, 60

	
Subject Index	
733
Inhibitory postsynaptic potential (IPSP), 
57, 57, 61f
Inhibitory synapses, 41–43, 42f, 61f, 537f
Inner ear, 209–210
labyrinths of, 227, 228, 228f
Insertional plaque, 212, 212, 213f
Insomnia, 294–295
in depression, 578
destruction of preoptic area and, 309
fatal familial, 300, 301, 531–533
Instrumental conditioning, 436, 437, 437, 
454–459
neural model of, 437f, 454–459
strengthening of neural connections 
and, 458
vs. classical conditioning, 458
Insufflation, 102
Insula, and smoking, 630, 630f, 631
Insular cortex, 80, 80, 82f, 484, 484f
and speech articulation, 484
Insulin, 404, 404, 428t
administration of, 102
satiety and, 412
effects on glucose and glycogen, 404f
Intensity differences, sound localization by 
means of, 221
Interferon β, for multiple sclerosis, 546
Interictal inhibition, 522
Interleukin(s), 610
Intermittent sleep deprivation,  
for ­depression, 580
Internal carotid artery, stent placement in, 
525–526, 525f
Internal division of globus pallidus (GPi), 
536, 536
stereotaxic surgery of, 536–538
Interneuron(s), 28, 29–30
excitatory, 41, 42f
inhibitory, 41–42, 42f
spinal cord, 263–264
Interpeduncular nucleus, and nicotine, 631
Interposed nuclei, 282, 282, 283f
Interstitial fluid, 396, 396
regulation of concentration of, 397
Intestines, satiety receptors in, 410–411
Intracellular fluid, 45, 45, 396, 396, 397
ions in, 45–46, 46f
loss of, 397
relative volume of, 396f
Intracerebral administration, 102, 102
Intracerebral hemorrhage, 523f
Intracerebroventricular (ICV) administration, 
102, 102
Intrafusal muscle fibers, 257, 257, 257f
receptors on, 258–259
Intramuscular (IM) injection, 101, 101–102
Intraparietal sulcus (IPS), spatial 
­perception and, 201, 201
Intraperitoneal (IP) injection, 101, 101
Intrarectal administration, 102, 102
Intravascular fluid (blood plasma), 396, 396
regulation of volume of, 396, 400
relative volume of, 396f
Intravenous (IV) injection, 101, 101
Intromission, 332, 333
Ion(s), 45, 45–46
in intracellular and extracellular fluid, 
45–46, 46f
movements through membrane, during 
action potential, 47–49, 48f
Ion channels, 47, 47–48, 47f
in auditory hair cells, 212–213, 214f
major types of, 57–58, 58f
neurotransmitter-dependent, 56–57, 56f
refractory, 48
voltage-dependent, 48
Ionotropic receptor, 56, 56, 56f
IP (intraparietal) injection, 101, 101
Iproniazid, 571
Ipsilateral, 69, 69
IPSP (inhibitory postsynaptic potential), 
57, 57, 61f
Iris, 168, 168f
Ischemic stroke, 522, 522–523, 522–526
Isotonic solution, 396, 396
Itch sensation, 235
IV (intravenous) injection, 101, 101
James, William, 388
James-Lange theory, 388, 388–389, 389f
Japanese language, phonetic vs.  
whole-word reading in, 504–505
Jet lag, 320–321
Jokes. See Humor
K complexes, 290–291, 291f
Kainate receptor, 121, 121
Kainic acid, 128t, 152, 524
Kanamycin, and auditory hair cell damage, 
216
Kanji symbols, reading and, 504–505
Ketamine
for depression, 573–574, 574f
depression and, 574f
schizophrenia and, 565
Kidneys, 400, 401f
renin-angiotensin system of, 400, 401f
Kinesin, 35, 36f
Kinesthesia, 231, 231
“Kiss and run” process, 55, 56f
Kisspeptin, 329
Koniocellular sublayers, 171, 171, 172f, 
189–190, 190t
Korsakoff, Sergei, 460
Korsakoff’s syndrome, 460, 460, 540, 547–548
mammillary bodies, degeneration in, 
547, 547f
Kuru, 531–533
Labeling studies
anterograde method, 140, 140f, 141f, 142f
retrograde method, 141–142, 142f
Laborit, Henri, 557
Labyrinths, 227, 228
Lactate, 36
Lactation, 353
Lactic acid, and panic attacks, 587
Lamella(e), 169, 169
Lamina terminalis, organum vasculosum 
of. See OVLT (organum vasculosum of 
the lamina terminalis)
Lange, Carl, 388. See also James-Lange theory
Language, 480–500. See also Speech
in autistic disorder, 594
“dyslexia-friendly,” 510
function of, 480
impairments, brain region involved in, 10
Lateral, 68f, 69, 69
Lateral corticospinal tract, 267, 267, 267f, 270t
Lateral fissure, 80, 80, 82f
Lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), 87, 87, 
171–172, 172f
dorsal, 171, 172f, 189f
koniocellular system of, 171, 172f,  
189–190, 190t
magnocellular system of, 171, 172f, 189–190
parvocellular system of, 171, 172f, 190t
Lateral group, of descending motor tracts, 
266–267, 266–268, 267f, 270t
Lateral hypothalamus, 415f
and eating behavior, 414–420, 415f
eating behavior and, 414–420
and emotional response, 362f, 363
Lateral intraparietal sulcus (LIP), 201, 201f
Lateral lemniscus, 215, 215, 215f
Lateral nucleus of amygdala, 361, 361
and conditioned emotional response, 
453, 453f
Lateral occipital complex (LOC), 192, 192, 
196
Lateral ventricle, 72, 72, 72f
Laughter, brain mechanisms involved in, 
385–386
l-DOPA, 114, 114, 114f
effect on dopaminergic synapses, 127t
in memory, 458
for Parkinson’s disease, 281, 535–536, 536
and schizophrenia symptoms, 557
uptake in Parkinson’s disease, 159, 159f
Learning, 434–477. See also Classical  
conditioning; Instrumental conditioning
aversive emotional, 362
brain structures in, 85
effect on neurogenesis, 79
effects of alcohol on, 632
episodic, 438
hippocampal lesions and disruption of, 
469–470, 470f
motor, 437, 438f, 454–458
nature of, 435–438
perceptual, 435, 438f, 449–452
and broken drawing task, 461, 461f
relational, 438, 469–477
REM sleep and, 302–303, 302f, 303f
simple model of, 461f
slow-wave sleep and, 302–303, 303f
spatial, 438, 468–469
stimulus-response, 436, 438f
strategies for, 24–26
stress and disruption of, 604
synaptic plasticity and, 439–448
LEDs (light-emitting diodes), 153
Lee-Boot effect, 335, 335
Lens, 168, 168f
Leptin, 330, 412, 412–413, 420f, 428t
hereditary deficiency in, 423, 424f
resistance to, 423
and satiety signals, 412–413, 413f, 418,  
419
stimulating effects of, 418
Lesion study(ies), 132, 132–145, 145t–146t
in evaluation of behavioral effects, 132
histological methods, 135–139
living human brain, 142–144
production of brain lesions, 132–134
stereotaxic surgery, 134–135
and tracing of neural connections, 
139–142
Lewy bodies, 534, 534, 534f
LGN. See Lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN)
LH. See Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Librium. See Chlordiazepoxide
Ligand, 52

734	
Subject Index
Light, 166–167
electromagnetic spectrum, 166f
perceptual dimensions of, 166–167
in seasonal affective disorder, 580–582, 581f
as zeitgeber, 315, 319, 320–321
Light therapy, 581–582
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs), 153
Limb apraxia, 276–277
Limbic cortex, 83f, 84, 84, 86f
and hippocampus, 468
Limbic system, 85, 85
Lingual lipase, 244
Linkage studies, 161
Lipase, lingual, 244
Lipid neurotransmitters, 124–125
Lipid solubility, 103
Lipoprivation, 408, 408
Liroprivic hunger, 409
Lithium, 571, 574–575
Liver
carbohydrate reservoir in, 404
hepatic portal blood supply to, 408, 409f
hunger detectors in, 408
satiety signals from, 411–412
l-NAME, 126, 128t
Lobectomy, bilateral medial temporal, 460–461
Lobotomy, 585
LOC (lateral occipital complex), 192, 192,  
196
Local motor seizure, 520t
Lockjaw. See Tetanus
Locus coeruleus (LC), 118, 118, 118f, 306
and emotional response, 362f
and REM sleep, 306, 306f
and withdrawal effects, 626
Long-lasting long-term potentiation 
(L-LTP), 445–447, 446f
Long-term depression (LTD), 441, 447, 
447–448
associative, 447
vs. long-term potentiation, 441, 447–448
Long-term memory, conversion of short-
term memory into, 460–461, 461f
Long-term potentiation (LTP), 439,  
439–440, 441f
AMPA receptors and, 443–444, 444f
associative, 440, 441f, 443f
CaM-KII in, 444
chemistry, 446f
chemistry of, 446–447
and classical conditioning, 453
early, 445–447, 446f
effects of alcohol on, 632
effects of dopamine on, 4644
forms of, 445–447, 447
induction of, 439–440, 441f
long-lasting, 446–447, 446f
NMDA receptors in, 442, 442f, 443
PKM-zeta in, 446–447, 446f
postsynaptic changes in, 444, 444f, 445f
presynaptic changes in, 445
role of summation in, 441, 441f
vs. long-term depression, 441, 447–448
Lordosis, 333, 333, 348
Loss of function mutation, 534, 534
Loudness, 209, 209, 209f
perception of, 218
LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide), 120, 120, 
128t, 625
LTP. See Long-term potentiation (LTP)
Lumbar vertebrae, 91, 91f
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 329, 329, 330t
and menstrual cycle, 332
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 120, 
120, 128t, 625
Lysosomes, 35, 35
MA (mercaptoacetate), 408
Macroelectrodes, 147
recording of neural activity with, 147–148
Mad cow disease, 531–533
MAFP, 125, 125, 128t
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 143,  
144f
functional, 149
functional (fMRI), 151, 151f
Magnetoencephalography, 149, 149
Magnocellular layers/system, 171, 171, 
172f, 189–190
in communication of emotion, 379–380, 
380f
properties of, 190t
Major affective disorders, 570–582. See also 
Bipolar disorder; Depression
heritability of, 571
treatments of, 571–582
Major depressive disorder (MDD), 570.  
See also Depression
Male brain, extreme, and autism, 597
Males
aggression in, 371–372
external sex organs in, 328, 328f
genetic, failure of androgenization of, 
341–342
internal sex organs in, 326f
prenatal sexual development in,  
326–328
sexual behavior in
hormonal control of, 332–333, 339–340
neural control of, 346–348
Malignant tumors, 517, 517
growth of, 517–518
Malleus, 209, 209, 210f, 212f
Mammals, evolution of, 17–21, 18f
Mammillary bodies, 85, 85, 86f
degeneration of, in Korsakoff’s 
­syndrome, 547, 547f
Mania, 570. See also Bipolar disorder
metabolic rate of subgenual ACC in, 
576–577, 577f
treatment of, 574–575
MAO. See Monoamine oxidase (MAO)
Marijuana, 124–125, 633–635
appetite stimulation by, 426
schizophrenia and, 635
Markers, 161
Masculinizing effect, 327, 327
in congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 341
Massa intermedia, 72f, 73, 85f, 86f
Mate selection
hormones and, 339
during menstrual cycle, 339
Maternal behavior, 352–353, 353f, 354f
hormonal control of, 353–354, 355f
neural control of, 354–356, 357f
MC-4R (melanocortin-4 receptor), 419, 419
MCH. See Melanin-concentrating hormone
MCH (melanin-concentrating hormone), 
415, 415–416, 428t
in addiction, 620
MDD (major depressive disorder), 570
MDMA (methylenedioxymethamphet-
amine), 120, 120, 128t
Mechanoreceptors, in skin, 232, 232, 232t
Medial, 68f, 69, 69
Medial geniculate nucleus, 87, 87
in auditory pathway, 215, 215f
Medial habenula, and nicotine, 631, 631f
Medial intraparietal sulcus (LIP), 201, 201f
Medial nucleus of amygdala, 336. See also 
Amygdala
and female sexual behavior, 350f
and male sexual behavior, 336, 348, 349f
and maternal behavior, 355, 357f
Medial preoptic area (MPA), 347, 347–348
and intermale aggression, 372
and male sexual behavior, 347–348, 349f
and maternal behavior, 354–355, 357f
and paternal behavior, 356
Medial temporal lobe, spatial memory and, 
468
Median preoptic nucleus (MnPN), 309, 
343, 398f, 401, 401–402
lesions of, effects on drinking, 401–402
Medulla (medulla oblongata), 90f, 91, 91
Meissner’s corpuscle, 231, 231–232, 232f, 232t
Melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH), 
415, 415–416, 428t
in addiction, 620
Melanin-concentrating neurons
connections of, 416f
inhibition of, CART and, 419
location of, 416f
Melanocortin-4 receptor (MC-4R), 419, 419
α-Melanocyte-stimulating hormone 
(α-MSH), 419, 419, 428t
Melanopsin
in retina, 316f
in seasonal affective disorder, 580
Melatonin, 320, 320
in jet lag and shift work management, 321
sleep cycles and, 581, 581f
Membrane(s), 31
ion channels in, 47–48, 47f
of neuron, 31–32, 32f
permeability of, action potential and, 48f
postsynaptic, 52, 53f
presynaptic, 52, 53f
sodium-potassium transporters in, 46, 47f
Membrane potential, 43, 43. See also Action 
potential; Resting potential
forces responsible for, 45–47
Memory/memories, 435
and Alzheimer’s disease, 540
brain structures in, 85
consolidation of, 460–461, 473–476
declarative, 462–463
formation of, 464–465
dopamine in, 458
effects of alcohol on, 632
effects of marijuana on, 635
episodic, 454, 467, 468
formation of, REM sleep and, 302–303
long-term, 460
nondeclarative, 463
prions and, 532
reconsolidation of, 474–475, 474f, 475f
semantic, 467–468
short-term, 451–452, 460–461
spatial, 468–469

	
Subject Index	
735
storage of, 85
stress and, 604
Men. See Males
Meninges, 70, 70, 71f
layers of, 70, 71f
Meningioma, 518t, 519, 519, 519f
Meningitis, 550, 550
Menstrual cycle, 331, 332
and aggressiveness, 372–373
neuroendocrine control of, 331–332, 332f
sexual behavior during, 338–339
synchronization of, 337
Menthol, 234
Mercaptoacetate (MA), 408
Merkel’s disk, 231, 231–232, 232f, 232t
Mesencephalic locomotor region, 285, 285
Mesencephalon, 75, 76f, 76t, 88, 90f. 
See also Midbrain
Mesocortical system, 115, 115, 115f
Mesolimbic system, 115, 115
cocaine use and, 627
drug addiction and, 618
and schizophrenia symptoms, 557
Messenger RNA (mRNA), 32
in protein synthesis, 32, 33f
Metabolic activity of brain
recording of, 149–151, 150f, 151f
sleep deprivation and changes in, 301
Metabolic disorders, inherited, 529–530
Metabolism, 403–406
absorptive phase of, 405–406, 405f
effect of leptin on, 413
efficiency of, differences in, 423
fasting phase of, 405, 405f
peptide neurotransmitters involved in, 428t
Metabotropic glutamate receptor, 121, 121
Metabotropic receptors, 57, 57, 57f
Metaphors, comprehension of, 491, 491f
Metastases, 517, 517
Metastatic carcinoma, 518t
Metencephalon, 75, 76f, 76t, 89–90
Methadone maintenance, 638
Methamphetamine, 626–627
dopamine transporters and, 627, 628f
Methylene blue, 137
Methylphenidate (Ritalin), 117, 117, 127t, 
599–601
for narcolepsy, 297
and schizophrenia symptoms, 557
Microdialysis, 158, 158–159, 158f, 456
Microelectrode(s), 43, 43, 44f, 147, 147
recording of neural activity with, 146, 147f
Microglia, 38, 38–39
Micrometer (μm), 37
Microscopy, electron, 137, 137f
Microtome, 136, 136, 136f
Microtubules, 35, 35, 36f
Midbrain, 88, 88–89, 90f. See also 
Mesencephalon
Middle ear, 209
Midsagittal plane, 69, 69
Milk production, 353
Milner, Peter, 455
Mind-body question, 3
Mirror neurons, 273, 273–275, 494
in autistic disorder, 596–597
emotional expression recognition and, 383
and speech, 487, 488f
Mitochondria, 34, 34
during stoke, 524
Mitral cells, 249, 249, 251f
MK-801, 568
MnPN. See Median preoptic nucleus (MnPN)
Moclobemide, 118, 118
effect on noradrenergic synapses, 128t
Model (scientific), 12, 12
Moebius syndrome, 383
Monism, 3, 3
Monoamine(s), 114, 114–120. See also 
Dopamine (DA); Epinephrine; 
Norepinephrine (NE); Serotonin (5-HT)
Monoamine hypothesis, of depression, 575
Monoamine oxidase (MAO), 117, 117
in dopaminergic terminal buttons, 117f
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, 
571–572, 575
Monosodium glutamate (MSG), taste of, 243
Monosynaptic stretch reflex, 261, 261, 262f
role in postural control, 261, 262f
Monozygotic (identical) twins, 160–161
dichorionic, 564
discordance for schizophrenia in, 563, 563f
monochorionic, 564
Mood, sleep deprivation and, 578–580, 
579f, 580f
Mood disorders, 570–582
Moral judgments, 369–370
examples of, 370t
and prefrontal cortex, 369–370
ventromedial lesions and, 369–370, 370f
Morphine
vs. aspirin, 104
vs. heroin, 617
Morris water maze, 469, 470f, 473
Motion sickness, 230
Motivation, brain structures in, 85
Motor association cortex, 83f, 84, 84. 
See also Premotor cortex
in movement control, 268–273
Motor cortex, 265–268, 265f, 270f. See also 
Motor association cortex; Primary 
motor cortex
organization of, 265–266
seizures originating in, 521
Motor endplate, 258, 258
Motor homunculus, 265f
Motor learning, 437, 437, 438f
neural pathways involved in, 454–458
Motor memories, in Broca’s area, 482
Motor neurons, 28, 28
alpha, 257, 257f
gamma, 257f, 258, 261–263
and polio, 549
Motor pathways, 266–268, 270t
lateral group, 266–268, 267f, 270t
ventromedial group, 267, 268, 269f, 270t
Motor seizure, 520t
Motor unit, 258, 258
Movement
basal ganglia and, 277–282
brain areas in, 86, 270–287
cerebellar, 282–285, 283f, 284f
initiating and comprehending, 273–275
mirror neurons in, 273–275
motor association cortex in, 268–273
motor cortex and, 265–268, 265f, 270f
motor systems and, 86, 255–287
muscle anatomy and, 256–258, 257f
muscle contraction and, 258–260, 259f, 260f
perception of, 198–201
posterior parietal cortex in, 275–276
premotor cortex in, 272–273
reaching and grasping, 275–276
reflexes and, 261–264, 262f, 263f
reflexive, 261–264
reticular formation and, 285
supplementary motor area in, 269–272
Movement therapy, constraint-induced, 
526, 526f
MPA. See Medial preoptic area (MPA)
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
mRNA. See Messenger RNA (mRNA)
MSG (monosodium glutamate), taste of, 243
α-MSH (α-melanocyte-stimulating 
­hormone), 419, 419, 428t
MST region, movement perception and, 198
MT area, movement perception and, 198
Müller, Johannes, 12, 12f
Müllerian system, 326, 326–327, 326f
Multiple sclerosis, 546–547
pure alexia in, 502, 502f
Multipolar neurons, 30, 30, 30f
internal structures of, 32f
Muscarine, 113, 127t
Muscarinic receptors, 113, 113
Muscimol, 122, 122, 128t, 134
Muscle(s), 256–260
antigravity, 257
contraction of, 258, 259f
extraocular, 167, 167f
facial, feedback from, 397–398
paralysis of, during REM sleep, 291, 292, 
313
responses of, 260f
sensory feedback from, 258–260
skeletal, 256–260, 257f
Muscle length detectors, 259
Muscle spindles, 257, 257f
efferent control of, 261–263
Music, perception of, 224–226
Mutation(s), 16, 16
in Huntington’s disease, 539
loss of function, 534
targeted, 161–162
toxic gain of function of, 534
Myelencephalon, 75, 76f, 76t, 91
Myelin sheath, 30, 30f, 37, 37
advantages of, 49–50
and autoimmune demyelinating disease, 
546–547
conduction of action potential in, 49–50, 
50f
formation of, 37, 38f
Myofibril, 258, 258
Myosin, 258, 258
Myosin cross bridges, 258, 259f
Myosin filaments
in auditory cilia, 211
in muscle contraction, 258, 259f
in muscle fiber, 257f
NAC. See Nucleus accumbens (NAC)
Nail biting, 591
Naloxone, 124, 124, 128t, 625, 625, 633, 638
for alcoholism, 641
Naltrexone, 633
for alcoholism, 641, 641f
Narcolepsy, 295, 295–297
REM sleep and, 313
slow-wave sleep and, 310

736	
Subject Index
Natronomonas pharaonis halorhodopdin 
(NpHR), 153–154, 153f
Natural selection, 15, 15
Navigational tasks, 469–470
ncRNA. See Non-coding RNA (ncRNA)
NE. See Norepinephrine
Neanderthals, 18
NEAT (nonexercise activity thermogenesis), 
422
Negative afterimage, 179, 179, 180f
Negative feedback, 395, 395
Negative reinforcement, 620, 620–621
and drug addiction, 620–621
vs. punishment, 620
Negative symptoms of schizophrenia, 554, 
554–555, 555t, 559
PCP abuse and, 565–566, 566f
relation with positive symptoms, 565–567
Neocortex, 84, 84
Neomycin, and auditory hair cell damage, 216
Neostigmine, 113, 113, 127t
Neostriatum, 115, 454, 455f
Neoteny, 20, 20–21
in evolution of human skull, 21f
Nerve(s), 30, 31f
doctrine of specific energies, 13
and message transmission, 12–13
interpretation of, 12–13
speed of conduction through, 13–14
Nerve cells. See Neurons
Nervous system, 66–98
basic features of, 67–74
descriptive terms of, 68–69
development of, 75f, 76f
directional terms of, 68–69
major divisions of, 70t
relation to rest of body, 71f
Nesting behavior, 353, 353f
Neural activity
recording, 146–151
stimulating, 151–154
Neural adhesion protein, 529, 529
Neural communication, 41–43
within neuron, 41–43
between neurons, 51–63
nonsynaptic, 62–63
synaptic, 51–62
Neural connections, tracing, 139–142, 140f
anterograde labeling method, 140, 140f, 
141f, 142f
retrograde labeling method, 141–142, 142f
Neural integration, 60, 60, 61f
Neural tube, 75, 75, 75f
Neuraxis, 68, 68
Neurinoma, 518t
Neurodegenerative disorders, 531–548
Neurofibrillary tangles, 540, 540–541, 541f
Neurogenesis, 79, 79
in adults, 475–476, 476f
in depression, 577–578, 579f
effect of learning on, 79
exercise and, 578, 579f
hippocampal, in memory consolidation, 
475–476
Neuroglia, 35–39
development of, 77
Neurological disorders, 516–550
Neurology, 24
Neuromagnetometers, 149
Neuromodulators, 62, 62, 110–113
localizing, 156–158
measuring, 158–159
nucleoside, 125–126
Neuromuscular junction, 258, 258
Neurons, 29–35
basic structure of, 29–31, 30f
bipolar, 30, 30f
communication. See Neural communication
and inclusion bodies, 539
internal structure of, 31–35, 32f
interneurons, 29, 29–30
migration of, 77f
motor, 28
multipolar, 30, 30f
internal structures of, 32f
regenerative properties of, 39
scanning-electron micrograph of, 138f
sensory, 28
stroke’s effect on, 524
supporting cells of, 35–39
unipolar, 30, 30f
Neuropeptide Y (NPY), 416, 416–417, 418, 
428t
multiple effects of, 417
role in anorexia, 430
Neuropeptide Y neurons
connections of, 418f
leptin receptors in, 420f
Neuropeptides, involved in eating, 428t
Neuropsychology, experimental, 24
Neuroscience
behavioral, 9–14, 24. See also Behavioral 
neuroscience
careers in, 24
historical perspective of, 11–14
cognitive, 24
Neurosecretory cells, 87, 87, 88f
Neurotransmitter(s), 31, 31.See also specific 
neurotransmitters
in addiction, 637
amino acids, 120–123
autoreceptors for, 60–61
in brain, 110–123
localizing, 156–158, 157f
measuring, 158–159
drugs affecting, 107f, 112–113
lipid, 124–125
localizing, 156–158, 157f
measuring, 158–159
peptide, 123–124
involved in eating, 428t
release of, 54–55, 54f
regulation of, 60, 61f
reuptake of, 58, 59f
drugs affecting, 107f, 110
soluble gases, 126
supersensitivity to, 558
Neurotransmitter-dependent ion channels, 
56, 56–579, 56f
major types of, 57–58, 58f
Newborns, face recognition by, 196–197, 196f
Nicotine, 127t, 627–631
addiction, treatment for, 639–640, 640f
Nicotine maintenance therapy, 639–640
Nicotinic receptors, 113, 113, 629, 637
Night terrors (pavor nocturnus), 297
Nightmares, 293–294
Nigrostriatal system, 115, 115
overactivity of neurons in, 557
in Parkinson’s disease, 534, 534f, 535
Nissl, Franz, 137
Nissl substance, 137
Nitric oxide (NO), 126, 126
Nitric oxide synthase, 126, 126, 445, 445
Nitroglycerine, administration of, 102
NMDA, effect on glutamate receptors, 128t
NMDA receptors, 121, 121, 121f, 442
and classical conditioning, 453
disruption of, and schizophrenia 
­symptoms, 565–566
and long-term depression, 447–448
and long-term potentiation, 442f
in long-term potentiation, 442, 443
NO (nitric oxide), 126, 126
Nociceptors, 235
Node of Ranvier, 37, 37, 37f
Nonclassical congenital adrenal 
­hyperplasia (NCAH), 341
Non-coding RNA (ncRNA), 34
in protein synthesis, 33f, 34
Noncompetitive binding, 108, 108, 109f
Nondeclarative learning task, slow-wave 
sleep and, 302, 302f
Nondeclarative memory, 463, 463
REM sleep and, 302
Nondeclarative memory tasks, examples 
of, 463t
Nonexercise activity thermogenesis 
(NEAT), 422
Non-REM sleep, 292, 292
Noradrenalin. See Norepinephrine (NE)
Noradrenergic neurons, 118–119, 118f
and arousal, 306, 306f
drugs affecting, 128t
and REM sleep, 147, 306, 306f
Noradrenergic receptors, 118–119
Norepinephrine (NE), 111, 117, 117–119
and arousal, 306
biosynthesis of, 114, 114f
and REM sleep, 306
secretion of, 96
as stress hormone, 602
Nouns, anomia for, 493
nPGi. See Nucleus paragigantocellularis 
(nPGi)
NPY. See Neuropeptide Y (NPY)
Nucleolus, 32, 32
Nucleosides, 125–126
Nucleus (cell), 32
median preoptic, 309
of neuron, 32, 32f
sublaterodorsal, in REM sleep, 312
Nucleus accumbens (NAC), 115, 455, 
455–456, 456f
dopamine release by
cocaine/amphetamine and, 627, 627f
nicotine and, 628–629, 629f
opiates and, 625
THC and, 633, 634f
in drug addiction, 618–619
electrical stimulation of. See also Deep 
brain stimulation (DBS); Electrical 
brain stimulation
maternal behavior and, 355–356, 357f
nicotine receptors in, 628–629
and reinforcement, 455–456
in reinforcement, 458
in schizophrenia, 557
Nucleus basalis, and emotional, response, 362f
Nucleus of the solitary tract, 246, 246
and hunger signals, 414, 414f
Nucleus paragigantocellularis (nPGi), 348, 348
and male sexual behavior, 348, 349f

	
Subject Index	
737
Nucleus raphe magnus, 240, 240
Nucleus reticularis pontis caudalis, and 
emotional response, 362f
Nucleus/nuclei (collection of neurons), 
86, 86. See also specific nuclei
of amygdala, 362f
cerebellar, 282–283, 283f
hypothalamic, 87f
thalamic, 86–87, 278, 279f
Nystagmus, 228
ob mouse, 412–413, 413f
Obesity, 421–427
addictive eating and, 424
in Pima Indians, 423
possible causes of, 421–423
prevalence of, 421, 422f
treatments for, 424–427
Object recognition, visual word-form area 
in, 508–509, 508f, 509f
Obsessions, 588, 588–589
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 
588, 588–592
and autism, 597
causes of, 589–590
treatment of, 590–592
Obstetric complications, schizophrenia 
and, 561–562
Obstructive hydrocephalus, 73, 73
surgical correction of, 73, 74f
Occipital lobe, 81, 81–82, 83f
seizure impact on, 521
OCD. See Obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(OCD)
Ocular dominance, 185, 185–186
orientation sensitivity and, 185–186, 185f
Oculomotor nerve, 95f
Odor(s)
perception of, 250–253, 251f
as pheromones, 335–338, 343
Odorants, 248
OFC. See Orbitofrontal cortex (OFC)
Olds, James, 455
Olfaction, 248–253
anatomy of olfactory apparatus, 248–249
coding of, 250–251, 252f
and maternal behavior in rat, 355, 356f
scent-tacking behavior and, 248, 249f
and sexual behavior, 335–338
split brain and, 6, 7f
stimulus for, 248
transduction of olfactory information, 250
Olfactory bulb, 94, 94, 249, 249, 250f
neurogenesis in, in memory 
­consolidation, 475–476
regions of, 251–252, 252f
Olfactory epithelium, 248, 248–249
Olfactory glomerulus, 249, 249, 251f
odor masking and, 253
and perception of specific odors, 
250–253
Olfactory nerve, 95f
Oligodendrocytes, 37, 37, 37f, 38f
Oligonucleotides, antisense, 166
Olivocochlear bundle, 214, 214
Onychophagia, 591
Operant conditioning. See Instrumental 
conditioning
Ophthalmoscope, 13
Opiate(s), 123, 128t, 625–626
addiction, treatment for, 638–639
effects of, neural basis of, 625
lipid solubility of, 103
reinforcing effects of, 625
withdrawal effects of, 625–626
Opiate blockers, 625–626
Opiate receptors, 625, 626f
alcohol craving and, 633, 634f
Opioids. See Endogenous opioids
Opponent colors, 176
Opponent-color system, 178–179
Opsin, 170, 170
Optic chiasm, 87, 87, 87f, 172, 172, 173f
Optic disk, 168, 168
Optic flow, 198, 198–199
Optic nerve, 95f, 168f
Oral administration, 102, 102
Orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), 249
effect of PYY on, 419, 420f
in obsessive-compulsive patients, 590
Orbits, 167
Orexigenic neurons, role in sleep,  
310–311, 310f
Orexigenics, appetite and, 426–427
Orexigens, 415–416
Orexin, 296, 296, 307, 415, 415–416, 428t
in addiction, 619–620, 631
and arousal, 307–308
in smoking, 631
Orexin neurons
connections of, 416f
inhibition of, CART and, 419
location of, 416f
Organ of Corti, 210, 210, 211f
scanning electron photomicrograph of, 213f
Organic senses, 231, 231
Organizational effect (of hormone), 325
on aggressive behavior, 371–373, 372f
on sexual behavior, 334, 335f
testosterone, 372f
Organizational effects, 325, 325–326
Organophosphates, effects on sleep, 156
Organum vasculosum of lamina terminalis. 
See OVLT (organum vasculosum of 
the lamina terminalis)
Orientation sensitivity, 181–182, 182f, 185
and ocular dominance, 185–186, 185f
Orlistat, for weight loss, 426
Orthographic dysgraphia, 512, 512, 512f, 514t
Oscilloscope, 43
Osmometric thirst, 397, 397–400
control of, 398–400
food-related, 398
Osmoreceptors, 398, 398
hypothetical action of, 399, 399f
Osmosis, 397
Ossicles, 209, 209–210, 210f
Osteoporosis, in anorexics, 429
Otoconia, 229, 229f
Oval window, 209, 209, 210f, 212f
Ovarian follicles, 332, 332
Ovaries, 326f
Overeating, as addiction, 424
Overtones, 219, 219
OVLT (organum vasculosum of the lamina 
terminalis), 398, 398–400, 398f, 402
osmoreceptors in, 398–400
Ovulation, 332
Oxidative stress, sleep deprivation and, 300
Oxytocin, 88, 330t, 333, 333
and autism, 596
and male sexual behavior, 333
in pair bonding, 351
and paternal behavior, 357
p75 neurotrophin receptor, 542
Pacinian corpuscles, 231, 231–232, 232f, 
232t
in muscle, 257f
PAG. See Periaqueductal gray matter 
(PAG)
Pain, 234–235
endogenous modification of, 240, 240f
perception of, 237–243
Pair bonding, 350–351
Pallidotomies, 536
Panic disorder, 586, 586, 586–588, 588f
Papillae, tongue, 244, 244f
Parabelt region, 215, 215, 216f
Parabrachial nucleus, and emotional 
response, 362f
Paradoxical sleep. See REM sleep
Parahippocampal cortex, 464, 464, 464f
Parahippocampal place area (PPA), 195, 
195, 195f
and object-memory retrieval, 451
Parasympathetic division, of ANS, 95, 96, 
96–98, 97f
Parasympathetic ganglia, 98
Paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of  
hypothalamus, 415f, 417
and emotional response, 362f
and glucocorticoid secretion, 602
and seasonal rhythms of sleep, 320
Parental behavior, 352–357
Paresis
emotional facial, 385, 385f
volitional facial, 385, 385f
Parietal lobe, 81, 81–82, 83f
functions of, 239, 269
seizure impact on, 521
Parietal reach region, 275, 275f
Parkin gene, 534, 534, 535f
Parkinson’s disease, 115, 115, 280–281, 
533–538
cause of, 86, 280–281
causes of, 534–535
dopamine transporters in, 627, 628f
dopaminergic neurons in, 534
gene therapy for, 538, 539f
Lewy body in, 534, 534f
parkin gene in, 534, 535f
pathophysiology of, 534–535, 534f, 535f
PET imaging in, 159f
symptoms of, 86, 280, 533–534
treatment of, 25, 115, 281, 535–538
Partial agonist, 567, 567
effects of, 567f
Partial seizures, 520, 520, 520t
Partial sleep deprivation, for depression, 580
Parturition, 353, 353
Parvocellular layers/system, 171, 171, 172f, 
189–190, 379–380
in communication of emotion, 379–380, 
380f
properties of, 190t
Patellar reflex, 261
Paternal behavior, neural control of, 356
Pattern recognition, 223
Pavlov, Ivan, 363
Pavor nocturnus (night terrors), 297
p-Chlorophenylalanine (PCPA), 119, 119
effects on serotonergic synapses, 128t

738	
Subject Index
PCP (phencyclidine), 122, 122, 625
abuse of, relation with negative 
­symptoms, 565–566
and schizophrenia symptoms, 565–566
site of action of, 565–566
PCPA. See p-Chlorophenylalanine (PCPA)
Pelvic thrusting, 332, 333
Penile erections, during REM sleep,  
292–293, 314
Peptide(s), 62, 62
involved in eating, 428t
localization in brain, 156, 157f
neurotransmitters, 123–124
Peptide YY3-36 (PYY), 411, 411, 428t
effect on orbitofrontal cortex, 419, 420f
effects on hunger, 411f
effects on hypothalamus, 419, 420f
per proteins, 319
Perception
basic function of, 9–10
brain areas responsible for, 84
spatial, and learning, 469–470, 470f
Perceptual learning, 435, 435, 438f, 
449–452
and broken drawing task, 461, 461f
function of, 449
Perforant path, 439
Perfusion, 136, 136
Periaqueductal gray matter (PAG), 89, 89, 
90f, 348, 348
and aggressive behavior, 365, 366f
and emotional response, 365
and female sexual behavior, 349, 350f
maternal behavior and, 355, 356f
Peribrachial area, firing on REM-ON cell 
in, 311f
REM sleep and, 311–312
Peripheral nervous system (PNS), 29, 29, 
92–96
autonomic, 94–96, 97f
major divisions of, 70t, 98t
regenerative properties of, 39
somatic, 94
supporting cells of, 35–39
Peripheral peptides, involved in eating, 428t
Peripheral vision, 174, 174f
Perirhinal cortex, 464, 464, 464f
Peritoneal cavity, 101
Persecution, delusions of, 554
Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome, 328, 328
PET (positron emission tomography), 150, 
150–151, 159f
Petit mal seizures, 521
PGi. See Nucleus paragigantocellularis (nPGi)
Phagocytosis, 36, 36–37
PHA-L, 140, 140, 141
in tracing of efferent axons, 140f, 141, 141f
Phantom limb, 239, 239
Pharmacokinetics, 101, 101–103
Pharmacology, 99–129. See also Drug(s)
Phase advance, in seasonal affective 
­disorder, 581, 581f
Phase delay, in seasonal affective disorder, 
581, 581f
Phase differences, 219–220, 220
localization of sounds through, 220f
Phencyclidine (PCP), 625
Phenylketonuria (PKU), 529, 529–530
Pheromones, 249, 335–338
and aggressive behavior, 372
Phonagnosia, 497
Phonetic reading, 503, 503, 504–505
vs. whole-word reading, 504–505, 505f
Phonological dysgraphia, 512, 512, 512f, 514t
Phonological dyslexia, 504, 504–505, 504f, 
514t
Phonological loop, 493
Photopigments, 170, 170
Photoreceptors, 168, 168, 169–171, 169t, 170f
absorption characteristics of, 176–177, 177f
Photosensitive proteins, 153–154, 153f
Photostimulation, 153–154, 153f
Phototherapy, 581, 581–582
Physiological psychology, 24. See also 
Behavioral neuroscience
on mind-body question, 3
research goals in, 11
Pia mater, 70, 70, 71f, 94f
Picrotoxin, 122–123
Pigment mixing, 176, 177f
Piloerection, 96
Pima Indians, obesity in, 423
Pineal body, Descartes’s theory of, 11, 12f
Pineal gland, 320, 320, 320f
and seasonal rhythms, 319–320
Pinealona, 518t
Pinna, 209, 210f
sound localization by means of, 221–228
Piriform cortex, 252
Pitch, 209, 209, 209f
anatomical coding of, 216f
place coding of, 216–218
rate coding of, 218
Pituitary adenoma, 518t
Pituitary gland, 88f
anterior, 87–88, 88f
posterior, 88, 88f
PKM-zeta
in long-term potentiation, 446–447, 
446f, 453
in memory, 458
in reinforcement, 458
PKU (phenylketonuria), 529, 529–530
Place cells, 470
in hippocampal formation, 468,  
470–472, 471f
spatial learning and, 471f, 473f
Place coding, of pitch, 216, 216–218
Placebo, 105, 105
effects of, 240–241, 240f, 241f
Plants, evolution of, 17
Plasminogen, 524
PNS. See Peripheral nervous system (PNS)
Polio (acute anterior poliomyelitis), 549
Polygraph, 147–148, 149f
Polysynaptic reflexes, 263–264
Pons, 90, 90, 90f
Pontine nucleus, 282, 282
Pontine tegmental reticular nucleus, 283f
Population EPSP, 439, 439
Positive reinforcement, and drug 
­addiction, 616–620
Positive symptoms of schizophrenia, 554, 
554–555, 555t, 559
drugs producing, 557–558
Positron emission tomography (PET), 150, 
150–151, 159f
Posterior, 68, 68, 68f
Posterior language area, 489, 489f
Posterior parietal cortex, 189, 189, 189f
anatomy of, 201–202, 201f
Posterior pituitary gland, 88, 88, 88f
Postganglionic neurons, 96, 96
Post-partum depression, 578
Postsynaptic membrane, 52, 52–53, 53f
Postsynaptic potential(s), 51, 51, 57–60, 61f
effects of, 60
excitatory, 57, 61f
inhibitory, 57–58, 61f
Postsynaptic receptor, 56, 56
drugs affecting, 107f
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 606, 
606–609
Posture, control of
reflex, 261, 262f
reticular formation and, 285
Potassium channels, 57, 58f
Potassium ions (K+), 45–46, 46f
Potential(s)
electrical. See Electrical potentials
receptor, 166
Potentiation, long-term. See Long-term 
potentiation
PPA. See Parahippocampal place area (PPA)
Prader-Willi syndrome, 407
Predation, 365, 365
neural control of, 365, 366f
Prefrontal cortex, 84, 84
in addiction, 619, 621
in autistic disorder, 600, 601
damage to, 369–370
effects of, 565–568
in depression, 576–577
emotional recognition and, 378–381
hypoactivity of, 565–566
and impulsivity, 619
medial
cocaine and, 622
cocaine intake and, 622f
moral judgments and, 369–370
in posttraumatic stress disorder, 608, 609f
in reinforcement, 458
in short-term memory, 451, 452
Prefrontal lobotomy, 585
Preganglionic neurons, 96, 96
Pregnancy
complications of, schizophrenia and, 
561–562
substance abuse in, schizophrenia and, 561
Premotor cortex, 265f, 266, 266, 272–273, 
455f. See also Motor association cortex
and learning, 454
major connections of, 537f
and movement, 266
rubber hand illusion and, 8
ventral, writing and, 511, 511f
Prenatal stress, 604–605
Preoptic area
medial. See Medial preoptic area (MPA)
role in sleep, 309, 309f
ventrolateral, 309
Preoptic nucleus, median, 398f, 401, 401–402
Presenilin, 542, 542–543
Pressure, sensitivity to, 232, 233
Prestriate cortex. See Extrastriate cortex
Pre–supplementary motor area (pre-SMA), 
271–272
Presynaptic facilitation, 61, 61
Presynaptic heteroreceptors, 108, 108, 109f
effects of drugs on, 109f
Presynaptic inhibition, 61, 61
Presynaptic membrane, 52, 52, 53f
fusion of synaptic vesicles with, 56–57, 56f

	
Subject Index	
739
Primary auditory cortex, 80, 80, 82f
and basilar membrane, 213, 215
and pattern recognition, 223
regions of, 215–216, 216f
Primary colors, 176
Primary gustatory cortex, 246–247, 247f
Primary motor cortex, 13, 81, 81, 82f, 
265–266, 265f, 455f
body parts controlled by, 265f
major connections of, 537f
and primary somatosensory cortex, 266
seizure and, 521, 521f
stimulation of, 266f
Primary sex characteristics, 328
Primary somatosensory cortex, 80, 80, 82f
major connections of, 537f
and pain perception, 238, 238f
and primary motor cortex, 266
Primary visual cortex, 80, 80, 82f, 172, 
173f, 449, 450f. See also Striate cortex
Primary visual pathway, 173f
Primates, evolution of, 17–21, 19f
Prion(s), 532, 532, 544
and memory, 532
Prion protein diseases, 531–533, 532f, 533f
Proceptivity, 334
Progenitor cells, 76, 76, 78, 79
Progesterone, 330t, 332, 332
and female sexual behavior, 334, 348–349
and maternal behavior, 354, 355f
Progesterone receptors, estrogen priming 
and, 348, 350f
Projection fibers, 86, 86
Prokineticin 2, 317
Prolactin, 88, 330t, 354
and maternal behavior, 354, 355f
and paternal behavior, 357
Proprioception, 231, 231
Prosody, 481, 496, 496–497, 497f
Prosopagnosia, 193, 193–194
phonagnosia and, 497
visual object agnosia without, 193, 194f
Prostate, 326f
Protanopia, 177, 177–178
Proteasomes, 534, 534
Protein(s)
in cytoskeleton, 35
enzymes, 32–33
in membrane of neuron, 32–33
neural adhesion, 529
photosensitive, 153–154, 153f
synthesis of, 32–33, 33f
and long-term potentiation, 446
tau, 541, 543
Prozac. See Fluoxetine
Pruritus, 235
Pseudopodia, 36
Pseudorabies virus, 141, 141
Psychic seizure, 520t
Psychobiology, 24
Psychological stress, colds and, 611–612, 611f
Psychoneuroimmunology, 609, 609–612
Psychopharmacology, 99–132, 101. See also 
Drug(s)
Psychosis. See also Schizophrenia
and marijuana, 635
Puberty, 328–330
schizophrenia onset during, 568
Punishing stimuli, 437, 437
Punishment, vs. negative reinforcement, 620
Pupil, 168, 168f
Pure alexia, 501, 501–503, 502f, 514t
in multiple sclerosis, 502, 502f
Pure word deafness, 378, 486, 486–488, 500t
case example of, 488
lesions causing, 486, 486f, 487, 487f
Pursuit movement, of eyes, 168, 168
Putamen, 86, 277, 278, 278, 279f, 454, 455f
in autistic disorder, 601
degeneration of, 280–281
in drug addiction, 618
in Huntington’s disease, 538
major connections of, 537f
PVN. See Paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of 
hypothalamus
Pylorus, 407–408
Pyramidal cells
dendritic spikes in, 442, 443f
spatial receptive fields and, 470–471, 472
Pyramidal tracts, 267, 267
Pyridoxine dependency, 530, 530
PYY. See Peptide YY3-36 (PYY)
Quadrigrams, 507
Rabies, 549, 549
Radial glia, 77, 77, 77f
Radiation treatment, of tumors, 518
Radio frequency (RF) lesion, 132, 133f
Raphe nuclei, 119, 120f, 306, 306–307
serotonergic neurons of, 306–307
and REM sleep, 307f
Rapid eye movement. See REM sleep
Rate coding, of pitch, 218, 218
Rate law, 49, 49, 50f
Reaching and grasping, 275–276
Reading
in aphasia, 500
audition and, 505–506, 506f
phonetic, 503, 503, 504–505, 505f
whole-word, 503, 503, 504–505, 505f
Reading comprehension
aphasia and, 500
audition and, 505–506, 506f
disorders of, 503–510. See also Dyslexia
processes involved in, 502–503, 503f
pure alexia, 502f
sounding out in, 503, 503f
two routes for, 10
word recognition in, 503, 503f
Reading disorders, 500–510, 514t
developmental dyslexias and, 509–510
Rebound phenomenon, 301, 301
after REM sleep deprivation, 301
Receptive aphasia, 486
Receptive fields, 174
spatial, pyramidal cells and, 470–471, 472
of visual system neurons, 174, 174f
color-sensitive ganglion cells, 179f
Receptivity, 334
Receptor(s), 52, 63
activation of, 56–57, 56f
binding site of, 52
drug effects on, 108–110, 109f
for hormones, 63
ionotropic, 56, 56f
localization in brain, 157–158, 158f
metabotropic, 57, 57f
for osmometric thirst, 398–399, 399f
postsynaptic, 56
sensory, 165–166
gustatory, 246–247
olfactory, 249–251, 250f
stretch, 258–259, 261
thermal, 234t
for volumetric thirst, 400
Receptor blocker, 108, 108
Receptor potentials, 166, 166
Reconsolidation, memory, 474, 474–475, 
474f, 475f
Red nucleus, 89, 89, 90f, 284f, 293f
5α Reductase, 327
Reduction, 10, 10
Reflex(es), 11, 11, 11f, 261–264
clasp-knife, 264
monosynaptic stretch, 261, 262f
patellar, 261
polysynaptic, 263–264
vestibulo-ocular, 230
withdrawal, 42, 42f
Refractory ion channels, 48
Refractory period, 333, 333
hormonal control of, 333
Regulatory mechanisms, example of, 395f
Reinforcement, 455–458
conditioned, 457–458
endogenous opioids and, 625
immediacy of, importance of, 617
negative, and drug addiction, 620–621
neural circuits involved in, 455–458
positive, and drug addiction, 616–620
synaptic strengthening in, 458
Reinforcing stimuli, 437, 437
detecting, 457–458
Reinstatement model, craving and, 621, 621f
Relapse, drug abuse and, 621–623
Relational learning, 438, 469–477
hippocampus and, 469–476
in laboratory animals, 469–476
Release zone, of synapse, 53, 53
REM sleep, 133, 291f, 292, 292–293
amount per night, 292, 292f
and brain development, 301–302
in depression, 578–579, 579f
effect of serotonergic and noradrenergic 
neurons on, 147
eye movements during, 293
functions of, 301–302
and learning, 302–303, 302f
mental activity during, 293
muscular paralysis during, 292, 313, 2991
neural control of, 311–314, 313f
principle characteristics of, 293t
problems associated with, 297
and slow-wave sleep, relationship 
between, 305–306, 307f
REM sleep behavior disorder, 297, 297
REM sleep deprivation, 301–302
in depression, 578–579, 579–580, 579f
REM-ON cell, 311–312
firing potential of, 311f
Renin, 400, 400
food ingestion and secretion of, 400
Renin-angiotensin system, 400, 401f
Reproductive behavior, 324–357
effect of pheromones on, 335–338
hormonal control of, 331–346
Reptiles, 17
Research, 130–163
animal, ethical issues in, 21–23
careers in, 24
genetic methods, 160–162, 160t, 163t
goals of, 11

740	
Subject Index
Research (continued )
lesion method (experimental ablation), 
132–145, 145t–146t
neurochemical methods, 156–160, 160t
recording and stimulating of neural 
activity, 146–155, 155t–156t
Reserpine, 116, 116
effect on dopaminergic synapses, 127t
effect on noradrenergic synapses, 128t
effect on serotonergic synapses, 128t
Response strategy, spatial memory and, 
468–469, 469f
Resting potential, 44, 44
Resting tremor, 280, 534
Reticular formation, 89, 89, 90f, 268
motor functions of, 285
Reticulospinal tract, 268, 268, 269f, 270t
Retina, 168, 168, 168f
center of, receptive field in, 174, 174f
and circadian rhythms, 316
coding of visual information in, 174–180
color, 178–179, 179f
light and dark, 174–175, 175f, 176f
layers of, 169, 170f
melanopsin-containing cells in, 317f
neural circuitry in, 170f, 171f, 173
periphery of, receptive field in, 174, 174f
Retinal, 170, 170
Retinal disparity, 184, 184
Retinitis pigmentosa, 154
Retinohypothalamic pathway, 316
Retrograde, 35
Retrograde amnesia, 459, 459, 460f
declarative memory and, 466–467
hippocampal damage and, 466, 466f
Retrograde axoplasmic transport, 35
Retrograde labeling method, 141,  
141–142, 142f
Rett’s disorder, 593
Reuptake, 58, 58, 59f
drug effects on, 107f, 110
Reversible brain lesions, 134
RF (radio frequency) lesion, 132, 133f
Rh incompatibility, and risk  
of schizophrenia, 562
Rhodopsin, 170, 170
Ribonucleic acid (RNA). See Messenger 
RNA (mRNA); Noncoding RNA 
(ncRNA); RNA editing
Ribosomes, 32, 32, 34
Riluzole, 545–546
Rimonabant, 125, 125, 128t
for smoking cessation, 629, 634, 640
for weight loss, 426
Risk-taking behavior, serotonin and, 
366–367, 366f
Ritalin. See Methylphenidate (Ritalin)
RNA editing, in amyotrophic lateral 
­sclerosis, 545
Ro15-4513, 633, 633f
Rods, 168, 168, 169t, 170f
RORA gene, in depression, 571
Rostral, 68, 68, 68f
Round window, 210, 210, 210f
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, 425, 425f, 426f
Rubber hand illusion, 8, 8f
Rubella, prenatal, 523
autism and, 595
Rubrospinal tract, 268, 268, 269f, 270t
Ruffini corpuscles, 231, 231–232, 232f, 232t
Saccadic movements, of eyes, 167, 167
Saccule, 228, 228, 228f, 229f
Sacral vertebrae, 91, 91f
SAD. See Seasonal affective disorder (SAD)
Sagittal sections, 69, 69, 69f
Salt, craving for, 401
Salt appetite, hypovolemia and, 398
Saltatory conduction, 50, 50, 50f
Saltiness
receptors for, 243
transduction of, 247f
Satiety, 395, 395, 395f
adenosine and, 311f
adipose tissue and, 412–413
eating, 410–413
force feeding effects and, 412, 412f
gastric factors for, 410
head factors for, 410
insulin and, 412
intestinal factors for, 410–411
liver factors for, 411–412
long-term, 412–413, 412f
orexigenic neurons and, 311, 311f
Saturation, 167, 167
SC (subcutaneous) injection, 102, 102
Scanning electron microscope, 137, 137
Scent-tacking behavior, 248, 249f
Schizophrenia, 554, 554–569
age of onset of, 564, 564f
brain damage in, 559–564
causes of, 560–564
evidence for, 559f
and cannabis use, 635
cognitive symptoms of, 554, 555, 555t
comorbidity in, 622
dopamine hypothesis of, 117, 556–558
environmental factors and risk for, 560–561
epidemiology of, 560–561
gray matter volume in, comorbidity and, 
622, 623f
heritability of, 555–556
incidence of, seasonality effect in,  
560–561, 560f
influenza and, 560
long-term drug treatment of, conse-
quences of, 557–558
negative symptoms of, 554–555, 555t, 559
PCP abuse and, 565–566
as neurological disorder, 559–568
obstetric complications and, 561–562
overview of, 554–555
positive symptoms of, 554–555, 555t, 
559, 627
drugs producing, 557–558
relation with negative symptoms, 565–567
prenatal factors in, 561–562
seasonality effect in, 560, 560
smoking and, 561, 622, 623f
susceptibility hypothesis of, 555, 556f
viral hypothesis of, 560–561
Schwann cells, 38f, 39, 39
Sclera, 167, 168f
Sclerotic plaques, 546
SCN. See Suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) 
of hypothalamus
Scrapie, 531–533, 533f
Scratching, itch sensation and, 235
SDN (sexually dimorphic nucleus), 347, 347
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD), 580, 
580–582
phase delay and advance in, 581, 581f
Seasonality effect
depression and, 571
schizophrenia and, 560–561, 560f, 571
Second messengers, 57, 57
Secondary sex characteristics, 328
Secretases, 541, 541, 542f
Seizure(s), 122. See also Epilepsy
alcohol withdrawal and, 632
causes of, 522
complex partial, 520
generalized, 520
partial, 520
primary motor cortex and, 521, 521f
simple partial, 520
stages of, 521
surgery for, 522
treatment of, 522
Seizure disorders, 519, 519–522
classification of, 520, 520t
treatment of, 522
Selective advantage, 16, 16–17
Selye, Hans, 603
Semantic agraphia, 513
Semantic dementia, 467, 467
symptoms of, 467–468
vs. anterograde amnesia, 468
Semantic memories, 467–468, vs. episodic 
memories
Semicircular canals, 228, 228, 228f
Seminal vesicles, 326f
Sensitization, 104
drug, 104, 105
early androgenization and, 372
Sensory association cortex, 82, 82, 83f
columnar arrangement of, 235–236
damage to, 82, 236–237
in short-term memory, 451
Sensory information, crossed brain 
­representation of, 6
Sensory neurons, 28, 28
Sensory processing, visual and auditory, 
223–224, 223f
Sensory receptors, 165, 165–166
Sensory seizure, 520t
Sensory transduction, 166, 166
Serial functions, of left hemisphere, 84
Serial reaction time task, 461–462, 462f
Serotonergic neurons, 120, 120f
and arousal, 307, 307f
drugs affecting, 119–120
functions of, 306–307
and REM sleep, 147, 307, 307f
Serotonin (5-HT), 119, 119–120
and aggression, 365–371
in animals, 365–366
in humans, 366–371
and arousal, 306–307
biosynthesis of, 119, 119f
in depression, 575–576
effects of, 111, 306–307
risk-taking behavior and, 366–367, 366f
and sleep, 307
Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitors (SNRIs), 572, 572
effects of, 575
Serotonin promoter, in depression, 575–576
Serotonin transporter
in depression, 575–576, 576f
promoter region of, 575–576

	
Subject Index	
741
Set point, 395, 395
Sex chromosomes, 325, 325
Sex hormones. See also specific hormones
activational effects on sexual behavior, 
338–340
classification of, 330t
and gender development, 326–328, 329f
and maternal behavior, 353–354, 355f, 356f
organizational effects on sexual behavior, 
334, 335f
and reproductive behavior, 331–346
and sexual maturation, 328–330
and sexual orientation, 340–346
Sex organs
development of, 325–328
external, 328, 328f
internal, 326–328, 326f
hormonal control of, 329f
Sexual behavior
analgesia and, 241
effect of androgens on, 334, 335f
effect of pheromones on, 335–338
female
hormonal control of, 338–339
during menstrual cycle, 338–339
neural control of, 350f
hormonal control of, 331–346
human, 338–340
male
hormonal control of, 339–340
neural control of, 349f
neural control of, 346–352
pair bonding and, 350–351
Sexual changes, during REM sleep, 292–293
Sexual development, 325–331
Sexual dimorphism, of brain, 342–344
Sexual identity, 343
Sexual maturation, 328–330, 329f
Sexual orientation, 340–345
brain and, 342–344
heredity and, 344–345
prenatal androgens and, 340–342
Sexually dimorphic behavior, 325, 325
Sexually dimorphic nucleus (SDN), 347, 347
SFO (subfornical organ), 398, 398–399, 
398f, 401–402
Sham lesions, 133, 133–134
Sharp-wave-ripple complexes (SWRs), 473, 
473–474
Shift work, 320
Short-term memory, 451, 451–452
conversion into long-term memory, 
460–461, 461f
perceptual, 451–452
Sibutramine, for weight loss, 426
Sign blindness, 503
Sign language, 494–496, 496f
inability to comprehend, 503
Sildenafil, 126, 128t
Simple cells, 182, 182, 182f
Simple partial seizures, 520, 520, 520t
Simulated emotions, feedback from, 390–391
Simulationist hypothesis, 383
Sine-wave gratings, 182, 182, 182f
Single-unit recording, 147, 147
Sirtuins, 637
Sites of action, drug, 101, 101, 106–110, 
109f
affinities for, 104
multiple, 105
Skeletal muscles, 256, 256–260
anatomy of, 257–258, 257f
Skin
anatomy of, 231–232, 232f
mechanoreceptors in, 232, 232t
Skull, neoteny and, 20–21, 21f
SLD (sublaterodorsal nucleus), in REM 
sleep, 312, 312
Sleep, 288–321
brain areas in, 89, 90
chemical control of, 304–305
in depression, 578–580, 579f, 580f
depression and, 578–580, 579f, 580f
disorders of, 294–298
and eating, 416
effects of exercise on, 301
effects of mental activity on, 301
functions of, 299–303
melatonin and, 581, 581f
mental activity during, 293
neural control of, 308–314
allostatic, 308, 311
circadian, 308, 311, 315–319
homeostatic, 308, 311, 316
physiological and behavioral description 
of, 289–293
REM. See REM sleep
slow-wave. See Slow-wave sleep
stages of, 290–293, 291f, 292f
temperature and, 319
Sleep apnea, 295, 295
Sleep attack, 295, 295
Sleep deprivation, 295, 299–301
animal studies, 300–301
in depression, 578–580, 579f, 580f
human studies, 299–300
intermittent, 580
partial, 580
REM, 301–302, 578–579, 579f
slow-wave, 579–580, 579f
total, 580, 580f
Sleep paralysis, 295, 295–296
Sleep phase syndrome
advanced, 319
delayed, 319
Sleep spindles, 290, 291f
Sleeping medications, 294–295
Sleep-related eating disorder, 298, 298
Sleep-waking cycle
acetylcholine and, 305f
flip-flop circuitry and, 309–314, 309f, 312f
Sleep-walking (somnambulism), 297–298
Slow-wave sleep, 291, 291
amount per night, 292f, 305
in depression, 579–580, 579f
effects of exercise on, 301
effects of mental activity on, 301
exercise and, 301
functions of, 299–301
and learning, 302–303, 303f
mental activity during, 293
neural control of, 308–311
principle characteristics of, 293t
problems associated with, 297–298
and REM sleep, relationship between, 
305–306, 307f
Slow-wave sleep deprivation, for 
­depression, 579–580, 579f
SMA. See Supplementary motor area (SMA)
Small intestine, satiety receptors in, 410–411
Smile, muscle activation and, 384–385
Smoking. See also Nicotine
heritability of, 637f
in pregnancy, schizophrenia and, 561
and schizophrenia, 622, 623f
treatment for, 639–640, 640f
Smoking cessation, 629–631
deterrents to, 630–631
and insula damage correlation, 630, 630f
treatment for, 639–640, 640f
Smooth muscle, 94
SNRIs. See Serotonin and norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs)
Social anxiety disorder, 586, 586–588
treatment of, 588f
Social norms, violation of, humor and, 
386, 386f
Social stress, and cocaine intake, 622–623, 623f
SOD1 (superoxide dismutase 1), 545
Sodium
in cell death, 524
in fluid balance, 400
Sodium channels, 57, 58f
and taste perception, 244–245
Sodium ions (Na+), 45–46, 46f
Sodium-potassium pump, 46, 47f
Sodium-potassium transporters, 46, 46, 47f
importance of, 49
location of, 50
during stroke, 524
Solitary tract, nucleus of. See Nucleus of 
the solitary tract
Soluble gases, as neurotransmitters, 126
Solutes, 397
Soma, 29, 29, 30f
synapse on, 31f
Somatic nervous system, 94, 94, 98t
Somatosensation, 166, 231–243
neural pathways for, 235–237, 236f
perception of cutaneous stimulation, 
232–235
skin anatomy, 231–232, 232f
stimuli for, 231
Somatosensory association cortex, 82, 83f
damage to, 82, 236–237
Somatosensory cortex. See Primary somato-
sensory cortex; Somatosensory associa-
tion cortex
Somatotopic organization, 265, 265
Somatotropic (growth) hormone, 88
Somnambulism (sleep-walking), 297–298
Sound, perceptual dimensions of, 209, 209f
Sound waves, 209, 209f
analyzing, 218–219, 219f
arrival times of, 219–220
localization by means of, 219–221
responses to, 210, 212f
Sourness
receptors for, 243, 245f
transduction of, 245, 247f
Spatial frequency, 182–184, 183, 183f
Spatial learning, 438
hippocampus and, 469–470
prion role in, 532
Spatial location, perception of
auditory system and, 219–223
visual association cortex and, 201–203
Spatial memory, 468–469
Spatial receptive fields, pyramidal cells 
and, 470–471, 472

742	
Subject Index
Spatial strategy, memory and, 468–469, 469f
Specific serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs), 572, 572
effects of, 575
Speech, 480–500. See also Language
apraxia of, 484
articulation of, control of, 484, 484f
brain lateralization in, 6, 13, 13f, 480–481
brain mechanisms involved in, 480–500
comprehension of, 487f
disorders of, 485–494
feedback in, 487–488
mirror neurons in, 487–488
vs. recognition, 489
production of, 480–485, 484f
disorders of, 481–485
self-monitoring in, 488
prosody of, 481, 496–497, 497f
and signing, 496f
Speech sounds, analysis of, 486–488
Spelling, 511–513
irregular, developmental dyslexias and, 510
Spelling dyslexia, 514t
Sperm, 324–325
Spinal accessory nerve, 95f
Spinal cord, 91, 91–92, 91f
and control of sexual responses, 346
Spinal ejaculation generator, 346, 348
Spinal foramens, 91, 91f
Spinal nerves, 71f, 92, 92
Spinal roots, 91, 91
Split brain, 5–6
and olfaction, 6, 7f
Split-brain operation, 5, 5, 5f
Spongiform encephalopathies, 
­transmissible, 531, 531–533
Sporadic disease, 532, 532
Square-wave gratings, 182, 182f
Squid giant axon, 43
SQUIDS (superconducting quantum 
­interference devices), 149
S-R (stimulus-response) learning, 436, 436, 
438f
Sry gene, 325, 325
SSRIs. See Specific serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs)
Staining, 136–137, 137f
Stanislavsky, Constantin, 384
Stapes, 209, 209, 210f
Status epilepticus, 521, 521
Stem cell transplant, for multiple sclerosis, 
546–547
Stent placement, 525–526, 525f
Stereopsis (stereoscopic vision), 79, 184
Stereotaxic apparatus, 135, 135, 135f
Stereotaxic atlas, 134, 134–135, 135f
Stereotaxic surgery, 134, 134–135
on human patient, 136f
Stereotyped behavior, in autism, 597, 597f
Steroid psychosis, 603
Steroids, 63, 63, 63f
STG (superior temporal gyrus), and 
speech comprehension, 486
Stimuli, learning to recognize, 449–451
Stimulus-response (S-R) learning, 436, 436, 
438f
Stomach, and satiety signals, 404, 410
Stress, 601, 601. See also Posttraumatic 
stress disorder
and brain damage, 604–606, 605f, 606f
caretaker, 604
central nucleus of amygdala and, 362
depression and, 575–576, 576f
effect on brain, 604–606
effect on immune function, 609–612, 611f
effects on immune system, 608–612
and hypertension, 603, 603f
and infectious diseases, 611–612, 611f
long-term, health effects of, 603–604, 
605f, 606f
prenatal, 604–605, 605f, 606f
and schizophrenia, 561–562
and wound healing, 603f, 604
Stress disorders, 601–612
Stress hormones, 602
secretion of, 602–603, 604f
Stress response, 601, 601
physiology of, 602–603
Stretch receptors, 258–259, 261
Stretch reflex, monosynaptic, 261, 261, 262f
role in postural control, 261, 262f
Striate cortex, 172, 172, 173f, 188f. See also 
Primary visual cortex
anatomy of, 181, 181f
and color sensitivity, 184–185
and depth perception, 184
modular organization of, 185–186
and orientation sensitivity, 181–182, 
182f, 185
and spatial frequency, 182–184
Striated muscle, 258, 258. See also Skeletal 
muscles
Stripes, of CO-rich neurons, 185, 185f, 189f
Stroke. See Cerebrovascular accident
Structure from motion, perception of, 
199–200
Strychnine, 123, 123, 128t
STS. See Superior temporal sulcus (STS)
Studying, strategies for, 24–26
Stuttering, 497–498, 498f
Subarachnoid space, 70, 70, 71f, 94f
Subcortical region, 80, 80
Subcutaneous (SC) injection, 102, 102
Subfornical organ (SFO), 398, 398–399, 
398f, 401–402
Subgenual anterior cingulate cortex, 577f
deep brain stimulation of, 573, 576–577, 
577f
in depression, 576–577, 576f, 577f, 578f
Sublaterodorsal nucleus (SLD), in REM 
sleep, 312, 312
Sublingual administration, 102, 102
Submissive behaviors, 365, 365
Substance abuse, in pregnancy,  
schizophrenia and, 561
Substantia nigra, 89, 89, 90f, 278, 456f
and Parkinson’s disease, 534f
in Parkinson’s disease, 534
Subthalamic nucleus
in deep brain stimulation, 537–538
major connections of, 537f
in Parkinson’s disease, 538
Subventricular zone, 78
Suction embolectomy, 524
Suicide
depression and, 570
serotonin and, 576, 576f
Sulcus (sulci), 80, 80, 81f
in Alzheimer’s disease, 540, 541f
anterior, 206
in autism, 595, 596f
central, 82f
intraparietal, spatial perception and, 201
Superconducting quantum interference 
devices (SQUIDS), 149
Superior (term), 69
Superior colliculi, 88, 88, 90f
Superior longitudinal fasciculus, in 
­short-term memory, 452
Superior olivary complex, 214, 214–215, 215f
Superior sagittal sinus, 72f, 73, 73
Superior temporal gyrus (STG), and 
speech comprehension, 486
Superior temporal sulcus (STS)
in autism, 595, 596f
perception of direction of gaze and, 
381–382
Superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), 545
Supersensitivity, 558, 558
Supplementary motor area (SMA), 265f, 
266, 266, 269–272, 455f
behavioral experiment and, 269–272, 271f
and learning, 454
major connections of, 537f
in movement, 266
neuron firing patterns in, 271, 271f
Supporting cells, 35–39
Suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN)  
of hypothalamus, 316, 316f
activity cycles of neurons in, 318–319, 318f
biological clock in, nature of, 318–319
circadian rhythms in, 316–319, 318f, 319f
and seasonal rhythms, 319–320
sexual dimorphism and, 343
synaptic connections with retina, 316
Surface dyslexia, 503, 503, 504f, 514t
VWFa lesion causing, 508
Surgery
for atherosclerotic plaque, 525–526, 525f
for obesity, 425, 425f, 426f
for seizure disorder, 522
stereotaxic, 134–135
Sutures, 134
Sweetness
receptors for, 243
transduction of, 245–246, 246f, 247f
Symmetrical division, 76, 76
Sympathetic division, of ANS, 95, 95–96, 97f
Sympathetic ganglia, 96, 96, 97f
Sympathetic ganglion chain, 96, 96
Synapse(s), 29, 29
axoaxonic, 52, 52f
axodendritic, 52, 52f
axosomatic, 52, 52f
dendrodendritic, 61–62
effects of drugs on, 106–110, 107f
electrical, 62f, 624
excitatory, 41, 42f, 61f
inhibitory, 41–43, 42f, 61f
integration of excitatory and inhibitory, 
60, 61f
locations of, 31, 31f
serotonergic, drugs affecting, 119–120
structure of, 52–53, 52f, 53f
Synapsids, 17, 18f
Synaptic cleft, 52, 52, 53f
Synaptic plasticity
and learning, 439–448
mechanisms of, 443–447, 444f
Synaptic strengthening
in addiction, 618
postsynaptic, 444, 444f
in reinforcement, 458, 618

	
Subject Index	
743
Synaptic transmission, 51
Synaptic vesicles, 52, 52–53, 53f
docking of, 54, 54f
fusion with presynaptic membrane, 
56–57, 56f
norepinephrine synthesis in, 118
Synchrony, neural, 290
Synthesis, in right hemisphere, 84
α-Synuclein, 534, 534, 536
System variable, 395, 395
Tactile agnosia, 236, 237f
Tactile apraxia, 237
Tardive dyskinesia, 558, 558
Target cells, 63, 63
Targeted mutations, 161, 161–162
Taste
neural coding of, 246–247
qualities of, 243
transduction of, 244–246, 246f, 247f
Taste buds, 244, 244f
Tau protein, 541, 541, 543
Tay-Sachs disease, 530, 530
TBI (traumatic brain injury), 526–527
TE area, 192
Tectoral membrane, 210, 210, 211f
Tectospinal tract, 268, 268, 269f, 270t
Tectum, 88, 88–89
Tegmentum, 89, 89
Telencephalon, 75, 76f, 76t, 80–86
Temperature
sensation of, 234
and sleep, 319
Temporal lobe, 81, 81–82, 83f
damage to, and anterograde amnesia, 460
seizure impact on, 521
Tendon receptors, responses of, 260f
Tendons, 256
TEO area, 191, 192
Terminal buttons (terminals), 30–31, 31
autoreceptors on, 60–61
neurotransmitter release and, 62f
structure of, 52f, 53f
Testes, 325, 326f
hormones secreted by, 327
Testosterone, 327, 327
and aggression, 371–373, 372f
and autism, 597
effects of, 330t
and female sexual behavior, 340
levels of, winning or losing and, 374
and male sexual behavior, 333, 339–340
organizational effects of, 371–373, 372f
on sexual behavior, 334, 335f
Tetanus (lockjaw), 123
Tetrahydrocannibinal (THC), 124,  
124–125, 128t, 633–635, 635f
Tetrodotoxin (TTX), 443
Thalamus, 85f, 86, 86–87, 86f
nuclei of, 86–87, 278, 279f
ventral anterior nucleus of, 278, 279f
ventrolateral nucleus of, 278, 279f
Thalidomide, autism and, 595
THC (tetrahydrocannibinal), 124,  
124–125, 128t, 633–635, 635f
Theory of mind, autism and, 594, 595, 596f
Therapeutic index, 103, 103–104
Therapsids, 17, 18f
Thermal receptors, mammalian, 234t
Theta activity, during sleep, 290, 290, 291f
Third ventricle, 72, 72–73, 72f
Thirst, 397–402
definition of, 397
food-related, 398
neural control of, 401–402
osmometric, 397–400
volumetric, 400–401
Thoracic vertebrae, 91, 91f
Thoracolumbar system. See Sympathetic 
division, of ANS
Threat behaviors, 365, 365
Threshold of excitation, 44, 44
Thrombus, 523, 523, 523f
stroke and, 522–526
Tic disorders, 589–590
Timbre, 209, 209, 209f
perception of, 218–219
sound localization by means of, 221–223, 
222f
Tip links, 212, 212, 214f
ion channels at, 212–213, 214f
movement of cilia and, 212
regulation of tension of, 212–213, 214f
Tip of tongue (TOT) phenomenon, 485
T-lymphocytes, 610, 610, 610f
TMS. See Transcranial magnetic stimulation 
(TMS)
Tolerance, drug, 104, 104–105
negative reinforcement and, 620
neural basis of, 625–626
Tongue, anatomy of, 244, 244f
Tonic phase, 521, 521
Tonic-clonic seizure, 520t
Tonicity, 396
Tonotopic representation, 215, 215
Topical administration, 102, 102
TOT (“tip of tongue”) phenomenon, 485
Total sleep deprivation, for depression, 
580, 580f
Touch, 232–233
Tourette’s syndrome, 589, 589–590
Toxic chemicals, in developmental 
­disorders, 528
Toxic gain of function mutation, 534, 534
Toy preference
in girls with CAH, 341
sex-typical, 341f
tPA (tissue plasminogen activator), 524
Tranquilizers, therapeutic index for, 104
Transcortical sensory aphasia, 489, 489, 
489f, 500t
vs. direct dyslexia, 509
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), 
154, 154, 154f, 199, 573
for addiction, 639
for posttraumatic stress disorder, 608–609
short-term memory and, 451
Transducin, 245
Transduction
of auditory information, 211–213, 214f
of gustatory information, 244–246, 247f
sensory, 166
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, 
531, 531–533
Transmission electron microscope, 137, 137
Transmitter substance.  
See Neurotransmitter(s)
Transneuronal tracing methods, 141–142
Transplant, fetal tissue, 536
Transplantation
disease transmission via, 532
stem cell, for multiple sclerosis, 546–547
Transsexuals, 343
Traumatic brain injury (TBI), 526–527
in Alzheimer’s disease, 543, 544
Traumatic events, effects of exposure to, 
606–609
Treatment-resistant depression, 572, 
572–573
electrical brain stimulation for, 573
Trichotillomania, 591
Trichromatic theory, of color vision, 176
Tricyclic antidepressants, 571, 571–572
Trigeminal facial motor nuclei,  
and emotional response, 362f
Trigeminal nerve, 95f, 235
Trigeminal nerve ganglia, 549
Triglycerides (fats), 404, 404
Tritanopia, 178, 178
Trochlear nerve, 95f
TRP thermoreceptor channels, 234, 234t
TRPM8 receptor gene, 234
Tryptophan, 119, 119f
Tryptophan depletion procedure, 575, 575
TTX (tetrodotoxin), 443
Tuberomammillary nucleus, 120
of hypothalamus, 307, 307
Tuberous sclerosis, autism and, 595
Tumor(s), 517, 517–519
benign, 517
encapsulated, 517
growth of, 517–518
malignant, 517
metastasizing, 517
types of, 518t
Tumor initiating cells, 518, 518
Tuning curves, 217–218, 218f
Turner’s syndrome, 328, 328
Twin studies, 161, 344
of addictive disorders, 637
of aggression, 367
of alcoholism, 637
of autistic disorder, 594
of posttraumatic stress, 607, 608f
of schizophrenia, 555, 563, 563f
of seasonal affective disorder, 580
Tympanic membrane, 209, 209, 210f
Tyrosine, 114, 114f
Ubiquitin, 534, 534–535
Umami, 243, 243, 246f, 247
Uncinate nucleus, 343
Unconditioned response (UR), 436, 436
Unconditioned stimulus (US), 436, 436
Unilateral neglect, 6, 6–8, 7f
Unipolar neurons, 30, 30, 30f
Up state, in slow-wave sleep, 291, 291
Upper respiratory infections
psychological stress and, 611–612
stress and, 611–612, 611f
Uterus, 326f
Utricle, 228, 228, 228f, 229f
V1 area, 192
V4 area, 192
and movement perception, 198
neuron response in, 198f
V5 area
location of, 199f
and movement perception, 198
neuron response in, 198f
Vaccines, autism and, 593
Vagina, 326f

744	
Subject Index
Vagus nerve, 94, 94, 95f, 246
dorsal motor nucleus of, and emotional 
response, 362f
Vagus nerve stimulation, for depression, 573
Valium. See Diazepam
Vampire bats, 524
Vandenbergh effect, 335, 335
Varenicline, for smoking cessation, 640, 640f
Variable, system, 395, 395
Varicosities, axonal, 118
Vasopressin, 88
in pair bonding, 351
Ventral, 68, 68, 68f
Ventral anterior nucleus, of thalamus, 278, 
278, 279f
Ventral corticospinal tract, 267, 267, 267f, 
270t
Ventral intraparietal sulcus (LIP), 201, 201f
Ventral roots, 91, 91, 91f
Ventral stream, 189, 189, 189f
Ventral tegmental area (VTA), 455, 456f
and drug addiction, 618, 623
and emotional response, 362f
and maternal behavior, 355, 357f
nicotine receptors in, 628–629
in reinforcement, 455, 457, 458
Ventricles, brain, 11, 72, 72–73, 72f, 76t
development of, 75
in schizophrenic patients, 559–560, 559f, 
563, 563f
Ventricular zone, 76, 76, 79
Ventrolateral nucleus, of thalamus, 87, 87, 
278, 278, 279f
Ventrolateral periaqueductal gray matter 
(vlPAG), in REM sleep, 312, 312
Ventrolateral preoptic area (vlPOA), 309, 309
role in sleep, 309, 309f, 310
Ventromedial group, of descending motor 
tracts, 267, 267, 268, 269f, 270t
Ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH), 350f, 
415f
eating behavior and, 414–420, 415f
receptor localization in brain and, 157–158
role in female sexual behavior, 157–158, 
350f
stimulation experiment, 152
study of, 139–142
Ventromedial nucleus of hypothalamus, 348
role in female sexual behavior, 348–350
Ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC), 
363, 363, 367–371, 367f
damage to, 368, 368f
effects of, 385–386
and emotional reactions, 367–371
Verbal communication, 480–500. See also 
Language; Speech
Verbs, anomia for, 494
Vergence movements, of eyes, 167, 167
Vermis, 282, 282, 283f
Vertebrae, 91, 91f
Vertebral column, 91
Vertebrates, evolution of, 17–21, 18f
Vesalius, Andreas, 3f, On the Workings of the 
Human Body
Vesicles. See Synaptic vesicles
Vestibular ganglion, 230, 230
Vestibular nerve, 228f
Vestibular sacs, 227, 228, 228f
receptive tissue of, 229f
Vestibular system, 228–230
anatomy of, 228–229, 228f
neural pathway of, 229–230
receptor cells of, 229
Vestibulo-ocular reflex, 230
Vestibulospinal tract, 268, 268, 269f, 270t
Vibration, sensation of, 232
VIP (peptide), 124
Viral infections, prenatal exposure to, and 
schizophrenia, 560–561
Vision, 164–206
analysis of visual information, 189f
striate cortex and, 181–182
visual association cortex and, 187–205
anatomy of visual system, 167–169
binocular, 184
coding of light and dark, 174–175
color, 176–180
evolutionary advantage of, 17
striate cortex and, 184–185
visual association cortex and, 190–191
foveal (central), 174, 174f
mammalian system of, 4–5
peripheral, 174, 174f
primitive system of, 4–5
and recognition of emotions, 378–381
stereoscopic, 79, 184
stimulus for, 166–167
Visual agnosia, 192, 192–195
without prosopagnosia, 193, 194f
Visual angle, spatial frequency and, 183, 183f
Visual association cortex, 83f, 187–205, 189f
and color perception, 190–191
damage to, 82, 192–193
dorsal stream of, 189, 189f, 202–203, 
202f, 449, 450f
and form perception, 191–197
and movement perception, 198–201
regions and their functions of, 203t–204t
in short-term memory, 451
and spatial perception, 201–203
two streams of analysis in, 189f
ventral stream of, 189, 189f, 202–203, 
202f, 449, 450f
Visual cortex. See also Primary visual cortex; 
Visual association cortex
major divisions of, 449, 450f
Visual short-term memory, 451–452
Visual stimuli, fMRI study of, 193, 193f
Visual word-form area (VWFA), 505, 
505–508, 505f
effects of lesions in, 508, 508f
evolution of, 508–509
in object recognition, 508–509, 508f, 509f
word recognition in, 506–509, 507f, 508f
Vitreous humor, 168, 168f
vlPAG (ventrolateral periaqueductal gray 
matter), in REM sleep, 312, 312
vlPOA. See Ventrolateral preoptic area 
(vlPOA)
VMH. See Ventromedial hypothalamus 
(VMH)
vmPFC. See Ventromedial prefrontal cortex 
(vmPFC)
Voice recognition, 497
Volitional facial paresis, 385, 385, 385f
Voltage-dependent ion channels, 48, 48
Volumetric thirst, 400, 400, 400–401
Vomeronasal organ, 249, 335, 335–337, 336f
in humans, 337–338
and intermale aggression, 372
Von Békésy, Georg, 210, 216
Von Economo, Constantin, 308–309
VTA. See Ventral tegmental area (VTA)
VWFA. See Visual word-form area (VWFA)
Waking (wakefulness)
EEGs patterns during, 290–292, 291f
neural control of, 305–308
Walker, Mary, 59–60
Warmth, sensation of, 234
Water, body loss of, 397, 397f
Weight. See Body weight
Wernicke’s aphasia, 387, 485–489, 500t
prosody in, 496
reading and writing in, 500
Wernicke’s area, 482f, 485, 485
connection to Broca’s area, 489, 489f, 
492–493
White matter, 80, 81f
and multiple sclerosis, 546
in spinal cord, 91–92
Whitten effect, 335, 335
Whole-word reading, 503, 503
vs. phonetic reading, 504–505, 505f
Wiesel, Torsten, 181
Willis, Thomas, 59
Withdrawal reflex, 42, 42f
Withdrawal symptoms, 105, 105, 620
alcohol and, 632
antagonist-precipitated, 626
caffeine and, 126
as negative reinforcement, 620
neural basis of, 625–626
nicotine and, 629–630
opiates and, 625–626
Wolffian system, 326, 326–327, 326f
Women. See Females
Word(s)
content, 481
function, 481
irregular, developmental dyslexias and, 510
meaning of, 490–491
Word blindness, 501–503
Word recognition
differences in, 507f
in visual word-form area, 506–509, 507f, 
508f
Working memory
in attention deficit/hyperactivity 
­disorder, 599
COMT effect on, 600, 600f
Wound healing, stress and, 604, 604f
Writing
in aphasia, 500
aphasia and, 500
development of, 508–509
processes involved in, 511–512
ventral premotor cortex and, 511f
Writing disorders, 511–513, 512–515, 514t
X chromosomes, 325
XBD173, 587
Y chromosomes, 325
Sry gene on, 325
Yohimbine, and panic attacks, 587
Young, Thomas, 176
Zeitgebers, 315, 315–316, 319
ZIP, in memory, 458

Figure and Table Credits
Chapter 1 p. 8, Figure 1.6: Illustration by Taina Litwak adapted from Science, (2004), 
305, 782–783. Reprinted by permission of Litwak Illustration Studio. p. 17, Figure1.14: 
Adapted from Carroll, R., Vertebrate Paleontology and Evolution. New York: W. H. Freeman, 
1988. p. 19, Figure 1.16: From Human Evolution: An Illustrated Introduction 5th ed. by 
Roger Lewin. Copyright © 2004. Reprinted by permission of Blackwell Publishing 
Ltd. p. 19, Figure 1.17: Illustration, p. 75 by Laurie Grace from “Genes, Peoples, and 
Languages” by L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, Scientific American, November 1991. Copyright © 1991. 
Reprinted by permission of Laurie Grace. p. 20, Figure 1.18: From Human Evolution: An 
Illustrated Introduction 5th ed. by Roger Lewin. Copyright © 2004. Reprinted by permis-
sion of Blackwell Publishing Ltd. p. 21, Figure 1.19: From Human Evolution: An Illustrated 
Introduction 5th ed. by Roger Lewin. Copyright © 2004. Reprinted by permission of 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Chapter 2  p. 33, Figure 2.7: Illustration by Lucy Reading from Scientific American (2004), 
291, 60–67. Copyright © 2004. Reprinted by permission of Lucy Reading for Scientific 
American Magazine.
Chapter 3 p. 77, Figure 3.9: From P. Rakic, Trends in Neurosciences (1995), 18(9), 383–388. 
Reprinted by permission of Elsevier.
Chapter 4 p. 103, Figure 4.1: Adapted from Feldman, R. S., Meyer, J. S., and Quenzer, 
L. F. Principles of Neuropsychopharmacology. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, 1997; 
after Jones, R. T. Nida Research Monographs, 1990, 99, 30–41. p. 112, Figure 4.8: From 
N. J. Woolf, Progress in Neurobiology (1991), 37(6): 475–524. Reprinted by permission 
of Elsevier. p. 116, Figure 4.12: Adapted from “Dopaminergic Systems in the Brain 
and Pituitary” (pp. 11–23=5) by K. Fuxe, L. F. Kalia et al., in Basic and Clinical Aspects 
of Neuroscience: The Dopaminergic System, ed. by E. Fluckinger, E. E. Muller, and M. O. 
Thomas. Copyright © 1985 by Springer Science+Business Media. Reprinted by permis-
sion of Springer. p. 118, Figure 4.15: Adapted from Cotman, C. W. and McGaugh, J. L. 
Behavioral Neuroscience: An Introduction. New York: Academic Press, 1980. p. 120, Figure 
4.17: Adapted from Consolazione, A. and Cuello, A. C. “CNS Serontonin Pathways” in 
Biology of Serotonergic Transmission, edited by N. N. Osborne. Chichester, England: Wiley 
& Sons, 1982. Copyright © 1982. Reprinted by permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
p. 126, Table 4.2: Based on data from Somani and Gupta, 1988.
Chapter 5 p. 135, Figure 5.4: Adapted from Swanson, L. W. Brain Maps: Structure of the 
Rat Brain. New York: Elsevier, 1992. Reprinted by permission of Blackwell Publishing 
Ltd. p. 153, Figure 5.30a: Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature  
(2007), 446: 617–619. Copyright © 2007 by Nature Publishing Group. p. 153, Figure 5.30b 
and 5.30c: Adapted from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature (2007), 446: 633–639. 
Copyright © 2007 by Nature Publishing Group. p. 158, Figure 5.34: Reprinted from  
L. Hernandez, et al., Life Sciences (1986), 39(26), 2629–2637. Copyright © 1986. Reprinted 
by permission of Elsevier.
Chapter 6 p. 170, Figure 6.6: Reprinted from J. E. Dowling, et al., Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London, B, (1966), 166: 80–111. Copyright © 1966. Reprinted by permission of 
Highwire Press. p. 171, Figure 6.8: Adapted from Dowling, J. E., in The Neurosciences: Fourth 
Study Program, edited by F. O. Schmitt and F. G. Worden. Copyright © 1979 by Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. Reprinted by permission of The MIT Press. p. 175, Figure 6.13: 
Adapted from S. W. Kuffler, Cold Spring Harbor Symposium for Quantitative Biology (1952), 17, 
281–192. Copyright 1952. by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. Reprinted by permission 
of Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. p. 177, Figure 6.17: Based on data from Dartnall, 
H. J. A., Bowmaker, J. K., and Mollon, J. D. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B, 1983, 
220, 115–130. p. 181, Figure 6.22: Redrawn from figure 3 in “Orientation Sensitivity” by D. H. 
Hubel & T. N. Wiesel, Journal of Physiology (1959), 148, 574–591. Copyright © 1959. Reprinted 
by permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd. p. 183, Figure 6.26: Adapted from Albrecht 
(1978) and De Valois & De Valois (1988). p. 186, Figure 6.30: Adapted from D. P. Edwards, 
et al., Vision Research (1995), 35(11): 1501–1523. Copyright © 1995. Reprinted by permission 
of Elsevier. p. 189, Figure 6.33: From Sincich & Horton, Annual Review of Neuroscience (2005), 
28: 303–326. Copyright © 2005. Reprinted by permission of Annual Reviews, Inc. p. 194, 
Figure 6.38: Adapted from “Separate Face and Body Selectivity on the Fusiform Gyrus” by R. 
F. Schwarzlose, C. I. Baker, & N. Kanwisher, Journal of Neuroscience (2005), 25, 11055–11059. 
Copyright © 2005 by Society for Neuroscience. Reprinted by permission of Society for 
Neuroscience. p. 195, Figure 6.40: Reprinted from Gauthier & Tarr, Vision Research (1997), 
37(12): 1673–1682. Copyright © 1997 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier.  
p. 198, Figure 6.44: Transient and Sustained Responses in Four Extrastriate Visual Areas of 
the Owl Monkey” by S. Petersen, F. Miezin, and J. Allman, (1988), Experimental Brain Research, 
70, 55–60. Copyright © 1988, Springer. Reprinted by permission of Springer.
Chapter 7 p. 216, Figure 7.11: Adapted from von Bekesky, The Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America (1969), 21(3): 233–245. Copyright © 1969. Reprinted by permission 
of American Institute of Physics. p. 218, Figure 7.13: Adapted by permission from 
Macmillan Publishers Ltd., Nature Reviews Neuroscience (2006), 7: 19–29. Copyright 
© 2006. Reprinted by permission of Nature Publishing Group. p. 222, Figure. 7.17: 
Adapted from “Axonal Delay Lines for Time Measurement in the Owl’s Brainstem” by 
C. E. Carr et al. (1989) Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 85, 8311–8315. 
Copyright © 1989. Reprinted by permission of Professor Catherine Carr, University of 
Maryland. p. 222, Figure 7.18: Adapted from Oertel & Young, Trends in Neurosciences 
(2004), 27(2): 104–110. Copyright © 2004. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. p. 234, 
Figure 7.26: Adapted from A. A. Romanovsky, American Journal of Physiology—-Regulatory, 
Integrative and Comparative Physiology (2007), 292(1): R37–R46. Copyright © 2007. 
Reprinted by permission of The American Physiological Society. p. 245, Figure 7.36: 
Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd., Nature (2006), 442: 934–938. 
Copyright © 2004. Reprinted by permission of Nature Publishing Group. p. 252, Figure 7.43: 
Adapted from Malnic, et al., Cell (1999), 96(5): 713–723. Copyright © 1999 by Elsevier. 
Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. p. 252, Figure 7.44: Adapted from Johnson & Leon, 
Journal of Comparative Neurology (2007), 503: 1–34. Copyright © 2007. Reprinted by per-
mission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. p. 252, Figure 7.45: Adapted with permission from 
Macmillan Publishers Ltd., Nature Neuroscience (2009), 12: 932–938. Copyright © 2009. 
Reprinted by permission of Nature Publishing Group.
Chapter 8 p. 259, Figure 8.3: From “Action Potentials and Contractions of a Muscle 
Fiber” by M. S. Devanandan, et al., Journal of Physiology (1965), 178, 359–367. Copyright 
© 1965. Reprinted by permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd. p. 266, Figure 8.10: 
Reprinted from M. S. A. Graziano et al., Neuron (2007), 56(2): 239–251. Copyright © 
2007 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. p. 271, Figure 8.14: Adapted from 
Chen, Y. C., Thaler, D., Nixon, P. D., et al. Experimental Brain Research, 1995, 102, 461–473. 
p. 278, Figure 8.22: As depicted in Fundamentals of Human Neuropsychology by B. Kolb &  
I. Q. Whishaw. New York: W. H. Freeman, 1980.
Chapter 9 p. 302, Figure 9.8: Adapted with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 
Nature Neuroscience (2003), 6, 697–698. Copyright © 2003. Reprinted by permission of 
Nature Publishing Group. p. 303, Figure 9.9: Adapted from Tucker, et al., Neurobiology 
of Learning and Memory (2006), 86 (2): 241–247. Copyright © 2006. Reprinted by per-
mission of Elsevier. p. 305, Figure 9.11: Adapted from F. Marrosu, et al., Brain Research 
(1995), 671(2): 329–332. Copyright © 1995. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. p. 306, 
Figure 9.12: From “Activity of Norepinephrine-containing Locus Coeruleus Neurons in 
Behaving Rates Anticipates Fluctuations in the Sleep-Waking Cycle” by G. Aston-Jones 
and F. E. Bloom, Journal of Neuroscience (1981), 1, 876–886. Copyright © 1981 by Society 
for Neuroscience. Reprinted by permission of Society for Neuroscience. p. 307, Figure 
9.13: Adapted from Trulson, et al., Brain Research (1979), 163(1): 135–150. Copyright © 
1979. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. p. 308, Figure 9.14: Adapted from Mileykovskiy,  
et al., Neuron (2005), 46(5): 787–798. Copyright © 2005. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. 
p. 310, Figure 9.17: Adapted from Porkka-Heiskanen, et al., Science (1997), 2716(5316): 
1265–1268. Copyright © 1997 by The American Association for the Advancement of 
Science. Reprinted by permission. p. 311, Figure 9.19: Adapted from M. Mansari, et al., 
Experimental Brain Research (1989), 76(3): 519–529. Copyright © 1989 by Springer. 
Reprinted by permission of Springer. p. 313, Figure 9.22: Reprinted from Schwartz, et al., 
Brain (2008), 131(2): 514–522. Copyright © 2008 by Oxford University Press. Reprinted by 
permission of Oxford University Press. p. 320, Figure 9.31: Redrawn as depicted in The Rat 
Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates by G. Paxinos and C. Watson. Sydney: Academic Press, 1982.
Chapter 10 p. 328, Figure 10.3: Adapted from Spaulding, M. H., in Contributions to 
Embryology, Vol. 13. Washington, DC: Carnegie Institute of Washington, 1921. p. 336, 
Figure 10.8: Reprinted from Wysocki, Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews (1979), 3(4): 
301–341. Copyright © 1979. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. p. 336, Figure 10.9: 
Redrawn from Brain Maps: Structure of the Rat Brain by L. W. Swanson. New York: Elsever, 
1992. p. 339, Figure 10.10: Adapted from Wallen, K, Hormones and Behavior, 2001, 40, 339–357. 
After data from Van Goozen et al., 1997. p. 343, Figure 10.12: Reprinted from Roselli,  
et al., Endocrinology (2004), 145, 478–483. Copyright © 2004. Reprinted by permission of 
The Endocrine Society. p. 355, Figure 10.20: From Rosenblatt, et al., Advances in the Study 
of Behavior (1979), 10, 225–311. Copyright © 1979. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier.
Chapter 11 p. 362, Figure 11.2: Adapted from M. Davis, Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 
(1992), 13: 35–41. Copyright © 1992. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. p. 364,  
Figure 11.4: Based on data from Phelps et al., Neuron, 2004, 43, 897–905. p. 370, Table 11.1: 
From Koenigs, et al., 2007. p. 370, Figure 11.9: Data from Koenigs, M., Young, L., 
Adophs, R., et al. Nature, 2007, 446, 908–911. p. 373, Figure 11.12: From “Models of 
Early Hormonal Effects on Intrasex Aggression in Males” by F. S. vom Saal in Hormones 
and Aggressive Behavior ed. by B. B. Svare. Copyright © 1983. Reprinted by permission of 
Springer Science+Business Media B.V. p. 374, Figure 11.13: Based on data from Winslow, 
J. T., and Miczek, J. A., Psychopharmacologia, 1988, 95, 92–98. p. 378, Figure 11.15: Based 
on data from Sauter et al., 2010. p. 382, Figure 11.21: Adapted from Perrett, D. I., et al., 
International Journal of Comparative Physiology (1990), 4, 25–55. Copyright © 1990. Reprinted 
by permission of International Society for Comparative Physiology. p. 386, Figure 11.26: 
Data from Goel, V., and Dolan, R. J. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2007, 19, 1574–1580.
Chapter 12 p. 399, Figure 12.7: Adapted from “Actin Filaments Mediate Mechanical 
Gating during Osmosensory Transduction in Rat Supraoptic Nucleus Neurons” by  
Z. Zhang, N. N. Kindrat, R. Sharif-Naeini, & C. W. Bourque, Journal of Neuroscience (2007), 
27: 4008-4013. Copyright © 2007 by Society for Neuroscience. Reprinted by permission 
of Society for Neuroscience. p. 402, Figure 12.10: Adapted from “Role of Forebrain 
Circumventricular Organs in Body Fluid Balance” by T. N. Thrasher, Acta Physiologica 
Scandinavica (1989), 136, 141–150. Copyright © 1989. Reprinted by permission of 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd. p. 407, Figure 12.13: Adapted from Cummings, et al., Diabetes 
(2001), 50: 1714–1719. Copyright © 2001. Reprinted by permission of American Diabetes 
Association. p. 411, Figure 12.16: Data from Batterham, R. L., Ffytche, D. H. Rosenthal, 
J. M., et al. Nature, 450, 106–109. p. 412, Figure 12.17: Adapted from Wilson, et al., 
American Journal of Physiology—-Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology (1990), 
259 (6): R1148–R1155). Copyright © 1990 by American Physiological Society. Reprinted 
by permission of The American Physiological Society. p. 414, Figure 12.20: Based on 
data from Ritter, S. and Taylor, J. S. American Journal of Physiology, 1990, 258, R1395–1401.  
p. 415, Figure 12.21: Based on Brain Maps: Structure of the Rat Brain by L. W. l Swanson. 
New York: Elsevier, 1992. p. 416, Figure 12.22: From “Chemically Defined Projections 
Linking the Mediobasal Hypothalamus and the Lateral Hypothalamic Area” by C. F. Elias 
et al., Journal of Comparative Neurology (1998), 402, 442–459. Copyright © 1998. Reprinted 
745
Credits

746	
Credits
by permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd. p. 420, Figure 12.25: Data from Batterham, R. L., 
Ffytche, D. H., Rosenthal, J. M., et al. Nature, 2007, 450, 106–109. p. 422, Figure 12.27: 
Based on data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. p. 426, Figure 12.30: 
Data from Shin, A. C., Zheng, H., Pistell, P. J., and Berthoud, H. R. International Journal 
of Obesity, 2011, 35, 642–651. p. 430, Figure 12.31: Data from Nergardh, R., Ammar,  
A., Brodin, U., et al. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 2007, 32, 493–502. p. 431, Figure 12.32: Data 
from Sodersten, P., Bergh, C., and Zandian, M. Hormones and Behavior, 2006, 50, 572–578.
Chapter 13 pp. 467-468, “Episodic and Semantic Memories” From “Semantic Dementia: 
Relevance to Connectionist Models of Long-Term Memory” by J. M. J. Murre, K. S. 
Graham, and J. R. Hodges, Brain (2001), 124, 647–675. p. 440, Figure 13.5: From “Long-
term Potentiation of Hippocampal Synaptic Transmission Affects Rate of Behavioral 
Learning” by T. W. Berger, Science (1984), 224 (no. 4649). Copyright © 1984 by The 
American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted by permission of the 
publisher. p. 447, Figure 13.15: Adapted from “Homosynaptic Long-Term Depression in 
Area CA1 of Hippocampus and Effects of N-methyl-D-aspartate Receptor Blockade” by 
S. Dudek & M. F. Bear, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (1992), 89, 4363–4367. 
Copyright © 1992 by National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A.. Reprinted by permission of 
S. Dudek. p. 450, Figure 13.17: Adapted from Kourtzi & Kanwisher, Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience (January 2000), 12(1): 48–55. Copyright © 2000 by the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology. Reprinted by permission of The MIT Press Journals. p. 456, Figure 13.20: 
Redrawn from Brain Maps: Structure of the Rat Brain by L. W. Swanson. New York: Elsevier, 
1992. p. 456, Figure 13.21: Adapted from A. G. Phillips, et al., Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences (1992), 654: 199–206. Copyright © 1992 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Reprinted 
by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. p. 461, Figure 13.25: Adapted from E. S. Gollin, 
“Developmental Studies of Visual Recognition of Incomplete Objects”, Perceptual and 
Motor Skills (1960), 11: 289–298. Copyright © 1960. Reprinted by permission of Ammons 
Scientific, Ltd. p. 466, Figure 13.30: Data from Bayley, Hopkins, and Squire, 2006. p. 467, 
Figure 13.31: Data from Smith and Squire, 2009. p. 469, Figure 13.32: From “Gray Matter 
Differences Correlate with Spontaneous Strategies in a Human Virtual Navigation Task” by 
V. D. Bohbot, J. Lerch, B. Thorndycraft, G. Iaria, and A. P. Zijdenbos, Journal of Neuroscience 
(2007), 27, 10078–10083. Copyright © 2007 by Society for Neuroscience. Reprinted by 
permission of Society for Neuroscience. p. 470, Figure 13.33: Adapted from Eichenbaum, H. 
Nature Reviews: Neuroscience, 2000, 1, 41–50. Data from Eichenbaum et al.,1990. p. 473, 
Figure 13.38: Adapted from E. R. Wood, et al., Neuron (2000), 27(3): 623–633. Copyright 
© 2000 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. p. 475, Figure 13.41: Based on data 
from Debiec, J., Diaz-Mataix, L., Bush, D. E. A., et al., Nature Neuroscience, 2010, 13, 536–537.
Chapter 14 p. 481 excerpt “The dots…”: Excerpted from p. 41 in Language and the Brain 
by L. K. Obler and K. Gjerlow, Cambridge University Press, UK, 1999. p. 483 excerpt 
“Picture of a boy…”: Excerpted from pp. 229 & 234 in “Evidence from aphasia: Isolating 
the components of a production model” by E. M. Saffran, M. F. Schwartz, and O. S. M. 
Marin in Language Production ed. by B. Butterworth. Academic Press, London, 1980.  
p. 485 excerpt “Examiner: What kind…”: Excerpted from p. 73 in “Anatomy of Jargon” 
by A. Kertesz in Jargonaphasia ed. by J. Brown, Academic Press, New York, 1981. p. 494, 
Figure 14.16: Adapted from O. Hauk, et al., Neuron (2004), 41(2): 301–307. Copyright 
© 2004 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. p. 495, Figure 14.18: Adapted 
from M. Gentilucci, European Journal of Neuroscience (2003), 17: 179–184. Copyright © 
2003 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
p. 501, Figure 14.23: From Cognitive Neuropsychology: A Clinical Introduction by R. A. McCarthy 
& E. K. Warrington. Copyright © 1990 by Academic Press. Reprinted by permission 
of Elsevier. p. 507, Figure 14.31: Adapted from J. T. Devlin, et al., Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience ( June 2006), 18(6): 911–922. Copyright © 2006 by the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. Reprinted by permission of The MIT Press Journals. p. 508, 
Figure 14.35: Adapted from M. Szwed, et al., Vision Research (2009), 49(7): 718–725. 
Copyright © 2009 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. p. 509, Figure 14.36: 
Figure 1 from “The Structures of Letters and Symbols throughout Human History Are 
Selected to Match Those Found in Objects in Natural Scenes” by M. Changizi, et al. 
(2006), The American Naturalist, 167(5), E117–E139. Copyright © 2006 by University of 
Chicago Press. Reprinted by permission of University of Chicago Press. p. 510, Figure 14.37: 
Adapted from M. Szwed, et al., Vision Research (2009), 49(7): 718–725. Copyright © 2009 
by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier.
Chapter 15 p. 524, Figure 15.8: Adapted from W. Hacke, et al., Stroke (2005), 36(1): 66–73. 
Copyright © 2005 by Wolters Kluwer Health. Reprinted by permission of Wolters Kluwer 
Health. p. 525, Figure 15.10: Based on data of Chimowitz et al., 2011. p. 526, Figure 15.11: 
Adapted from E. Taub, et al., Stroke (2006), 37(4): 1045–1049. Copyright © 2006 by Wolters 
Kluwer Health. Reprinted by permission of Wolters Kluwer Health. p. 532, Figure 15.13: 
Data from OIE-World Health Organization for Animal Health and the CJD Surveillance 
Unit. p. 538, Figure 15.18: Based on Medtronic, Inc. p. 539, Figure 15.19: Adapted from 
M. G. Kaplitt, Lancet (2007), 369, 2097–2105. Copyright © 2007 by Elsevier. Reprinted by 
permission of Elsevier. p. 545, Figure 15.26: Adapted from C. Hock et al., Neuron (2003), 
38(4): 547–554. Copyright © 2003 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier.
Chapter 16 p. 558, Figure 16.2: Adapted from “Single Photon Emission Computerized 
Tomography Imaging of Amphetamine-Induced Dopamine Release in Drug-Free 
Schizophrenic Subjects” by M. Laruelle, et al., (1996), Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, USA, 93, 9235–9240. Copyright © 1996 by National Academy of Sciences, 
U.S.A. Reprinted by permission of PNAS. p. 559, Figure 16.3: Figure 8-1, p. 159 
(Ventricular Size/VBR) from “Brain Morphology in Schizophrenia: In vivo Studies” by 
D. R. Weinberger & R. J. Wyatt from Schizophrenia as a Brain Disease ed. by Fritz A. Henn 
& Henry A. Nasrallah. Copyright © 1982. Reprinted by permission of Oxford University 
Press. p. 559, Figure 16.4: Figure 1 from “Volume Changes in Gray Matter in Patients with 
Schizophrenia” by H. E. Hulshoff, et al., American Journal of Psychiatry (2002): 159(2): 244–250. 
Copyright © 2002 by American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc. Reprinted by permission of 
American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc. p. 560, Figure 16.5: Based on data from Kendell 
and Adams, 1991. p. 562, Table 16.2: Appendix 1 from “Minor Physical Anomalies and 
Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders: A Prospective Investigation” by J. Schiffman, American 
Journal of Psychiatry (2002): 159: 238–243. Copyright © 2002 by American Psychiatric 
Publishing, Inc. Reprinted by permission of American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc. p. 564, 
Figure 16.8: Adapted from H. Hafner, et al., Psychological Medicine (2009), 23: 925–940. 
Copyright © 2009 by Cambridge University Press. Reprinted by permission of Cambridge 
University Press. p. 566, Figure 16.11: Adapted from J. D. Jentsch, et al., Science (1997), 
277(5328): 953–955. Copyright © 1997 by the Association for the Advancement of 
Science. Reprinted by permission of the Association for the Advancement of Science. 
p. 570 excerpt “[A psychiatrist] asked me…”: Excerpted from Darkness Visible: A Memoir 
of Madness by W. Styron. Random House, 1990. p. 571, Figure 16.15: Based on data of 
Dome et al., 2010. p. 576, Figure 16.18: Adapted from A. Caspi, et al., Science (2003), 
301(5631): 386–389. Copyright © 2003 by the Association for the Advancement of 
Science. Reprinted by permission of the Association for the Advancement of Science. 
p. 579, Figure 16.22: Adapted from J. C. Gillin & A. A. Borbely, Trends in Neuroscience 
(1985), 8: 537–542. Copyright © 1985 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. 
p. 579, Figure 16.23: Based on data from Landsness et al., 2001. p. 580, Figure 16.24: 
Figure 2 from “The Biological Basis of an Antidepressant Response to Sleep Deprivation 
and Relapse: Review and Hypothesis” by W. E. Bunney & J. C. Wu, American Journal of 
Psychiatry (1990), 147(1): 14–21. Copyright © 1990 by American Psychiatric Publishing, 
Inc. Reprinted by permission of American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc. p. 581, Figure 16.25: 
Based on data from Gonzalez and Aston-Jones (2006, 2008). p. 581, Figure 16.26: 
Adapted from “The Circadian Basis of Winter Depression” by A. K. Lewy et al., (2006), 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 103, 7414–7419. Copyright © 2006 by 
National Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. Reprinted by permission of PNAS.
Chapter 17 p. 588, Figure 17.1: From “Fluvoxamine in the Treatment of Panic Disorder: 
A Multi-Center, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study in Outpatients” by G. M. Asnis, 
et al., Psychiatry Research (2001), 103(1), 1–14. Copyright © 2001 by Elsevier. Reprinted 
by permission of Elsevier. p. 588, Figure 17.2: Adapted from Ressler et al., 2004 (acro-
phobia); Guastella et al., 2010b (social phobia); and Otto et al., 2010 (panic disorder). 
p. 590, Figure 17.3: Figure 1 from “A Case of Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric 
Disorders Associated with Streptococcal Infections” by S. J. Perlmutter, et al., American 
Journal of Psychiatry (1998), 155(11): 1592–1598. Copyright © 1998 by American Psychiatric 
Publishing, Inc. Reprinted by permission of American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc. p. 596, 
Figure 17.5: Adapted from F. Castelli et al., Brain (2002), 125, 1839–1849. Copyright  
© 2002 by Oxford University Press. Reprinted by permission of Oxford University Press. 
p. 597, Figure 17.7: Adapted from E. Hollander, et al., Biological Psychiatry (2005), 58: 
226–232. Copyright © 2005 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. p. 600, Figure 
17.10: Adapted from “Catechol 0-Methyltransferase val (159)-met Genotype and Individual 
Variation in the Brain Response to Amphetamine” by V. S. Mattay (2003), Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 100, 6186-6191. Copyright © 2003 by National Academy 
of Sciences, U.S.A. Reprinted by permission of PNAS. p. 603, Figure 17.12: Based on 
data from Cobb and Rose, 1973. p. 604, Figure 17.13: Adapted from J. K. Kiecolt-Glaser,  
et al., The Lancet (1995), 346(8984): 1194–1196. Copyright © 1995 by Elsevier. Reprinted 
by permission of Elsevier. p. 605, Figure 17.14: Adapted from Diamond, D. M., Park,  
C. R., Heman, K. L., and Rose, G. M. Hippocampus, 1999, 9, 542–552, and Mesches, M. H., 
Fleshner, M., Heman, K. L., Rose, G. M., and Diamond, D. M. Journal of Neuroscience, 199, 
19, RC18(1-5). p. 605, Figure 17.15: Adapted from A. K. Salm, et al., Developmental Brain 
Research (2004), 148(2): 159–167. Copyright © 2004 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission 
of Elsevier. p. 606, Figure 17.16: From “Prenatal Stress and Glucocorticoids in Adulthood” 
by A. Barbazanges, Journal of Neuroscience (1996), 16, 3943–3949. Copyright © 1996 by 
Society for Neuroscience. Reprinted by permission of Society for Neuroscience. p. 607, 
Figure 17.19: Figure 1 from “Association Study of Trauma Load and SLC6A4 Promoter 
Polymorphism in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Evidence from Survivors of the Rwandan 
Genocide” by Iris-Tatjana Kolass, et al., The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71; 5: 543–547, 
2010. Copyright © 2010 by Physicians Postgraduate Press. Reprinted by permission. p. 608, 
Figure 17.20: Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd., Nature Neuroscience 
(2002), 5(11): 1242–1247. Copyright © 2002. Reprinted by permission of Nature 
Publishing Group. p. 611, Figure 17.24: Adapted from R. Glaser, et al., Psychosomatic 
Medicine (2000), 62(6): 804–807. Copyright © 2000 by Wolters Kluwer Health. Reprinted 
by permission of Wolters Kluwer Health. p. 611, Figure 17.25: Based on data from Stone, 
A. A., Reed, B. R., and Neale, J. M. Journal of Human Stress, 1987, 13, 70–74. p. 611, Figure 
17.26: From “Psychological Stress and Susceptibility to the Common Cold” by S. Cohen, 
et al., New England Journal of Medicine (1991), 325. Copyright © 1991 by MMS. Reprinted 
by permission of Massachusetts Medical Society.
Chapter 18 p. 618, Figure 18.1: Adapted from D. Belin & J. Everitt, Neuron (2008), 
57(3): 432–441. Copyright © 2008 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier.  
p. 621, Figure 18.3: Figure 1 from Peter W. Kalivas, Jamie Peters, and Lori Knackstedt, 
“Animal Models and Brain Circuits in Drug Addiction” Molecular Interventions, December 
2006, 6: 339–344. Reprinted by permission of American Society for Pharmacology and 
Experimental Therapeutics. p. 622, Figure 18.4: Adapted from K. Bolla et al., Journal 
of Neuropsychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience (2004), 16, 456–464. Copyright © 2004 by 
American Psychiatric Press, Inc. Reprinted by permission of American Psychiatric 
Publishing, Inc. p. 623, Figure 18.5: Based on data from D. H. Mathalon, et al., Archives 
of General Psychiatry (2003), 60, 245–252. p. 623, Figure 18.6: Adapted from M. Weiser,  
et al., American Journal of Psychiatry (2004) 161, 1219–1223. Copyright © 2004 by American 
Psychiatric Association. Reprinted by permission of American Psychiatric Publishing, 
Inc. p. 623, Figure 18.7: Adapted from T. A. Kosten et al., Brain Research (2000), 875 
(1-2): 44–50. Copyright © 2000 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier. p. 626, 
Figure 18.8: Adapted with permission from Macmillan Publishing Ltd., Nature (1996), 
383: 819–823. Copyright © 1996. Reprinted by permission of Nature Publishing Group.  
p. 627, Figure 18.9: Adapted from P. Ciano, Behavioural Pharmacology (1995), 6(4): 311–322. 
Copyright © 1995 by Wolters Kluwer Health. Reprinted by permission of Wolters Kluwer 
Health. p. 629, Figure 18.11: Adapted from G. Damsma, et al., European Journal of 
Pharmacology (1989), 168(3): 363–368. Copyright © 1989 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permis-
sion of Elsevier. p. 630, Figure 18.13: Based on data of Forget et al., 2010. p. 631, Figure 
18.14: Based on data of Fowler et al., 2011. p. 634, Figure 18.17: Based on data from 
Heinz, et al., 2005. p. 634, Figure 18.18: With kind permission from Springer Science 
+ Business Media, from J. Chen, Psychopharmacology (October 1, 1990), Vol. 102(2), 
156–162. p. 635, Figure 18.19: Based on data of Morgan et al., 2010. p. 637, Figure 18.20: 
Adapted with permission from Macmillan Publishing Ltd., Nature Reviews Genetics (2005), 
6(7): 521–532. Copyright © 2005. Reprinted by permission of Nature Publishing Group. 
p. 639, Figure 18.21: Reprinted from “Office-Based Treatment of Opiate Addiction with a 
Sublingual-Tablet Formulation” by B. Fudala, New England Journal of Medicine (2003), 349, 
949–958. Copyright © 2003 by Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted by permission 
of MMS. p. 641, Figure 18.23: Adapted from C. P. O’Brien, et al., Alcohol (1996), 13(1): 
35–39. Copyright © 1996 by Elsevier. Reprinted by permission of Elsevier.

	
Credits	
747
Image Credits
Chapter 1 p. 1, © tatraholiday / iStockphoto.com. p. 3, Figure 1.1: Courtesy of National 
Library of Medicine. p. 7, Figure 1.5: Courtesy of Neil Carlson. p. 12, Figure 1.9: Courtesy 
of National Library of Medicine. p. 14, Figure 1.11: Copyright © North Wind / North 
Wind Picture Archives – All rights reserved.
Chapter 2 p. 27 Image99/Image100/Jupiter Images. p. 31, Figure 2.3: From Tissues and 
Organs: A Text-Atlas of Scanning Electron Microscopy, by Richard G. Kessel and Randy H. 
Kardon. Copyright © 1979 by W. H. Freeman and Co. Reprinted by permission of Barbara 
Kessel and Randy Kardon. p. 35, Figure 2.8: From Hirokawa, N. Science, 1998, 279, 519–526.  
Copyright © 1998 American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted with  
permission. p. 53, Figure 2.28: From De Camilli, P., et al., in Synapses, edited by W. M. Cowan, 
T. C. Sudhof, and C. F. Stevens. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001. p. 54, 
Figure 2.29: From Heuser, J. E., in Society for Neuroscience Symposia, Vol. II, edited by W. M. 
Cowan and J. A. Ferrendelli. Bethesda, MD: Society for Neuroscience, 1977. Reprinted with 
permission. p. 55, Figure 2.31a: From Heuser, J., and Reese, T. Journal of Cell Biology, 1981, 
88, 564–580. Reprinted with permission. p. 55, Figure 2.31b: From Heuser, J., and Reese, T. 
Journal of Cell Biology, 1981, 88, 564–580. Reprinted with permission. p. 62, Figure 2.39: 
Bennett, M. V. L., and Pappas, G.D. The Journal of Neuroscience, 1983, 3, 748–761/Society for 
Neuroscience.
Chapter 3 p. 66 Creatas Images/Ime Icons/Jupiter Images. p. 73, Figure 3.5: From Tissues 
and Organs: A Text-Atlas of Scanning Electron Microscopy, by Richard G. Kessel and Randy 
H. Kardon. Copyright © 1979 by W. H. Freeman and Co. Reprinted by permission of 
Barbara Kessel and Randy Kardon. p. 80, Figure 3.10: Leuner, B., Mendolia-Loffredo, S., 
Kozorovitskiy, Y., Samburg, D., Gould, E., and Shors, T.J. Journal of Neuroscience/Society 
of Neuroscience. p. 81, Figure 3.11: Betty G. Martindale and Anthony D’Agostino, Good 
Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon/Harvard Medical School. p. 84, Figure 3.14: Hofer, S., 
and Frahm, J. Neurolmage, 2006, 32, 989–994/Elsevier LTD.
Chapter 4 p. 99 © John Steele / iStockphoto.com. p. 125, Figure 4.20: Courtesy of Miles 
Herkenham, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD.
Chapter 5, p. 130 Corbis/Jupiter Images. p. 133, Figure 5.1: Turkenburg, J. L., Swaab, D.f., 
Endert, E., Louwerse, A. L., and van de Poll, N. E. Brain Research Bulletin, 1988, 21, 215–224/
Elsevier LTD. p. 133, Figure 5.2: Courtesy of Benno Roozendaal, University of California, 
Irvine. p. 136, Figure 5.6: Photograph courtesy of Joahrn W. Snell, University of Virgina 
Health System. p. 136, Figure 5.7: Courtesy of Neil Carlson. p. 137, Figure 5.8: Courtesy of  
Neil Carlson. p. 137, Figure 5.9: Reproduced by permission from [Rockel, A. J., and Jones, 
E. G. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 1973, 147, 61–92]. p. 138, Figure 5.10: From Tissues 
and Organs: A Text-Atlas of Scanning Electron Microscopy, by Richard G. Kessel and Randy 
H. Kardon. Copyright © 1979 by W. H. Freeman and Co. Reprinted by permission of Barbara 
Kessel and Randy Kardon. p. 139, Figure 5.12: Mizrahi, A., Crowley, J. C., Shtoyerman, 
E., and Katz, L. C. Journal of Neuroscience, 2004, 24, 3147–3151/Society for Neuroscience.  
p. 141, Figure 5.15: Courtesy of Kirsten Nielsen Ricciardi and Jeffrey Blaustein, University of  
Massachusetts. p. 142, Figure 5.16: Courtesy of Yvon Delville, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School. p. 142, Figure 5.18: © Larry Mulvehill/Rainbow. p. 143, Figure 5.19: 
Courtesy of J. McA. Jones, Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon. p. 144, Figure 5.20: 
Living Art Enterprises / Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 144, Figure 5.21: From Wakana, S., Jian, H., 
Nagae-Poetscher, L. M., van Zijl, P. C. M., and Mori, S. Radiology, 2004, 230, 77–87. Reprinted 
with permission. p. 149, Figure 5.24: PHANIE/Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 150, Figure 5.25:  
From Schwartz, W. J., and Gainer, H. Science, 1977, 197, 1089–1091. Reprinted with permission.  
p. 150, Figure 5.26: Courtesy of Marc Tetel, Skidmore College. p. 152, Figure 5.27:  
Courtesy of the Brookhaven National Laboratory and the State University of New York, Stony 
Brook. p. 153, Figure 5.28: Courtesy of the Brookhaven National Laboratory and the State 
University of New York, Stony Brook. p. 154, Figure 5.31: Photograph courtesy of the Kastner 
Lab, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey. p. 157, Figure 5.32: Courtesy of Geert 
DeVries, University of Massachusetts. p. 157, Figure 5.33: Courtesy of David A. Morilak and 
Roland Ciaranello, Nancy Pritzker Laboratory of Developmental and Molecular Neurobiology, 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine.  
p. 158, Figure 5.34: Herkenham, M.A., and Pert, C.B. Journal of Neuroscience, 1982, 2,  
1129–1149/Society of Neuroscience. p. 159, Figures 5.36 a and b: Adapted from Widner, H., Tetrud, 
J., Rehncrona, S., Snow, B., Brundin, P., Gustavii, B., Björklund, A., Lindvall, O., and Langston, J. W. 
New England Journal of Medicine, 1992, 327, 1556–1563. Scans reprinted with permission.
Chapter 6 p. 164 Thinkstock/Jupiter Images. p. 172, Figure 6.9: Photomicrograph from 
Hubel, D. H., Wiesel, T. N., and Le Vay, S. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London, B, 1977, 278, 131–163. Reprinted with permission. p. 173, Figure 6.10: From Hubel, 
D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, B, 1977, 198, 1–59. Reprinted 
with permission. p. 181, Figure 6.21: From Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London, B, 1977, 198, 1–59. Reprinted with permission. p. 184, Figure 6.27: 
From Harmon, L. D., and Julesz, B. Science, 1973, 180, 1191–1197. Copyright 1973 by the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted with permission. p. 185, 
Figure 6.28: Reprinted from Sincich, L. C., and Horton, J. C. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 
Volume 28 © 2005, 303–326 by Annual Reviews www.annualreviews.org. p. 188, Figure 6.31: 
From Sterzer, P., and Rees, G. Nature Neuroscience, 2006, 9, 302–304. Reprinted with permission. 
p. 188, Figure 6.32, a, b, c, d, e: Tootell, B.H., and Hadjikhani, N. Cerebral Cortex, 2001, 
11–298–311/Oxford University Press UK. p. 193, Figure 6.35: From Grill-Spector, K., Knouf, 
N., and Kanwisher, N. Nature Neuroscience, 2004, 7, 555–561. Reprinted with permission.  
p. 194, Figure 6.36: Erich Lessing / Art Resource, NY. p. 194, Figure 6.37: From Cox, D., 
Meyers, E., and Sinha, P. Science, 2004, 304, 115–117. Copyright © 2004 American Association 
for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted with permission. p. 195, Figure 6.39 a, b: Steeves, 
J. K. E., Humphrey, G. K., Culham, J. C., Menon, R. A., Milner, A. D., and Goodale, M. A. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2004,16,955-965/MIT PRESS JOURNALS MIT PRESS.  
p. 195, Figure 6.40: Gauthier, I., and Tarr, M. J. Vision Research, 1997,37,1673-1682/
ELSEVIER LTD. p. 196, Figure 6.41: Courtesy of Golijeh Golarai, Department of Psychology, 
Stanford University. p. 197, Figure 6.43: From Le Grand, R., Mondloch, C. J., Maurer,  
D., and Brent, H. P. Nature Neuroscience, 2003, 6, 1108–1112. Reprinted with permission.  
p. 199, Figure 6.45: Annese, J., Gazzaniga, M. S., and Toga, A. W. Cerebral Cortex, 2005, 15,  
1044–1053/OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS UK. p. 200, Figure 6.46: Grossman, E. D., and Blake,  
R. Vision Research, 2001, 41, 1475–1482/ELSEVIER LTD.
Chapter 7 p. 207 Image Source/Jupiter Images. p. 213, Figure 7.6: Photomicrograph courtesy 
of I. Hunter-Duvar, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario. p. 213, Figure 7.7 a, 
b: Hudspeth, A. J., and Gillespie, P. G. Neuron, 1994, 12, 1–9/Cell Press/ELSEVIER LTD.  
p. 224, Figure 7.20: Alain, C., He, Y., and Grady, C. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2008, 
20, 285–295/MIT PRESS JOURNALS MIT PRESS. p. 230, Figure 7.24, a, b: A. J. Hudspeth 
and R.A. Jacobs. p. 237, Figure 7.28, a, b: Nakamura, J., Endo, K., Sumida, T., and Hasegawa, 
T. Cortex, 1998, 34, 375–388 and Reed, C.L., Caselli, R. J., and Farah, M. J. Brain, 1996, 
119, 875-888/OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS UK. p. 239, Figure 7.30: From Rainville,  
P., Duncan, G. H., Price, D. D., Carrier, Benoit, and Bushnell, M. C. Science, 1997, 277, 968–971.  
Copyright © 1997 American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted with 
permission. p. 241, Figure 7.32: From Zubieta, J.-K., Bueller, J. A., Jackson, L. R., Scott,  
D. J., Xu, Y., Koeppe, R. A., Nichols, T. E., and Stohler, C. S. Journal of Neuroscience, 2005, 
25, 7754–7762. Reprinted with permission. p. 241, Figure 7.33: From Zubieta, J.-K., Bueller, 
J. A., Jackson, L. R., Scott, D. J., Xu, Y., Koeppe, R. A., Nichols, T. E., and Stohler, C. S. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2005, 25, 7754–7762. Reprinted with permission. p. 247, Figure 7.39:  
Schoenfeld, M. A., Neuer, G., Tempelmann, C., Schussler, K., Noesselt, T., Hopf, J. M., and 
Heinze, H. J. Neuroscience, 2004, 127, 347–353/Elsevier LTD. p. 249, Figure 7.40: From 
Porter, J., Craven, B., Khan, R. M., Chang, S.-J., Kang, I Judkewitz, B., Volpe, J., Settles, G., 
and Sobel, N. Nature Neuroscience, 2007, 10, 27–29. Reprinted with permission.
Chapter 8 p. 255 Steve Allen/Brand X Pictures/Jupiter Images. p. 266, Figure 8.9: From Wahl, 
M., Lauterbach-Soon, B., Hattinger, E., et al. Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 12132–12138. 
Reprinted with permission. p. 271, Figure 8.15: From Shima, K., and Tanji, J. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 2000, 84, 2148–2160. Reprinted with permission of the American Physiological 
Society. p. 274, Figure 8.17, a, b: Haslinger, B., Erhard, P., Altenmuller, E., Schroeder, U., 
Boecker, H., and Ceballos-Baumann, A.O. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 2005, 17, 282–293/
MIT PRESS JOURNALS MIT PRESS. p. 275, Figure 8.18: From Iacoboni, M., Molnar-
Szakacs, I., Gallese, V., Buccino, G., Mazziotta, J. C., and Rizzolatti, G. PLoS Biology, 2005, 3, 
e79. Reprinted under open access license. p. 275, Figure 8.19: From Connolly, J. D., Andersen, 
R. A., and Goodale, M. A. Experimental Brain Research, 2003, 153, 140–145. Reprinted with per-
mission. p. 276, Figure 8.20: Frey, S. H., Vinton, D., Norlund, R., and Grafton, S.T. Cognitive 
Brain Research, 2005, 23, 397–405/ELSEVIER LTD. p. 277, Figure 8.21: From Pazzaglia, 
M., Smania, N., Corato, E., and Aglioti, S. M. Journal of Neuroscience, 2008, 28, 3030–3041. 
Reprinted with permission. p. 281, Figure 8.24, a, b: Courtesy of Harvard Medical School/
Betty G. Martindale and Anthony D’Agostino, Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon.
Chapter 9 p. 288 PureStock/Jupiter Images. p. 290, Figure 9.1: Philippe Platilly/SPL/Photo 
Researchers. p. 291, Figure 9.2: Horne, J. A. Why We Sleep: The Functions of Sleep in Humans 
and Other Mammals./Oxford University Press UK. p. 292, Figure 9.3: From Vyazovskiy, V. V., 
Olcese, U., Lazimy, Y. M., et al. Neuron, 2009, 63, 865–878. Reprinted with permission. p. 293,  
Figure 9.5: Gift of Mr. and Mrs. Bert L. Smokler and Mr. and Mrs. Lawrence A. Fleischman, 
Acc. No. 55.5. Courtesy of the Detroit Institute of Arts. p. 296, Figure 9.6: Photos courtesy 
of the Sleep Disorders Foundation, Stanford University. p. 308, Figure 9.14: Mileykovskiy, 
B. Y., Kiyashchenko, L. I., and Siegel, J.M. Neuron, 2005, 46, 787–798/ELSEVIER LTD.  
p. 316, Figure 9.25: Courtesy of Geert DeVries, University of Massachusetts. p. 317, 
Figure 9.26: From Hattar, S., Liao, H.-W., Takao, M., Berson, D. M., and Yau, K.-W. 
Science, 2002, 295, 1065–1070. Copyright © 2002 The American Association for the 
Advancement of Science. Reprinted with permission. p. 318, Figure 9.28: From Schwartz, 
W. J., and Gainer, H. Science, 1977, 197, 1089–1091. Copyright © 1977 The American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted with permission. p. 318, Figure 9.29: 
Welsh, D. K., Logothetis, D. E., Meister, M., and Reppert, S.M. Neuron, 1995, 14, 697–706/
Cell Press/ELSEVIER LTD.
Chapter 10 p. 323 Hemera Technologies/Jupiter Images. p. 341, Figure 10.11: Photograph 
courtesy of Gerianne M. Alexander, Texas A & M University. p. 343, Figure 10.13: From 
Zhou, J.-N., Hofman, M. A., Gooren, L. J. G., and Swaab, D. F. Nature, 1995, 378, 68–70. 
Reprinted with permission. p. 347, Figure 10.14: Gorski, R. A., in Neuroendocrine Perspectives, 
Vol. 2, edited by E. E. Muller and R. M. MacLeod. Amsterdam/Elsevier LTD. p. 350, Figure 
10.16: Courtesy of Joanne Turcotte and Jeffrey Blaustein, University of Massachusetts.  
p. 353, Figure 10.18: Courtesy of Neil Carlson. p. 354, Figure 10.19: Courtesy of Neil Carlson.
Chapter 11 p. 359 PhotoAlto/James Hardy/Jupiter Images. p. 377, Figure 11.14: Paul Ekman, 
Ph.D./ Paul Ekman Group, LLC. p. 380, Figure 11.18: From Vuilleumier, P., Armony, J. L., 
Driver, J., and Dolan, R. J. Nature Neuroscience, 2003, 6, 624–631. Reprinted with permission.  
p. 381, Figure 11.19: From Spezio, M. L., Huang, P.-Y. S., Castelli, F., and Adolphs, R. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 2007, 27, 3994–3997. Copyright © 2007, The Society for Neuroscience. 
Reprinted with permission. p. 381, Figure 11.20: From Vuilleumier, P., Armony, J. L., Driver, 
J., and Dolan, R. J. Nature Neuroscience, 2003, 6, 624–631. Reprinted with permission. p. 322, 
Figure 11.22: From Adolphs, R., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., Cooper, G., and Damasio, A. 
R.The Journal of Neuroscience, 2000, 20, 2683–2690. Copyright © 2000 by the Society for 
Neuroscience. Reprinted with permission. p. 384, Figure 11.23: From Curtis, V., Aunger, R., 
and Rabie, T. Biology Letters, 2004, 271, S131–S133. p. 384, Figure 11.24: © Hulton-Deutsch 
Collection / CORBIS All Rights Reserved. p. 385, Figure 11.25, a, b, c, d: From Hopf, H. C., 
Mueller-Forell, W., and Hopf, N. J., Neurology, 1992, 42, 1918–1923. Reprinted with permission. 
p. 386, Figure 11.27: H. A. Sackeim and R.C.Gur, Lateral asymmetry in intensity of emotional 
expression, 1978, with kind permission from PERGAMON PRESS LTD. p. 387, Figure 11.28: 
From Adolphs, R., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., Cooper, G., and Damasio, A. R. The Journal 
of Neuroscience, 2000, 20, 2683–2690. Copyright © 2000 by the Society for Neuroscience. 
Reprinted with permission. p. 391, Figure 11.30: From Field, T., in Development of Nonverbal 
Behavior in Children, edited by R. S. Feldman. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1982. Reprinted 
with kind permission of Springer Science and Business Media.
Chapter 12 p. 393 Hemera Technologies/Jupiter Images. p. 400, Figure 12.8: Egan, G., Silk, 
T.x Zamarripa, F., Williams, J., Federico, P., Cunnington, R., Carabott, L., Blain-West, J., Shade, 
R., McKinley, M., Farrell, M., Lancastar, J., Jackson, G., Fox, P., and Denton, D. Proceedings  
of the National Academy of Science, USA 2004, 100, 15241–15246]. Copyright © [2004] National 
Academy of Sciences, U.S.A. p. 413, Figure 12.18: HO Agence France Presse/Newscom. p. 424,  
Figure 12.28, a, b: Licinto, J., Caglayan, S., Ozata, M., Yildiz, B. O., de Miranda, P. B., 
O’Kirwan, F., Whitby, R., Liang, L., Cohen, P., Bhasin, S., Krauss, R. M., Veldhuios, J. D., 
Wagner, A. J., DePaoli, A. M., McCann, S. M., and Wong, M. L. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Science, USA, 2004, 101, 4531–4536.. Copyright © [2004] National Academy of 
Sciences, U.S.A.

748	
Credits
Chapter 13 p. 434 Fuse/Jupiter images. p. 440, Figure 13.4: Swanson, L. W., Kohler, C., and 
Bjorklund, A., in Handbook of Chemical Neuroanatomy. Vol 5: Integrated Systems of the CNS, 
Part 1. Amsterdam/Elsevier. p. 445, Figure 13.12, a, b: Bourne, J., and Harris, K. M. Current  
Opinion in Neurobiology, 2007, 17, 381–386/ELSEVIER LTD. p. 445, Figure 13.13: From Shen,  
K., and Meyer, T. Science, 1999, 284, 162–166. Copyright © 1999 by the American Association 
for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted with permission. p. 457, Figure 13.22: From Berns, 
G. S., McClure, S. M., Pagnoni, G., and Montague, P. R. Journal of Neuroscience, 2001, 21, 
2793–2798. Reprinted with permission. p. 461, Figure 13.25: Gollin, E. S. Developmental 
studies of visual recognition of incomplete objects. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 1960, 11,  
289–298. © Southern Universities Press 1960. p. 465, Figure 13.29, a, b: From Rempel-
Clower, N. L., Zola, S. M., Squire, L. R., and Amaral, D. G. Journal of Neuroscience, 1996, 16, 
5233–5255. Reprinted with permission. p. 471, Figure 13.34: From Derdikman, D., and Moser, 
E. I. Trends in Cognitive Science, 2010, 14, 561–568. Reprinted with permission. p. 472, Figure 
13.36: From Derdikman, D., and Moser, E. I. Trends in Cognitive Science, 2010, 14, 561–568. 
Reprinted with permission. p. 472, Figure 13.37: From Solstad, T., Boccara, C. N., Kropff, E., 
et al. Science, 2008, 322, 1865–1868. Reprinted with permission.
Chapter 14 p. 479 Steve Allen/Brand X Pictures/Jupiter Images. p. 484, Figure 14.5, a, b: 
From Dronkers, N. F. Nature, 1996, 384, 159–161. Reprinted with permission. p. 486, Figure 
14.6: From Stefanatos, G. A., Gershkoff, A., and Madigan, S. Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society, 2005, 11, 456–470. Reprinted with permission. p. 487, Figure 14.8:  
Reproduced by permission from [Sharp, D. J., Scott, S. K., and Wise, R. J. S. Annals of Neurology, 
2004, 56, 836–846]. Copyright © [2004] by [John Wiley & Sons, Inc. / Wiley-Liss, Inc.]. p. 488, 
Figure 14.9: From Pulvermüller, F., Huss, M., Kherif, F., et al. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 2006, 103, 7865–7870. Reprinted with permission. p. 491, Figure 
14.12: Sotillo, M., Carretie, L., Hinojosa, J.A., Tapia, M., Mercado, F., Lopez-Martin, S., and 
Albert, J.Neuroscience Letters, 2005,373,5-9/Elsevier LTD. p. 491, Figure 14.13: Arnett, P. A.,  
Rao, S. M., Hussain, M., Swanson, S. J., and Hammeke, T. A. Neurology, 11996, 47, 576–578/
LIPPINCOTT WILLIAMS & WILKINS. p. 493, Figure 14.15: Reproduced by permission 
from Catani, M., Jones, D. K., and ffytche, D. H. Annals of Neurology, 2005, 57, 8–16]. Copyright  
© [2005] by [John Wiley & Sons, Inc. / Wiley-Liss, Inc. p. 495, Figure 14.17: From Iacoboni, 
M., Woods, R. P., Brass, M., Bekkering, H., Mazziotta, J. C., and Rizzolatti, G. Science, 1999, 
286, 2526–2528. Copyright © 1999 by the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science. Reprinted with permission. p. 497, Figure 14.20: Reproduced by permission from 
Meyer, M., Alter, K., Friederici, A.d., Lohmann, G., and von Cramon, D. Y. Human Brain 
Mapping, 2002, 17, 73–88. Copyright © by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. / Wiley-Liss, Inc. p. 498, 
Figure 14.21: Reproduced by permission from Brown, S., Ingham, R. J., Ingham, J. C., Laird, 
A. R., and Fox, P. T. Human Brain Mapping, 2005, 25, 105–117. Copyright © [2005] by John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. / Wiley-Liss, Inc. p. 498, Figure 14.22: Neumann, K., Preibisch, C., 
Euler, H. A., von Gudenberg, A. W., Lanfermann, H., Gall, V., and Giraud, A. L. Journal of 
Fluency Disorders, 2005, 30, 23–39/Elsevier LTD. p. 501, Figure 14.23: McCarthy, R. A., and 
Warrington, E. K. Cognitive Neuropsychology: A Clinical Introduction. San Diego: Academic 
Press, 1990/Elsevier LTD. p. 502, Figure 14.25: Mao-Draayer, Y., and Panitch, H. Multiple 
Sclerosis, 2004, 10, 705–707/Sage Publications Inc. p. 506, Figure 14.30: Marinkovic, K., 
Dhond, R. P., Dale, A. M., Glessner, M., Carr, V., and Halgren, E. Neuron, 2003, 38, 487–497/
Elsevier LTD. p. 507, Figure 14.33: Vinckier, F., Dehaene, S., Jobert, A., Dubus, J. P., Sigman, 
M., and Cohen, L. Neuron, 2007,55,143-156/Elsevier LTD. p. 508, Figure 14.34: Gaillard, 
R., Naccache, L., Pinel, P., Clemenceau, S., Volle, E., Hasboun, D., Dupont, S., Baulac, M., 
Dehaene, S., Adam, C., and Cohen, L. Neuron, 2006,50,191-204/Elsevier LTD. p. 508, Figure 
14.35: Adapted from Szwed, M., Cohen, L, Qiao, E., and Dehaene, S. Vision Research, 2009, 
49, 718–725. p. 509, Figure 14.36: Adapted from Changizi, M. A., Zhang, Q., Ye, H., and 
Shimojo, S. American Naturalist, 2006, 167, E117–E139. p. 511, Figure 14.38: Longcamp, 
M., Anton, J.L., Roth, M., and Velay, J.L. Neuropsychologia, 2005,43,1801-1809/Elsevier LTD.  
p. 512, Figure 14.39, a, b: Henry, M.L., Beeson, P.M., Stark, A.J., and Rapcsak, S.Z. Brain 
and Language, 2007,100,44-52/Elsevier LTD.
Chapter 15 p. 516 Jupiter Images. p. 518, Figure 15.1: Courtesy of A. D’Agostino, Good 
Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon. p. 518, Figure 15.2: Courtesy of A. D’Agostino, 
Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon. p. 519, Figure 15.3: Courtesy of A. D’Agostino, 
Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon. p. 519, Figure 15.4: Courtesy of A. D’Agostino, 
Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon. p. 519, Figure 15.5: Courtesy of A. D’Agostino,  
Good Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon. p. 525, Figure 15.9: From Stapf, C., and Mohr, J. 
P. Annual Review of Medicine, 2002, 53, 453–475. Reprinted with permission. p. 529, Figure 
15.12: Photographs courtesy of Katherine K. Sulik. p. 533, Figure 15.14: From Mallucci, G., 
Dickinson, A., Linehan, J., Klöhn, P. C., Brandner, S., and Collinge, J. Science, 2003, 302, 871–874. 
Copyright © 2003 by the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted 
with permission. p. 534, Figure 15.15: Photograph courtesy of Dr. Don Born, University of 
Washington. p. 538, Figure 15.18: Illustration used with permission by Medtronic, Inc. p. 539, 
Figure 15.19, a, b: Kaplitt, M.G., at al. Lancet, 2007,369,2097-2105/Elsevier LTD. p. 540, 
Figure 15.20: Photo courtesy of Steven Finkbeiner, Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease 
and the University of California, San Francisco. p. 541, Figure 15.21: © Larry Mulvehill/
Rainbow. p. 541, Figure 15.22: Photos courtesy of D. J. Selkoe, Brigham and Women’s 
Hospital, Boston. p. 542, Figure 15.24: Courtesy of William Klunk, Western Psychiatric 
Institute and Clinic, Pittsburgh, PA. p. 543, Figure 15.25: From Buckner, R. L., Snyder, A. Z., 
Shannon, B. J., LaRossa, G., Sachs, R., Fotenos, A. F., Sheline, Y. I., Klunk, W. E., Mathis, C. A., 
Morris, J. C., and Mintun, M. A. Journal of Neuroscience, 2005, 25, 7709–7717. Copyright © 
2005 by the Society for Neuroscience. p. 546, Figure 15.27: Courtesy of A. D’Agostino, Good 
Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon. p. 547, Figure 15.28: Courtesy of A. D’Agostino, Good 
Samaritan Hospital, Portland, Oregon.
Chapter 16 p. 552 Rubberball/Clark Dunbar/Jupiter Images. p. 563, Figure 16.6: 
Courtesy of D. R. Weinberger, National Institute of Mental Health, Saint Elizabeth’s Hospital, 
Washington, DC. p. 565, Figure 16.9: Thompson, P. M., Vidal, C., Giedd, J. N., Gochman, 
P., Blumenthal, J., Nicolson, R., Toga, A.W., and Rapoport, J. L. Rroceedings of the National 
Academy of Science, USA 2001,98,11650-11655. Copyright © [2001] National Academy of 
Sciences, U.S.A. p. 565, Figure 16.10: From MacDonald, A. W., Carter, C. S., Kerns, J. G., 
Ursu, S., Barch, D. M., Holmes, A. J., Stenger, V. A., and Cohen, J. D. American Journal of 
Psychiatry, 2005, 162, 475–484. Reprinted with permission from the American Journal of 
Psychiatry. Copyright © 2005 American Psychiatric Association. p. 572, Figure 16.16: Will & 
Deni McIntyre / Photo Researchers, Inc. p. 577, Figure 16.19: Drevets, W.C., Current Opinion 
in Neurobiology, 2001, 11, 240–249/Elsevier LTD. p. 579, Figure 16.21: From Pereira, A. C., 
Huddleston, D. E., Brickman, A. M., et al. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 
2007, 104, 5638–5643. Reprinted with permission.
Chapter 17 p. 584 Goodshoot/Jupiter Images. p. 596, Figure 17.6: From Schultz, R. T. 
International Journal of Developmental Neuroscience, 2005, 23, 125–141. Reprinted with permission. 
p. 606, Figure 17.17, a, b: Based on data from Hollander et al., 2005. p. 606, Figure 17.18: 
From van Harmelen, A. L., van Tol, M. J., van der Wee, N. J., et al. Biological Psychiatry, 2010, 
68, 832–838. Reprinted by permission.
Chapter 18 p. 615 Brand X Pictures/Photo 24/Jupiter Images. p. 628, Figure 18.10: From McCann, 
U. D., Wong, D. F., Yokoi, F., et al. Journal of Neuroscience, 1998, 18, 8417–8422. By permission. 
p. 632, Figure 18.15: From Ikonomidou, C., Bittigau, P., Ishimaru, M. J., et al. Science, 2000, 287, 
1056–1060. By permission. p. 633, Figure 18.16: Photograph courtesy of Steven M. Paul, National 
Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, Md. p. 634, Figure 18.17: Based on data from Heinz et al., 2005.

3 ways to find your
MyPsychLab Ordering ISBN
MyPsychLab is available with texts for Physiological Psychology courses.
Look at the MyPsychLab ad  
on the back cover of your text.
Visit the Pearson Psychology website  
and search for your text. 
www.pearsonhighered.com/psychology
Visit the Books Available page of 
MyPsychLab and scroll to your text. 
www.mypsychlab.com/books-available
Proven Results
For over 10 years, instructors and students have reported  
better grades through increased engagement and 
real-time insights into progress. 
engaging Experiences
MyLab is designed to reach students in a personal way.  
Engaging learning and practice opportunities lead to  
assessments that create a personalized study plan. 
a Trusted Partnership
With millions of students registered annually, MyLab is the 
most effective and reliable learning solution available today. 
To order this text with MyPsychLab
TM
use ISBN 0-205-88978-6
Pearson’s MyLab
TM
Students, you can access MyPsychLab through the code packaged with your book, through 
a code from your local bookstore, or go to www.mypsychlab.com. 
 
Instructors, for additional information on the MyPsychLab to accompany Physiology of Behavior, 
please contact your Pearson Publisher’s Representative at www.pearsonhighered.com/replocator.

MyPsychLab This online, all-in-one study resource offers a 
dynamic, electronic version of your textbook with embedded 
video clips (close-captioned and with post-viewing activities) and 
embedded animations and simulations that dynamically illustrate 
chapter concepts. MyPsychLab also includes text-specific 
practice test questions for each chapter, which help you prepare 
for exams. After completing a chapter pre-test, MyPsychLab 
generates a customized Study Plan for each individual student 
which helps to focus studying where it is needed most. Visit the 
site at  www.mypsychlab.com.
Save Time. Improve Results.  www.mypsychlab.com 
More than 4 million students  
are now using Pearson MyLab products!
Pearson eText
Just like the printed text, students can highlight and add their 
own notes. Students save time and improve results by having 
access to their book online.
Virtual Brain within MyPsychLab
Students can immerse themselves in an interactive landscape 
of the human brain. The Virtual Brain incorporates real-life 
scenarios as well as simulations, activities, quizzes, and more.
Bioflix within MyPsychLab
Bioflix within MyPsychLab: Highly visual interactive video on the 
toughest topics in Physiological Psychology.
MyPsychLab

