
PUNK 
PLAYTHINGS
Provocations for 21st Century 
Game Makers


PUNK 
PLAYTHINGS
Provocations for 21st Century 
Game Makers
Chris Lowthorpe
Sean Taylor

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2018 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-7022-4 (Paperback)
978-1-138-29580-3 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and 
publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of 
their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all mate-
rial reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish 
in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please 
write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, repro-
duced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.
copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
(CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organi-
zation that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have 
been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, 
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

v
Contents
Forewords .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . vii
Acknowledgments .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  xiii
Authors  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . xv
Introduction  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . xvii
CHAPTER 1 — The Road Less Traveled . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
No Gods, No Masters  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
I Wanna Be Adored  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 11
Weapons of Mass Destruction . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  21
Yesterday . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  30
Canon Fodder .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  38
thatgamecompany: A Case Study in Aesthetics .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  49
CHAPTER 2 — Ideals Over Ideas .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 61
What Side Are You On? .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  62
Approximate Authenticity . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  71

vi
Contents
Bunker Busting .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  81
Monument Valley: A Case Study in Craftwork . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  90
CHAPTER 3 — Remake/Remodel . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  103
Into the Unknown  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  104
After the Gold Rush .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 112
Start a Band, Not a Business .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 119
Stop Just Making Stuff .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 126
The Work of Play in the Age of Digital Reproduction .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  135
Threes: A Case Study in Itinerant Iteration .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  142
Dear Esther: A Case Study in Challenging Assumptions . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  152
CHAPTER 4 — Success Doesn’t Suck . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  163
It’s Just a Business Model .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  164
Let Me Be Your Fantasy . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  182
Patronize Me, Please .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  193
Devolver Digital: A Case Study in Amplification .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  204
Conclusions . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 217
The Punk Playthings Manifesto . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 219
References . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  221
Colophon .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  253
Index . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  255

vii
Forewords
Being playful, like being thoughtful, acquiescent, or combative, is sim-
ply one of the many states of being we occupy day to day. As social 
creatures, we often use playfulness to interrogate our social and 
physical environment, to build relationships, and to establish bound-
aries. We may not describe this as gameplay but we engage in situa-
tions many times every day that require us to interpret rules of social 
and professional norms and make decisions about how we behave 
in order to achieve the outcomes we desire. As we get older, how we 
perceive and engage with play is re-contextualized and the grammar 
we use to describe it evolves, but essentially we negotiate the world 
by engaging similar strategies to those we used to test our parents’ 
patience or the strength of a rope swing.
Right now video games are going through those difficult teenage years, 
where the desire to be a grownup is engaged in a constant battle with 
the desire to run and jump and shout out loud. Like a teenager, the 
route to maturity for games cannot be negotiated using the tools or 
experiences available to us, we learn as we go. Over time we start to 
hang out with different people in different places and, while we might 
still feel like teenagers inside, externally our maturity is judged by the 
company we keep, the places we go, and the things we do.
For video games that means you will now find them in the museum 
or art gallery, in the classroom or medical center, and in festivals and 

viii
Forewords
events being used by musicians and performers to reinterpret their 
performances; they are the subject of research conferences where 
academics discuss the way that games allow us to develop our under-
standing of ourselves and our interactions with ideas and actions. The 
maturity of a medium is not defined by the age of its audience but more 
by the way it enters culture. Culture, of course, is a two-way street. This 
book shows, for the first time, how our culture and traditions can influ-
ence our approach to designing and making games as well as being 
designers and makers.
I first came across Chris teaching a games course in a provincial art 
school. Having one eye open for people with a cultural studies back-
ground and an interest in video games, I immediately picked up on 
the influence Chris was having on the student artists and designers 
as it came through in the fluency and maturity of their understanding 
of their work. I pointed this out to a senior academic, recommending 
that they hold on to Chris jealously as academics with his knowledge 
and enthusiasm for games are hard to find. Imagine my delight to 
discover shortly afterward that he’d been moved to another depart-
ment…Meanwhile in Dundee, a small games studio was building a 
reputation for excellence, reliability, and productivity, building small 
casual games for digital TV set-top boxes. Denki would develop over 
150 games for that platform and develop a design process that was 
as close to anything I’d seen to a reliable and reproducible approach 
to designing a stream of high-quality products.
The “Denki Way,” as it became known, was developed by the inspired 
and mercurial Gary Penn and the insightful and forensic Colin Anderson. 
The studio practices an all-encompassing approach to design and devel-
opment that values craft and quality with a player-centered approach to 
all aspects of planning, design, and production. When the opportunity 
arose for a study of design practices in the games industry, funded by 
the Economic and Social Research Council here at Abertay University, 
Denki and Chris seemed like an irresistible match.
In the eye of the storm at Denki sat Sean Taylor, producer and the 
man tasked with implementing the “Denki Way” and ideally placed 
to guide Chris through the twist and turns of the process; how it had 
developed from principle to practice and what it meant for day-to-day 
life in the studio. Collaboration turned to friendship through a shared 
passion for pop culture, fashion, and music. What started as research 
soon became a crusade to improve design practice in the games 
industry, learning from previous experiences in other media, par-
ticularly in advertising and design agencies. Their approach borrows 
the ecosystem of the music industry and the emerging “authentic-
ity culture” in catering and hospitality; the soft politics of the hipster 

ix
Forewords
movement influenced their thinking. Conceived over craft beer and 
artisan pretzels, this book is the joyful issue of their union.
Punk Playthings is overtly political. It challenges game makers to line 
up alongside rebellious visionaries from Malcolm McLaren to Quentin 
Tarantino; to recognize that they are part of a disruptive tradition that 
casts a skeptical eye to its past and a jealous eye to its future. In these 
pages, commercial success is neither motivation nor shameful desire 
but a consequence of authenticity. Here, game making is a response to 
the urge to engage with others and, in its authentic state, a means by 
which to critique contemporary society, its values and its institutions. 
Engagement, for Chris and Sean, is not a transaction—not downloads 
or in app purchases—but an ethos that begins in the studio (or even 
at the bar), expressed in shared cultural values. They emphasize the 
need for an agreed vision (manifesto) and a commitment to your craft 
that is matched by a commitment to your players, a cultural appetite 
that informs every aspect of production and an openness to the influ-
ence of the past on the potential of the future.
This book brings to mind Flannery O’Connor’s answer to a ques-
tion about why she writes. In her response, “I write to discover what 
I know,” the author captures the fundamental condition of creative 
production. She points out that grand visions quickly turn to philos-
ophy but that the creative impetus begins in the individual experi-
ence; it is the personal made public and the intimate made explicit. In 
speaking of what we know, we preserve authenticity and offer up an 
invitation to players to enter into the confidence of the game.
As the introduction says, this book is not for everyone. Game mak-
ers, designers and developers are an increasingly diverse group. Over 
my 15 years of practicing teaching and researching in games, I have 
worked with at least three games industries and visited enormous 
games factories, micro-studios, and sole traders. I have witnessed a 
technology industry become a creative industry, become a cultural 
industry and be all of these at once. The one thing I find everywhere 
I go is a spirit of adventure, a desire to look over the horizon to bring 
back what they find. This book is written in that spirit and if you’re a 
fellow traveler, this book might just be for you.
Gregor White
Professor of Applied Creativity
Head of School of Design and Informatics and the
UK Centre for Excellence in Computer Games
Education at Abertay University

x
Forewords
I was pleasantly surprised when Sean told me that he and Chris would 
be writing a book inspired by Chris’ time studying Denki’s develop-
ment methods. I’ve always intended to share more about the lessons 
Denki has learned as independent game developers, but never quite 
got around to it for various reasons. The idea of having someone else 
start the ball rolling was more than welcome. However, I was a little 
concerned when Sean asked me to write a foreword for the fruits of 
their labor: Punk Playthings. That’s because it’s hard to imagine any-
one less “punk” than me—a balding, middle-aged geek who grew up 
doing what I was told, keeping away from those unruly characters 
who might lead me astray and finding solace in that quintessential 
antithesis of punk rock music—prog rock.
That said, I’ve always had a healthy respect for mavericks—those peo-
ple I saw doing their own thing because they inherently knew it was 
right, even when everyone around them was telling them otherwise. 
Fortunately, upon joining DMA Design in 1993, I had the opportunity 
to work with an entire company of mavericks early in my career and 
that experience lit in me a desire to carry the torch forward after DMA 
abandoned its pioneering roots and jumped aboard the Grand Theft 
Auto gravy train at the end of 1999. I never really considered it this way 
at the time—but with this benefit of hindsight and the perspective I’ve 
gained from this book you’re about to read—I guess you could say that 
leaving the safe harbor of DMA to start Denki was … a little bit punk?
Having now read Punk Playthings, I certainly recognize a few hallmarks 
I wouldn’t have beforehand. Denki was born of the kind of frustration 
and rebellion this book champions—frustration at the dysfunctional 
development methods our industry considers “normal”—and rebellion 
at the widely held belief that the creative process of making games is 
somehow sacred: a dark art, full of superstition and ritual, complete 
with its high-priests who claim a deeper understanding and insight. 
As far as I’ve been able to tell from my own experiences, all those 
approaches ever do are create convenient shadows that charlatans can 
hide in after making poor decisions so as never to be held to account 
for their outcomes, or used to frighten developers into compliance. I 
wanted Denki to kick the doors open, to throw back the curtains, let 
in some light and show everyone that game development wasn’t any-
thing to be worshiped or revered without question but rather a won-
derful new art-form to be explored, studied, and challenged by a digital 
generation of artisans in just the sorts of ways Punk Playthings encour-
ages. So I guess you might say that was a little bit punk too?
When I launched Denki with my co-conspirators in 2000, we rejected 
commercialism as our prime motivator, unlike the majority of our 
games industry peers at the time. Not in the sort of naive, idealis-
tic way that Punk Playthings wisely warns young game creators away 

xi
Forewords
from, but by placing money in its rightful place as a key resource to 
be respected rather than a principal guiding aim to be chased at any 
cost. Of course, everyone says they’re not motivated by the money, 
but we only really find out whether we are or not when it’s on the 
table right in front of us. That’s why one of my proudest moments 
remains Friday March 10, 2000, when I and my fellow Denki founders 
looked a £1.6 Million offer to buy the company outright straight in the 
eye and said, “no thanks—our independence matters more to us.” 
I guess that was pretty punk.
The independence we bought ourselves that day enabled us to build 
Denki entirely without compromise and grow it into a sort of creative 
laboratory for game development, crystallizing our culture slowly 
around our core principles without any impurities. We were able to 
find people along the way who shared our goal of making game devel-
opment more transparent and effective and who wanted to build 
games with a focus on the substance rather than the surface. Every 
time we did make money, we didn’t spend it on flashier offices—as 
anyone who has ever visited Denki HQ will attest—or fast cars or 
any of the other vanity traps young game developers often fall into. 
Instead, each time we amassed the kind of money that might have 
bought us bigger houses or faster cars, we spent it on funding more 
research in the Denki games laboratory, exploring original concepts 
that inspired us or refining the techniques that would help us master 
the craft of game making. I guess that was pretty punk.
The development method we arrived at—which we rather unimagi-
natively refer to as “The Denki Way”—certainly helps us make games 
more effectively, but it was never intended to be prescriptive; it was 
intended to be provocative. Sure, no one blinks at the mention of video 
games and digital toys in the same sentence today, but back in 2000 
when Denki shunned the “games company” descriptor and announced 
itself as “A Digital Toy Company,” the suggestion of computer games as 
digital toys was more likely to start a fight than inspire thoughtful dis-
cussion. In some ways, we were wearing the I Hate Pink Floyd t-shirts of 
our day. So, you know, maybe that was properly punk too.
Oh yeah—and now I come to think of it—Denki never really had a 
commercial hit either. What could possibly be more punk than that, 
right?
I’ve been lucky enough to meet and work with some truly inspirational 
mavericks over the years and the authors of this book certainly fall 
into that category. Sean is a kindred spirit who embodies the ideals 
Denki was founded on better than I do. He’s held us all accountable to 
those ideals in practice and he continually challenges their underlying 
assumptions without deference in order to make them better. Chris is 

xii
Forewords
his perfect counterpart—every bit as curious, insightful and fearlessly 
questioning as Sean, but forged in the academy rather than tempered 
in the furnaces of creative factories. Between them, they have a for-
midable insight and perspective on the most pressing issues today’s 
game makers will need to overcome if they want to work in play for 
the long term. And I’m really pleased to see so many of those insights 
successfully captured and shared within the pages that follow.
It’s been something of a bittersweet experience reading through the 
wisdom Sean and Chris have carefully distilled into Punk Playthings. 
Part of me is deeply jealous that I didn’t have this book when I was 
starting my career in game development 25 years ago. There are 
lessons on almost every page that are worth their weight in gold—
lessons that took me months—sometimes years—to learn. There are 
innovative approaches to game development in here that I literally 
bankrolled and wasted tens, or maybe hundreds, of thousands of 
pounds on before discovering their limitations—all expertly decon-
structed and exposed for the misguided thinking they always were, 
so that no one else has to waste their time or money going down 
those dead ends again. I seriously wish I could go back and hand my 
younger self a copy of this book when I was starting Denki.
Then again, maybe it’s just as well this stuff wasn’t in circulation back 
then because after reading this book I’ve realized I’m so punk I’d prob-
ably have rebelled against it all anyway. Now I’m just left wondering 
what pisses off today’s new generation of game makers the most? 
What aspects of “the games industry” are they going to rebel against? 
By the time they’ve finished reading Punk Playthings, they’ll have the 
perspective and manifesto to marshall themselves to change it.
I sincerely hope that Punk Playthings hands them the match they need 
to light their anger into a healthy, two-fingered salute to conventional 
wisdom.
Kick out the jams motherfuckers.
Colin Anderson
CEO
Denki
Dundee, Scotland

xiii
Acknowledgments
Chris says
Thanks to Professor Gregor White for glimpsing a glimmer of poten-
tial many years ago then consistently helping me realize it. To Colin 
Anderson and Gary Penn for their friendship, openness, and generos-
ity. And to my dad for putting Pong in his seaside amusement arcade 
40 or so years ago—this is your fault.
Respect to my fellow gunslinger, Sean, for much the same things he’s 
kindly written about me. Plus his razor-sharp insight into making 
games and careful nurturing of my now deep appreciation of noctur-
nal Scottish culture. ¡Larga vida la conspiración!
Thanks to friends at the University of Abertay, Dundee—Dr Iain 
Donald and Dr Dayna Galloway in particular—and some of the won-
derful students I’ve taught over the years (hello, Rosie!).
Most importantly, I really could not have written this book without the 
love and support of my wife and best friend, Marie-Claire. This book 
is for you.

xiv
Acknowledgments
Sean says
I’d like to thank Gary Penn for helping me to think differently about 
the design of game design and Colin Anderson for giving me the 
impetus to articulate it. I’d also like to thank my co-conspirator, Chris, 
for his endless enthusiasm, inspiring provocations and ever-insightful 
criticisms.
Finally, this book is dedicated to my wife, Zoe. This book would not 
have been possible without her love and support. Thank you.
We both say
Chris and Sean would like to thank Louie Isaaman-Jones for his ster-
ling work making this book look unique. When he’s not selecting 
music, crafting cocktails, or tending to urban woodland, Louie does 
distinctive design for some of London’s most maverick nights, record 
labels, agencies, and companies. If you want him to make something 
of yours look better, say hello: 
Email: info@louieij com
Web: http://www louieij com/
Instagram: https://www instagram com/louieij

xv
Authors
Dr Chris Lowthorpe is an award-winning game educator and playful 
provocateur. He earned his doctorate from the University of Abertay, 
Dundee—currently Europe’s top game school—where he also won 
the 2014 Innovation in Teaching Award. Chris has taught and men-
tored some of the brightest talents in UK games and provided game 
education, development, and entrepreneurship consultancy to aca-
demic, cultural, and commercial organizations.
An unreconstructed East Anglian, Chris is a lifelong Pong fanatic, 
trained chef, amateur cocktail crafter, ex-London tour guide, socialist-
turned-pragmatist, retired DJ and Acid House veteran. Somehow, all 
this is connected. He lives in the middle of a Suffolk field with his wife, 
Marie-Claire, extensive record collection, trusty Jeep, and the occa-
sional pheasant.
Web: https://www.playhaus.online
Twitter: https://twitter.com/chrislowthorpe
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/chrislowthorpe/
Sean Taylor is an award-winning game producer and playful pro-
vocateur. In 1996, Sean dropped out of college to join the organized 
chaos of DMA Design—midway through the production of the origi-
nal Grand Theft Auto—and has been making games ever since. For 
10 years, Sean was the producer at Denki—Dundee’s digital toy 

xvi
Authors
factory—where he helped design, develop, and produce hundreds 
of games across web, mobile, television, console, and social—most 
notably, the BAFTA-winning Quarrel. He has worked on some of the 
world’s largest and smallest game projects—creating a lot of value 
and a lot more mistakes along the way.
Made in Scotland and currently residing in Dubai, Sean helps game 
makers around the world do the things that they do better so they 
can do better things.
Web: https://www.playhaus.online
Twitter: https://twitter.com/kwangchow
Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/kwangchow/

xvii
Introduction
1,2,3,4...
“Hello Peter, Hello Paul,
Saints and sinners, welcome all,
Tommy Cannon and Bobby Ball,
Hello, Hello, Hello, Hello!”
The Beloved
Hello (1990)
Is It Me You’re Looking For?
Before we get started, we would like to thank you for buying this book 
(muchas gracias), borrowing it (cheers), or possibly stealing it (bloody 
cheapskate). We also want to discuss expectations. If you’re reading 
this in the hope of discovering a silver bullet for entrepreneurial game 
making success—forget it. That’s the next book. If you wanted a pre-
scriptive how-to handbook for the step-by-step creation of compel-
ling playful experiences—sorry, no dice. Don’t worry. There are plenty 
of people out there who will gladly nickel and dime you with snake 
oil promises for both the above. But if you’re looking for a book to 
provoke, challenge, and sometimes frustrate you—while maybe forc-
ing the odd nod of recognition or occasional outburst of emphatic 
­agreement—you could be in luck.

xviii
Introduction
This book is a compass, not a map. It is both probe and provoca-
tion, not a comfortable confirmation of game making biases and 
orthodoxies. You might love it and hate it at the same time. That’s 
fine. All we ask is you keep an open mind. Do that and who knows 
what might happen? This book is not for everyone. But it might just 
be for you.
Who’s Better, Who’s Best?
“We tried and we failed
And we tried and we failed
Oh, we tried and we failed
We tried and we failed
And we tried …
Cash on the nail ... it’s just a fairytale!”
The Smiths with Sandie Shaw
Jeane (1984)
This is a book born out of failure. Primarily, the failure to settle 
an argument. In January 2012, Denki—the independent game stu-
dio in Dundee, Scotland, where Sean worked—launched Quarrel 
for the Xbox. A strategy word game best described as Scrabble × 
Risk × Countdown, Quarrel was initially published on the App 
Store in August the previous year. The game quickly received 
critical acclaim, culminating in the BAFTA Scotland Best Game 
Award for 2011. But the development story of Quarrel was not a 
happy one.
Denki first envisaged Quarrel in 2008, finishing a version for Xbox 
Live Arcade (XBLA) two years later. And this is where the trouble 
began. Following prevailing industry orthodoxy, the studio started 
shopping Quarrel around to publishers. The game acquisition 
teams loved it but once they passed the game up the decision 
tree, problems started. The executives in finance and marketing 
­departments—what Denki CEO Colin Anderson terms “the bit more 
commonly known as The Industry”—were not interested (2012). 
The publishers gave many reasons for rejecting Quarrel but one 
signal persisted through the noise: gamers don’t buy word games. 
Anderson didn’t agree. He believed “gamers know a good game 
when they see one and will happily invest in it” (Anderson 2012). 
Denki pressed on. When it published the iOS version a year later, 
critical reaction and the winning of a BAFTA supplied signals 
Anderson could be right. So on the day of Quarrel’s XBLA launch, 
in his usual engaging and candid style Anderson penned an article 

xix
Introduction
for Gamasutra describing what had occurred and provocatively 
asking: who was right, the game industry or Quarrel?
The answer was neither. Quarrel was not the commercial success 
Denki hoped for. The certification process and legal wrangling 
necessary for publishing on XBLA had become “excruciating” for 
independent developers (Carmel 2011). Denki proved no excep-
tion. Worse, the company had chosen the wrong publisher for the 
game. But Quarrel had to be released if it was going to recoup its 
development costs. Finally, the game emerged, but only at great 
commercial, cultural, and personal cost to the company. Despite 
all its best intentions, it transpired that Denki had sold Quarrel out 
to the wrong people.
But Denki’s failures do not mean the industry was right. What the 
story of Quarrel exposed were the limits of industry orthodoxy. The 
old ways of thinking, making, and selling were no longer working in a 
newly disrupted landscape. A game that had been a notable critical 
success, that connected and resonated with players during open play-
testing and following its App Store launch, had somehow managed to 
sink without trace. For Denki, Quarrel was proof, traditional industry 
methods were now useless at selling quirky games or ­esoteric expe-
riences. The orthodoxy was based on notions of the mass, of bloc 
demographics, and of push advertising. Instead of attracting patron-
age directly from the like-minded, dogma demanded identikit games 
that conformed to established genres. These simply cannibalized 
concepts and mechanics from other successful games in an effort 
to appeal to the same audience, conveniently identified by proxies 
such as focus groups and personas. The resulting products were then 
neatly packaged and put on the “supermarket shelf.” Games were 
beginning to eat themselves.
Turning Disruption into Money
Releasing Quarrel was futile yet valuable. The game failed com-
mercially but it confirmed what Denki had suspected: the indus-
try playbook hadn’t changed but the playing field and rules of the 
game had. Radically. After learning this, Denki decided it needed 
to experiment with new approaches for making and selling games. 
It would need to adapt better and faster if it was going to negoti-
ate the uncertainties of a disrupted marketplace and survive. This 
need was the provocation that led to a new project: Denki Skunk 
Works.
Skunk Works was a highly autonomous team working on experi-
mental projects relatively unhindered by bureaucracy. Sean was 

xx
Introduction
instigator and leader of the project, Chris observed it for his doc-
toral research. The team sought to explore new thinking and per-
spectives by developing experimental products that provided 
heuristic learning. Skunk Works would learn quickly and fail fast 
by conducting insurgencies into the new and supposedly democ-
ratized marketplace generated by digital distribution. It was hoped 
this learning would eventually help Denki circumvent outmoded 
industry bullshit and achieve commercial success making its own 
games.
Denki already knew self-publishing presented as many challenges as 
opportunities. It brought increased uncertainty, a saturated market-
place, and the need for a new mindset and set of competencies. It 
was difficult to get a game discovered by customers or to persuade 
those that discovered it to make a purchase. In its impetuous ideal-
ism, the valorization of self-publishing by the indie sector tended to 
gloss over these challenges—it still does—but Denki had been playing 
the game too long to get fooled. The company had begun exploring 
approaches designed to help overcome these new challenges, start-
ing with Steve Blank’s Customer Development approach then pro-
gressing to Lean Startup principles advocated by Eric Ries and Ash 
Maurya. But Anderson soon realized adopting Lean Startup through-
out Denki would be too radical, risky, and slow. Instead, the proposed 
Skunk Works would do it. So this team began a series of experiments 
to implement Lean Startup, build adaptive and entrepreneurial 
capacity, recognize and overcome the challenges of self-publishing, 
and most of all, to learn. One of the first things Skunk Works learned 
was that while Lean Startup had some useful ideas and approaches 
for game development, it was too clinical for creating compelling play-
ful experiences. Worse, the team discovered that building adaptive 
capacity, encouraging entrepreneurship, and developing a heuristic 
mindset take time and therefore money. Unfortunately, both were 
running out for Denki.
Skunk Works came to an end due to lack of resources. By usual busi-
ness metrics, it had been a failure. The project had not delivered com-
mercial success from its experimental game, Par Tribus, and the only 
meaningful revenue now coming into Denki was from work for hire. 
The company had a proven repertoire for efficient high-quality mak-
ing, so it seemed obvious its best chance for short-term sustainability 
lay in that direction. Denki gave up trying to create and sell original 
games for the foreseeable future. Instead, it went back to making 
games for other organizations. End of story.
Well, not quite. Because in many ways, Skunk Works was a ­success. 
It delivered what it was supposed to: valuable heuristic learning. 
Denki learned through failure that Lean Startup was not a silver 

xxi
Introduction
bullet for game making. It also learned that the company was not—at 
that time—well equipped to sell its own games on the open market. 
And it learned all this fast enough to change direction and return to 
client work. As a result, Denki not only saved itself but has quietly 
prospered in the past few years. More personally, it made us real-
ize that a heuristic mindset, nimble adaptability, entrepreneur-
ship, and intrapreneurship are now crucial competencies for game 
makers. These are no longer luxuries; they are necessities. But this 
learning—­complimented by secondhand learning from the failure of 
others—also led us to think there had to be other ways to skin the 
game making cat. There had to be different approaches beyond the 
well-trodden but increasingly deteriorating AAA or indie pathways. 
Some new roads less traveled. We started discussing and explor-
ing hundreds of examples that imparted more learning and it is a 
curated collection of these that appear in this book. Many come from 
the world of games but many do not. All helped us develop a set of 
first principles that form the foundation for our approach to making 
games in the early 21st century.
Career Opportunities
“Anger is an energy!”
Public Image Limited
Rise (1986)
Another catalyst for this book was the serial tendency of game start-
ups in our local ecosystem to fail after a year or so. Many had been 
“incubated” by much-vaunted programs funded by public money, 
others by a national broadcaster. Most featured students we had 
previously taught or mentored, who we knew were extremely tal-
ented and had been educated on perhaps the best university game 
program in Europe. It was obvious something was seriously wrong 
when so much creative talent was being wasted. We investigated 
further and began to identify why this was happening: the funding 
of snowflake ideas instead of sustainable teams, pressure to incor-
porate not speculate, monocultural and orthodoxical ­mentorship, 
exhortations to endlessly make that treated selling as an after-
thought or dirty word, self-limiting “indie” cultures and identities, 
and those holding the purse strings often being more interested in 
“conserving the institution” than the future of talented young peo-
ple. It made us sad and angry to see all this entrepreneurial spirit 
wasted and enthusiasm crushed. And it is this anger that deto-
nated this book and underpins its provocative approach. We really 
care about this shit.

xxii
Introduction
Walls Come Tumbling Down
“Creativity is just connecting things … [Creative people] connect 
experiences they’ve had and synthesize new things ... the broader 
one’s understanding of the human experience, the better design we 
will have.”
Steve Jobs
interviewed by Gary Wolf in Wired (1996)
This book is a mosaic. It adopts a contextual and inductive approach 
where exemplars act as tesserae assembled to make up a unified 
whole. Or at least, that’s the plan. We display little respect for bound-
aries between mediums, industries, sectors, specialisms, or disci-
plines. We want this book to function as a trading space for ideas and 
learning sourced from across domains and cultures. We agree with 
Steve Jobs—the broader your cultural inputs, the better your creative 
outputs. Monocultures are simply systems devoted to reducing the 
variation that helps ecosystems evolve (Turner 2008, p.45). A mono-
cultural mindset has no place in creative or artistic ecosystems, serv-
ing only to increase homogeneity and diminish originality. Creativity 
scholar Keith Sawyer argues “you can’t create in a vacuum” (2006, 
loc.3414). We agree. For Sawyer, creativity is a sociocultural, interac-
tional, collaborative phenomenon—contextually dependent on wider 
culture and society. And creating games is no different. Even though 
it sometimes seems like its own island, as a creative endeavor game 
making is really part of a vast, connected archipelago. A tessera in the 
cultural mosaic, to extend the metaphor. And when everything is con-
nected, you can learn from anywhere. All you have to do is embrace 
knowledge-gathering, expand your cultural capital, think laterally, 
and make interesting new connections. Poach, plunder, and pilfer 
good ideas. Appropriate everything worth taking and reimagine it as 
something fresh.
You will find each essay here functions as a stand-alone piece but is, 
of course, connected to everything else. This means you don’t have 
to read this book in sequential order if you don’t want. You will also 
notice essays and examples raise points and themes that repeat and 
resonate throughout this book. Sometimes we make these explicit, 
sometimes they remain implicit. There are also shifts in authority, 
tone, and perspective. We make no apologies for this. We’re explor-
ing a complicated, fluid, and uncertain landscape where there are 
no easy answers. This book constitutes the process of our thinking 
rather than a completed product of discovery. We employ examples 
and case studies as probes and provocations, as means of insight to 
enable pattern recognition, rather than to deliver the fleeting chimera 

xxiii
Introduction
of objective truth. Like Marshall McLuhan, we see ourselves as safe-
crackers who don’t know what’s inside. We just sit down and start 
to work. We listen, test, accept, and discard. We try out different 
sequences until the tumblers fall and (hopefully) the doors spring 
open (Playboy 1969). We have no fixed perspective. And we are happy 
to revise anything we say that later proves to be nonsense or doesn’t 
provide deeper understanding. The nearest we come to advocating 
anything is our manifesto, a set of first principles that both informed 
and emerged from the iterative process of writing this book. Outside 
of those, we pretty much leave you to make your own connections and 
draw your own conclusions. We’ve got total confidence in your level of 
intelligence. After all, you’re reading this book. Plus, it gives you some-
thing to do. Who said games have the monopoly on interactivity?
Rip It Up and Start Again
Although this book begins with failure, it is not about failure. It is about 
taking failure and learning from it, then using that learning to develop 
alternative approaches. This book is about learning from other peo-
ple, from other cultures, domains, and sectors, from the distant or 
recent past. But it is definitely not about following prescriptive rules 
and dogma or getting stuck in nostalgic quicksand. The past is for 
building on, not living in. This book is about encouraging a truly inde-
pendent mindset and approach for creating expressive playful expe-
riences that resonate through culture. It is about embracing chaos, 
flipping the bird to orthodoxy, making new and unusual connections 
and, of course, doing it yourself. For this is the true essence of punk—
not mohawk haircuts or ripped t-shirts—and the reason this book is 
called Punk Playthings.
Thick as Thieves
Finally, the thinking that appears on these pages is the product of 
two minds. It is the result of a conspiracy. And that conspiracy grew 
from serendipity, as so many creative things do. A few weeks after 
Chris began research at Denki, he was dispatched to a conference in 
Glasgow. So was Sean. Neither of us knew the other was attending, 
as we had only exchanged pleasantries at this point. By chance, we 
found ourselves attending the same talk and sat together. Afterward, 
we discussed the content and discovered we had reached roughly the 
same conclusions. So, in the absence of anything more interesting on 
the agenda, we withdrew to one of Glasgow’s fine hostelries to dis-
cuss things further. And so the journey began.

xxiv
Introduction
In the five years since, we have continued these conspiratorial con-
versations. Incessantly. During visits to Dundee’s best bars and pubs, 
our respective homes, London restaurants, workspaces, and most 
recently—due to geographical distance—on Slack. During this time 
we kept working our day jobs, adapted our thinking, and iterated our 
principles. The book you’re reading is a different proposition to the 
book we began. And that’s as it should be. Writing is thinking—as is 
any creative act. But at some point, you just have to stop. At some 
point, you have to expose your conspiracy and invite others in—if 
only to make it real. And so, dear reader, here is your invitation.

1
Chapter 1
The Road Less 
Traveled
Abstract
There are exceptional games but there is nothing exceptional about 
games. As a medium, it is no better or worse than any other.
This chapter explores creative mavericks who rejected the conven-
tional wisdom and subverted the orthodoxical practices of their 
chosen mediums and domains. It argues that game makers them-
selves must move beyond the ghetto of the gamer—and the nostal-
gic clichés of traditional game development—to become genuinely 
independent in their thoughts, intentions and actions. To invent 
the future, games must take the road less traveled.

2
Punk Playthings
No Gods, No Masters
“A man with no enemies is a man with no character.”
Paul Newman 
(quoted in Verlhac and Dherbier 2006)
“Imagination is its own form of courage.”
Francis J Underwood
House of Cards (2015)
Eclectic Skeptics
We worry too much about what people think of us. And we accept 
too much of what we’re told. Now, this might sound rich coming 
from a book constantly telling you stuff. But that’s not what this 
book is about. What we’re doing is sharing provocations that will 
hopefully make you stop and think. What you do then, that’s totally 
up to you. Nobody is infallible; no one has a monopoly on truth, 
despite what snake oil sellers would have you believe. And that’s 
always worth remembering. Be an eclectic skeptic. Form your own 
character. Accept no gods, no masters. Look around, process and 
evaluate your context, assimilate information, then find new per-
spectives and imagine new realities. Leave the Kool-Aid on the 
shelf and resist restrictive silos. We don’t follow prescriptive rule 
books—why should you?
More than a Woman
“Men liked to put me down as the best woman painter. I think I’m 
one of the best painters.”
Georgia O’Keeffe
(quoted in Chadwick 1990)
Consider Georgia O’Keeffe. Today regarded as one of the great 
artists of the last century, O’Keefe spent much of her life resist-
ing  categorization. She lived uncompromisingly on her own 
terms and her work was equally resolute. In the 1920s she 
started to paint plants and flowers—nothing new you might 
think—but O’Keeffe had a different perspective. Instead of a tra-
ditional still-life viewpoint, she decided to paint flora as if viewed 
through a magnifying glass—up close and extremely personal. 
Works such as Black Iris garnered critical and public attention, 

3
The Road Less Traveled
helping establish O’Keeffe as one of America’s most innovative 
modernists (Messinger 2004). These paintings also led to critics 
making myriad associations with the female body, due mainly to 
the popularity of Sigmund Freud’s ideas at the time. Throughout 
the 1920s, her work was continually described in Freudian terms, 
labelled as “feminine” concerning perspective and method of 
expression. O’Keefe hated this. She viewed these interpreta-
tions as lazy ideological constructions that reinforced ideas of 
sexual difference, leading to more social and cultural segregation 
between genders (Chadwick 1990). In this construction, women 
painters were “feminine,” “emotional,” and “elementary,” sub-
consciously obsessed with their bodies and close to the earth, 
whereas men were “masculine,” “rational,” and “intellectual.” 
O’Keeffe never apologized for her gender—often exploring and 
celebrating her womanhood—but she believed such thinking 
only continued to marginalize female artists and reinforce patri-
archy. It kept her firmly in the category of “great woman artist” 
but excluded her from being a “great artist.”
In 1929, O’Keeffe started to visit New Mexico and became 
enchanted by the landscape and iconography of the desert there. 
Again, she adopted a new perspective, juxtaposing skeletal objects 
with desert landscape imagery, playing with size and scale. These 
works were provocative and unsettling, surreal and often mascu-
line in form, far from the perceived femininity of her earlier work. 
For the rest of her life she would continue to shift perspectives in 
her paintings, moving close-up and abstracting her favorite land-
scapes, reimagining clouds from above through an airplane win-
dow. O’Keeffe would live in the brutal, beautiful desert lampooning 
men who talked about the “Great American Adventure” but had 
“never crossed the Hudson” (Imagine 2016). She was an outsider 
prickly as a local cactus who ploughed her own idiosyncratic fur-
row. Fellow outsider Joan Didion argued O’Keeffe was “equipped 
early with an immutable sense of who she was and a fairly clear 
understanding she would be required to prove it” (1979, p.129). And 
this she did by remaining fluid, shifting perspectives by zooming in 
and out, resisting categorization and in the process, disrupting the 
patriarchal art world.
Today there are major retrospectives of O’Keeffe’s work in the 
most prestigious museums and galleries in the world. Her reso-
lutely maverick life is the subject of biographies and documen-
taries. Georgia O’Keeffe is now described simply as “a pioneer of 
20th-century art” (Tate 2016) or “American Painter” (Encyclopedia 
Britannica 2016); the words “female” or “woman” conspicuous 
by their increasing absence. Her continued resistance to being 

4
Punk Playthings
sidelined and categorized, her insistence on being judged solely 
on her work rather than her gender, finally paid off. Today Georgia 
O’Keeffe is simply one of the best painters.
An Englishman in New York
“We Sell—or else!”
David Ogilvy
Confessions of an Advertising Man (2013)
With David Ogilvy it’s often hard to separate the myth from the 
man; he was equally at home selling himself as he was selling his 
clients’ products. But that’s part of what makes him so fascinat-
ing. Born in England of Scots and Irish extraction, Ogilvy won a 
scholarship to Oxford to read history. By his own admission he 
“screwed up” his university education, leaving in 1931 to work as 
an apprentice chef in Paris (Tungate 2007). A year or so later, he 
took a job peddling Aga cooking stoves to French chefs in London 
restaurants. During this time as a door-to-door salesman, Ogilvy 
discovered and refined his talent for selling and closing a deal, 
becoming so successful his boss asked him to write a manual for 
the other salesmen. Decades later, this book was still being praised 
by Fortune magazine as an exemplar for sales manuals, at the time 
it led Ogilvy to his first job in advertising (Tungate 2007). But the 
lessons he learned on the streets of London never left him, grant-
ing Ogilvy a unique perspective that led him to become perhaps 
the most quoted and revered “ad man” ever. The tough streets 
were a world away from the glamour of advertising but closer to 
the customer. And it was here Ogilvy heuristically and memora-
bly, realized that “the customer isn’t a moron, she is your wife” 
(2013, p.124). Long before advertisers started to think of people as 
individuals or even personas—these were the days of the masses 
“understood” by distant proxy—Ogilvy beat them to the punch by 
actually getting out and meeting people. Fancy that. He learned 
and never forgot that customers were more than abstractions or 
catch-all demographics—they were people too.
Ogilvy always maintained advertising was simply a sophisticated 
form of selling. No more, no less. Immersing himself in the indus-
try during his early career, he spent time learning from New York’s 
most successful ad men. But Ogilvy was a natural skeptic. He evalu-
ated learning and information, abandoning what didn’t resonate 
with him and adopting and synthesizing what did—before adding 

5
The Road Less Traveled
his unique twist. He rarely followed trends, preferring to formulate 
his own opinion and forge his own path.
At his height during the 1960s—advertising’s creative revolution—
Ogilvy was skeptical of “creativity” as a silver bullet solution or an end 
in itself. He even banned the unthinking use of the word within his 
agency, describing it as “hideous” (Ogilvy 2013). Ogilvy valued creative 
people, but their value resided in an ability to sell products. He believed 
advertising needed to be entertaining but always in the service of 
being persuasive, famously quipping, “We make advertisements that 
people want to read. You can’t save souls in an empty church” (2013, 
p.125). But this razor-sharp focus on selling ran counter to the pre-
vailing industry zeitgeist. At the time most agencies were focusing on 
making “clever” or “arty” ads. Ogilvy insisted a good advertisement 
didn’t need to be clever; it needed to sell a product without drawing 
too much attention to itself (2013, p.108). The salesman in him meant 
Ogilvy could never forget agencies existed, first and foremost, to 
sell products for their clients. For him, the best advertising was well 
researched, based on a “big idea” and able to sell a product by com-
municating its benefits in an engaging way. Simple as that.
David Ogilvy changed advertising in many ways—usually by run-
ning counter to prevailing orthodoxies or trends. He even believed 
the best way to win new clients was not to spend precious resources 
on speculative “creative” pitches but to do great work for existing 
clients. Imagine that. The company he founded still bears his name, 
adheres to many of his ideals and is one of the world’s most success-
ful agencies. His desire to champion nonconformity, to pay well, to 
promote a positive corporate culture, to inspire people—plus his 
constant playful provocations in print—had a massive effect on the 
way advertisers thought about their work. Ogilvy reminded adver-
tising of what it did and encouraged the industry to value itself for 
doing it. Advertisers weren’t artists; they were salesmen who put 
on an entertaining and engaging show. This unique perspective 
and healthy skepticism reminded the industry of its essence at a 
time many were losing sight of it: “We Sell—or else!”
Insert Coin
“The things I had learned about getting you to spend a quarter 
in one of my midway games, I put those sales pitches in my auto-
mated box.”
Nolan Bushnell
(quoted in Kent 2000)

6
Punk Playthings
Meet someone else who divides opinion. Meet Nolan Bushnell. 
Celebrated and criticized in almost equal measure, there’s one 
thing most people agree on: Nolan Bushnell pretty much invented 
the modern game industries. You’re reading this book, so you 
already know about Atari, the iconic company Bushnell formed 
in 1972. Atari developed the seminal Pong—the first commer-
cially successful arcade video game—and quickly followed it with 
other canonical titles. Then the company released the hugely suc-
cessful cartridge-based Atari 2600 console in 1977. This machine 
took video games into both the home and the mainstream. It also 
unintentionally kick-started independent development when dis-
gruntled Atari employees left to found Activision—the first inde-
pendent game development company. So far, so familiar. But what 
we want to discuss is how Atari came to happen in the first place. 
And yes, you guessed it. It’s about gaining a different perspective 
and imagining a new reality.
Nolan Bushnell loves ideas. At high school he loved philosophy, 
debating and playing imaginative pranks on friends. Nolan was 
a smart kid. And like many smart kids he enrolled to get a col-
lege education, joining the University of Utah in 1962 to major 
in engineering. Utah was one of the top schools in computer sci-
ence—then a relatively new discipline—and Bushnell became 
fascinated by the subject. By befriending teaching assistants 
he gained regular access to the computer lab, where he played 
early computer games such as Spacewar!, taught himself to 
code and eventually made games of his own. His college educa-
tion enabled Bushnell to understand computers and computer 
games. But he also attended another place of learning during 
this time.
The story goes that after losing his tuition money in a poker 
game, Bushnell was forced to take a job to earn money. He did 
this running arcade games at the Lagoon amusement park, just 
outside Salt Lake City. He started on the midway, working a stall 
where punters knocked down stacked milk bottles with a base-
ball at a quarter a shot. Bushnell soon realized the key to his 
job wasn’t to stack the bottles; it was to attract players and get 
them to part with their coins. So he became a “midway barker”—
drumming up patronage from the passing public. After a while, 
he was moved to the pinball and electro-mechanical game 
arcade. Here he used his engineering knowledge to maintain the 
machinery, but all the time he was observing and learning how 
the games worked, honing his understanding of the ­business 
(Kent  2001, p.29). Bushnell immediately realized each coin-­
operated machine was fundamentally a stand-alone business. 

7
The Road Less Traveled
And he also discovered just how successful these mechanical 
businesses were, making as much as $200* a week per machine 
(NPR 2017). Bushnell saw opportunity and decided to get an 
intimate understanding of the tactics and tricks pinball and 
other games used to attract patronage then keep patrons part-
ing with their money. He observed how the machines put on a 
show through an “attract mode” designed to entice passersby, in 
just the way he’d been drumming up business by barking on the 
­midway. This understanding would serve him well in the future. 
The amusement park would be Bushnell’s second education.
With his new perspective, Bushnell realized the future lay in 
combining the computer games he loved with the coin-operated 
analog arcade games he’d learned so much from at Lagoon. 
His first attempt was a false start. Computer Space had an eye-
catching cabinet that attracted players—a trick learned from the 
arcades—but the gameplay was so complicated it required pages 
of instructions nobody wanted to read. The game was a failure, 
but Bushnell quickly learned from this. He started Atari and gave 
his new employee, Al Acorn, a brief to create a computer game as 
an exercise. Depending on who you believe, this was influenced 
either by the rudimentary computer tennis games Bushnell had 
played in college, or directly by the tennis game on the Magnavox 
Odyssey. Whatever the truth, Acorn came up with a prototype, 
surpassing what Bushnell had imagined with innovations such as 
ball acceleration and ricochets. Bushnell named the prototype 
Pong. The team added a few tweaks—including a coin-opera-
tion mechanism and the beautifully simple instruction to “Avoid 
missing ball for high score”—then installed a prototype cabinet 
at Andy Capp’s Tavern in Sunnydale, California. Bushnell knew 
Atari had something special but he also knew it didn’t have the 
money or manufacturing muscle to mass-produce it. So he flew 
to Chicago in a bid to sell Pong to one of the biggest coin-op com-
panies, Bally Manufacturing. In a myopic business decision on par 
with Dick Rowe turning down The Beatles, Bally rejected the game 
outright. Bushnell says it did so because Pong was a two-player 
game and the orthodoxy of coin-operated machines “didn’t allow 
for a two-player game if there’s not a one-player game” (quoted in 
NPR 2017). Bushnell was bitterly dejected and decided to return 
to California. But before he left, he decided to call Al Acorn. It was 
a call that would change both Bushnell’s life and the history of 
entertainment.
*	 Approximately $1600 per week when adjusted for 2017.

8
Punk Playthings
When Nolan got through to Al, his employee recounted how the 
team had received a request from Andy Capp’s to service Pong 
because the game had malfunctioned. When Acorn arrived at 
the bar, he had opened up the coin box to play a free game and 
test the machine. To his astonishment, hundreds and hundreds 
of quarters gushed out all over the floor. The game had stopped 
working simply because it could not take any more money! After 
some quick calculations, Bushnell realized Bally rejecting the 
game was the best thing that could have happened. He decided 
Atari would build and license Pong itself. It had just enough money 
to build 12 cabinets and as Bushnell recalls, “the minute I got off 
the plane I submitted the order for the parts ... and we were off to 
the races” (NPR 2017). The era of the commercial game industries 
had begun.
Imagine
O’Keeffe, Ogilvy and Bushnell had impact because they looked 
at the world around them and imagined it both different and 
better. They glimpsed another reality, then worked to bring that 
vision into being. Georgia O’Keeffe saw a world where women 
artists would be in the artistic canon on their own terms and 
merit. David Ogilvy envisaged an advertising industry that deliv-
ered value to its clients by selling its products to real people 
in a nonpatronizing, entertaining and persuasive way, rather 
than thinking of people as a malleable mass to be manipulated 
through self-indulgent creative cleverness. And Nolan Bushnell 
imagined arcades full of beautiful, bright, bleeping video game 
machines bringing joy to millions—and hopefully, millions to 
him. Of course, these are not the only examples. History is 
full of people who dared not only to dream but to make those 
dreams reality—people like Ada Lovelace, the Wright Brothers, 
Marie Curie or Steve Jobs. None of them adhered to orthodoxy 
or gave much credence to trends. All had maverick tendencies 
and were often difficult. But running against orthodoxy is only 
for the headstrong. To be truly independent of mind, you need 
a healthy suspicion of accepted wisdom, conventions and opin-
ions. You have to be skeptical but not cynical. You must question 
the status quo while continually learning from a wide range of 
influences, experiences and failures to imagine and realize new 
alternatives, new directions, new realities. You need the courage 
to imagine something new and the character to make it happen. 
If you can do that—who knows? You might make the world a bet-
ter place.

9
The Road Less Traveled
FIGURE 1.1  Atari Pong arcade cabinet. (Courtesy of Rob Boudon, 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0.)

10
Punk Playthings
FIGURE 1.2  Portrait of Georgia O’Keefe by Alfred Stieglitz. (Courtesy of 
Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AO’​
Keeffe-(hands).jpg)

11
The Road Less Traveled
I Wanna Be Adored
“When I discover who I am, I will be free.”
Ralph Ellison
The Invisible Man (1965)
“If I was you, I’d be a bit careful about this idea of independence. 
We’re all connected.”
Gil Scott-Heron
(quoted in PIAS 2016)
Me, Myself and I
The landscape is changing: AAA is a niche business, “gamer” a sub-
cultural ghetto, “indie” increasingly a genre and identity. All are 
becoming meaningless, mostly empty clichés. Don’t get cornered. 
Don’t believe the hype. Putting #indiedev or #indielife on a tweet 
doesn’t make you independent. It only shows your desire for accep-
tance. Never mind the virtue signaling. Be independent of mind. Be 
independent of action. Be yourself.
Out of One, Many
Gaming culture and industry were disrupted by the “casual revolu-
tion” during the mid- to late 2000s. First proposed by ludologist 
Jesper Juul, this concept describes a process of video games ceas-
ing to be a subcultural activity—limited mostly to young males who 
self-identify as “gamers”—and becoming increasingly mainstream 
by connecting with “casual players” through “casual games.” These 
games were accessible, demanding less time or knowledge of 
gaming subcultures and conventions to enjoy. Juul (2010) argues 
the phenomenon was mainly the result of two trends: the rise of 
“mimetic interfaces,” where a player performs a physical activity 
mimicked on-screen—e.g. Nintendo’s Wii console or games like 
Guitar Hero—and the rise of downloadable casual games.
While mimetic interfaces contributed to the casual revolution, in 
hindsight they were—as shiny tech often is—a fad. More impor-
tant was the emergence of downloadable games, or to be more 
accurate, digital distribution. This frictionless method of distribut-
ing games—enabled by the faster internet connections available 
from the mid-2000s—heralded a massive shift for game makers. 
Now their intangible game products and services could be deliv-
ered directly to the consumer, apparently eliminating the need for 

12
Punk Playthings
the publishers who had traditionally dominated the relationship. 
Self-publishing was viewed as the silver bullet that would democ-
ratize making and selling games. And in their rush to self-publish, 
game makers left physical retailers reeling and traditional publish-
ers sidelined. Out of this chaos Apple, Google and Valve elevated 
themselves to dominance. A similar phenomenon—exacerbated 
by rampant piracy—had massively disrupted the music industry 
only a few years earlier. Even so, many established game makers 
initially dismissed digital distribution, ignoring or underestimating 
the disruption it might cause. They were more interested in exploit-
ing existing customers by engineering demand for their shiny plas-
tic guitars.
But if these game makers had heeded lessons from the music 
industry, they might not have been so dismissive. The music busi-
ness had made more money than ever during the late 1990s, but 
by the mid-2000s those profits—and the industry itself—were in 
freefall (Goldman 2010; Witt 2015). By ignoring digital distribution, 
the industry subjected itself to closures, mergers, rationalization, 
layoffs and a desperate search for new business models to survive 
(Witt 2015). If game makers had paid attention and joined up the 
dots, they might have realized that what happens to one creative 
industry can happen to another. But few were watching. And it 
was this failure to observe the wider context, to look and learn—­
coupled with the financial meltdown of 2008—that led inevitably 
to closures of medium and large developers around the world, 
plus mergers, rationalization, layoffs and a search for new business 
models to survive.
Digital distribution also changed gaming culture by making games 
ridiculously accessible to anyone with a smartphone or tablet, not 
just those with proprietary consoles. Such accessibility resulted in 
a “mainstreaming” of games throughout wider culture and society. 
We’re all gamers now—to the point where that epithet is anach-
ronistic and meaningless. The “traditional” pre-casual revolution 
gamer is now a niche audience, served by a niche console indus-
try overly reliant on flashy technology—such as virtual reality—or 
the formatting of intellectual property (IP). Formatting involves 
the endless extension and exploitation of successful franchises—
death by sequel where explorative innovation gets crushed by the 
logic of risk aversion and mitigation—or games eating themselves 
through the constant recycling of popular mechanics and tropes. 
Or sometimes both.
But as the audience for games has changed, so has the industry 
that makes them. It’s no longer tenable to talk about a singular 
game industry—if it ever was; there are only game industries with 

13
The Road Less Traveled
vastly diverging realities. Workers made redundant from the big 
studio closures started their own small studios, realizing the digi-
tal distribution that once put them out of work might also repre-
sent an opportunity. They were joined by waves of young game 
­makers—many fresh from college and university—who also saw 
the App Store, Google Play, Steam and others as an easy way to get 
their games directly to players. By 2014, research in the UK found 
95% of game developers were small or micro-studios (Mateos-
Garcia et al. 2014). Further investigation confirmed that over 65% 
of all studios employ fewer than four people and that nearly 70% of 
UK developers were founded post-2010, after the casual revolution 
(TIGA 2016; Ukie 2016). This rapid proliferation and diversification 
denote the much discussed and touted “rise of the indies” (Parker 
2011; Gamasutra Staff 2013).
Independence Day?
But what does being indie—or more accurately, an indepen-
dent game maker—mean? Nearly a decade on from the financial 
meltdown and disruption of the casual revolution, the answer is 
increasingly little. Indie game development has mostly become a 
badge of identity and aesthetic genre. The Guardian writer Keith 
Stuart has suggested indie game development now represents 
an extension of the 1960s “counterculture” (2012). But this pre-
supposes the existence of a singular dominant culture to run 
counter to—an idea absurd in the fractured and atomized cul-
tural milieu of the late 2010s. Or that repeating the self-­indulgent 
navel gazing of the hippy counterculture is even desirable; as the 
punks always said, “Never trust a hippie.” Worse, such a per-
spective treats indie as a singular homogenous culture itself. 
It ignores the diversity among so-called independent develop-
ers, from celebrated superstars like Jenova Chen—the central 
character in Stuart’s article—to the thousands of unknown and 
unseen people making a variety of games in a variety of con-
texts. There’s a world of difference between the cultural impact 
Chen achieved with his powerfully resonant experiences and the 
myriad of indie vanity projects and “lifestyle businesses” churn-
ing out conformist mediocrity. Instead of providing a viable 
alternative to the mainstream—based on radically different eth-
ics and values, modes of production or ownership—the major-
ity of these projects have zero meaningful impact, culturally 
or economically. The lucky ones quickly cease to exist. Others 
make just enough to perpetuate a shambling “indie lifestyle” 
for yet another go-round. But that’s not real independence—it’s 
entrapment.

14
Punk Playthings
Again it’s worth looking at the music industry for historical paral-
lels. In the wake of the 1970s punk revolution, the music industry in 
the UK and US witnessed an explosion of indies. Record labels like 
Rough Trade, Factory, Beggars Banquet, Fast Product, Postcard, 
Beserkely, Sub Pop, Matador and hundreds of others popped up 
everywhere. These labels were mostly set up by mavericks inspired 
by the do-it-yourself ethos of punk. They wanted to bypass the 
major labels that dominated the industry and do things on their 
own terms. These labels took risks by putting out content wildly dif-
ferent from the mainstream on a shoestring budget, often through 
the collaborative distribution of records and tapes (there were no 
digital downloads in 1982). Indies often controlled their supply 
chain and took products directly to the consumer. As a result, they 
were seen as “sticking it to the man” in an explosion of authenticity. 
And in the beginning, they probably were.
But as the 1980s progressed, indies became increasingly common-
place. Concurrently, the music they released became less known 
for its eclecticism, radical values, DIY ethos or alternative modes 
and means of production, more recognized simply as a genre. Most 
people buying “indie music” cared less and less about who owned 
the record label, how it distributed its products or treated its artists. 
Instead indie came to symbolize a band of usually white, usually 
middle-class musicians with jangly guitars and precious lyrics that 
appealed to college students. The apogee of this indie genericism 
was the so-called C86 movement—named after a compilation cas-
sette distributed free with New Musical Express in 1986—described 
by Creation Records boss Alan McGee (quoted in Music for Misfits 
2015) as “wet shite” and criticized by John Peel for its “shambling” 
self-conscious primitivism. C86 advanced the proliferation of twee 
indie bands peddling bubblegum indie tunes. It also gave birth to 
the Indie Kid™. These were children of the bourgeoisie who wanted 
everyone to know just how fiercely independent they were, so they 
adopted a uniform. Soon the streets were packed with teenagers 
clad exclusively in black jeans and plimsolls, cardigans and floral 
shirts. Indie was now everywhere. The major labels were finished. 
The future was bright. The future was indie.
Only it wasn’t. By the end of the 1980s, an indiepocalypse was start-
ing. Many of the best-known independents were going out of busi-
ness. And there waiting in the wings were the major labels, ready for 
a spot of cherry picking. Majors are sluggish beasts; their size and 
bureaucracy make them slow to recognize and adapt to market dis-
ruption. They often get out-innovated by hip young gunslingers like 
the indie labels of the 1980s. But these big companies have things 
the gunslingers don’t: stability, infrastructure, business acumen 

15
The Road Less Traveled
and money. And so these lumbering giants have learned to inno-
vate in a different way, through mergers and acquisitions. As indie 
music became popular, the majors started to poach the most suc-
cessful artists by offering huge advances the independents could 
never match. Or, if the indie label had a great roster and identity, 
the majors quietly acquired it. After all, by the late 1980s, it was 
becoming clear that most indie labels didn’t have much in the way 
of business or selling smarts. Started as hobbies to initially put a 
record out, many couldn’t adapt to scale and sustain themselves in 
a cut-throat industry. Even Factory Records—perhaps the seminal 
indie label of the era—had gone to the wall by 1992, its successful 
acts snapped up by London Records. Factory had done the hard, 
risky, explorative work of finding and developing artists, but it was 
a major that would fully exploit the rewards.
This strategy is still popular. Large media and entertainment com-
panies learned the lessons of the 1980s. Instead of trying to out-
innovate young gunslingers, they scour domains they operate in 
for the best talent and ideas. In games, big companies connect 
with universities to discover nascent talent or monitor innovative 
startups and studios as they experiment with their own energy, 
time, capital and risk in the marketplace. Once the market has fil-
tered out the wheat from the chaff, the big players swoop in and 
acquire the successful entity and its intellectual property. It’s 
a smart approach. And many game startups are now following 
examples from the tech sector, banking on getting acquired by a 
large studio or funded by venture capital (VC). Indeed, the delight-
ful experiences made by Jenova Chen’s supposedly “indie” thatg-
amecompany would not have happened if the studio had not been 
bankrolled by Sony straight out of university. But all this complex-
ity muddies the waters. Recognizing who is indie and who isn’t is 
increasingly difficult. As a consequence, the term is ever more asi-
nine and irrelevant.
From Safety to Where?
There’s also an existential problem for indie game development: an 
extinction event. As with the indie record labels of the 1980s, there 
are now way too many independent game makers operating in a 
saturated marketplace who are just not that good at selling things. 
Consequently, these studios are either failing to scale or simply fail-
ing. We’ve both seen this happen first-hand. It’s upsetting to watch 
talented and enthusiastic young game makers have their dreams 
shattered. But one of the culprits is the term “indie” itself and the 
attitudes it often encourages and legitimizes.

16
Punk Playthings
To be indie in the creative industries has become a badge of iden-
tity, a form of self-valorization. It has increasingly little to do with 
how you go about your business, more that you adopt and display 
an outsider posture and lifestyle. This lifestyle celebrates being 
apart from—and somehow above—the dirty business of making 
money. And the indies that subscribe to such posturing see them-
selves as inherently “authentic” and “radical,” heroically fighting 
the evil forces of capitalism one Steam or App Store release at a 
time. But this results in a proliferation of the worst kind of lifestyle 
businesses: ones that cannot afford to sustain the lifestyle they 
celebrate.
There is an acute problem with sustainability in independent 
game development. Few people like to talk about it, fewer seem 
to care. Most high-profile industry veterans tell young people sim-
ply to make stuff and do what they did, even though the environ-
ment for today’s game makers is radically different from two or 
three decades ago. This “advice” is irresponsible but these stars 
have made their money. Perhaps worse, however, is the constant 
posturing and virtue signaling of the indie scene itself, which 
obfuscates and ignores the sustainability problem. Get past the 
valorization and the harsh truth is, if you’re operating in the enter-
tainment business—as game makers are—then whatever you 
identify as, you’re in business. Simple. And if you want to survive in 
business, you have to take it seriously and make money. Whatever 
you make, you need to make and sell it effectively. Then you can 
pay yourself, your collaborators and of course, fund the continued 
production of more, perhaps better, experiences. If you want to be 
a radical outsider, great. We love radicals and outsiders. But then 
be truly radical and operate entirely outside the business of mak-
ing games. Be a hobbyist or dillettante, make games for fun in your 
spare time, funded by your day job. Or adopt the artistic approach 
and attract patronage. These strategies remove the pressures of 
having to make money from your games just to survive, so you can 
be as radical as you dare, defiantly flipping the bird to big business 
and late capitalism. But if you want to be more than a hobbyist, to 
be a prosperous and sustainable independent game development 
business, then you might take some tips from XL Recordings.
Contra
Founded in 1989, XL was a side project of Groove Records, a record 
store in London’s Soho (Teather 2007). Richard Russell, a young 
hip-hop enthusiast from suburban Edgware, was a regular cus-
tomer who began working at the label. XL’s early releases were 

17
The Road Less Traveled
niche, consisting of house and techno tracks from mostly unknown 
British and European artists. But by the early 1990s—as the UK 
dance and rave scene grew exponentially—these releases started 
to cross over to the mainstream. Most famous were On a Ragga 
Tip by SL2, Charly by The Prodigy and The Bouncer by Russell’s own 
Kicks like a Mule. Somewhat amazingly, given their frenetic and 
challenging sound, these records reached numbers two, three 
and seven, respectively, in the UK singles chart. Simon Reynolds—
music industry and rave culture historian—believes that had XL 
closed at the end of this period, it would still be remembered as a 
“legendary label” (cited in Jonze 2011a). But it had no intention of 
closing.
As the 1990s progressed, Russell took full control of XL. He wid-
ened its appeal beyond dance music, nurturing the roster and 
carefully adding new artists. And by mid-decade, early signing 
The Prodigy was achieving sustained success. The band’s second 
studio album, Music for a Jilted Generation, reached number one in 
the UK; its third, 1997’s Fat of the Land, achieved the same feat in 
26 countries ­including the US. This success marked a turning point 
for the company, providing revenue and key learning for Russell as 
he expanded the label. The Prodigy had been allowed to develop 
its own sound, free from record label interference. When the 
band went mainstream around the globe, Russell realized the key 
had been affording it this creative control. He decided XL would 
move forward always guided by the principle of “letting musicians 
develop their vision instead of trying to dilute the work and make it 
more digestible” (Teather 2007).
Alongside creative control for artists, another XL first principle is 
quality control. The label only signs artists it likes, both musically 
and personally. In a 2011 interview, Russell stated that a corner-
stone of XL’s success was to only “put good records out.” This might 
sound simplistic but to achieve such quality control the label signs 
only one or two artists per year, despite receiving over 200,000 
unsolicited demos. Instead of the scattergun approach so often 
used in the music industry, XL is highly selective. This makes its 
success even more astounding, particularly when you consider 
the quality and cultural impact of its signings. Names such as The 
Prodigy, Dizzee Rascal, Vampire Weekend, The White Stripes, MIA, 
The xx and Adele read like a who’s who of the last 20 years in alter-
native popular music.
A further XL principle is people over ideas. Russell (cited in Jonze 
2011a) argues this is key to developing sustainable and scalable suc-
cess for both artist and label: “the music [the artist] has done when 
you sign them is barely relevant. It’s not even the start. It’s much 

18
Punk Playthings
more about the person and their ideas and strength of character 
and the direction they want to go in.” XL Recordings is not inter-
ested in developing a house sound or style; it is more about nur-
turing diverse artists with strong personalities and strong tastes 
to achieve their best works (Jonze 2011a). And it is this diverse 
­roster—enabled by its adaptable artist-centric approach—that has 
been the secret to XL’s success and sustainability.
Someone Like You
XL Recordings signed Adele Laurie Blue Adkins in 2006, on the 
strength of a Myspace demo she recorded as an 18-year-old stu-
dent. Two years later, the label released her first album, 19, which 
was an instant critical and commercial success. Further success 
followed when Adele’s second album, 21, was released in 2011 
and went 16 times platinum within a year. Another four years 
later, 25, her third studio album, was certified ten times platinum 
within six months and became the best-selling album worldwide in 
2015 (Adejobi 2016; BPI 2016). Adele has continually broken music 
industry records and become the richest British singer ever (Ellis-
Petersen 2016). And she has done it by crafting and performing 
music that resonates across cultures while signed to an indepen-
dent record label. XL gave her “the freedom to become a block-
buster artist on her own terms ...  [and] recognized and nurtured 
her talent” (Ellis-Petersen 2016). At the same time, it demonstrated 
that the major labels aren’t the only ones who can scale an artist at 
a global level (Sullivan 2012).
XL’s guiding principles meant it refused to pressure Adele to do 
things she didn't want to, such as perform at festivals or deliver 
to the kind of structured release timetable demanded by a major 
(Jonze 2011b). Rather it gave the singer a plentiful period of artis-
tic development—alongside a sensible financial burden—in her 
early years (Ingham 2015). And it let her choose where and when 
she wanted to perform or appear, important for a star wary of the 
limelight (Ellis-Petersen 2016). In return, Adele’s phenomenal suc-
cess has given XL an invaluable financial cushion. Sales of 21 alone 
earned the label some $67 million in profit during 2011 (Rolling 
Stone 2012). These earnings allow XL to engage and invest in new 
artist development for the foreseeable future. The label is inde-
pendently free to take more risks and sign increasingly experi-
mental acts like Ibeyi—a French-Cuban duo that sings mostly in 
Yoruba—or Haitian hip-hop artist Kaytranada. For XL Recordings, 
Adele has been not only the mother of invention but the guarantor 
of its independence.

19
The Road Less Traveled
Crystalized
Adele left XL when her three album deal expired in summer 2016. 
Many in the industry were shocked but others were encouraged. 
Three album deals were label policy and XL had stayed true to 
this principle by extending the same freedom to its biggest earner 
(Adejobi 2016). A couple of months later, Richard Russell was 
awarded the Pioneer Award at the AIM Music Awards. Introducing 
him, Damon Albarn called XL Recordings “the greatest modern 
independent label in the world” and Russell “a genius” (PIAS 2016). 
Hyperbole aside, Albarn has a point. But much of the genius lies 
in those few simple principles Russell formulated to guide XL. It is 
these that have allowed it to adapt and scale. Signing artists with 
powerful artistic visions and distinct personalities, rather than one 
good song, means they are more likely to develop into sustainable 
commercial entities. Strong characters might cause tension, but 
by extending them full creative control this is minimized, allowing 
them to get on with what they’re best at—making great music. And 
by signing only a few artists each year, the label has the resources 
to nurture and scale talent on the roster. This gives artists the best 
chance of achieving both cultural resonance and commercial suc-
cess. XL’s extraordinary hit rate is a testament to this approach. 
The success of artists such as The Prodigy, Vampire Weekend, The 
xx and Adele helps the bottom line, long-term sustainability and 
enables the company to take more risks with new artists.
Make It Last Forever
Independent game developers can learn much from Russell and 
XL. The label has learned how to make money and compete with 
the majors while staying faithful to its guiding principles. Russell 
doesn’t spend his time flaunting his outsider, antiestablishment 
identity at every turn, moaning about how hard life is fighting “the 
man.” Instead, Russell has beaten the man at his own game. He has 
ensured the label remains truly independent by realizing every-
thing is connected. XL’s successful insurgencies into the commer-
cial mainstream free it from the shackles of VC investment, public 
sector funding or constantly trying to survive. This means the label 
can make its own decisions to sign who it wants when it wants, 
offering artists a fair deal and the creative control to help them 
develop. XL has learned to be sustainably independent through 
commercial success because Russell realized early on that being 
indie doesn’t entitle you to a living.
Real independents can’t afford to ignore making money 
because it doesn’t fit an indie identity. Do that and you won’t be 

20
Punk Playthings
independent for long. If you want to be in the business of making 
games, you need to act like it. There is nothing wrong with making 
money so you can make better, more creative, more radical games. 
But there is everything wrong with a self-limiting identity that 
either ignores or devalues the realities of business in an attempt to 
celebrate itself. As Jim Reid, indie hero and legendary lead singer of 
The Jesus and Mary Chain argues, “There is a lot of aiming too low 
[in indie] ... but we always wanted to be on Top of the Pops” (Music 
for Misfits 2015). The lesson is: if you want to be truly independent, 
forget transient regard from the uniformed worthies; sustained 
popular adoration is far more liberating.
FIGURE 1.3  Author Chris Lowthorpe’s 12” vinyl of Charly by The 
Prodigy. (Reprinted with permission from Chris Lowthorpe.) 

21
The Road Less Traveled
Weapons of Mass Destruction
“There are, in fact, no masses; there are only ways of seeing 
­people as masses.”
Raymond Williams
Culture and Society (1963)
“Cause I’m not like everybody else,
I’m not like everybody else.”
The Kinks
I’m Not Like Everybody Else (1966)
Massing
Raymond Williams argued the concept of the “masses” was a prod-
uct of industrialization. People left the countryside to “mass” in 
the new industrial towns, where they then massed together in the 
new factories. As a result of this physical massing, a further social, 
political and cultural massing occurred as the newly urbanized 
workers came to view themselves—and be viewed—as the “work-
ing class.” From this massing a variety of ideas emerged, including 
mass production, mass action, mass democracy, mass communi-
cation, mass entertainment and the mass market. And for most of 
the 20th century, we thought about things through the lens of the 
mass and the masses.
Mass Effect
Growing up in 1980s Britain, mass entertainment and mass audi-
ences still dominated. Television was king, even though there were 
only four channels until satellite and cable television services 
launched at the end of the decade. Radio, monopolized by the BBC, 
was also popular. News came primarily from these sources or the 
newspapers. This was a broadcast landscape. A place where one 
voice called to the masses and had a good chance of being heard 
and even believed. Shared viewing experiences were common, 
as evidenced when more than 30 million people (53% of the UK 
population) watched the 1986 Christmas Special of BBC soap opera 
EastEnders (BARB 2017). This remains the most watched TV show of 
all time in the UK, excluding special events. Out of the next 24, only 
one aired after 2000. And even that was the return of 1980s favor-
ite Only Fools and Horses (BARB 2017). The most watched program 

22
Punk Playthings
of 2015—an episode of The Great British Bake Off—was seen by less 
than 25% of the population; and that figure included the two chan-
nels it broadcast on (SD and HD) plus the on-demand viewing fig-
ures from BBC iPlayer (BARB 2017). So, what changed?
In entertainment: a lot. The media landscape has shifted from 
broadcasting to narrowcasting to microcasting. First, cable and 
satellite providers disrupted mass entertainment by offering more 
choice tailored to increasingly targeted audiences. Today, Netflix 
gives us what we want, when we want it. Streaming platforms such 
as YouTube or Twitch go even further, catering for super-niche audi-
ences by enabling individuals to create, stream and watch hyper-
tailored and targeted content on individual channels. The days of 
shared viewing experiences on a nationwide scale are a thing of the 
past. The masses appear to be no more.
Trumped
But the mass is a powerful and persistent concept; we’ve used it for 
so long it’s hard to change. Even smart people still get blindsided by 
myths of the mass, as the US presidential election of 2016 revealed. 
The Democratic party relied on a strategic playbook predicated 
primarily on demography, the statistical study of populations. 
Studies have consistently shown the US experiencing consider-
able demographic change, becoming more ethnically and racially 
diverse as over 59 million people immigrated to the nation during 
the last 50 years (Cohn and Caumont 2016). Most of these immi-
grants have come from Latin America and Asia. Indeed, in the four 
years between the 2012 and 2016 elections, the Latino electorate 
alone had grown by 17% (Krogstad 2016). This change was thought 
the key to electoral success by the Democrats, as the foundation 
of their playbook was the “bloc vote.” This is a concept predicated 
on the belief that people vote en masse according to an aspect of 
their identity. Because of the bloc vote theory, Democrats believed 
Latinos were the reason Hillary Clinton would beat Republican 
candidate Donald Trump. Traditionally Latinos vote Democrat. 
Consequently, as there were more Latinos voters than ever—and 
Trump had publicly antagonized the Latino population—the think-
ing was they would vote for Clinton in record numbers and swing 
the election. But this didn’t happen.
The problem is the bloc vote is rooted in ideas of the mass. It 
selects people by an aspect of their identity—most often ethnic-
ity, race or gender—then groups them together accordingly. Once 
people are conceptualized as a homogenous mass, it’s easy to 
ascribe certain traits or behaviors to them, or in extreme cases, 

23
The Road Less Traveled
discount or dehumanize them. The Democrats weren’t attempting 
anything nefarious, but they were making the mistake of predicting 
people’s thinking and behavior on a single aspect of their identity. 
Consequently, a thesis emerged that proposed virtually all Latinos 
would vote Clinton. Another one suggested that most women 
would too, particularly as Clinton would be the first female presi-
dent and Trump seemed an unapologetic misogynist. The majority 
of African-Americans were also assumed to be Clinton voters. But 
this thinking was fallacious because it ignored individual difference 
and the multivalent complexity of identity.
Raymond Williams knew the concept of the masses was problem-
atic. Individuals don’t conceive of themselves as part of a mass: “the 
masses are always other people, ones we don’t know or can’t know ... 
to other people we also are the masses. The masses are other peo-
ple” (1963, p.289). In other words, we don’t think of ourselves as part 
of a homogenous mass but as an individual with a unique identity. 
This identity is complex, often fluid and multilayered, with particular 
aspects dominant at different times. But, however we self-identify at 
certain moments, one thing that remains constant is our belief that 
we are individual and unique. The trouble is when we think of other 
people as a mass—Latino voters, for example—we simplify their 
identity, conceiving of them purely through the frame we have used 
to lump them together. Such reductionism loses sight of the individ-
ual, attributing conformity to diversity. We forget people are emo-
tional individuals who experience different life events; these inform 
the way they think and act, which can often be selfish and irrational. 
This forgetting is what sabotaged the Democratic playbook.
Of course, the majority of Latino voters did cast their ballot for 
Hillary Clinton. But not as many as the bloc vote strategy predicted 
or relied on. Exit polls suggested only 65% of Latinos voted for the 
Democratic candidate, with 29% actually voting for Trump. This repre-
sented a smaller percentage than those who voted for Obama in 2012 
(Krogstad and Lopez 2016; Luhby and Agiesta 2016). In the key swing 
state of Florida, things were even worse. Here 35% of Latino voters 
went for Trump, with that figure soaring to 54% among Cuban Latinos 
(Krogstad and Flores 2016). Women also supported Clinton less than 
expected, with the percentage down on the previous two elections 
where the candidate had been male. Surprisingly, 42% had supported 
Trump despite accusations of sexual abuse and misogyny against him 
(Tyson and Maniam 2016). Fundamentally, the bloc vote had failed to 
materialize as predicted because the playbook treated people as a 
one-dimensional mass governed by a single aspect of their identity. 
The truth was far more complex, located in individual life experiences 
and hidden heterogeneity within demographic groups. The split 

24
Punk Playthings
between Cuban and non-Cuban Latino voters evidences such com-
plexity. And a day after the election, Mexican-American journalist 
John Paul Brammer further highlighted this by arguing the Latino 
vote is made up of men, women, immigrants, natural-born citizens, 
the college-educated, farmers, conservatives and progressives who 
all get lumped together as a homogeneous mass in a way white peo-
ple tend not to be (2016). The same goes for the “female vote” or the 
“African-American vote.” It is no longer viable, nor desirable, to think 
about people in such a reductionist and simplistic way. Mass voting 
blocs can no longer be relied on to elect presidents, if they ever truly 
could be. And treating people as homogeneous lemmings is not only 
insulting but liable to result in a nasty surprise come Election Day.
The mass is pretty much dead. It was a phenomenon of industrial-
ized societies where people, production and communication were 
increasingly concentrated. But as society in so-called developed 
nations becomes more postindustrial and atomized, the idea of a 
mass anything is becoming untenable, categorizing individuals by 
a homogenizing demographic or assumptive persona more unreli-
able. It’s difficult to change the way we think, but today everyone is 
an individual. Or at the least, they believe they are. Things for every-
body are now really for nobody. Everything is niche. So the trick is 
to be selfish, to make and do things for yourself. Create something 
intoxicating you want to experience. The chances are others will too.
The Haçienda Must Be Built!
“The idea was to start the club for yourself, cos there was nowhere 
in Manchester that gave you what you wanted. There was nowhere 
you could get in, dressed normally.”
Peter Hook
(quoted in Savage 1992)
Manchester’s legendary Haçienda nightclub is a great example of 
selfish creation resonating with a niche group and becoming suc-
cessful. There are many legends and tall tales about the club but 
perhaps the most insightful recounts a moment just before it 
opened when Tony Wilson, head of Factory Records, was showing 
friends around. One of them, looking at the Haçienda’s cutting edge 
architecture and costly interior design, asked who Factory was build-
ing the club for. Wilson responded the Haçienda was built for “the 
kids.” The friend pointed out “the kids” were currently interested 
in watching bands in the corner of a grotty room while wearing 
long drab clothes and old raincoats, so why was Factory building a 

25
The Road Less Traveled
glossy New York discotheque for them? Wilson recalls being “rather 
stumped. I couldn’t answer that question” (Wilson 1992). By identify-
ing “the kids,” Wilson was thinking in conventional terms of the mass. 
But he was dead wrong—the Haçienda wasn’t for the masses at all.
The Haçienda was primarily for Rob Gretton, New Order’s man-
ager. At the time there was nowhere in Manchester Gretton wanted 
to go—especially to meet members of the opposite sex—so he 
dreamed up a new nightclub (Gretton 1992). He proposed his grand 
vision to members of New Order—his charges and Factory’s most 
successful band—who liked it and were persuaded to put up a sub-
stantial amount of funding. Peter Hook, the band’s bass player, 
argues there was no sense of doing it for “the kids” or giving back 
to the people of Manchester. Hook (1992) says: “the main priority 
for it was the fact that people like you, yourself and your friends 
mainly, didn’t have anywhere to go.” This sentiment is echoed by 
others such as Stephen Morris (1992), who remembers: “I don’t 
think we were thinking about the people of Manchester at the time. 
We were doing it for selfish reasons.” In another place or time, this 
might be unremarkable. But what made the Haçienda different was 
its context. It was the antithesis of everything people in early 1980s 
Manchester thought a nightclub could or should be (Morris 1992).
Manchester was the world’s first industrialized city. As such, it had 
been a hotbed of massing: physical, social, political and cultural. 
The size and population of the city exploded throughout the 19th 
century as it became an epicenter of mass production—known 
as “Cottonopolis”—and radical mass politics, driven by the newly 
massed and urbanized working class. But by the early 1980s, 
Manchester was well on its way to becoming one of the world’s first 
postindustrial cities, due to extensive factory closures and job losses. 
Much of the city center was desolate. Once-bustling Victorian railway 
stations were parking lots, proud factories stood idle and derelict. 
And it was into this postindustrial decline that Factory decided to 
insert a colorfully modernist, late-night fun palace. It would be filled 
with designer furniture and located in a disused yacht showroom on 
Whitworth Street West. The arrival of the club was nothing short of 
an alien invasion. Mike Pickering, one of the Haçienda’s most famous 
DJs, remembers it causing widespread confusion because: “there 
was nothing like it ... I don’t think it’s too outrageous to say that then 
it was completely beyond people” (1992). So, how did this enigma 
become one of the most influential and loved nightclubs ever?
It took time. The club struggled to make ends meet in its first few 
years, mostly as the result of overspends on construction and poor 
management. Luckily, Gretton and New Order hadn’t quit their day 

26
Punk Playthings
jobs so could continue to subsidize it. The Haçienda opened seven 
nights a week—often with few customers—but weekends and live 
gigs were relatively busy. Gradually, the club attracted a following. It 
became known as a place where people who felt outside mass cul-
ture, mass entertainment and the mass market could feel at home. 
Unlike other clubs at the time, the Haçienda had no prescriptive 
dress code predicated on mainstream ideas of what constituted suit-
able nocturnal attire. At “the Haç” you could wear what you and your 
friends wanted and all tribes were welcome. The club also had an 
unapologetically out and proud gay night at a time when homosexu-
als were often ghettoized and ridiculed (or worse) in British culture 
and society. The music policy became ever more niche and experi-
mental, with more and more nights playing cutting edge music. 
Within five years, the Haçienda—always a warehouse party waiting 
to happen—found itself at the epicenter of the late 1980s Acid House 
explosion, adopting new sounds from Chicago and Detroit before vir-
tually anywhere else. It became ground zero for Manchester’s urban 
regeneration, bringing hundreds of young creative people into the 
forgotten south side of the city center. Epiphanies happened every 
weekend on the dancefloor, bands formed at the bar and friendships 
were cemented for life. The Haçienda went from zero to iconic leg-
end in under a decade, as its unique spirit percolated first through 
Mancunian culture then wider British and global culture too.
Today, the Haçienda itself is gone—an inevitable victim of the regen-
eration it spawned. But in 2016, thousands packed out London’s 
Royal Albert Hall to hear a classical orchestra reinterpret electronic 
“hits” from the club’s dancefloor. Books are written about the club 
and its design and influence are regularly celebrated. In 2013, two 
urinals from the club toilets even went on sale for £15,000 (Dex 2013). 
Taking the piss aside, it’s clear the Haç still resonates through culture 
nearly two decades after it closed its doors. Not bad for club built so 
a few mates had somewhere to go of an evening.
It’s the Context, Stupid
“Despite the continuing role of mass production in many societ-
ies, the task is to design for the individual placed in his or her 
immediate context ... Products should be personal pathways in 
the otherwise confusing ecology of culture.”
Richard Buchanan
Branzi’s Dilemma: Design in Contemporary Culture (1998)

27
The Road Less Traveled
Whatever you do, it’s essential to think about individuals and 
their contexts. It’s no good trying to make and sell to nonexistent 
masses. Instead, think about specific contexts filled with individ-
uals, contexts like yours. Often individuals in similar social and 
cultural environments want similar things, regardless of more 
essentialist identities. The young people who built the Haçienda 
wanted somewhere to go away from the commercial mainstream, 
where they could dance to niche music, wear what they wanted to 
wear, be who they wanted to be. In the context of a newly postin-
dustrial Manchester, enough people like them wanted the same 
thing. Unlike a Clinton campaign that imagined voters as mass 
blocs organized along racial or gender lines, Donald Trump’s cam-
paign also focused on individuals in their contexts. The campaign 
acknowledged that many people, regardless of gender or race, 
felt fed up and angry in their immediate environment. Common 
among these was a belief that things were changing for the worse, 
that they were being abandoned by globalization and looked down 
upon by a metropolitan liberal elite. Whatever the realities, instead 
of relying on mass demographics, Trump told compelling stories of 
“Making America Great Again” that resonated with those dissatis-
fied with their lot.
Making and selling playful experiences is not running a nightclub, 
nor is it running for office. But it is equally dependent on context 
and abandoning ideas of viewing people as a mass. Unlike the 19th 
and 20th centuries, there are fewer and fewer mass movements, 
more and more agile insurrections. Our postindustrial societies 
have atomized: cultures become subcultures, subcultures become 
tribes, tribes become cadres. And cadres are now becoming loose, 
fluid groups of individuals in specific contexts. The hipster—that 
cultural phenomenon of the early 21st century—may be easy to 
laugh at but is also extremely hard to define. Few individuals self-
identify as hipsters, but they can often be recognized contextually 
by where they hang out, either physically or online (Peter York’s 
Hipster Handbook 2016). Increasingly, those who can create expe-
riences that resonate in these specific contexts and provide a 
“personal pathway” through an increasingly complex culture will 
be successful. These experiences may be niche and ephemeral—
more one-hit wonders than extensive bodies of work—but for a 
moment they will feel vitally ­authentic. And authenticity, however 
manufactured and constructed, only occurs when an experience 
emotionally resonates with ­someone—voter, dancer, player or 
customer—in their immediate and specific environment. Mass is 
finally over.

28
Punk Playthings
FIGURE 1.4  Author Chris Lowthorpe’s flyer for the Haçienda. 
(Reprinted with permission from Chris Lowthorpe.) 

29
The Road Less Traveled
FIGURE 1.5  The efficient assembly line at the Volkswagen plant in Wolfsburg, Germany. (Courtesy of Roger Wollstadt, 
Flickr: Wolfsburg—Inside the Volkswagen Plant, http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0.)

30
Punk Playthings
Yesterday
“Plunder and destroy, refuse to worship the past and remember 
that anyone can do it.”
Sheryl Garrett
Cut and Thrust (1988)
“Yesterday, all my troubles seemed so far away...”
Lennon and McCartney
Yesterday (1966)
The Nostalgia Machine
Nostalgia ain’t what it used to be. Just because the future is uncer-
tain does not mean you should spend your time pining for a past that 
never existed. Reject romanticized traditions and false idylls—you 
don’t know where they’ve been. Tradition can be a straightjacket, 
nostalgia a myth. Plunder the past, learn from history, then create 
your own myths. Remember, the past is for building on, not living in.
A Turn to Craft?
The past decade has seen an explosion of craft and artisanship. 
Beer, gin, denim, bicycles, bread, cheese, leather goods, even video 
games—all these and more are now being crafted rather than pro-
duced. Out goes the mass-made, processed and homogenized. In 
comes the handcrafted, authentic and unique. And this is a good 
thing. Mostly. Who but a masochist prefers insipid mass-produced 
lager over a flavorful “small batch” beer, crafted by enthusiasts in 
your local microbrewery? Why would anyone eat a nutrition-free 
slice of processed white bread when there’s a delicious hunk of 
artisan sourdough waiting to be savored?
Cost is one answer. Anything crafted by a skilled artisan is likely to 
be more expensive than its mass-produced counterpart, due to the 
extra risk, care and time in making it. That’s understandable. If a 
product uses the best raw materials, is carefully and painstakingly 
crafted by specialists in small batches, then you expect to pay more 
for it. It’s “reassuringly expensive”—to quote an advertising cam-
paign that for over two decades successfully sold mass-produced 
beer by channeling myths of rural idylls filled with happy artisans. 
And here lies the problem. There are two sides to the craft revolu-
tion: “craft” as a verb and “craft” as a noun.

31
The Road Less Traveled
Oh, I Believe in Yesterday
“In recent years the words ‘crafted’ and ‘hand-built’ have become 
absorbed into the language of advertising and packaging and into 
popular culture in general.”
Christopher Frayling
On Craftsmanship (2011)
“Craft” as a noun draws on nostalgic myths of the happy artisan, a 
mythology that positions craft as both precursor and resistor to indus-
trialized capitalism. This view supposes everything was better before 
industrialization, that the world was full of artisans leading charmed 
lives filled with carefree crafting of simple but unique objects. As 
Frayling (2011) argues, this is nostalgia masquerading as history. 
While industrialization had many downsides, preindustrial society 
was definitely no walk in the park. So, where does all this craft nostal-
gia come from? Frayling (after Wiener 1992) believes it is possible for 
nations to industrialize economically while not entirely industrializing 
culturally. Raymond Williams concurs, arguing that as industrializa-
tion progressed in Britain, artists, writers and poets were paradoxi-
cally hard at work mythologizing a simple, natural and unadulterated 
countryside, creating a dichotomy between the capitalist exploitation 
of the industrialized city and the disappearing rural idylls populated 
by happy artisans (1973). This Romanticism positioned the myth of a 
lost preindustrial golden age at the heart of British culture, creating a 
sense of retrospective regret and persistent nostalgia. For Williams, 
such nostalgia is “myth functioning as memory” (1973, p.43). And this 
myth persists in contemporary Britain, with versions existing in other 
so-called developed nations. It would seem one thing our atomized 
postindustrial societies still have in common is a deep nostalgia for 
their preindustrial salad days.
Nostalgic notions of craft highlight our enduring fascination with 
both the mythology of craftsmanship and a paradise lost (Frayling 
2011). And when “craft” is used as a noun, it functions as a symbolic 
shorthand for this mythology. In the dense fog of nostalgia, the pre-
industrial era appears simpler, better, happier—a time free from the 
uncertainty that defines our modern realities. Of course, this is non-
sense. The “maelstrom of modern life” has been with us for nearly 
five centuries (Berman 2010). But such nostalgic symbolism is seduc-
tive and reassuring, deceiving us with simplicity and reassuring us 
with cost. When put in the hands of accomplished marketers, it can 
be highly effective at persuading us to purchase “craft” at inflated 
prices—especially when it promises a slice of that simple, better, hap-
pier life. We’re regaining our lost paradise, and we can feel good about 

32
Punk Playthings
it too—simply by looking at the price tag. “Craft” as a noun seduces 
consumers by piggybacking on these nostalgic myths and of course, 
on the reemergence of genuine small-scale, small-batch, artisanal 
makers that practice “craft” as a verb, as a process, as a careful but 
risky act, rather than as a product differentiation strategy. Not sur-
prisingly given its power, more and more mass-producers and mar-
keters are using craft as a noun to gain access to our wallets.
Crafty
In September 2016, some “low volume” beers produced by Heineken 
Ireland (a subsidiary of Heineken International) were accused of being 
mis-sold as craft beers throughout the Republic of Ireland. Allegedly, 
these beers were rebadged at the tap to look like local craft brews 
to deceive the consumer. No one seems to know who was respon-
sible, but Heineken Ireland apologized and appointed an external 
body to investigate. The incident prompted the Food Safety Authority 
of Ireland to announce an investigation into the craft beer market 
and led to the Independent Craft Brewers of Ireland (ICBI) launch-
ing a quality mark to guarantee real craft beers (Hospitality Ireland 
2016). The ICBI complained: “some companies are ... releasing prod-
ucts into the market which they’re misrepresenting as craft beer and 
being vague about origin to suggest a provenance of craft beer from 
an independent Irish brewery” (Murphy 2016). Provenance is deemed 
crucial in craft brewing, both to ensure quality and highlight regional-
ity. Industrial producers have been criticized by genuine craft brew-
ers and beer enthusiasts for selling “craft” beers with no information 
regarding where the product is made or by whom, leading many to 
suspect surreptitious mass production by large-scale operations. 
By 2015, things had got so bad that Barrett Garese and friend Rudy 
Jahchan launched Craft Checker, an app that can tell you whether your 
pint is “from an authentic craft brewery or just a mass-market imita-
tion craft beer” (Craft Check 2016). Now we like a craft brew, but we are 
not beer snobs. As Anthony Bourdain says, sometimes you just want 
any cold beer “to get a little bit buzzed and pleasantly derange the 
senses and have a good time and interact with other people” (quoted 
in Sellers 2016). But industrial brewers using “craft” as a noun—­
masquerading ordinary mass-produced beer as craft to charge more 
and gain access to the lucrative market eroding their core brands—is 
somewhat underhand, if not particularly surprising.
Levi’s, the world’s most famous jean manufacturer, also employs 
“craft” as a noun. The company launched its Made & Crafted line 
in 2009, but although the name focuses consumer attention on the 
act of making—deploying “craft” as a verb to emphasize nostalgic 

33
The Road Less Traveled
mythology and notions of quality—the reality seems somewhat dif-
ferent. In a 2013 interview, the design lead for the line said it was 
impossible to say “Levi’s Made & Crafted quality is so much more 
superior than anything else that we do, because that’s not neces-
sarily the case” (Williams 2013). He then revealed that the Crafted 
element of the name was simply the result of the word being reg-
ularly used around the design studio at the time of naming—no 
doubt influenced by the rise of genuinely crafted denim and other 
products (Williams 2013). This sleight of hand—implying “craft” as a 
verb when it is more likely a noun—does not make Made & Crafted 
clothes poor products. But trading on nostalgic craft mythology to 
justify a reassuringly high price does perhaps make them a little 
disingenuous. Just calling something crafted does not make it so. 
But, in Levi’s defense, a degree of redemption comes from Made & 
Crafted’s attempt to reinterpret company heritage by adding a con-
temporary twist to the back catalog. Perhaps it is less a product that 
is being crafted here and more a curated concept.
Crafted
“Roy subscribes to the ideal that in order for something to be 
great, it has to be given time, work and patience.”
Young Lee
A Conversation with Roy Slaper (2013)
The best exponents of the craft explosion adopt a DIY ethic and 
take skills, materials and approaches from the past, then marry 
them with a modern twist to create delightful new products and 
experiences. They employ “craft” as a verb: a skillful and careful 
act. Many learn almost forgotten skills or arcane knowledge. Care, 
quality and uniqueness trump nostalgia. That does not mean nos-
talgia is not present here. But this is a nostalgia for taking pride 
in your work and its outcomes, for knowledge that deserves sav-
ing from extinction. It is yesterday placed in service of tomorrow, 
enhanced by the attitudes, tools and opportunities of today. Most 
of these new craft makers are as expert with digital tools and ser-
vices as they are with the traditional tools of their trade; some even 
craft digital artefacts. Virtually all use digital means to communi-
cate their story and sell their goods. These artisans are plundering 
the past and remixing it with the present to create the future.
Take Roy Slaper in Oakland, California. Roy was a skilled metalworker 
who decided he wanted to make himself a pair of jeans, then set out 
to learn how. Sometime around 2010, he bought a couple of vintage 

34
Punk Playthings
sewing machines, put them in his apartment, sourced some denim 
and made his first pair. They were almost unwearable. But pleased 
he managed to make anything at all, Roy decided to carry on. He 
learned his craft through painstaking research, attending sewing 
groups and immense amounts of practice. There were plenty of fail-
ures, but after a few months, Roy was making wearable jeans. He 
also found a mentor who taught him more about the mysteries of 
denim. She introduced him to “a string of really smart people who 
seemed to be the gatekeepers of a lost art. It’s funny to say that 
­making jeans is a lost art but it sort of is” (Roy Denim 2016). The jeans 
continued to improve and Roy became further immersed in learning 
his craft, to the point where his apartment was so full of material and 
vintage sewing machines there was hardly enough room to sleep 
(Lee 2013). Unsurprisingly, news of this maverick maker started to 
spread through the Bay Area, leading to a handful of orders for his 
experimental products. Roy realized he couldn’t go on making jeans 
in his apartment—the neighbors didn’t like the noise for a start—so 
he rented space to use as a studio. As an experiment, he put up a 
basic website with pictures of what he was doing and a way to buy 
the single style he made. The localized word-of-mouth buzz quickly 
spread online to niche denim forums then resonated across social 
media. The orders started to roll in. His experiment had been a suc-
cess, suggesting Roy could make a sustainable life and business as 
a one-man artisan jean maker. He started to professionalize, col-
laborating with stockist Self-Edge to produce videos of his making 
process that rapidly helped spread the word online. Half a decade 
later, Roy is considered “one of the best craftsmen in the world when 
it comes to hand-making jeans from start to finish” (Articles of Style 
2015). He has bespoke denim woven for him by the prestigious Cone 
White Oak Mill in North Carolina. His small-batch collections are 
eagerly awaited by denim enthusiasts around the world and sell out 
almost immediately. And he still does everything himself, from the 
first chain stitch to the final Instagram post.
Games of Craft
“We like to handcraft, not mass produce.”
Ken Wong
Behind the Scenes: Monument Valley (2014a)
The best thing about “craft” as a verb is that anyone with dedica-
tion can do it. From a metalworker with dreams of crafted jeans 
to a game designer with a vision for a crafted playful experience. 

35
The Road Less Traveled
We  talk about Monument Valley in more depth later, but for now, 
let’s focus on Ken Wong’s statement about wanting to “handcraft” a 
digital game. On first reading, such a statement seems counterintui-
tive. How can something intangible be crafted by hand? But Wong 
is alluding to the importance of heuristic learning and care. Frayling 
(2013) argues that what distinguishes craft is the care with which 
things are made, the fact they have been made by human beings for 
other human beings. He agrees with scholar David Pye (1968) that 
craft is an activity where quality is not predetermined but depends 
on the judgment, dexterity and care the maker exercises as they 
work. Both thinkers emphasize the importance of makers continu-
ally learning while doing. This primacy of care and heuristic learning 
is implicit in Wong’s statement; he deliberately contrasts the idea 
of handcrafting something individual—carefully and lovingly made 
by a human being for a human being—with the impersonal homo-
geneity of something mass-produced by machines for the masses. 
This focus on collaborative craft has been echoed by the rest of the 
Monument Valley team, affirming how important the craft making of 
each level was to the success of the game (Wong et al. 2014b).
The craft of Monument Valley is not “craft” as a noun. The aesthet-
ics of the game are resolutely digital and game-like—despite being 
influenced by artist M.C. Escher—and completely devoid of nos-
talgic notions of craft. Here craft is not superficial; it is put into 
the making of every level and espoused in the narrative of the 
development team. Monument Valley wants to be different to the 
soulless mass-produced. And such a process of crafting a digital 
game represents a coming to terms with (post) modernity, postin-
dustrialism and the possibilities of digital technologies. This is craft 
articulated through the language of technology and entering the 
realm of production with its own networks, expertise and knowl-
edge sharing (Frayling 2011; Carpenter 2011). And rather than being 
nostalgic resistance to modernity, this kind of crafting can be a 
boon to entrepreneurial makers in postindustrial contexts. Craft is 
a business model too. Just take a stroll around the so-called hipster 
area of your local city and look at the plethora of artisan coffee 
joints and bakers, craft brew pubs and jean makers. This is not a 
counterculture; it is rampant and unapologetic entrepreneurship. 
There is much to be learned here. And the most critical lesson is 
that by exercising care in making an experience the best it can be, 
by always remembering that you’re humans making something for 
other humans, “craft” as a verb can set you and what you make 
apart. Craft doesn’t have to be about a longing for yesterday; it can 
be a vision and strategy for tomorrow.

36
Punk Playthings
FIGURE 1.6  Early sketches of Monument Valley. (Reprinted with per-
mission from ustwo games, ©ustwo Games 2014. All rights reserved.)

37
The Road Less Traveled
FIGURE 1.7  A screenshot from Monument Valley. (Reprinted with per-
mission from ustwo games, ©ustwo Games 2014. All rights reserved.)

38
Punk Playthings
Canon Fodder
“Most of my heroes don’t appear on no stamps...”
Public Enemy
Fight the Power (1989)
Checklist Culture
We are obsessed and surrounded by cultural lists: the 50 best mov-
ies, albums, books, games and restaurants. Ever. Each December we 
pour over the end-of-year lists from columnists, critics and anyone 
else with an opinion—just in case we missed something. Recently 
we have become hooked on bucket lists: things to be experienced 
before we shuffle off our mortal coil. Or more accurately, cultural 
checklists for the terminally unimaginative. It sometimes feels like 
our whole culture has been reduced to a series of lists to be checked 
off rather than experiences to be discovered. Or even experienced. 
But where does this obsession with grouping and categorization 
come from? Who compiles these lists? And why should we care?
Imperfect List
“[Beethoven, Mozart, Bach and Brahms] They’re all heroes of 
ours, ain’t they? They’re wonderful people. Oh yes, they really turn 
us on!”
Johnny Rotten
on Today with Bill Grundy (1976)
Compiling lists of culture is not new. For hundreds of years, 
­culture—mainly literature but also visual art and music—has been 
compiled into a supposedly definitive list: the Western canon. This 
identified works considered the most valuable in shaping and pre-
serving Western culture, in particular so-called high culture, that is, 
poetry, literature, classical music or fine art. The canon essentially 
listed the works that laid the foundations for everything the West 
is and stands for. Sounds interesting, right?
Well, yes and no. While great work was listed in the canon, it had 
serious failings. It was exclusive and elitist. During the postmod-
ern “culture wars” of the 1970s and 1980s, the canon was criti-
cized for what it failed to contain, namely women or people from 
nonwhite or non-Western backgrounds (think Georgia O’Keefe). It 
became regarded as the exclusive preserve of “Dead White Men,” 

39
The Road Less Traveled
a cornerstone of a patriarchal, white, Western culture that failed to 
recognize or value the work of women, nonwhites or minorities—
or indeed anything from outside the West itself. Also, the canon 
excluded everything but rarified high culture. There was no room 
for the popular culture most of the Western population enjoyed in 
their everyday lives. No movies, no popular music, no TV, no com-
ics and certainly no video games. The canon was fundamentally 
the preserve of a cultural elite who judged not only what work had 
cultural or artistic merit but as a result decided what might be wor-
thy of preservation or funding. And these judgments reflected the 
elite’s cultural tastes and snobbery. The postmodernists decided 
it was time to challenge all of this, believing such an imperfect list 
could benefit from that most postmodern of processes: a remix.
Sacred Cows Slaughtered Daily
Postmodernism was great at challenging and deconstructing the cul-
tural status quo. It playfully subverted the orthodoxies of art, culture 
and society to reveal new narratives and points of view. Postmodernism 
argued that the “grand narratives”—religion, progress, capitalism—
were either dead or dying. Modernism had failed to make the world a 
better place, artistic originality was impossible and the best we could 
all hope for were ironic and playful remixes of everything that had 
gone before. To postmodernists there was no singular historical truth, 
just competing historical narratives. Many of these—based on gen-
der, ethnicity, sexuality, etc.—had been obscured or overlooked for 
decades. Similarly, there was no fixed meaning in a work of art or cul-
ture. It was irrelevant what the maker intended because the moment a 
work was complete, it was open to deconstruction and interpretation. 
The author might as well be dead. In short, postmodern thought was 
fundamentally against a singular view of anything. It was heteroge-
neous, inclusive, pluralist. It encompassed elements of Marxism, fem-
inism, queer theory, postcolonialism, poststructuralism and any other 
“ism” that wanted in. Even capitalism. So the existence of a singular 
Western canon that exclusively defined what culture had value—and 
equally important, what culture was deemed valueless—provided a 
bright red rag to the postmodernist bulls of the late capitalist 1980s.
Postmodernism encouraged artists and creators to play. To decon-
struct and reassemble, to perform cultural remixes by putting 
myriad influences through a creative blender. Sacred cows were 
slaughtered daily. Ex-arch modernist Philip Johnson remixed the 
quintessential modernist office block with a playful Chipperfield 
pediment; Malcolm McLaren remixed Puccini with hip-hop beats; 
Barbara Kruger remixed commercial advertising with a dose of 

40
Punk Playthings
feminist and anti-consumerist messages. The voices and narra-
tives of the unheard became heard. Consequently, postmodernists 
subverted and remixed the existing Western canon, playing with its 
contents and producing new canons of alternative culture they val-
ued instead. The exclusion of women and minorities was over. The 
barrier constructed between so-called high and low culture melted 
into air. The fight back against cultural and political elites was on. 
The people were sick and tired of being told what to think and do. 
Capitalism was starting to crumble and the cultural revolution was 
most definitely being televised.
All right, so that last bit is an overreach. The Anglophone West mostly 
voted for radical right governments that were both socially and cul-
turally conservative throughout the 1980s. It continues to do so. And 
most people going about their daily lives at the time weren’t par-
ticularly aware of the culture wars raging on university campuses, 
in ­academic publications and throughout the art world. Why should 
they have been? The people were less concerned with learning from 
Las Vegas than going there and taking it for every dime they could. 
But consciously or not, people were increasingly interacting with 
postmodern culture and postmodern ideas on a regular basis.
Your New/Old Arsenal
“Tell the truth, James Brown was old,
’til Eric and Ra came out with ‘I Got Soul’!”
Stetsasonic
Talkin’ All That Jazz (1988)
The technique of sampling in popular music—enabled by digital 
technology—was an inherently postmodern act. Samplers had been 
around in basic yet expensive form since the late 1960s, but by the 
early 1980s machines such as the E-mu SP1200 had become smaller 
and cheaper, consequently making sampling accessible. Young art-
ists creating new musical genres such as electro, hip-hop, house or 
techno could now have a sampler in their bedroom. These creators 
used them to plunder content—vocal snippets, drum loops, guitar 
riffs, sound effects—from their influences. These usually took the 
form of extant recorded music but could also be more esoteric, 
including documentary narrations, speeches, civil defense broad-
casts, porn soundtracks, Disney cartoons and so on. Manipulated 
by the sampler, these snippets were reconstructed into a sonic 
­collage—or more accurately bricolage (see Levi-Strauss 1966)—to 
create something new from the culture that surrounded the creators. 
Well, newish. Records that achieved mainstream success—Pump Up 

41
The Road Less Traveled
the Volume by M/A/R/R/S or the Double Trouble remix of Eric B and 
Rakim’s I Know You Got Soul—contained dozens of relatively obscure 
samples, exposing listeners to new pieces of culture many had not 
encountered previously. Often these were the product of another 
time, place or cultural group and they encouraged further explora-
tion among the culturally curious. For example, many white middle-
class kids in 1980s Britain developed an obsessive interest in Black 
American music of the previous decade, due to the funk, soul or 
disco samples used in new hip-hop and house records. This obses-
sion would lead to a popular subculture known as Rare Groove in 
the mid- to late 1980s (Thornton 1995). Exploring these new/old cul-
tures created more and more subcultures based around them, each 
sporting its unique canon constructed from the bottom up.
Although postmodernism is usually considered anticanonical, 
­sampling is an example of how it could be extremely effective at 
exposing previously overlooked work and enabling the construction 
of new canons from it. Postmodern creators sampled, “quoted” and 
remixed culture continually, making ironic references, hybridizing 
genres, subverting meanings—all the time drawing attention to the 
obscure, the unknown and the undervalued. Never mind cultural 
appropriation, this approach shone a light on the forgotten and the 
marginalized, exposing and celebrating their culture. In the pro-
cess, it created something new that both subverted and enhanced 
mainstream Western culture. True, postmodernism could be a cul-
de-sac—its lack of belief in anything too often resulting in negative 
conservatism and a relativistic shrug of the ­shoulders—good at 
pulling things apart but less good at constructing or proposing alter-
natives. But this was more the case with politics, economics and 
science, rather than art and culture. Here postmodernism empow-
ered creators to discover and curate canons constructed from an 
arsenal of diverse influences and passions. And the extreme exten-
sion of this empowerment is all those cultural lists and checklists 
of experiences to “do” before we die. The lists might have got out 
of control but the good thing is that canons are no longer for the 
elite. We’ve all got a provisional license to curate now. That’s why 
we describe everything as curated, from DJ sets to booklists to 
menus (Rosenbaum 2014). You no longer need to know the Western 
canon to be culturally astute or creatively successful. Instead, you 
might know a lot about hard-boiled fiction, trashy novels, ambient 
music, JRPGs, or have an encyclopedic knowledge of movies from 
arthouse to grindhouse. Or all of these at the same time. And using 
that knowledge you might constantly mine, sample and expose 
your influences, creating an evolving canon of your own for fans to 
explore with every new thing you create. Or you might if your name 
is Quentin Tarantino.

42
Punk Playthings
Turning Shit into Gold
“Tarantino's influence  ... is derived from his own pop-cultural 
cherry-picking: Every film he’s directed or written has been loaded 
with countless homages, lifts and references to books, movies, TV 
shows and music that coalesce into a pop-cultural galaxy of their 
own.”
Larry Fitzmaurice
Quentin Tarantino: The Complete Syllabus (2015)
Quentin Tarantino needs no introduction. He has been recycling, 
reusing and remixing supposedly disposable mainstream cul-
ture into critically acclaimed movies for a quarter of a century or 
so. Often considered the ultimate postmodern filmmaker, he is 
also one of the most gifted and controversial. But this is not an 
in-depth discussion of his work, nor a list of his best films to be 
argued over ad infinitum. What is interesting about Tarantino for 
our purposes is the way he constructs his own canon of “great” 
movies by sampling them, challenging and reshaping orthodoxy 
as he goes.
Film historian Foster Hirsch calls Tarantino’s seminal Pulp Fiction 
a “terminally hip postmodern collage  ... a succulent guilty plea-
sure, beautifully made junk food for cinéastes” (Clarens and Hirsch 
1997). Strangely, this was partly meant as a put-down. But not only 
does Hirsch inadvertently write a great advertisement for the film, 
he also makes a fundamental mistake: neither Tarantino nor the 
influences he remixed in Pulp Fiction could have been described as 
“hip” at the time of the film’s production.
Instead of referencing obscure arthouse or canonical movies such 
as Citizen Kane or Battleship Potemkin, Tarantino makes homage to 
the ephemeral and often failed popular culture of his childhood or 
teens. He kick-started the 1970s revival of the 1990s with Reservoir 
Dogs, then helped sustain it with Pulp Fiction and Jackie Brown. 
Although the first two are primarily tributes to hard-boiled fic-
tion and film noir, they are liberally sprinkled with homages to late 
1960s and 1970s culture—from The Taking of Pelham 123 and Mean 
Streets to Happy Days and The Brady Bunch. And it’s not just films 
being referenced; Tarantino’s early movies were soundtracked with 
often forgotten songs from the same era, including Reservoir Dog’s 
infamous “ear scene” accompanied by 1974 hit Stuck in the Middle 
with You. With Jackie Brown, Tarantino went even further, paying 
homage to the ultimate—and at the time, ultimately forgotten—
1970s film genre blaxploitation.

43
The Road Less Traveled
Neither Tarantino nor his influences and homages were especially 
hip when he emerged in the early 1990s. He was seen as a hyperac-
tive film geek—at a time when “geek” was still a pejorative term—
and the 1970s regarded as “the decade that taste forgot,” a terrifying 
land of flared trousers, trashy medallions and avocado bathroom 
suites. Instead, both the director and his influences became hip—
and indeed important—because of each other. Tarantino is an 
incredibly skilled filmmaker who draws on and remixes eclectic 
personal ­influences—in the process taking advantage of our cul-
tural amnesia—to create highly acclaimed work. He does this so 
well that his influences then become fashionable and valuable—hip 
because he uses them, not the other way around. Sometimes these 
influences are obscure. Sometimes they are from overlooked main-
stream culture. The ten movies Tarantino chose for the British Film 
Institute’s Director’s Poll are revealing: over half appear solely on his 
list, including mainstream blockbuster The Great Escape. Tarantino, 
more than most directors, values mainstream movies and culture 
as much as the obscure. And just like his sampling, his valuing of 
the mainstream is not deployed with detached irony but lovingly, 
as genuine homage. Tarantino is a superfan of film and popular cul-
ture, not a detached observer. This fanaticism resonates with the 
­culturally curious who watch his ­movies. People seek out the influ-
ences, finding new culture and helping ­compile the Tarantino canon. 
Willis (1997) described Tarantino as “turning shit into gold”—alluding 
to his fascination with toilet scenes—but equally, this describes per-
fectly his ability to create critically acclaimed and canonical work by 
recycling forgotten and disparaged influences.
Quentin Tarantino reinvigorated and changed film and wider popu-
lar culture by not adhering to the traditional “good taste” canon of 
the critical and cultural elite. His years as a video store clerk gave 
him a unique, bottom-up, idiosyncratic knowledge that he utilized 
superbly to create works both popular and critically acclaimed. 
Tarantino never completely abandoned the canon but he has 
helped reshaped it, while also creating his own alternative and per-
sonal version. And that’s what an ex-record store assistant from 
Minneapolis did with alternative music too.
8.2
“Distinguish yourself ... just be unique and have an independent 
voice.”
Ryan Schreiber
(quoted in Williams 2015)

44
Punk Playthings
Ryan Schreiber founded Pitchfork in 1995. Today it is the go-to place 
for serious—if at times rather earnest and pretentious—discussion 
and reviews on alternative music. A kind of Rolling Stone for hip-
sters. As a result, it divides audiences. Some love it. Some hate it. 
But that was always part of the plan.
Schreiber was inspired to start Pitchfork by the DIY ethos of fanzines 
and college radio. Working in a record store helped him gain an 
encyclopedic bottom-up knowledge of his medium while also being 
aware of its traditional canon, just like Tarantino. But Schreiber was 
irritated by the lack of criticality and insight delivered by the music 
press at the time, believing reviews lacked strong opinions, were too 
reverent and ultimately dishonest. He had a point. Due to dwindling 
circulation, the established music press relied heavily on advertis-
ing and access, leaving it vulnerable to pressure from record com-
panies. The scathing reviews of Lester Bangs and Nick Kent were a 
thing of the past. If an artist got a bad review, that artist’s label might 
threaten to pull adverts or access to promotional releases, or to 
other artists from across its roster. This imbalance of power had led 
to an almost comical collapse of criticality and depressing descent 
into irrelevance. The magazines had simultaneously become more 
conventional too. Schreiber knew something had to be done—and 
he thought the internet might be the answer.
The first iteration of Pitchfork launched online with the name 
Turntable. The content was sporadic and of variable quality—
Schreiber had no writing experience—but it was at least critical, 
feeling more honest as a result. It changed its named in 1996, but 
few noticed. Schreiber continued working in the record store to 
pay the bills, plugging away with Pitchfork on the side, happy to be 
expressing himself and receiving some free promos of new music. 
It wasn’t until 1997 when he recruited more writers to produce 
regular and more consistent content that Pitchfork started to gain 
traction. The next year he moved the operation from its origins in 
Minneapolis to Chicago and recruited even more writers. The site 
honed its distinctive voice and never looked back.
Today, Pitchfork is a barometer for alternative music. Its per-
ceived frankness and criticality—aided by an authoritative yet 
tongue-in-cheek scoring system that rates everything from 10.0 
down to 0.0—has gathered a loyal following. And yes, a few 
works have received the double zero. As Pitchfork’s influence has 
grown, so has that of the culture it favors. It has helped break 
hundreds of esoteric artists—Sufjan Stevens, Animal Collective, 
Arcade Fire, Bon Iver and more—plus created its own canon of 
albums and songs. Every year Pitchfork compiles end-of-year 

45
The Road Less Traveled
lists that thousands immediately stream or download. It has 
challenged and revised existing canons for past work, compiling 
alternative lists of the best albums of the last four decades that 
repeatedly challenge the received wisdom found in more con-
ventional publications.
Of course, anything as critical and opinionated as Pitchfork 
is bound to be criticized. Some dismiss its favored artists as 
“Pitchfork darlings,” or its alternative canons as “hipster lists.” 
But that’s the point. By challenging mainstream and alternative 
music orthodoxies, sharing its influences, championing new tal-
ents and creating distinct canons, Pitchfork has become trusted, 
influential and wildly successful. It has progressed and changed 
the shape of alternative music, rebuilding it in its own image. 
In late 2015, the site was acquired by Condé Nast—publisher of 
Vogue, The New Yorker, Wired, GQ, etc.—for an undisclosed sum. 
Impressive for a site founded to air the opinions of a frustrated 
record store clerk.
Northern Soul: A Warning from History
“Open up your eyes and see it baby, Give yourself a better chance, 
Because time will pass you, Right on by ...”
Tobi Legend
Time Will Pass You By (1968)
As you’ve no doubt realized by now, this is a celebration of discover-
ing, curating and remixing your own influences. We believe drawing 
on and channeling things you genuinely love or value—rather than 
those you’re told to value—results in creating more meaningful 
and expressive experiences. That doesn’t mean traditional canons 
are valueless—throwing the baby out with the bathwater is never a 
smart move—just that these are no longer the only lists in town. If 
postmodernism has given us anything, it’s permission to discover 
our own influences, sample and curate these in an informed way, 
accruing our own unique cultural capital to spend creatively. But 
sometimes it can lead us up a blind alley.
The roots of Northern Soul lie in the “rare soul” clubs of the English 
Midlands and North West in the 1960s. These were initially influ-
enced by London clubs playing imported soul music on labels 
such a Tamla Motown, Stax and Atlantic. But by the early 1970s, 
this sound had lost popularity in London, replaced by the new 

46
Punk Playthings
heavier funk of James Brown or Parliament/Funkadelic. But in the 
North, crowds still preferred the driving beats of earlier soul to 
fuel their all-­nighters at clubs like Wigan Casino or Manchester’s 
Twisted Wheel. As a result, this music—and the subculture around 
it—became known as “Northern Soul.” For a time it was incredibly 
vibrant, with thousands crowding dancehalls across the Midlands 
and the North to dance the night away. The problem was that the 
music fueling these nights was already out of date. By the mid-
1970s, most songs were over a decade old and there were no more 
in production. Some records became Northern classics and these 
formed a canon of sorts. But DJs couldn’t play these songs repeat-
edly all night, week in, week out—unless they wanted to bore every-
one to death. So the search started for rarer and more obscure 45s 
to keep things alive. At first, these were songs that had not become 
hits on known labels such as Motown, or less successful efforts by 
known artists, but as these were discovered, played and eventu-
ally overplayed, the search moved to ever more obscure songs and 
artists. Most of these obscurities had not been released in the UK 
and finding them involved an army of record dealers and the odd 
DJ crate-digging their way across the United States. And as anyone 
with an intimate knowledge of crate-digging knows, there’s always 
more chaff than wheat.
Northern Soul eventually became a creative cul-de-sac. Sure, the 
diggers found a few gems, but increasingly the scene became 
predicated on the scarcity of a record rather than its quality and 
appeal. This suited the record dealers but not the DJs, now asked 
to pay £40 or £50 pounds for a copy of The Triumph’s Walkin’ 
the Duck—a generic and mediocre sub-Motown instrumental—
at a time when the average weekly wage was around £30. Nor 
in the long run did it suit much of the crowd, who were increas-
ingly drifting away to other scenes that embraced new and evolv-
ing music rather than listening to poor imitations of the original 
Northern sound. By the early 1980s, the remaining Northern clubs 
demanded a strict diet of “clip-clop popular oldies,” blacklisting 
DJs who tried to play new releases. This hardcore scene found 
itself isolated and in terminal decline as a result of its puritanical 
adherence to obscure and inane “stomping” records. Northern 
Soul was increasingly dancing on the spot. Even its famous motto, 
“Keep the Faith,” began to feel more like a desperate plea than a 
rousing call to arms.
Northern Soul was an archival culture, where records expedite a 
cultural revival and allow “dancing to music recorded and forgotten 
in another world and another time” (Thornton 1995, p.69). These 
cultures are vibrant and fun for a time—even useful in preserving 

47
The Road Less Traveled
the obscure or forgotten—but ultimately cannot move forward 
if they don’t create anything new. Many don’t and some actively 
demonize it. Also, these cultures are usually monocultural, focus-
ing on one cultural form and drawing exclusively from it. They are 
concerned with purity, not sustainability. As a result they have a 
limited shelf life. Northern Soul today is kept on life support by a 
small hardcore fan base, fueled by nostalgia and happy to stomp 
to a continual loop of mediocre old records. This stands in stark 
contrast to the dance music derived from the electro, techno or 
house movements of the 1980s. This has continually morphed and 
developed from its obscure subcultural roots to global domination. 
Meanwhile, Northern Soul has remained rigid and stuck in time. 
Time has passed it right on by.
Games without Frontiers
So how is this connected to making games? Sadly, game makers 
and game culture can also be dangerously monocultural. One 
reason is that game design orthodoxy has traditionally fore-
grounded gameplay mechanics over artistic or creative content. 
You choose your “core mechanic” first, then you mold every-
thing else around and in service to it. That’s how we ended up 
with hundreds of identikit first-person shooters (FPS) with inter-
changeable narratives tacked on. Like Northern Soul, these might 
be vibrant and entertaining for a time, but generic FPSs are the 
gaming equivalent to the “stompers” that made Northern Soul 
irrelevant. Of course, some designers try to be more creative with 
mechanics, hybridizing one game’s mechanic with that of another. 
But  these  again draw solely on one source: games. And so do 
most of their concepts and content. Too much of this and games 
will eat themselves.
Ultimately, game makers need to challenge orthodoxy and cast 
a wider cultural net. We need to question whether the mechanic 
should always take precedence in the conceptual process. Surely 
there are alternatives, more inspiring starting points than simply 
what a player does? For example, what a player might feel. And 
we need to work harder at exploring new, unknown, alternative 
or forgotten culture, mining and sampling influences taken from 
beyond games to remix into something more vital and sustainable. 
With the internet, we don’t even have to work that hard to do it. 
Gathering influences is simple but it is only valuable if you do some-
thing creative with it. The point is not to compile new lists; it is to 
create new and provocative content to be curated into future lists. 
Of course, some game makers are already doing this. But nowhere 

48
Punk Playthings
near enough. We need to explore other cultures, domains, art 
forms. We should pay homage to the past to influence and shape 
the future. But don’t just regurgitate: recycle, reuse, remix. Push 
things forward. Otherwise, time might pass us by too.
Postmodern Playlist
Steinski—Lesson 3 (1985)
M/A/R/R/S—Pump Up the Volume (1987)
Eric B and Rakim—I Know You Got Soul (Double Trouble’s Six 
Minutes of Soul Mix) (1988)
Malcolm McLaren—Madam Butterfly (1984)
Sufjan Stevens—Illinois (2005)
Quentin Tarantino—Pulp Fiction (1994)
DMA Design/Rockstar — Grand Theft Auto Series (1997 - present)
Devolver Digital—Hotline Miami (2012)
Tobi Legend—Time Will Pass You By (1968)
FIGURE 1.8  The sampler that helped start it all: the E-mu SP-1200. 
(Courtesy 
of 
2xUeL, 
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File%3AE-mu_SP-1200_front_of_machine.jpg)

49
The Road Less Traveled
thatgamecompany: A Case 
Study in Aesthetics
In The Substance of Style: How the Rise of Aesthetic Value Is Remaking 
Commerce, Culture and Consciousness, Virginia Postrel (2003) argues 
that we live in an age of aesthetics where everyday decisions are 
informed by our sensory experiences, rather than clinical, rational 
information or functionality. In Postrel’s view, aesthetics extend 
well beyond mere decoration to permeate the look, feel and emo-
tion of all types of people, places and things.
thatgamecompany embodies Postrel’s concept of aesthetic 
value. It is a studio deliberately designed to create compelling 
emotional experiences and challenge the perception of what 
games can be. Players expect—and receive—a greater depth 
from thatgamecompany: more emotion, more catharsis, more 
multisensory stimulus and a greater diversity of place, perfor-
mance and feeling. A perfect harmony of substance, style and 
emotion.
Cloud
Kellee Santiago and Jenova Chen met as master’s students at 
the University of Southern California (USC) where they were 
both enrolled in the Interactive Media Program at the School of 
Cinematic Arts. Neither Santiago—with a background in experi-
mental New York theater—or Chen—a computer science student 
from Shanghai—were prototypical game makers. But both recog-
nized the potential of video games as a means of communication 
and expression (Chaplin 2009).
An avid gamer as a child, Chen (2015) felt games had failed to grow 
up alongside him, lacking the emotional maturity to engage him as 
an adult:
Film is very established; you have a genre for every single thing 
you want to feel. No matter your age, genre, nationality and 
mood there’s something for you. But for games...  You have a 
thriller, horror, action film, and sports victory film. But there 
is no romance, no drama, no documentary, and no thought-
ful examination on life. These are basic feelings humans want 
to have in life, but they are just not available in games. That’s 
why lots of people stop playing games as they grow older; 
they want to feel these things but games don’t offer it.

50
Punk Playthings
Inspired by their studies at USC—particularly the classes of game 
designer Tracy Fullerton and her playcentric design methodology—
both Santiago and Chen began to speculate on what games could 
be and their potential as an immersive and emotional means of 
expression. Over the next three years, the pair would collaborate 
on projects, exploring their notion of games as meaningful emo-
tional experiences and eventually arriving at two provocative ques-
tions: could they make a game that expressed something different 
to gaming monoculture? If they could, would people be interested 
in playing such a game?
The answer to both questions was “yes.” Cloud—funded by a 
$20,000 grant from USC—attracted over 400,000 downloads in 
four months (McCartney 2012). What set the game apart was the 
way it deliberately attempted to capture a feeling: what it was like to 
“be a kid, staring at the clouds and daydreaming” (Santiago 2010a). 
Rather than dictate an idea or present a game mechanic, the mak-
ers posed and probed a question: what if a game could trigger an 
immersive, emotional experience within a player?
“I actually, literally cried at the sheer beauty of it. I just wanted 
to let you know that your work engendered such motion. Cloud is 
just utterly impressive.”
Email from a Cloud fan
Fullerton et al. (2006)
Flow in Game
Fundamental to the success of Cloud and its emotional resonance 
was capturing flow: the sweet spot between ability and challenge 
for a player. Flow was the subject of Chen’s MFA thesis, Flow in Game 
(2006), an exploration of how Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (1990) flow 
theory could be used to deliver optimal, contextual experiences for 
different players within the same game.
Csikszentmihalyi defined “flow” as the feeling of complete and 
energized focus in an activity, with a high level of enjoyment and 
fulfillment (Chen 2006). During a flow experience, “we lose track of 
time and worries” as attention focuses on the performance of an 
activity and the pleasure derived from it (Chen 2007). This optimal 
experience is commonly referred to in a gaming context as being 
“in the zone.”
Motivated by the observation that despite evolving into a “mature 
medium,” video games were still perceived as shallow, aggressive 

51
The Road Less Traveled
and immature by the non-game-playing majority, Chen (2006) 
argued that the most effective way to challenge this perception 
was to create games nongamers could play and enjoy. He pos-
ited that descriptions of flow were “identical to what players 
experience when immersed in games” but he was also aware that 
“different players have different skills and expect different chal-
lenges” (Chen 2007). To confront perceptions and broaden their 
audience, games needed to transport different types of players 
to “personal flow zones” (Chen 2007). For a game to appeal to a 
broader ­audience—with these variable desires and abilities—
Chen believed an experience could not be the same for all play-
ers (2007). This type design challenge is typically resolved through 
the introduction of binary choices such as “novice” or “hardcore” 
difficulty settings, or their in-game equivalent, passive dynamic 
difficulty adjustment. Chen disagreed with this approach, believ-
ing that too much noncontextual choice overwhelmed and 
­distracted players, undermining the fundamental component of 
flow: “a sense of control and concentration of the task at hand” 
(2007). It was Chen’s view that the best way to create games that 
challenged and entertained a broad, diverse audience was to offer 
implicit and adaptive choices embedded within the game’s core 
activities. This method allowed for different users to enjoy the 
experience without their flow being interrupted or undermined. 
To illustrate and test this game design assumption, Chen created 
fl0w, a minimal browser game about exploring and evolving within 
a surreal biosphere as a simple organism. fl0w enabled players 
to intuitively curate their optimal experience. Personal gameplay 
choices and performance dynamically adjusted the difficulty level 
and pacing of the game, allowing gamers—and nongamers—of all 
abilities to enjoy the experience in their own way, at their own 
pace. Hailed as “beautiful, relaxing and confusing” (Parsons 2006), 
fl0w drew more than 5 million unique visitors in its first year of 
release and was named Internet Game of the Month by Edge (Chen 
2006; Kong 2017).
fl0w the Game
As a breakthrough in emotional game design and validation that play-
ers desired resonant emotional experiences, the success of Cloud 
inspired Santiago and Chen to formalize their collaboration. But 
neither was “out to make a games company”; thatgamecompany 
would be a means to make their kinds of games—immersive, emo-
tional experiences that challenged perceptions of what games are and 
who they might be for—on their own terms (Santiago 2010a). Idealist 
but definitely not a niche arts project, thatgamecompany was on a 

52
Punk Playthings
mission to “make commercially successful games ... as a communica-
tive medium” (Santiago 2010b). There was no desire to operate at the 
fringes; Santiago and Chen wanted to infiltrate the mainstream indus-
try, delight the broadest possible audience and inspire other game 
makers to abandon the gamer monoculture and push the medium 
forward.
For such a fantasy to become a reality, thatgamecompany required 
a very particular kind of partner: a publisher or investor who not 
only bought into its creative vision but could also help cultivate an 
environment where thatgamecompany could flourish. Cloud dem-
onstrated potential to prospective partners but any deal came with 
significant risk. thatgamecompany required a partner prepared to 
invest time, energy and money while devolving complete creative 
control to a young team fresh out of university and full of ideal-
ist game design notions. Described by Santiago (2010b) as “part 
publisher and part mentor,” Sony Santa Monica signed thatgame-
company on a three-game deal in spring 2006 to produce games 
exclusively for PlayStation Network (PSN). The deal benefitted both 
parties: it gave Sony exclusive “indie” games to differentiate the 
upcoming PSN service from the rival Xbox Live Arcade service and 
it gave thatgamecompany the reach and exposure to establish a 
brand in the mainstream (Santiago 2010b).
Sony Santa Monica incubated thatgamecompany within its 
Los Angeles studio, helping the young company learn about the 
“shipping process of making games and working with the pub-
lisher” while affording the critical distance to “discover a creative 
focus process” for itself (Santiago 2010b). The initial plan was to 
remake Cloud for its PSN debut but conscious of the risk of starting 
a project, a company and a publishing relationship simultaneously, 
Santiago (2010b) took the pragmatic decision to shift production 
focus to remaking fl0w, as it was a more fleshed-out design and 
easier project to realize within constraints. Even so, remaking fl0w 
represented a steep learning curve for the rookie team, who ini-
tially planned to make the game twice as large in a development 
schedule half as long. But with Sony Santa Monica’s support—
equipment, contractors and experienced production oversight—
thatgamecompany released fl0w on PSN in February 2007.
The most downloaded game on PSN in 2007, fl0w received a host of 
award nominations including Best Innovation at the 2007 BAFTAs 
and Best Downloadable Game of the Year from the Academy of 
Interactive Arts & Sciences DICE Awards (Wikipedia 2016a). It 
also exhibited at the Smithsonian American Art Museum and the 
Museum of Modern Art, the latter ­describing it as a “wondrous 

53
The Road Less Traveled
experience of inhabiting a different kind of being, one endowed 
with surprising motility, behavior and mind” (2014). Most impor-
tantly for Santiago, fl0w “validated our process, our mission, all of 
the blood, sweat and tears we put into it” (2010b).
Flower
The success of fl0w demonstrated games could be more than 
macho thrills and instant gratification. Chen (2009) had no quarrel 
with video game machismo but believed it limited the potential of 
the medium by lacking a “complexity of feeling” or the daring to 
“evoke the other types of feelings.” And complexity of feeling was 
what thatgamecompany decided to pursue next, using the next 
two years to create Flower: an “interactive poem” exploring the 
tension between urban bustle and natural serenity (Boyer 2009; 
Govan 2009).
Flower started out as a series of feelings thatgamecompany wanted 
to articulate in interactive form. From this starting point, the team 
embarked upon a protracted 14-month period of exploring how 
such feelings might be expressed and captured in a compelling 
emotional experience (Kong 2017). Throughout prototyping—and 
the 10-month production period that followed it—the game’s 
design focused on keeping the player in a peaceful emotional state 
(Kong 2017). This meant continuously stripping away rogue ele-
ments of frustration or excitement that threatened to turn Flower 
into just another game. Flower was an “escape from stress and 
loneliness” according to Santiago, an “emotional shelter” that pro-
jected positivity onto its players (quoted by Carless 2009).
“Three quarters of the development time involved was just 
­prototyping—just getting the feeling right and the last fraction 
involved producing the actual game.”
Santiago and Hunicke (2010)
Released on PSN in February 2009, Flower delighted and conflicted 
critics. IGN’s Ryan Clements (2009) hailed it as one of the “most 
beautiful games I’ve ever played.” Eurogamer’s Tom Bramwell 
(2009) also praised Flower’s beauty but criticized the $9.99 price 
tag placed on a “brief, film-length” experience. Perhaps Alice Liang 
(2009) best captured Flower’s intentions, rejecting the opportu-
nity to offer any “analytical take on thatgamecompany’s auteurist 
endeavor” and, instead, simply reveling in the joy of a beautiful, 
tactile, immersive experience.

54
Punk Playthings
With Flower, thatgamecompany again demonstrated a main-
stream game did not have to be thematically conservative or 
emotionally repressed to connect with an audience. It was one 
of the most downloaded games on PSN in 2009 but possibly the 
only one that regularly, according to Jenova Chen (2009), moved 
players to tears:
We have already had a few fans mail us about Flower to tell us 
they had tears in their eyes, or they cried after they played the 
first level because it reminds them of their dead mother, or it 
reminds them of the town they used to live in forty years ago. 
So why are we even asking if [games] can make people cry? 
Games have already accomplished that.
Santiago (2009) compared the making of Flower to “walking in the 
mist,” a purposeful but “hard and painful” journey punctuated by 
blind trial and error. Flower’s development stretched thatgame-
company’s creative capabilities and provoked it into evolving its 
creative process to realize ambitions. But could the process keep 
pace with Chen wanted to do next?
Journey
Inspired by a conversation with a former astronaut about how 
one’s spiritual self is forever changed after seeing Earth from 
space, Chen identified the next positive emotion he would seek to 
capture and communicate inside an interactive experience: awe. 
After coming face to face with the sublimity of infinity, astronauts 
returned to Earth poignantly aware of their relative insignificance 
within the universe. Chen (2015) asserted that a typical game does 
the opposite; instead, it places the player at the “center of power.” 
Chen believed that to feel genuine awe within a game, you had to 
feel small and be stripped of empowerment.
In an interview with Simon Parkin, Chen (2015) mapped what he 
believed to be the only three ways to create valuable games for adults:
	
1.	 Intellectual experiences, such as Portal, allowed players to 
see the world from a fresh perspective.
	
2.	 Emotional experiences, such as Flower, provoked genuine 
emotion, reflection and catharsis within a player.
	
3.	 Social environments where “intellectual or emotional stim-
ulation could happen from other people.”
Journey would explore the third way of mature game making: con-
structing an online multiplayer emotional exchange within an 

55
The Road Less Traveled
interactive space, cultivating social emotion and shared feelings 
among players. Chen (2015) wanted to create genuine connections 
between people, challenging the assumption that online multi-
player experiences meant sharing spaces and emotions with ran-
dom “assholes”:
There’s an assumption in video games that if you run into a 
random player over the Internet, it’s going to be a bad experi-
ence. You think that they will be an asshole, right? But listen: 
none of us was born to be an asshole. It’s the game designer 
that made them an asshole. If you spend every day killing one 
another how are you going to be a nice guy? All console games 
are about killing each other or killing one another together … 
Our games make us assholes.
Chen believed the vast majority of multiplayer experiences were 
about task solving and when a player was in task-solving mode they 
could not possibly be in the right frame of mind to exchange emo-
tion. To create the context for meaningful emotional and social con-
nections between random players, Journey had to strip the player of 
empowerment: no names, no chatting, no quests, no words, no meta 
progression, no extrinsic rewards and, above all, no competitive play.
Ironically, exchanges in initial prototypes were characterized by play-
ers going out of their way to kill each other. In spite of the fact that 
everyone involved in making the game knew its intention was to 
communicate “positive things about humanity,” their natural impulse 
was to seek out and perform actions that provided the strongest 
visceral feedback (Chen 2015). Inspired by discussions with a child 
psychologist friend, Chen took the radical step of stripping out gam-
ing ­prerequisites—such as collision detection—that introduced the 
opportunity to engineer spectacular moments of gratifying negativ-
ity. Without personalized usernames, chat or the ability to harm each 
other, all that remained were moments of innocent, serendipitous, 
silent collaboration. Chen (2012a) likened this process of subtraction 
to a Japanese Zen Garden, “where the design is perfect when you can-
not remove anything else.” Stripped of clutter and convention, Journey 
possessed a raw, emotional resonance that surpassed even Flower.
Hours after release, players streamed unprompted onto thatgame-
company’s forums and started discussing the anonymous players 
they had encountered on their personal journey:
“To my companion who appeared when things were darkest, who 
encouraged me on with song when thing’s [sic] got tough and 
­danger loomed overhead, who ran to my aid when I was down 

56
Punk Playthings
and who meditated with me near the end; thank you for an inde-
scribably beautiful experience. It will stay with me for the rest of 
my days.”
Monk (2012)
“Am I the only person who gets so full of grief when they lose a 
companion, they can’t bear to complete that Journey and instead 
start a new one?
While Journeying, I generally (always) stick with the same com-
panion from the bridge until we walk into the light together. I’ve 
never had to leave early, but occasionally will lose a companion 
about halfway through. I get really sad and turn off my console 
when that happens.”
B_Squared (2012)
“I do sometimes get sad when people leave, especially when they 
leave mid-level. But I understand that people sometimes have 
other things to do. I also guess I have lost so many real people in 
my life that—as a metaphor—I know you have to just keep going.”
Jo Pierce (2012)
The emotion, reflection and catharsis of Journey’s meaningful 
shared experience was never more pronounced than in a letter 
Chen received from a 15-year-old girl named Sophia (quoted by 
Takahashi 2013), who shared a Journey with her father before he 
died from an illness:
“I want to thank you for the game that changed my life, the game 
whose beauty brings tears to my eyes. Journey is quite possibly the 
best game I have ever played. I continue to play it, always remem-
bering what joy it brought and the joy it continues to bring.”
—I am Sophia, I am 15 and your game changed my life for 
the better
The letter was one of many received from people who had lost 
family members and for whom Journey had provided a lasting and 
cherished memory. Fittingly, thatgamecompany (2017a) describe 
Journey as an “interactive parable” where:

57
The Road Less Traveled
You wake alone and surrounded by miles of burning, sprawl-
ing desert and soon discover the looming mountaintop which 
is your goal.
Faced with rolling sand dunes, age-old ruins, caves and howl-
ing winds, your passage will not be an easy one. The goal is to 
get to the mountaintop, but the experience is discovering who 
you’re, what this place is and what is your purpose.
These are words that not only capture the “Hero’s Journey” of the 
game but also serve as an allegory for the game’s development, a 
challenging and protracted “trial of perseverance,” according to Chen 
(2012b). Journey may have become the fastest selling game ever on 
PSN when released in March 2012 but it bankrupted thatgamecom-
pany in the process (Chen 2013; Wikipedia 2016b). The making of 
Journey began in January 2009 but, constrained by a strict Sony devel-
opment budget, it had only a one-year development schedule. Chen, 
a self-confessed perfectionist, was faced with a stark choice: ship on 
time and deliver an average experience, or stay true to the vision 
and hold off shipping until the game had “achieved its intended emo-
tional impact” (Chen quoted by Parker 2013). Chen chose the latter 
and Journey ended up taking three years to design and develop. The 
team had to survive on half pay for the final six months and the stu-
dio temporarily shut down between project completion and release 
(Chen 2013). Producer Robin Hunicke described the experience as an 
“emotionally destructive development cycle” bound by two compet-
ing tensions: “passionately believing that something is possible and 
deeply fearing there’s not enough time, not enough money and not 
enough faith to make it happen” (quoted by Dyer 2012).
“The fact of the matter is we signed an unrealistic schedule believ-
ing, in our heart of hearts, it would probably be extended later 
and we paid for that stress in the entire project. We were poor 
at extracting realistic individual estimations and people failed to 
confront the true costs of ‘just in time’ changes to the game.”
Robin Hunicke
(quoted by Khaw 2012)
The experimental creative process pioneered by Chen and Santiago 
was pushed to its very limits by Journey. Its production perfectly 
encapsulates —and amplifies —the natural contradiction that exists 
between probing new aesthetic frontiers and being beholden to the 
rational requirements of a major label benefactor.

58
Punk Playthings
Dandelions
Journey marked the conclusion of thatgamecompany’s three-game 
deal with Sony and the end of an era for the studio. Shortly after 
release, Kellee Santiago left the company on amicable terms to seek 
fresh challenges, as did Hunicke and half the team (Alexander 2012). 
With Santiago’s departure, Chen remained as sole leader, visionary 
and public face of the studio. Backed by a $5.5 million investment 
from Benchmark Capital in 2012, Chen (2015) left behind the rela-
tive security of being “under the wing of the giant mother Sony” to 
fully embrace entrepreneurship and independence. In early 2017, 
five years after the release of Journey, thatgamecompany teased their 
next title: a “game about giving” that seeks to “positively touch more 
players than ever before” (thatgamecompany 2017b). Chen (2015) is 
under no illusion as to how critical its success will be for investor con-
fidence and the ongoing viability of thatgamecompany: “It does [being 
independent of Sony’s distribution, marketing and editorial muscle] 
bring a lot of risks and extra pressure that the game has to be good. 
Otherwise, we’re done. The company’s gone.” But Chen believes that 
by continuing to curate emotionally resonant experiences with endur-
ing aesthetic value, the risk will be rewarded: “Our advantage is that 
we want to create positive things for people, unlike most people that 
make games. By sticking to that, we will have commercial success” 
(Chen 2015).
Punk Provocations
••
What if you designed an experience around making the 
player feel an emotion?
••
What if you observed nature then articulated it as an inter-
active experience?
••
What if you defined the aesthetic value—the substance, 
style and emotion—of your game before you started mak-
ing it?

59
The Road Less Traveled
FIGURE 1.9  A screenshot from Cloud. (Reprinted with permission from thatgamecompany, ©thatgamecompany 2005. 
All rights reserved.)

60
Punk Playthings
FIGURE 1.10  thatgamecompany tease their forthcoming game in early 2017. (Reprinted with permission from thatg-
amecompany, ©thatgamecompany 2017. All rights reserved.)

61
Chapter 2
Ideals Over Ideas
Abstract
Meaningful ideals and creative innovation have been replaced by 
cheap ideas and mediocre invention. Making is important—but 
only within the wider context of a clear purpose and magical vision. 
Understanding what you’re trying to do and why it matters is not 
something to be explored as an afterthought. It is the essence of 
any designed experience.
This chapter probes the approximation of authenticity through 
provocative manifestos and playful cultural appropriation, arguing 
that critical thinking, polycultural synthesis and serendipity make 
a greater contribution to meaningful and resonant playful experi-
ences than slavish authenticity, virtuous craft, or technical mastery.

62
Punk Playthings
What Side Are You On?
“I’m talking about drawing a line in the sand, Dude!”
Walter Sobchak
The Big Lebowski (1997)
A “just make it” mantra is prevalent in game making. Never mind 
context or vision the orthodoxy goes—just make something and 
everything will be fine. But this is the equivalent of building a bridge 
without measuring the gap. You end up with something nobody 
wants. Sure, making is essential but stop just making stuff. Before 
you start, ask questions like: What are we making? Why are we 
making it? Who are we making it for? And what does it all mean? 
Otherwise, you’re only making noise.
Why We Create
“But he don’t know what it means,
Don’t know what it means,
And I say, yeah!”
Nirvana
In Bloom (1991)
Creative people act to express what they think or feel—even to find 
out what they think or feel. They create to explore and understand 
the human condition, their personal condition, to react against what 
exists, to express their anger, frustration, puzzlement, despair, or 
joy. Whatever the impulse, creativity is always part of an ongoing 
search for meaning. And that is something we are all engaged in. 
It is what makes us human. We seek meaning in the senseless, to 
find “the sermon in the suicide ... the moral lesson in the murder 
of five” (Didion 1979, p.11). Or we search for meaning in something 
new, something wonderful, something transformative. And it is 
here that great art delivers. Art alters our perceptions; it connects 
with us, it provides new meanings while challenging the old. As 
Simon Schama says, “Great art has dreadful manners ...  the great-
est paintings grab you in a headlock, rough up your composure 
and then proceed in short order to rearrange your sense of real-
ity” (2006, p.6). But that is what we want. Or at least, it is what we 
should want. To be shaken out of the quotidian by the protean. To 
shatter the dumb complacency of the mediocre. To have the banal-
ity of routine disrupted by delight—if only for a few minutes. It is 

63
Ideals Over Ideas
this meaning that reminds us we’re alive. We constantly search for 
it. Some of us even search for the same things. That’s why mean-
ing is key to creating experiences people truly want. Humans clus-
ter around meanings, ideals and narratives, not single snowflake 
ideas.
Really Saying Something
“I don’t know what I think until I write it down.”
Joan Didion
The White Album (1979)
Consider what has meaning to you. What makes you emotional, 
inquisitive, or angry? If you reflect, then articulate a creative and 
provocative response; it can resonate across cultures. Learn to 
probe prod and make a dent in the world. Like Marshall McLuhan. 
In the 1960s, this Canadian media theorist articulated prescient 
provocations about the coming of the “electronic information 
revolution.” He identified the transformative effects it would have 
on culture and society, three decades before computers and the 
internet went mainstream. At a time when the orthodoxy dealt in 
the masses and delineated specialisms, McLuhan argued that new 
electronic media would soon return us to tribalism. That increas-
ingly we would reside in a connected “global village” where special-
ism was irrelevant. Sound familiar?
Not surprisingly, McLuhan’s thinking upset people. It disturbed their 
complacent refusal to imagine a future radically different from their 
present. But some—especially in academia—were more disturbed 
by the way he articulated his thinking. McLuhan eschewed long-
winded logical argument and definitive answers in favor of rapid-
fire aphorisms and punchy provocations. For example: “We look at 
the present through a rearview mirror. We march backward into 
the future” (McLuhan and Fiore 1967, p.74). McLuhan called these 
probes. He viewed himself as an explorer, a pioneer penetrating 
new media landscapes to kickstart debate and enhance under-
standing (McLuhan and Zingrone 1997). Many of his probes—most 
famously “the medium is the message”—passed into everyday 
usage. McLuhan became an intellectual and cultural icon. He was 
interviewed in Playboy magazine and featured in the Woody Allen 
masterpiece Annie Hall, where he performed a cameo settling an 
argument about his theories. Later, he would be cleverly referenced 
in an episode of The Sopranos and become “patron saint” of the influ-
ential technology magazine Wired. Today, he is viewed as perhaps 

64
Punk Playthings
the most influential—if controversial—media theorist of the 20th 
century. No wonder the other academics didn’t like him.
McLuhan was a provocative thinker. But he knew thinking has to be 
articulated to have real value or impact. It’s no use saying the same 
old thing, in the same old way, to the same old people. To draw a 
line in the sand and stand out from the crowd, you must expose 
and communicate your ideas and ideals. Challenging the status 
quo requires crafted articulation of provocative content. McLuhan 
was a master at this. He knew that turning complex ideas into reso-
nant probes connected with real people. He understood that to 
resonate, you must articulate.
Manifest Destiny
The manifesto has long been the articulation of choice for radicals 
of all kinds. It was first democratized by English dissenters in the 
17th century and soon became almost obligatory among revolu-
tionary groups. Famous early examples include the US Declaration 
of Independence (1776) and the Communist Manifesto (1848). But 
at the beginning of the 20th century, the manifesto became the 
property of artists and creators. From the Futurists onward, every 
art and design movement worth its salt had a manifesto declaring 
what was wrong with the world and what it was going to do about 
it. These manifestos were provocations, articulated statements of 
intent. They probed and prodded the status quo with radical ideals 
and values, laying out ground rules for creative action and sound-
ing a clarion call to the likeminded.
Manifestos usually have an “enemy,” but the best ones are more 
than a hectoring list of dislikes. Karl Marx understood that the mani-
festo is a performance, crafted to resonate with its intended audi-
ence, provoking them to think and ask questions while also codifying 
and communicating a new set of ideals, beliefs and values. The best 
manifestos are utopian, not only identifying defects and flaws but 
proposing resolutions and ideals. The great manifesto is a vision of 
a better world as seen through the eyes of its creators. It highlights 
what is no longer good enough while suggesting a better way. It pro-
vokes, cajoles, encourages and changes. It becomes a guiding light.
Kick in the Eye
The Bauhaus was the most influential art school of the 20th cen-
tury. It sought to reinvent art and design education by unifying 

65
Ideals Over Ideas
art, craft and technology. The Bauhaus challenged the hierar-
chical orthodoxy that discriminated against “applied art” in 
favor of “fine art,” that is, favoring the artist over the artisan. 
It embraced the machine age and the role of machines in mak-
ing. The Bauhaus became the cradle of modernism that helped 
shape the visual culture of the century. And it started with a 
manifesto:
“Architects, sculptors, painters, we all must return to the crafts! 
For art is not a “profession.” There is no essential difference 
between the artist and the craftsman. The artist is an exalted 
craftsman ... proficiency in a craft is essential to every artist. 
Therein lies the prime source of creative imagination. Let us then 
create a new guild of craftsmen without the class distinctions 
that raise an arrogant barrier between craftsman and artist!”
Walter Gropius
excerpt from The Bauhaus Manifesto (1919)
Walter Gropius was the founder of the Bauhaus. He believed his 
provocative yet utopian vision could be achieved by teaching “indis-
pensable proficiencies” to students and embracing the machine. 
These proficiencies would include perception, form, materials, 
color theory and many others, enabling students to break down 
artificial barriers and collaborate on a “total work of art.” The 
Bauhaus removed other obstacles, too. Women were encouraged 
to enroll. There were no teachers or pupils, only masters, journey-
men and apprentices working toward the common purpose articu-
lated in the manifesto. The school quickly became a cadre of the 
likeminded, where friendly relations were encouraged between 
members. There were plays, concerts, lectures and legendary par-
ties that enabled free expression, constructed a creative commu-
nity and further reinforced the sense of shared purpose. But like 
many radical provocations, this cadre often confused those on the 
outside:
“When we dared to go out on the streets—especially the girl weav-
ers who wore trousers—there was always an uproar. ‘Impossible!’ 
people would say. When we came along with ponytails mothers 
warned daughters, ‘Don’t look! They’re from the Bauhaus!’
We were seen as the punks of Dessau!”
Professor Kurt Kranz
Bauhaus Student (Bauhaus 1994)

66
Punk Playthings
The Bauhaus did not fully resolve its vision, partly as a result of its 
dissolution by the Nazis—it was far too radical for their mediocre 
minds—partly because complete resolution was always unachiev-
able. But it is precisely because the manifesto set its sights and 
expectations so high that it became a rallying point for a community. 
The Bauhaus manifesto was an articulation that issued a visionary, 
radical and provocative challenge to the status quo. It gave creative 
mavericks something to cluster around and at times challenge. As a 
result the diaspora of “Bauhaus punks” who emigrated to England, 
the US, Israel and beyond after Hitler came to power would trans-
form the visual and material culture of the 20th century, assuring 
the school a place in design ­history. A few decades later, a new gen-
eration of punks would cluster around a new manifesto to change 
culture again.
Itchy Knickers
“There are two rules I’ve always tried to live by: turn left if you’re 
supposed to turn right; go through any door that you’re not sup-
posed to enter. It’s the only way to fight your way through to any 
kind of authentic feeling in a world beset by fakery.”
Malcolm McLaren
This Much I Know (2008)
Malcolm McLaren was an itinerant art student, rag trader, wan-
nabe Svengali and consummate maverick. After years of gov-
ernment funded “study” at London’s top art schools, he decided 
British music and culture of the early 1970s was terminally dull and 
arrogantly complacent. He wanted to shake things up. He wanted 
to make a mark. And so he became manager—or creator, depend-
ing who you talk to—of The Sex Pistols.
McLaren went outside music industry orthodoxy to make his 
band famous. And better than making The Sex Pistols famous, 
McLaren made them infamous. He and the band became “an itch in 
­someone’s knickers” (Wallington-Lloyd cited in Savage 1991, p.38). 
McLaren was inspired by anything he could approximate or appro-
priate, notably the playfully subversive ideas of the Situationists. In 
Society of the Spectacle, Guy Debord provocatively argued that soci-
ety had become simply an accumulation of spectacles engineered 
by the mass media and capitalism, where everything once directly 
lived had retreated into representation (1967, p.7). This resonated 
with McLaren, who particularly liked the Situationist concept of 
detournement—where the spectacle was creatively hijacked and 

67
Ideals Over Ideas
exposed through subversive pranks. Debord argued for this sub-
version because “in a world that is really upside down, the true is a 
moment of the false” (1967, p.9).
McLaren engineered a series of stunts and pranks to gain a fol-
lowing for The Sex Pistols. He constantly irritated the mainstream 
to expose its complacency and hypocrisy. With then-girlfriend 
Vivienne Westwood, he created clothes adorned with provoca-
tive images and Situationist statements for the band to wear. He 
concocted fights and assaults at their gigs and encouraged foul-
mouthed appearances on family television shows. He staged an 
infamous performance where the Pistols played God Save the 
Queen—a song that described the British monarchy as a fascist 
regime—on a boat called Queen Elizabeth sailing past the Palace 
of Westminster at the height of the Silver Jubilee celebrations. 
As you might imagine, this did not go down at all well with the 
British Establishment. Police launches were dispatched and the 
boat forced to dock. As the police approached, McLaren raised 
a fist and shouted: “You fucking fascist bastards.” He and others 
were promptly arrested and taken to jail. But this was exactly the 
outcome McLaren wanted. He had filled the boat with journalists 
who would lovingly describe every moment in the music press and 
beyond. McLaren deliberately courted controversy instead of con-
firmation. You either loved or loathed The Sex Pistols. And that was 
fine with him.
The Sex Pistols became the seminal band of punk rock, if not the 
first or even the best. And with McLaren steering, their antics 
attracted a gang of outcasts and mavericks from every part of 
British society. These early punks creatively rejected the status quo 
with music, fashion, art and anything else at their disposal. This 
resonated with more young people across the nation and beyond, 
detonating a punk movement that continues to influence culture 
to this day. But although 1977 was perhaps the apogee of punk—it 
really began a few years earlier.
You’re Gonna Wake Up One Morning
“I have been called many things: a charlatan, a con man, or, most 
flatteringly, the culprit responsible for turning British popular cul-
ture into nothing more than a cheap marketing gimmick. This is my 
chance to prove that these accusations are true.”
Malcolm McLaren
interviewed in Classic Rock Magazine (2010)

68
Punk Playthings
The derogatory epithet “punk” had been around for years in the 
US. And there had been bands—MC5, The Stooges, The Modern 
Lovers, etc.—who created the sonic prototypes for punk from the 
late 1960s onward. But the catalyst for the punk rock explosion of 
1976 and 1977 came two years earlier when Malcolm McLaren col-
laborated with Bernie Rhodes—later manager of The Clash—and 
Vivienne Westwood on a t-shirt–based manifesto. Called You’re 
Gonna Wake Up One Morning, the manifesto was inclusive and 
exclusive at the same time, resonating with some, repulsing oth-
ers, provoking all.
The manifesto was divided across the front of the t-shirt. On one side 
was a list of things McLaren and Rhodes hated about 1970s society 
and culture; on the other, the things they wanted to celebrate. It was 
a tongue-in-cheek reaction to the dull conformity and complacency 
of the time that sought to articulate another way. A utopian vision 
of a world where “imagination,” Simone de Beauvoir, Joe Orton and 
John Coltrane would banish Leo Sayer, the National Front, grey skies 
and “all those fucking saints.” Forever. No wonder it struck a chord.
Fittingly, “imagination” is the final thing celebrated on the shirt. 
And by imagining another reality, a road less traveled, McLaren 
was gambling his wearable articulation would provoke a strong 
enough reaction to attract more cultural mavericks and outcasts. If 
it could, it might just help him form a movement, gain momentum 
and change the culture around him. It did. The playful, sarcastic, 
disruptive t-shirt served as a rallying point for the avant-garde of 
punk. And it brought the act of manifestoing—which had become 
the preserve of politicians, artists and designers—into the realm 
of commercial popular culture. Today, both the punk spirit and the 
manifesto are alive, well and living in an eco-brewery just outside 
Aberdeen, Scotland.
Postmodern Punks
BrewDog is a self-defined “punk brewery.” Founded by two friends 
bored with industrially brewed lagers and stuffy real ales, it shakes 
things up through provocations and controversies, sometimes 
articulated in the form of a product, sometimes as a stunt. BrewDog 
created a new movement of “beer punks,” became the world’s first 
crowdfunded brewery, achieved an annual turnover of £30 million 
in 2014 and by 2015 boasted the UK’s bestselling craft beer, Punk 
IPA (BrewDog 2015a). Not bad for a company under a decade old, 
founded by two guys and a dog with virtually no capital, that had to 
scale up during the worst recession in 80 years.

69
Ideals Over Ideas
What helped BrewDog was its manifesto for change. It classically 
identified an enemy to hate and a utopian vision of a time when that 
enemy is banished, a time when there would be:
“There will be nothing industrial or genneric in sight, nothing 
monolithic, nothing mass-produced.”
BrewDog (2010a)
And BrewDog was clear what it wanted to achieve:
“To make other people as passionate about great craft beer as 
we are.”
BrewDog (2010b)
BrewDog wears its punk influences on its sleeve, embracing playful 
subversion and engineering media storms to get its point across. It 
is the spiritual heir to both McLuhan and McLaren—with a healthy 
dose of Debord thrown in. BrewDog is an idea factory channel-
ing an anti-establishment, anti-mediocrity ethos into one prob-
ing provocation or surreal stunt after another. Its first London bar 
opened to the sound of a BrewDog tank rumbling down the local 
high street. It brewed a series of super-strong beers—including the 
best-named beer ever: Tactical Nuclear Penguin—that enraged UK 
industry watchdogs. BrewDog then smartly responded with a weak 
beer cheekily titled Nanny State. BrewDog always upsets the apple-
cart and is consistently an itch in someone’s knickers. And its fans 
love that.
The BrewDog manifesto articulates its ideas and values, identifying 
what it deems meaningful. It communicates an ethos, attracts the 
likeminded, guides direction and represents the collective vision of 
everyone on the BrewDog team:
“We Bleed Craft Beer. This is our True North.
We Are Uncompromising. If we don’t love it, we don’t do it. Ever.
We Blow Shit Up. We are ambitious. We are relentless. We take risks.
We Are Geeks. Learn obsessively. Share evangelically.
Without Us, We Are Nothing. We are BrewDog.”
BrewDog
The BrewDog Charter (2015)

70
Punk Playthings
This punk spirit both attracts and repels people. BrewDog is not 
for everyone. The values enshrined in the manifesto, the prod-
ucts the manifesto enables, the endless sensational stunts, all 
inspire fanatical devotion among likeminded beer lovers around 
the globe. People cluster around the anti-homogenization, anti-­
establishment, anti-pretension narrative to make a stand. It helps 
construct a meaningful identity and define what they believe, 
­placing those beliefs in opposition to others. Of course, this is 
dichotomous—you’re either BrewDog or you’re not—and there 
are recent indications the company is softening this binary stance 
as it scales. But the BrewDog punk approach has resulted in such 
stratospheric success that if they haven’t already, the beer punks 
will be invading a town near you soon.
Articulated Provocations
BrewDog is not the only creative organization harnessing the power 
of the manifesto to define itself and attract a loyal fan base. From 
brewers to clothes labels to high-end restaurants, creative people 
are probing culture and context with provocative statements of 
intent that resonate with the likeminded. Manifestoing is just one 
creative, effective and empowering “attract mode” that can make 
your ideals and values concrete, drawing people to you and pro-
viding foundations for entrepreneurship. However, provocations 
do not have to be articulated through pure writing, as McLaren’s 
t-shirt or BrewDog’s beers demonstrate. Provocations can be 
expressed as products, services, performances, playful experi-
ences and much more. But before you start making any of those, 
first you need to wake up and know what side of the bed you’re on.

71
Ideals Over Ideas
Approximate Authenticity
“History, it is easily perceived, is a picture-gallery
containing a host of copies and very few originals.”
Alexis de Tocqueville
The Old Regime and the Revolution (1856)
It’s a Small World
Our world has been shrinking for hundreds of years—but recently 
the speed of contraction has accelerated. Globalization, ably abet-
ted by electronically networked communications, has altered time 
and space. Trade and transactions between one side of the planet 
and the other now occur in milliseconds. Open Skies policies have 
led to low-cost flights, meaning we can radically change our physi-
cal realities on a weekend whim. Open borders have allowed us to 
change those realities more permanently, for professional advance-
ment or that dream place in the sun. There has been an “intensifi-
cation of worldwide social relations which link distant localities in 
such a way that local happenings are shaped by events occurring 
many miles away and vice versa” (Giddens 1991, p.64). As a result 
of this process, our cultural and political differences have been flat-
tened and we have increasingly become global citizens.
Or have we? Recent events such as Brexit, the election of Trump and 
the rise of nationalism suggest a backlash in progress. Some people 
seem to feel that being a citizen of everywhere feels a lot like being 
from nowhere. More feel left behind and under threat. What feels like 
freedom to the highly educated and highly skilled feels like punish-
ment to those with less to trade in the global marketplace. This phe-
nomenon is what Bauman (2007, p.7) terms “negative globalization,” 
a “selective globalization of trade and capital, surveillance and infor-
mation, violence and weapons, crime and terrorism, all unanimous in 
their disdain of the principle of territorial sovereignty and their lack 
of respect for any state boundary.” In light of this globalism run wild, 
protectionist narratives of “taking back control” become compelling. 
Under assault from cheap goods and cheap labor from abroad, plus 
the increased threat of terrorism, many nation states are adopting 
protectionist stances and closing their borders. So-called national val-
ues are hastily rediscovered and reasserted. We are turning inward.
Perhaps. But this is a strange and confused backlash. We want to 
safeguard jobs from cheap foreign labor, when the real threat comes 
from automation. We close our borders to global terrorism, ignoring 
the painful and disturbing reality that most terrorism is homegrown. 

72
Punk Playthings
We satirize and stereotype other nations, while happily visiting them 
on weekend breaks and summer holidays. And we “Buy American” or 
“Buy British” without considering what that really means.
The German Job
In 2001, the new Mini was launched. Despite criticism by tradition-
alists, the car was an immediate success. By 2013, the Mini was not 
only a Top 10 seller in the UK but also a major success around the 
globe, accounting for 40% of all UK car exports (Love 2013). And 
in 2016, over 63,000 were sold in the UK alone. These not-so-mini 
offspring of the iconic car designed by Sir Alec Issigonis can be 
spotted whizzing around the UK, often with a Union Flag displayed 
prominently on the vehicle, sometimes right across the roof.
There are few cars on the road that want to be as authentically 
British as the Mini. The models are still called Cooper, Clubman 
and Countryman. Launch events feature Bulldogs named Spike 
and noted British historians celebrating the Mini as “a symbol of 
Britishness—lovable, cheeky, reliable, robust. A small car with big 
clout” (Sandbrook, quoted in Love 2013). Once you slap a Union 
Jack on the bodywork, these cars feel more authentically British 
than fish and chips (more on this later). But scratch the surface and 
you’ll discover the Mini is not as British as it seems.
The Mini marque is now owned by BMW AG. Although the cars are 
mostly manufactured in Oxford, some models are made in Austria 
and the profits end up in Stuttgart. Parts are sourced from around 
the world—as with any other car-manufacturing supply chain—
and the vehicle’s designer was born in Morocco to an American 
father and Spanish mother. In short, the new Mini transcends 
nationalities and provides a snapshot of the globalized economy. 
Yet these cars still feel authentically British because BMW made 
a conscious decision to trade on that “Britishness” from the start. 
It positioned the new Mini as creative and slightly maverick, a car 
with a strong British heritage and “personality.” This is aligned with 
a certain British underdog cheekiness that can be traced back to 
the Swinging Sixties, to John Lennon’s impertinent wit and The 
Italian Job (Edensor 2006). The new Mini is that maverick creativity 
reinvented for a new century and embodied on four wheels, a per-
fect blend of crafted history and mechanical innovation.
Advertising experts like Sir Martin Sorrell argue that in a world of 
globalization “consumers are seeking out brands with genuine his-
tory and authenticity” (quoted in Hiscock 2002). It seems the more 
choice we’re given, the more brands and culture transcend national 

73
Ideals Over Ideas
borders, the more we want products to feel authentically of some-
where or embody something tangible. We want a Mini because of 
its British heritage and “cheeky chappy” personality. But know-
ing this four-wheeled maverick is underpinned by German quality 
doesn’t hurt. Likewise, Jeep emphasizes its free-roaming pedigree 
and American roots with models called Cherokee and Renegade. 
Land Rover trades on British luxury and myths of off-road Discovery. 
Of course, both marques are mostly foreign owned—Jeep by Fiat 
Chrysler, Land Rover by Tata Motors of India—and many owners 
will never take them further off-road than the pavement outside 
their local deli. But none of this seems to matter. It is the exciting 
approximation of authenticity that makes these brands and prod-
ucts resonate, not quotidian realities or facts regarding who owns 
the modes and means of production.
100% Authentic
A mistake often made when discussing authenticity is to assume 
it resides in a product, service, or person. Nothing could be fur-
ther from the truth. Authenticity is not an inherent quality; it is an 
ongoing multifaceted negotiation, fluid rather than solid. Richard 
Peterson identifies the fabrication necessary for artists to cre-
ate and innovate in country music while maintaining a sense of 
heritage and tradition. In his book on authenticity and country, 
he describes how both the music and its attendant culture hinges 
on ideas of authenticity. But, he argues, this is not inherent in the 
song, artist, or event that is designated authentic; instead it is a 
socially agreed construct (1999, p.21). Peterson also states that as 
there is no authority to confer authenticity in country music, it is 
instead continually renegotiated, reworked and adapted through 
ongoing interactions between creators, audiences and commer-
cial interests (1999, p.22). Often authenticity can be fabricated by 
adopting particular language, symbolism, identities, or conven-
tions. If these are accepted, then a song or artist can be authentic. 
In short, songs and artists are only authentically “country” when 
enough people agree they are.
Peterson’s argument applies equally across popular culture. The 
ancient Greek notion of authentikos—an authoritative text or sole 
authority that “fixes” authenticity—has disappeared over the past 
century or so. Yet strangely, we are increasingly surrounded by 
the rhetoric of the authentic. It is applied to food, clothing, songs, 
politicians, even indie game makers. Whether these things or peo-
ple are accepted as authentic depends on how successfully their 
authenticity has been fabricated and performed and how well it 

74
Punk Playthings
can be sustained through ongoing negotiations. Our increasingly 
globalized world with its multiplicity of choice has not led to cul-
tural flatness and complete homogenization. Instead it has caused 
antithetical reactions. Rather than destroying authenticity, global-
ization has led to an ever-­increasing appetite for it. We are now con-
stantly engaged in a search for something pure and authentically 
real, even when that authenticity is little more than a response to 
market demands (Cobb 2014).
100% Dynamite
“‘The napalm sauce, sir?’ asked Rashid. ‘Yeah. The napalm sauce.’ 
The first spoonful swiped a mustache of sweat on to Keith’s upper 
lip and drew excited murmurs from the kitchen. ‘Bit mild,’ said 
Keith when he could talk again. Tears inched their way over his 
dry cheeks. ‘Bland, Rashid,’ said Keith, later, as he paid and under 
tipped. ‘Bland. Dead bland.’”
Martin Amis
edited excerpt from London Fields (1989)
The Indian restaurant scenes Amis describes in London Fields—the 
postmodern pinnacle of his career—will resonate with anyone who 
has experienced the classic British “curry house” after the pubs shut. 
These restaurants fill with hordes of inebriated diners who plough 
through mountains of mouth-scorching Vindaloo or Madras curries, 
wash them down with liberal amounts of fire-quenching Indian lager, 
then stagger home. Since the 1950s, “going for an Indian” has been 
the eat-out experience of choice for many Brits, particularly those 
from the white working classes (Fielding 2014; Wilson 2017). Myriad 
Indian takeaways add a “grab it and go” option and Indian-themed 
ready meals can be found in every supermarket. This exotic import 
has become the fast food of choice, even supplanting fish and chips 
as the national dish. Britain is a nation of Indian food lovers.
But if we interrogate this phenomenon through a frame of authen-
ticity, things become more complicated. Just as fish and chips is not 
“authentically” British—the idea of frying potatoes was most likely 
an import from the Low Countries, fried fish served with them a 
product of Sephardic Jews immigrating to London’s East End in the 
late 19th century (Walton 1992)—the food served in the quintessen-
tial British curry house bears scant resemblance to authentic Indian 
food. One reason is that nearly 90% of “Indian” restaurants in the UK 
are actually owned and operated by Bangladeshis and Pakistanis, 
who have distinct regional food cultures and traditions that differ 

75
Ideals Over Ideas
sharply from those of India (Khaleeli 2012: Wilson 2017). Another is 
the relationship between these restaurateurs and the expectations 
of their customers as negotiated through the marketplace.
What has occurred in the UK is a constant fabrication, negotia-
tion and renegotiation of what constitutes “authentic” Indian food 
since the 1950s. As Bangladeshi restaurateurs worked to gain 
acceptability for their food within indigenous British society, they 
adapted their offer to conform to white working-class expecta-
tions. Meat was elevated over vegetables to more closely resemble 
the traditional British “meat and two veg” meal. Traditionally dry 
dishes were sauced to approximate gravy and starchy components 
were added to mimic potatoes. However, this was done carefully 
to ensure everything still felt exotic and authentically Indian. The 
food still had foreign names and was hyperspiced with unfamil-
iar ingredients, in the process inventing a scorchingly hot food 
that no Indian person would fully recognize as their own (Wilson 
2017). Restaurants adopted names that reinforced their Indian 
credentials—The Raj, The Imperial Madras, Passage to India—but 
also resonated with echoes of the lost British Empire, foreign yet 
familiar, reassuring in their cultural hybridity. Inside were stereo-
typical images of the Taj Mahal, exotic music and other fabricated 
cues that could be recognized by their customers as “Indian.” 
The British Indian restaurant became a space of fabrication, where 
authenticity was approximated and negotiated in response to the 
logic of market demand. Similar phenomena have occurred around 
the world. The Rijsttafel ubiquitous throughout the Netherlands is 
freely adapted from its Indonesian roots. The gloriously inauthentic 
General Tso’s chicken—so popular in the US a full-length documen-
tary was made about it—has no real analog in China. But none of 
this matters as long as you can keep approximating and renegoti-
ating authenticity with your customers or audience. The extraordi-
nary success of Indian food in the UK emphasizes the effectiveness 
of adaptability. Start with some base ingredients and a vision for 
what you’re attempting to do, then learn and adapt your way to 
success. The trouble is, the minute you stop learning and adapting, 
things can go wrong.
Salaam Bombay!
“The British public have a love affair with Indian food. But the 
proposition offered to them was the tired stereotype of a curry 
house and lager.”
Adash Radia
Co-founder of Dishoom (quoted in Featherstone 2016)

76
Punk Playthings
From only 300 in 1960, there were over 12,000 Indian restau-
rants in the UK by 2011. Politicians cited chicken tikka masala as 
“the national dish” and a distillation of the success of multicul-
tural Britain (Cook 2001). But in recent years the quintessential 
curry house has entered a decline, with the Bangladeshi Caterers 
Association warning thousands could shut down over the next 
few years. There are many causal factors—the rise of other cui-
sines such as Thai, Japanese, Vietnamese, Korean, even American 
BBQ. The unwillingness of many third-generation British Asians to 
endure the long hours, backbreaking work and casual abuse that 
comes with running an Indian restaurant, opting for university and 
the professions instead. Government restrictions on immigration 
that have left chronic labor shortages in most restaurants. But 
perhaps most importantly, the expectations and knowledge base 
of customers have changed and many curry houses have failed to 
adapt to meet them. Due to cheaper air fares and the recent relax-
ation of visa requirements, Britons of all classes have been visiting 
India in record numbers (Telegraph 2015). To their surprise, they 
find little sign of the hybridized dishes served in the curry houses 
back home. There has also been increased criticism of “Banglish” 
food by Indian cooks and food critics such as Madhur Jaffrey, who 
described chicken tikka masala as “the dish without a home” (cited 
in Fielding 2014). All this has increasingly led to a failure in the rene-
gotiation of authenticity, as more knowledgeable customers keen 
on searching out authentic Indian food realize it’s unlikely to be 
found at The Imperial Madras. But this shift isn’t the end for Indian 
food in Britain—it’s a new beginning.
Dishoom opened in London’s Covent Garden in 2010. It was an 
immediate success. More branches opened across the capital and 
by late 2016 it had expanded to Edinburgh. Dishoom takes its influ-
ences from the Irani cafés of 1930s Bombay, founded by Iranian 
immigrants to the city in the 19th century. These were highly 
democratic places that transcended class, caste and regional cui-
sine, breaking down social and cultural boundaries while serving 
great food. It was this ethos experienced first-hand that inspired 
the founders—all members of an extended Indian family—to open 
Dishoom. That and a deep desire to bring high-quality food rooted 
in India to the British public (Basu 2014; Featherstone 2016).
Like the curry house, authenticity at Dishoom is a construct. It is 
fabricated and negotiated. The restaurants are designed to evoke 
the “feel” of Bombay’s century-old Irani cafés but experiencing 
this depends on a willing suspension of disbelief. Such willingness 
is manufactured by painstaking attention to detail, intelligent cues 
and references through interior and graphic design, menus that 

77
Ideals Over Ideas
replicate dishes served in the “real” thing, cocktails that adapt clas-
sics with an Indian twist, a walk-up policy that creates a degree of 
controlled chaos that feels “authentically” Bombay. All reinforced by 
lots of workers and customers with South Asian roots. Dishoom fab-
ricates and stages an “authentic” Indian experience through all these 
things, plus high-quality food that eschews hyperspiced neon-red 
sauces. The experience is so enjoyable that a Yelp list voted the origi-
nal branch the best eatery in the UK in 2016 (Yelp, Inc 2016).
Dishoom is successful because it embraces the performative aspect 
of authenticity. The founders are perfectly aware Dishoom is not 
an Iranian cafe in 1930s Bombay, because “we are not Iranians and 
this is not the 1930s in Bombay” (Basu 2014). And they know you 
know that, too. No one is trying to con anyone. What Dishoom does 
is embrace its invented reality, instead approximating a feeling of 
authenticity to deliver a great experience: a couple of enjoyable 
hours where the diner is transported to a parallel Bombay-tinged 
reality filled with potent drinks and quality food. Dishoom is not the 
tired parody many curry houses have become but instead a playful 
and celebratory pastiche of Indian cuisine and culture. Its found-
ers acknowledge it can never be truly authentic but just needs to 
feel authentic enough. They recognize the source material cafés as 
beautiful spaces led by powerful philosophies and see Dishoom 
primarily as a tribute to that (Basu 2014). Their restaurants are 
believable because they effectively pay that tribute, wearing influ-
ences proudly on sleeves and keeping tongues firmly in cheeks.
Don’t Fight It, Feel It
“What I’m trying to do, as an amateur, is ‘authentic approxima-
tion’ ... I’m not trying to be original. If you sit in a studio all day 
trying to be original, you’ll never do it.”
Andrew Weatherall
(quoted in Gieben 2013)
You don’t need to be a car maker or restaurateur to understand the 
power of approximating authenticity or the futility of constantly fret-
ting about being 100% authentic and original. Andrew Weatherall—
one of the most critically acclaimed DJs, remixers and music producers 
of the last 30 years—today describes himself as a gentleman amateur. 
His approach leans heavily on the idea of creativity as an additive pro-
cess, believing “if you go into a studio and do an authentic approxi-
mation of the music you love, I think you end up becoming original 
without even trying” (quoted in Gieben 2013). Weatherall says his best 

78
Punk Playthings
work is done when his influences are unconscious, a product of exten-
sive inductive learning and slow percolation. Clothing designer Nigel 
Cabourn has a similar approach. Celebrated for “authentic” garments 
based on his obsessively sourced collection of military and outdoor 
wear from the first half of the 20th century, Cabourn admits the per-
ceived authenticity of his clothes is only ever an approximation. He 
candidly says “I Cabournise them. I mean ...  at some point I have to 
decide what fabrics, colours and textures to use. And I can’t have the 
clothes fitting the way they did in 1950. But I do try to copy the little 
things when I can, trimmings and things like that” (quoted in Cronberg 
n.d.). Cabourn has also imbibed his influences over a protracted 
period, allowing them to percolate into his work. And he wears these 
influences on his sleeve—literally and figuratively—putting his source 
material front and center when telling the story of a collection and its 
garments. He also knows this is where the value is produced: “I could 
tell you stories about every little detail on a garment. People come up 
to me and ask me why my clothes are so expensive, so I tell them. The 
stories justify the price” (quoted in Cronberg n.d.).
The rhetoric of authenticity surrounds us. We are told to be authen-
tic to ourselves—a narcissistic exhortation based on the nonsensical 
notion that we believe the same thing at all times—and that certain 
things are more authentic than others. But it is impossible for anything 
to be truly authoritative and authentic in a world where gatekeepers 
have become almost irrelevant. Who is to say what is genuine, real, 
true? What feels authentic to you seems plastic and fake to the next 
person. The best bet is not to worry so much. Approximate authen-
ticity and embrace its performative aspects, just like Dishoom. Be 
believable, have integrity, but don’t take yourself too seriously. Wear 
influences on your sleeve. Don’t bury them, celebrate them. Don’t let 
yourself stop learning, becoming a tired parody of something you no 
longer believe in. That really is fake. Instead, add a new personal twist 
to things that inspire you. Put new content through old processes. Put 
old content through new processes. You’ll achieve something fresh 
and exciting by default.

79
Ideals Over Ideas
FIGURE 2.1  Cover of 1848 publication of The Communist Manifesto by 
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. (Courtesy of Wikimedia Commons, 
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ACommunist-manifesto.
png.)

80
Punk Playthings
FIGURE 2.2  The Spice of India Restaurant and Takeaway, Nelson, Lancashire. (Courtesy of Robert Ward, https://com-
mons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Spice-of-India-Restaurant-Nelson-Lancashire.jpg.)

81
Ideals Over Ideas
Bunker Busting
“In our increasingly complex and confusing world, we need all the 
help we can get from each distinct domain of our emotional and 
intellectual being.”
Stephen Jay Gould
The Hedgehog, the Fox and the Magister’s Pox (2004)
Industrialization led to a division of labor. Workers were deskilled 
and trained to do a single task, resulting in specialisms and knowl-
edge silos. Art and the humanities concurrently became separated 
from science, forming the almost antithetical fields of knowledge 
CP Snow famously called the “two cultures.” Each culture then 
developed a bunker mentality. But as we accelerate into an uncer-
tain 21st century, this needs to change. Bunkers must be busted if 
we are to survive and thrive.
Art et Science
“It is a world in which the creative imagination of the artist is now 
needed by the men who handle computers.”
Marshall McLuhan
(quoted in McLuhan and Zingrone 1997)
Our conception of art and science views each as a separate entity, 
possibly the binary opposite of the other. Science is measured and 
rational, the arts subjective and irrational. Science aims for truth, 
art for expression. Science is defined and procedural, art is loose 
and intuitive. Each domain appears to have separate goals and 
looks to be inhabited by different people. You only need conjure up 
a typical stereotype of an artist or scientist to know this is true. But 
it wasn’t always this way.
During the early European Renaissance, the so-called polymath 
was king. Philosophies and principles of art, architecture, engineer-
ing and science were understood by all intelligent people (Ashley-
Smith 2000). The Renaissance was a rebirth of scientific and artistic 
knowledge from the classical world that had been forgotten during 
the Dark Ages. The scientific discoveries of Copernicus and Galileo 
that culminated in the works of Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo 
and Rembrandt were rooted in the recovery of ancient wisdom 
(Gould 2004; Richmond 1984). But Copernicus was not simply 
a scientist; he was also a classics scholar and diplomat. Galileo 
was a philosopher as well as the “father of scientific method.” 

82
Punk Playthings
Likewise,  Leonardo and Michelangelo were the embodiment 
of the “renaissance man” (and sadly, they were only men at this 
point). Even Rembrandt—­considered one of the greatest artists 
in history—was highly knowledgeable of scientific principles and 
concepts. Indeed, many Renaissance artists belonged to science-
related guilds because they knew how to mix ingredients—rather 
like a chemist or pharmacist—to produce paint, or understood the 
complex chemical processes required for etching. Increasingly art-
ists also needed to understand the geometry that informed new 
theories of perspective and composition. And today it seems likely 
that many Renaissance artists integrated science even further into 
their work than was previously thought.
One of our most persistent artistic stereotypes is the “artist as 
genius.” This myth depicts the penniless master ensconced in a drafty 
garret, making art for art’s sake because their imagination and craft 
are so far ahead or apart from the mainstream that contemporaries 
do not appreciate—much less buy—their work. The artworld—art 
critics and historians, galleries and dealers—does little to dispel 
such romantic and misleading myths. But at the turn of the millen-
nium, David Hockney did. In his book Secret Knowledge, Hockney 
advances a controversial thesis. He argues that, from the early 15th 
century onward, many great Western artists employed the science 
of optics—the branch of physics concerned with the behavior and 
properties of light—by using mirrors and lenses (or a combination of 
the two) to create living projections (2006, p.12). These projections 
were then used as tools and templates to enhance looking at and 
vividly representing, the material world (Hockney 2006, p.14).
Unsurprisingly, Hockney’s thesis proved contentious and many in 
the artworld sought to dismiss it. But this has proved difficult. For 
not only is Hockney one of the most significant artists of the last 
60 years—with a practitioner’s intimate knowledge of making—he 
was also collaborating with respected physicist and optics expert 
Charles Falco. Consequently, the Hockney–Falco thesis has inspired 
a host of new research into the use of optics throughout the history 
of art. Analyzing the work of Rembrandt, one recent paper even 
concluded that the great artist used lens and mirror technology to 
help make his self-portraits (O’Neill and Palazzo-Corner 2016, p.9).
Each exploration of the Hockney–Falco thesis causes heated debate 
within the artworld. Some argue against it objectively, but most dis-
pute the thesis out of a need for self-preservation. The strongest resis-
tance comes from those who believe Hockney and Falco’s argument 
devalues the genius of the artist and consequently the artist’s work. 
Of course, these people usually have a vested professional or financial 
interest in keeping art values—both monetary and cultural—as high 

83
Ideals Over Ideas
as possible. An example of such protectionism is the review of docu-
mentary Tim’s Vermeer conducted by Jonathan Jones. The film follows 
inventor Tim Jenison’s Hockney-inspired attempts to prove Johannes 
Vermeer painted with the help of optics. Jones—an art critic for The 
Guardian—rubbishes the film, claiming it fails to show “any sense of 
the greatness of art” and “is a depressing attempt to reduce genius to 
a trick” (2014). He laments the documentary “implies anyone can make 
a beautiful work of art with the right application of science. There is 
no need for mystical ideas like genius” (Jones 2014). Jones is brazenly 
peddling the artist-as-genius myth here. Worse, he is implicitly rein-
forcing a dichotomy between art and science: art is mystical and filled 
with genius, science merely the rational application of knowledge—
perhaps even a trick. Either way, he is missing the point.
Hockney and Falco never argue that artists who used optics were in 
some way “cheating” or poor exponents of their craft. They do not 
suggest science invalidates artistry. If anything, Hockney believes the 
opposite, arguing that to “suggest ...  artists used optical devices ...  is 
not to diminish their achievements. For me, it only makes them all the 
more astounding” (2006, p.14). This stance echoes Marshall McLuhan’s 
argument that artists are “navigators,” often first to deploy or produce 
value with new thinking or technology (McLuhan and Zingrone 1997, 
p.278). In fact, the Hockney–Falco thesis is a celebration of the union 
of art and science and the ability of such a union to produce astound-
ing work. Hockney is perfectly aware that Renaissance polymaths 
would be puzzled by our binary approach toward these two fields of 
knowledge. The question is: why do most of us now exist only in one 
domain or culture? How did we arrive at a point where a whole body 
of knowledge is closed to us and our endeavors?
The Division Bell
There is no precise moment when art and science became separate 
domains. Scholars mostly argue for a process that began in the late 
Renaissance. This was impeded temporarily by the unifying ideals 
of the early Enlightenment, before accelerating during the scientific 
revolution of the late 17th century, resulting in a yawning chasm by 
the middle of the 19th (Snow 1961; Wilson 1999; Gould 2003). Stephen 
Jay Gould (2003, loc.410) argued the opening of the divide in the 
17th century resulted from a debate between Ancient and Moderns, 
where Aristotle and the Renaissance were pitted against Bacon and 
Descartes. It is worth remembering that science as we know it did not 
exist until this time and Gould believes the separation of domains was 
mostly the result of the new “scientists” staking a claim for their scien-
tific methods in the face of entrenched institutions (2003). Whatever 
the exact causes, it is clear that by the middle of the industrialized 

84
Punk Playthings
19th century, science and art (including the humanities) had divided 
into two distinct domains of knowledge with separate cultures.
The “two culture” theory was first articulated by CP Snow in his Rede 
Lectures of 1959. Snow believed “the intellectual life of the whole 
of Western society is increasingly being split into two polar groups” 
(1961). These groups had become unable to communicate or exchange 
knowledge with each other. Snow argued this had serious ramifica-
tions for “our creative, intellectual and, above all, our normal life ...  
leading us to interpret the past wrongly, to misjudge the present and 
to deny our hopes of the future ... making it difficult or impossible for 
us to take good action” (Snow 1961). Certainly, Snow had his private 
agenda, mostly rooted in experiences of cultural snobbery from the 
dominant arts and humanities academics at Cambridge. But the lec-
ture was a sensation and his ideas resonated around the globe.
For Snow, the principal cause of the two cultures was a “fanatical 
belief” in specialization, particularly within education (1961, p.144). 
The trend toward specialized education began in the 19th century 
and accelerated throughout the 20th, possibly reaching a peak as 
Snow was writing in the 1950s and 1960s. No wonder he was worried. 
School, college and university curricula had made it nearly impossible 
to study art and science subjects simultaneously. Therefore success in 
either domain became dependent on specialization and people had to 
make hard choices (Ashely-Smith 2000). As a consequence, it became 
acceptable for specialists in one culture to be ignorant of issues in the 
other. As education was compartmentalized, we became increasingly 
monocultural, ignorant of both knowledge and imaginative experi-
ence outside our respective domains and subjects (Snow 1961). And 
although the peak of the two cultures may now have passed, there is 
no doubt we are still suffering from the fallout.
Here We Go Again
As constant uncertainty and disruption change the creative indus-
tries, the nature of business and work in these fields inevitably 
alters. To cope with this change, we must build adaptive capacity 
and resilience, drawing on all knowledge from all domains to navi-
gate safely past the icebergs. Unfortunately, the dominant narra-
tive for education is based not on adaptability and resilience but on 
plugging existing skills gaps for industry.
The STEM (science, technology, engineering and math) agenda 
seeks to correct perceived skills gaps in these crucial areas, touting 
economic disaster for any nation that fails. But STEM has some-
thing missing: the arts and humanities. By pushing STEM, we’re 

85
Ideals Over Ideas
again implicitly creating an art/science divide, following a path of 
domain-limited specialization instead of providing an interdisciplin-
ary education for the leaders, innovators and creative entrepre-
neurs of the future—you know, the ones less likely to get replaced 
by artificial intelligence (AI). And to make matters worse, there is a 
good chance STEM skills shortages are fallacious.
According to respected demographer Michael S. Teitelbaum, the 
received wisdom claiming a shortage of STEM graduates is not so 
wise. Teitelbaum (2014) argues “there is little credible evidence of 
the claimed widespread shortages in the U.S. science and engi-
neering workforce,” citing extensive research from various sources 
to support this. And while agreeing that expertise in STEM is cru-
cial, he argues that US higher education produces way more gradu-
ates in these areas than the nation needs. There is little evidence 
suggesting the situation is markedly different in other “developed” 
nations but the STEM shortage narrative persists. As a conse-
quence, STEM occupations are increasingly an employer’s market. 
Salaries are being driven down and careers in these areas are 
starting to look less attractive. The winners in the short term are 
the large tech companies who would rather not pay big salaries 
with extensive benefits (Dash 2016). Unsurprisingly, many of these 
companies are the most enthusiastic supporters of STEM. Now, 
we totally get the importance of the bottom line. We’re not com-
munists. But too much focus on short-term profit usually means 
things get missed—like lessons from history.
The Rad Lab
When the US entered the second world war, the way innova-
tion happened changed dramatically. The most transformational 
change was the emergence of publicly funded collaborations 
between the military, private industry and academic institutions 
of a kind unknown before 1940 (Turner 2006). Unfortunately—due 
to President Eisenhower’s 1961 farewell address, Oliver Stone’s 
JFK and thousands of conspiracy theorists—this transformative 
­military–industrial–academic complex is now held responsible 
for every abominable innovation or nefarious activity of the past 
70  years. Of course, these collaborative projects were responsi-
ble for new and secret weapons, with the Manhattan Project the 
most infamous outcome. But if we stop staring at the conspiracy 
trees for just a moment, the forest comes into view. For not only 
did these collaborations innovate some of the most game-changing 
technologies of the war, but they also produced many of those that 
transformed the relative peace that followed, including the internet, 
GPS and video games. Even more importantly for this essay, they 

86
Punk Playthings
provide a historical model for how to overcome the limitations of 
siloed specialisms.
After the German invasion of Poland in 1939, Vannevar Bush 
arranged an urgent conversation with President Roosevelt. Bush, 
a former Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) professor 
and administrator, persuaded FDR to create the National Defense 
Research Committee. Its goal would be to channel government fund-
ing to civilian contractors and research universities, enabling them 
to work together on innovative projects for the military. Renamed 
the Office of Scientific Research and Development, by the end of the 
war, Bush’s organization had contributed over $450 million ($6 bil-
lion in 2017) to research new technologies, knitting together a fabric 
of military, industrial and academic cooperation at the same time 
(Turner 2006, p.18). At the heart of this were laboratories where inno-
vation flourished in an environment of interdisciplinary and nonhi-
erarchical collaboration, including Los Alamos, Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory and the groundbreaking Rad Lab at MIT.
Initially housed in a variety of buildings, the mostly Anglo-American–
staffed Rad Lab moved to a new but temporary wooden structure 
known as Building 20 after 1943. And it was here the magic hap-
pened. The lab quickly became a site of flexible and collaborative 
work that brought multiple disciplines together. Engineers worked 
with designers, mathematicians with planners. Risk-taking and 
entrepreneurship became the norm in a permissive culture that 
eschewed hierarchy. Crucially, “formerly specialized scientists were 
encouraged to become generalists ...  able not only to theorize but 
also to design and build new technologies” (Turner 2006, p.19). 
The Rad Lab culture encouraged crossing professional boundar-
ies and shattering disciplinary silos and this culture was facilitated 
by Building 20 itself. Built out of wood with a horizontal layout, the 
“Plywood Palace” was highly adaptable, inherently nonhierarchical 
and conducive to serendipitous encounters. Courtyards between 
wings could be repurposed to house collaborative projects, walls 
cut down or put up at will and the horizontal floor plan “helped to 
encourage interaction between groups,” according to lab veteran 
Henry Zimmerman (Brand 1995). The Rad Lab staff became joined 
together in a common search for technologies that would help win 
the war. They were less concerned with doing things right, more with 
doing the right thing, at the right time. And this they did. An MIT 
report estimated that in five intense war years, the Rad Lab achieved 
over 25 peacetime years’ worth of innovation (Garfinkel 1987). The 
project was a model of effectiveness, demonstrating what can be 
achieved when specialisms were de-emphasized, knowledge bun-
kers busted and interdisciplinary bridges and networks built instead.

87
Ideals Over Ideas
Come Together
“To be absolutely certain about something, one must know every-
thing or nothing about it.”
Henry Kissinger
(quoted in Ferguson 2015)
“Since we live in an age of innovation, a practical education must 
prepare a man [sic] for work that does not yet exist and cannot 
yet be clearly defined.”
Peter Drucker
The New Realities (1989)
Perhaps one of the best arguments for going to college or uni-
versity is to be part of a learning community where knowledge, 
creativity and critical thinking are valued and lasting social and cul-
tural connections formed. These communities socialize young peo-
ple. They support them to learn by providing a space to learn and 
experiment in. At their best they encourage a curious mind and 
learning mindset, personal growth, entrepreneurship and estab-
lish future networks that enable serendipitous collaboration—just 
like Building 20. Unfortunately, many colleges and universities have 
become obsessed with skills agendas and notions of employability. 
As a result, these institutions are hurtling backward into the future. 
They have forgotten that the experimental learning communities 
and spaces, and the serendipitous social encounters these enable, 
are what makes them valuable. Some universities have closed 
down social spaces, more are moving much of their delivery online, 
supposedly to help students learn but usually to help themselves 
fit ever-larger numbers of paying customers into cramped cam-
puses. Both approaches negate serendipitous and interdisciplinary 
collaboration rather than encourage it.
We need education but we do not need an educational system that 
is reopening the divide between the two cultures and stuck in the 
industrial era. Specialized education is simply an industry training 
people for industry, mass-producing workers for mass-production 
work that is either being outsourced or teetering on the edge of 
AI-induced extinction. As the industrial age recedes further into 
the rearview mirror, we need a fresh and pragmatic approach to 
education. We must recognize that the domain-specific specialisms 
and knowledge silos of industrialization will no longer work in our 
postindustrial future. Instead of specializing we must connect and 
harness all knowledge—art, the humanities and science—to best 
equip us for uncertainty.

88
Punk Playthings
Do It Fluid
“Fixation is the way to death, fluidity is the way to life.
This is something that should be well understood.”
Miyamoto Musashi
The Book of Five Rings (circa 1645, 2011)
Despite the plan to demolish Building 20 after the second world war, 
it continued to be used long after the Rad Lab was disbanded. For 
the next 50 years, it would house experimental projects, becom-
ing known as the “Magic Incubator.” Here would be born some of 
the most influential ideas and innovations of the late 20th century. 
In fact, had Building 20 not housed the Tech Model Railroad Club 
in the early 1960s, you probably wouldn’t be reading this book. 
Its permissive culture empowered three members of that club to 
mess around with a DEC PDP-1 computer in their spare time. As a 
result, those friends created SpaceWar!—the fountainhead of mod-
ern video games. The key to Building 20’s ongoing success was that 
it never became a knowledge silo; it was never assigned to any one 
school, department, or center; it was always a permissive space 
for beginning a project, a graduate student experiment, or inter-
disciplinary research (Brand 1995, p.114). The Rad Lab and Building 
20 succeeded by busting bunkers of domain knowledge. They pro-
vided a setting—a physical environment—where an experimental, 
heuristic, entrepreneurial mindset could emerge and thrive. And 
this was achieved through principles that embraced domain fluid-
ity, rejecting disciplinary division and bureaucratic rules to build 
a risk friendly, nonhierarchical, interdisciplinary culture. The great 
artists who used optics in their work also embraced domain fluid-
ity, using new scientific knowledge and technologies to enhance 
their artistic skills. Fluidity enables great innovation; rigidity leads 
to obsolescence. We must reunite the “two cultures” and cross dis-
ciplines to bridge innovation gaps and ensure our future. A future 
where principles and philosophies of art, the humanities, technol-
ogy, science, engineering and math are once again understood by 
all intelligent people.

89
Ideals Over Ideas
FIGURE 2.3  Spacewar! running on the Computer History Museum’s 
PDP-1. (Courtesy of Joi Ito, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File%3ASpacewar!-PDP-1-20070512.jpg.)

90
Punk Playthings
Monument Valley: A Case Study 
in Craftwork
Can a trendy East London design studio with no background or ped-
igree in making games create one of the best games of the modern 
era? Can a game use modern art as its muse and still find success 
with a mainstream audience? Can a game be so simple it needs no 
written instruction, yet still be a deep, emotive experience? Can 
a premium-priced game be short enough to be consumed within 
a single commute without alienating its paying customers? Can a 
premium app leave all of that free-to-play “money on the table” 
and still make a handsome profit?
Conventional wisdom says the answer to each of these questions is 
a resounding no. Monument Valley says: “Hell, yes!”
Whale Fail
Formed in 2011 as a self-funded, experimental team inside of 
ustwo—a digital design agency with clients including Sony, JP 
Morgan and Adidas—ustwo Games was an attempt to reinvest 
profits into the creation of original products and intellectual 
property. Its first title, Whale Trail, was a one-button arcade game 
inspired by Andreas Illiger’s Tiny Wings. With vibrant visuals, engag-
ing gameplay, a Gruff Rhys soundtrack and savvy marketing, Whale 
Trail generated over 38,000 downloads in its first week of release 
(Dredge 2011).
But despite its early promise, Whale Trail struggled to find a sus-
tainable business model. The game took over two years—and 
3.6  ­million downloads—to recoup a development budget of 
£250,000. Matt “Mills” Miller (2012), co-founder of ustwo, consid-
ered Whale Trail—and the process of making it—the “beta” for 
ustwo Games. In hindsight, it is more accurate to view the game as 
the alpha; the beta came next.
Just a Blip
Blip Blup represented a step change for ustwo Games. Responding 
to lessons of Whale Trail, it had a clarity of purpose and creative 
constraint from the start. The game—and the approach to mak-
ing it—can be viewed as a proto-Monument Valley, where the 
principal ingredients of Monument Valley’s success were first 
explored and articulated. According to designer and programmer 
Manish  Mistry  (2013), instead of starting with a single idea the 

91
Ideals Over Ideas
project began with the team asking itself a series of constraining 
yet provocative questions:
••
How would it feel to tap on some squares and see light 
spread out from my finger?
••
What if there were things that blocked the light?
••
Can I create a puzzle from this?
Blip Blup was the answer to these questions. Quickly the concept 
evolved from a paper prototype into an engaging experience with 
a bold minimalist aesthetic and a clear, purposeful, set of guiding 
principles (Mistry 2013):
What it is:
••
It’s a game about thinking
••
It’s a game about stopping and taking your time
••
It’s a game about logic.
What it isn’t:
••
It’s not a game about speed
••
It’s not a game about timing
••
It’s not a game about quick reflexes.
Inspired by the “fail fast” approach deployed in ustwo’s corporate 
client projects, Blip Blup evolved inside a series of weeklong pro-
totyping sprints, each ending with a company-wide show-and-tell 
presentation. These displays exposed progress to real players and 
ustwo co-workers; according to Mistry (2013), they became some-
thing of a compass for the team:
If an idea was engaging, we’d take it further. If it didn’t have a 
spark, we would shelf [sic] it and move on. It was an important 
lesson for us to learn how to say no to our own ideas if they 
simply weren’t good enough.
To create levels that were visually stimulating, fun to play and 
requiring of mental ingenuity, the team meticulously handcrafted 
each one, an approach that demanded “many gruelling [sic] hours ... 
spent playing, tweaking and replaying levels” to find the right bal-
ance between difficulty and playability (Mistry 2013).
At a time when the majority of mobile games were migrating to a 
freemium business model, ustwo Games went against the grain by 
going premium. This decision reflected the desire for Blip Blup to be 
a “simple proposition—straightforward puzzling and nothing else,” 
a game that eschewed mainstream gamers for a “niche audience 
of puzzlers” (Mistry 2013). Blip Blup would prove an enlightening 

92
Punk Playthings
experience for ustwo Games, prompting it to refine its mission of 
intent. According to soon-to-be-hired executive producer Daniel 
Gray, there was a renewed ambition to “do something that has 
meaning, that has something to say to players” (2014). As Blip Blup 
launched in May 2013, this grand plan was already in motion—but 
first ustwo Games needed to assemble its A-team.
A Product of Its Creative Environment
Ed Catmull (2008), president of Walt Disney and co-founder/presi-
dent of Pixar Animation Studios, has long argued that ideas are 
overrated:
A few years ago, I had lunch with the head of a major motion 
picture studio, who declared that his central problem was not 
finding good people—it was finding good ideas. Since then, 
when giving talks, I’ve asked audiences whether they agree with 
him. Almost always there’s a 50/50 split, which has astounded 
me because I couldn’t disagree more with the studio executive. 
His belief is rooted in a misguided view of creativity that exag-
gerates the importance of the initial idea in creating an original 
product. And it reflects a profound misunderstanding of how 
to manage the large risks inherent in producing breakthroughs.
Instead of idolizing ideas, Catmull (2008) suggests four guiding 
principles for creative projects: Empower your creatives. Create a 
peer culture. Craft a learning environment. Stimulate meaningful 
postmortems. Through exploration, experimentation and critical 
self-reflection, ustwo Games reached similar conclusions: if your 
purpose is to create experiences that push a medium forward, 
then you do not just need good ideas or people, you need the right 
team within the right creative environment.
In late 2012, Miller set about remodeling ustwo Games, assembling 
a team “built on tight relationships between talented people” that 
was capable of realizing his ambitions (2013). The original Whale 
Trail team had come from inside the agency—app developers and 
graphic designers—with no direct game making experience. This 
naivety had its advantages, but Miller now wanted to “blend our 
own home grown skills with those of the games world thorough-
breds” to realize his vision for ustwo Games (2013). Key hires made 
during this period included Daniel Gray and designer Ken Wong.
With the right team assembled, Miller took a leaf out of the Pixar 
playbook and empowered it to think and act independently. He set 

93
Ideals Over Ideas
no goals, budgets, or timeframes, instead giving the team com-
plete ownership of the decisions it made and the games it pro-
duced. Miller’s only stipulation was that the team “make something 
we can all be proud of” (quoted by Bernstein 2014). Expectations 
set, the team began exploring its next big thing, spending the next 
three months prototyping in all shapes and forms. It met weekly to 
see what resonated and every week the answer seemed to be the 
same: “the pencil sketch on the wall” (Gray 2014).
What If … ?
The question of “how one might design a game where the archi-
tecture was the central character?” had intrigued Ken Wong for 
years (Wong 2014). Inspired by sacred architecture and its ability 
to concurrently convey artistry, mystery and innate playfulness, 
Wong (2014) kept returning to the question of “how to make an 
interactive experience out of this?” Everything clicked into place 
when Wong rediscovered Ascending and Descending by MC Escher, 
an artwork he had never previously considered through the lens of 
game design. Wong (2015) asked himself:
What if you had to guide a figure to enter the building, solve 
some puzzles hidden in the interior rooms, with the goal of 
getting to the highest tower? Rather than following the char-
acter with a first-person or third-person camera, we could 
keep the emphasis on the environment by retaining the bird’s 
eye view and this enclosed framing that Escher had used.
His answers would become the seed for Monument Valley.
With Wong preferring to pitch concepts in the form of posters, the 
first prototype of Monument Valley was a simple pencil sketch cre-
ated in March 2013. Daniel Gray (2014) remembers that it drew “a 
lot of curiosity and enthusiasm” from the rest of the team, studio 
and passing visitors. It gained so much attention Gray began prob-
ing interested parties, asking them, “how would you play with a 
game like that?” (Gray 2014). The innate playfulness and mystery 
in architecture revealed that even as a simple sketch, Monument 
Valley could capture the imagination and start playing in a person’s 
head; it was already a place where people wanted to spend time.
Through a series of rapid digital prototypes, the team explored 
and identified the core mechanics of play before turning their 
attention to the wider experience: How would the core mechan-
ics evolve through play? How would the tactile experience feel? 
What secondary and tertiary activities were needed to support 

94
Punk Playthings
the core mechanics? How would they add a greater depth to the 
experience? How long would the experience be? (Gray 2014). By 
May 2013, ustwo Games felt that they had enough of the necessary 
answers to repeat the approach of Blip Blup and pitch Monument 
Valley to the entire company (Gray 2014).
An interesting side-effect to operating inside an agency—rather than 
an orthodox game-development silo—was that none of the team’s 
studio colleagues were game makers. Instead, the early champions 
of Monument Valley were “animators, graphic and user interface 
designers and programmers, people with a broad cultural palette 
and a deep understanding of the way people use mobile devices,” 
according to Gray (quoted by Bernstein 2014). These people did not 
obsess about game mechanics or gaming exceptionalism: they just 
wanted to be surprised and delighted. Even in its earliest prototyp-
ing phase, Monument Valley—shaped by its surroundings, sensibili-
ties and supporters—had developed principles.
A Line in the Sand
With Monument Valley, Ken Wong (2014a) set out to “create a piece 
of interactive art worth hanging on a wall.” Not the typical goal of 
your average game maker. Wong and the team intended to “rethink 
what a video game is and why people play them” and discard many 
of the “popular elements of traditional video games that often frus-
trate less hardcore players and leave them excluded” (Wong 2014a). 
He understood that games were surprisingly difficult for the non-
gaming majority: too challenging and dexterous, too demanding of 
a person’s time and often thematically unappealing. Wong (2014a) 
observed:
Other games exclude large groups of players because of 
their content or aesthetics. Although some of the finest 
games ever made include graphic violence, poor gender 
representation and endless dank corridors of blue and 
brown metal, their great moments often prove inaccessible 
to all but the most dedicated gamers.
Such observations helped the team shape what Monument Valley 
stood for and against—an understanding Wong (2014a) formalized 
in a set of design principles used to guide development:
The game would be so simple it needed almost no instruction.
The game would appear friendly and engaging. If Escher 
could make artwork that was both beautiful to behold and 

95
Ideals Over Ideas
geometrically fascinating to a wide audience, perhaps we 
could achieve a similar feat in the interactive medium.
Players will appreciate quality play time over quantity of play 
time. Instead of creating as many levels as possible, we would 
only add levels when we had something new and unique to 
say. Keeping the experience short would allow more players 
to see the story through to the end.
Challenge is not the focus of the game and difficulty is not the 
central arc. The feeling of discovery and the joy of exploring a 
new world can be just as powerful and stimulating.
[The game] would earn the player’s emotional engagement. 
The art, sound, text and animation are restrained and subtle, 
designed to permit empathy, not force it.
Turning Fantasy into Reality
The desire to make a selfish experience posed a unique set of chal-
lenges for the team. Each chapter—or level—had to work harmo-
niously as a playful interactive experience, a piece of architecture 
and a graphic design composition. Each also had to feel unique 
and contain a “distinct and separate theme, gameplay mechanic 
or story beat” worth articulating (Wong 2014b). Once again plac-
ing emphasis on quality rather than quantity, Wong and the team 
reprised the handcrafted design approach of Blip Blup, significantly 
increasing the physical, mental and financial investment required 
to “achieve an elegant balance of interaction, beauty and storytell-
ing” (Wong 2014b). This approach was inefficient but effective. “All 
killer, no filler. We like to handcraft, not mass-produce” was Daniel 
Gray’s mantra (2014). Such was the painstaking, often impracti-
cal, adherence to these design principles, it would be December 
2013—nine months after the original concept sketch—before the 
team was ready to start showing the game off.
Showing Off
Few game makers appreciate the importance of exposing their 
work early and often. Fewer still incorporate it into their workflow. 
But  Monument Valley proactively used play-testing to see “what 
made [people] smile and what made them frustrated” (Wong 
quoted by Bernstein 2014). Rather than treat early access and 
promotion as an afterthought, ustwo Games worked as hard at 
attracting and building a relationship with fans and the press as 
it did making the game. Because of this, months before its release 

96
Punk Playthings
Daniel Gray already sensed that Monument Valley was something 
“bigger than the team”; it was a unique “shared experience in which 
everyone —team, fans, press” was invested (2013).
The game was introduced to the world in a flurry of blog posts in 
December 2013. A carefully curated combination of words, visuals 
and videos introduced the concept, building interest and anticipa-
tion. Forty-eight hours after release, the teaser trailer had 18,000 
views. Gray (2013) initially estimated the team would receive 100 
responses to its beta-testing invitation. When it received 1,200, he 
received the clearest indication yet that ustwo Games “might just 
be onto something.” At the end of 2013, the first public beta rolled 
out and the team spent the next four months leveraging their army 
of play-testers to turn a good game into a great experience.
A Luxury Experience
In May 2013, Miller sent an email to the Monument Valley team, chal-
lenging it to “unleash on a level never seen.” Using the recent suc-
cess of the Superbrothers: Sword & Sworcery EP as impetus, Miller 
(quoted by Wong 2014c) outlined his aspirations for Monument 
Valley:
••
win apple [sic] iPad game of the year 2013 as the very least
••
get awards from being the most wonderful experience 
from a magic point of view and design
••
must be the type of art you need to put on your wall, must 
be so so iconic
••
must sell for super premium
••
must engage apple [sic] with progressive builds from today
••
must excite the whole studio with charm, delight and wow
••
must sell 200,000 copies in year 1!!!
••
must engage industry cool kids, so they want to talk about 
it socially … ie be so hot they can’t ignore
••
must make you cry …
••
must make me say, i wish ustwo made that
••
must do more, this is 1% of what this project must mean
••
this is the one …
••
no pressure .. .
The game made good on its promise when it was named iPad 
Game of the Year 2014—although this was a year later than Miller 
dreamed due to the length of development. There were thou-
sands of decisions that took Monument Valley from concept sketch 
to prestigious award but two stand out from Miller’s email: sell-
ing for super premium and engaging with Apple—the platform 

97
Ideals Over Ideas
gatekeeper and kingmaker—long before the game was due for 
release. The decision to go super premium was contrarian and 
risky. The conventional thinking of the time held that premium 
mobile games were dead, but the team wanted to lead rather 
than follow. It had scant regard for “what the rest of the indus-
try is doing” (Wong quoted by Sheffield 2014). Instead, the team’s 
interest was in creating something valuable for a small, discern-
ing audience. For Wong (quoted by Sheffield 2014), premium best 
communicated inherent value:
Price communicates value, in ordinary life; it’s thought that 
high-quality goods are worth spending money on. We wanted 
to communicate that our game was a premium experience, 
like staying in a five-star hotel, or driving an Audi, or owning 
an iPhone. The rationale was simple—and, again, artisanal—
“What is the quality of those hours?” We think that 90 minutes 
of only our best work can be worth more than hundreds of 
hours of doing the same thing over and over again.
In an App Store dominated by free games and freeloading gam-
ers, ustwo Games appeared crazy to reject the traditional “indus-
try standard” gaming product for a “compact yet bespoke” curated 
interactive experience (Gray 2014). In particular, the extremely 
short length of the experience raised eyebrows, but Gray (2014) 
was happy to argue that length does not equal value:
My favourite movie of all time is Enter the Dragon and I don’t 
believe it would have been improved by watching Bruce Lee 
one-inch punching henchmen repeatedly for a further five 
hours. The only way Monument Valley could truly realize its 
grand vision was to go premium and avoid modern tropes 
such as leaderboards, pay walls and heavy social integration.
And it wasn’t just Gray or Wong that held this view. The director of 
games at ustwo Games, Neil McFarland (quoted by Kollar 2014), was 
just as critical of this arbitrary, unfounded industry assumption:
There’s a weird mirror between the use of the player’s time 
and the use of our time as developers. We want to give the 
player as much as we can with the time they’ve got and it’s the 
same for us as developers.
We want to make sure we’re spending our time doing stuff 
that we really love—not grinding on making loads of padding 
to fill out a fixed, desired time for the game.

98
Punk Playthings
Where the decision to curate a luxury experience confounded 
industry expectations, it delighted Apple. When awarding the 
2014 Apple Design Award, judges described Monument Valley as “a 
game that set out to do something big and it succeeds” (quoted by 
Dormehl 2014). That award—and the iPad Game of the Year acco-
lade that followed six months later—were the culmination of a long 
and deliberate courtship. A courtship that began with the team ask-
ing themselves, “If Apple were to make an internal first-party game, 
what would it look like?” and ending with an experience that was as 
uncompromising on design, user experience and seamless usabil-
ity as something designed by Apple in California (Gray quoted by 
Bradley 2017; McFarland 2015). For Gray (quoted by Bradley 2017) 
the logic was simple: game makers are a slave to the tastes and cul-
tures of the platforms they publish, so if ustwo Games could make 
Monument Valley look and feel as good as a first-party experience, 
then “of course Apple are going to pick up on it!”
ustwo Games first previewed Monument Valley to Apple in June 2013 
and as development progressed Apple received updates of increas-
ing quality on a regular basis. Like their newfound fans and the press, 
Apple was made to feel part of the shared experience (Gray 2014). 
The reward came on April 4, 2014, when Monument Valley launched 
with a massive marketing push from Apple, featuring on the front 
page of the App Store in 155 countries (Wong 2014e). This editorial 
sway helped propel the game to the top of the paid app charts in 
more than 30 countries in just four days. A week after launch, it had 
recouped development costs and become profitable; a milestone 
Whale Trail took two years to achieve. In under six weeks, Monument 
Valley sold over 500,000 copies (Wong 2014d) and earned universal 
acclaim from the gaming press and the industry itself.
“Monument Valley is the most elegant game I’ve ever played. Every 
aspect—the presentation, the puzzles, the UI—amazingly elegant. 
Play it!”
Tim Schafer
President, Double Fine (2014)
But at the same time it gathered patronage from its peers, some-
thing far more interesting was happening. Monument Valley was 
crossing over into wider popular culture.
Crossing the Cultural Chasm
Miller’s fantasy of creating “the type of art you need to put on your 
wall” became a reality when Monument Valley screen prints went 

99
Ideals Over Ideas
on sale shortly after the game’s release (Wong 2014f). Beyond 
the obvious commercialization, it indicated the game was moving 
beyond the initial sense of shared experience and taking on a life of 
its own. The game’s screenshot-sharing feature introduced a con-
venient, compelling way for fans to collect and share their newly 
acquired digital works of art. A modern twist on the arcade attract 
mode—the prerecorded demonstration displayed for the purpose 
of enticing passersby—over 600,000 screenshots were saved in 
the first year of release with 60,000 shared across email, Facebook, 
Twitter and Instagram (Gray 2015). The game also spawned a popu-
lar Tumblr fan art gallery—with over 200,000 submissions—and a 
range of handcrafted wooden toys sold via the artisanal market-
place, Etsy (naturally). But the best was yet to come.
In mid-2015, House of Cards featured the game in its third season, 
with President Frank Underwood not just playing the game but 
eulogizing it:
“Whoever you’re, whoever you think you’re, believe also you’re a 
silent princess. Your name is Ida, your journey is one through a 
forgotten landscape of twisting staircases and morphing castles, 
atop floating stones defiantly crossing an angry sea, within dimly 
lit caverns cobwebbed with ruins, MC Escher could only grasp at 
in a dream state.”
President Francis J Underwood
House of Cards, Chapter 31 (2015)
When the episode was broadcast in February 2015, the impact 
was “insane,” according to Gray, generating eight times the typi-
cal number of weekly downloads and highlighting “the amount of 
people that don’t know about games unless they see it in another 
medium” (Gray quoted by Blake 2015). The team had succeeded 
not only in making “every screen worthy of being framed and hung 
on a wall” but deserving of the presidential seal of approval.
Punk Provocations
••
What if you gathered 10 interesting photos or sketches, 
then asked, “how would you play with a game like that?”
••
What if you identified five reductive gaming tropes and 
directly contradicted them?
••
What if you reduced your game down to its most inter-
esting, inspiring five-minute experience?

100
Punk Playthings
FIGURE 2.4  Early sketches of what would become Monument Valley. (Reprinted with permission from ustwo games, 
©ustwo Games 2014. All rights reserved.)

101
Ideals Over Ideas
FIGURE 2.5  Level design consideration from the making of Monument Valley. (Reprinted with permission from ustwo 
games, ©ustwo Games 2014. All rights reserved.)

102
Punk Playthings
FIGURE 2.6  A screenshot from Monument Valley. (Reprinted with per-
mission from ustwo games, ©ustwo Games 2014. All rights reserved.)

103
Chapter 3
Remake/Remodel
Abstract
The demise of the traditional publisher model, the democratiza-
tion of making and an increasingly oversaturated market have left 
the game sector in a state of flux. To remain relevant, game mak-
ers must reevaluate and reimagine the cultural inputs and creative 
outputs that shape their experiences and the experiences they 
create.
This chapter suggests that game makers must accelerate the 
sector’s deindustrialization and disregard premature incorpora-
tion, prescriptive processes and commoditization for the masses. 
Instead, game makers should embrace adaptability and curiosity in 
order to curate meaningful, playful experiences that surprise and 
delight audiences.

104
Punk Playthings
Into the Unknown
“As an architect, you design for the present, with an awareness of 
the past, for a future which is essentially unknown.”
Norman Foster
My Green Agenda for Architecture (2008)
Unknown Unknowns
February 2002, five months after the tragic events of 9/11. US 
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld is hosting his regular 
Pentagon press conference. NBC correspondent Jim Miklaszewski 
poses a question about the reported lack of hard evidence linking 
Saddam Hussein’s Iraqi regime with the supply of weapons of mass 
destruction to terrorist organizations. Rumsfeld (2002) provides 
a typically evasive answer:
Reports that say that something hasn’t happened are always 
interesting to me, because as we know, there are known 
knowns; there are things we know we know. We also know 
there are known unknowns; that is to say we know there are 
some things we do not know. But there are also unknown 
unknowns—the ones we don’t know we don’t know.
The comment was met with bemusement by the White House 
press  corps and widely mocked in popular culture. But reflect-
ing on the quote today—regardless of Rumsfeld’s motivation—it 
makes a valid point: context matters in a complex world.
By the Book
At the time of the infamous quip, Rumsfeld was serving President 
George W Bush. The path to the White House is familiar to the 
Bush family. George W’s father, George HW Bush, served as the 
41st president of the US just a decade before him. So when Jeb 
Bush, George W’s younger brother, launched his campaign for the 
2016 Republican presidential nomination, he brought out “the play-
book,” the tried-and-tested, “play-by-play” Bush blueprint for win-
ning the race to the White House (Stokols 2016).
The Playbook—a real document stored in a binder—had been suc-
cessfully deployed in the election of both Jeb’s father and elder 
brother and his campaign team saw no reason to deviate from a 
winning plan. Bidding to become the third Bush in three decades to 

105
Remake/Remodel
hold the most powerful office in the world, Jeb’s team knew “cash, 
organization and a Republican electorate ultimately committed to 
an electable centre-right candidate” typically decided the nomina-
tion (Stokols 2016). Unfortunately for Bush, the 2016 race was any-
thing but typical.
“When you’re the son and brother of former presidents, the grand-
son of a U.S. senator, how do you run in a year like this? It is just 
a year of personality, not message. All of a sudden, there was no 
path for him. They just kept falling back on his record as governor, 
which is all he has—and no one gives a shit.”
Anonymous Republican operative “close to the Bush family”
(quoted in Stokols 2016)
In more predictable times, Jeb Bush’s decade-long record of con-
servative accomplishment as governor of Florida would have prob-
ably swayed voters. But in 2016 there was little appetite among a 
disillusioned electorate to pay deference to the political establish-
ment. The race became a battle of personality rather than policy 
and the playbook had made no provision for the biggest personal-
ity in the race: Donald J Trump. By the time Bush suspended his 
campaign in February 2016, Trump had eviscerated him in the 
press, in the polls, in live debates and at the ballot box. As Trump 
confounded experts to emerge as the prospective nominee, the 
Bush campaign was impotent. It was incapable of adapting to cir-
cumstances, adjusting its risk-averse positioning, or reacting to 
unforeseen, unorthodox campaigning.
“You cannot run a political campaign and not have the ability to 
adapt, to pivot. To sit there and say ‘We have a book’ just shows 
immaturity.”
Anonymous, longtime Bush family donor and supporter
(quoted in Stokols 2016)
The Playbook presumed a campaign that played out on Bush’s 
terms, a campaign where political record and policy details were 
vote-winning plays. There was no plan to counter the man Slate 
called “the best bully American politics has ever seen” (Parton 
2016). When Trump’s popularity grew, Bush—unable to adapt 
or improvise—was left holding a binder of rational predictions 
and orderly plans that bore no resemblance to reality. It’s what 
Donald Rumsfeld refers to as a “failure of imagination” (quoted in 
Larivé 2014).

106
Punk Playthings
In the Loop
So how did Trump manage to overcome an experienced politician 
like Jeb Bush? According to the Atlantic, Politico and several promi-
nent political commentators, he got inside his OODA loop (Fallows 
2016; Shafer 2016). As the establishment figure and frontrunner in 
the polls, Bush and his meticulously planned campaign had every-
thing to lose. Operating at a quicker tempo than his rival, Trump 
was able to seize the initiative and shape the unfolding race and its 
narrative, forcing Bush to react to unpredictable, unfolding circum-
stances rather than execute his planned prescriptions. Trump is a 
populist, his politics are ambiguous, his intentions unpredictable 
and his actions adaptive and largely improvised. Winning is more 
important than ideological virtue, political correctness, or sticking 
to a plan. This was populist theater and Trump was the director. 
Outmaneuvered and disorientated, by the time Bush had finally 
prepared his reaction—filtered through a bureaucratic stream of 
political consultants, policy wonks and pollsters—Trump had again 
shifted the narrative and reality of the race (McLaughlin 2015).
Whether Trump explicitly deployed the OODA loop as his political 
strategy is debatable. For the record, we think not. Doing so credits 
him as some Machiavellian political chess master rather than the 
astute opportunist and spellbinding showman we see. Regardless, 
there is merit in the consideration and value in understanding the 
credited OODA loop. The work of Colonel John Boyd—the Korean 
War fighter pilot who grew into “arguably the most important mil-
itary thinker” of the 20th century (Ford 2010, loc.11)—the OODA 
loop is a mental model consisting of four main elements: Observe, 
Orient, Decide, Act.
The first stage of the loop is observation: using contextual awareness, 
data and judgment to understand reality as it is, rather than what 
we assume or wish it to be. The second is orientation: the analysis 
and synthesis of assumptions, observations and existing paradigms 
to form clear perspectives. The third stage is decision: moving for-
ward with purpose, informed by intentions, best guesses and reori-
ented perspectives. The fourth is action: the high-tempo testing of 
decisions. Boyd’s model is often portrayed as a glib four-step linear 
process cycle, but in reality it is considerably more dynamic, recur-
sive and messy (see Figure 3.1). An OODA loop—and everything that 
emerges from it—is informed by its circumstantial, environmental 
and cultural inputs and its dynamic outputs. As Boyd highlighted in 
his military briefing The Essence of Winning and Losing, the entire loop 
is an “ongoing many-sided implicit cross-referencing process of pro-
jection, empathy, correlation and rejection” (Boyd 1996).

107
Remake/Remodel
Coming from the mind of a man nicknamed “40-Second Boyd” in 
the US Air Force—based on a standing bet he could “wax” any 
opponent’s tail in under 40 seconds or he’d pay $40—who later 
helped design the F-16 jet fighter and personally advised Dick 
Cheney on military strategy during the 1991 Gulf War, it is unsur-
prising discussions around the OODA loop are often wrapped up 
in tales of conflict and machismo. But Boyd was really a bricoleur, 
his mental model as much influenced by Gödel’s incompleteness 
theorems, Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle and the second 
law of thermodynamics as it was by great military minds like Sun 
Tzu, TE Lawrence and Carl von Clausewitz (Ford 2010). Tellingly, 
Boyd never formalized the model, preferring to practice what 
he preached and maintain the OODA loop as an ever-evolving 
verbal concept, presented and tested in military briefings and 
subjected to the same “whirl of reorientation, mismatches, 
analyses/synthesis” he believed everything else should be (Boyd 
quoted by Hammonds 2002).
The New Rules of Engagement
By the end of 2004, attacks on American forces in Iraq aver-
aged 87 per day and the American death toll had passed 1,000 
McChrystal (2015, p.4). Al-Qaida Iraq (AQI) were poorly trained 
and ill-equipped, yet the US Joint Special Operations Task Force 
(the Task Force) was struggling to overcome its threat. AQI had 
got inside the Task Force’s OODA loop. Writing about his expe-
rience as head of the Task Force, General Stanley McChrystal 
(2015, p.4) recalls:
Although lavishly resourced and exquisitely trained, we found 
ourselves losing to an enemy that, by traditional calculus, we 
should have dominated. Over time we came to realize that 
more than our foe, we were actually struggling to cope with an 
environment that was fundamentally different from anything 
we’d planned or trained for. The speed and interdependence of 
events had produced new dynamics that threatened to over-
whelm the time-honoured processes and culture we’d built.
McChrystal and the Task Force incorrectly assumed that AQI was a 
traditional insurgency that could be outthought and outfought with 
robust military planning and a tried-and-tested tactical playbook. 
Very quickly they realized AQI was actually a hyper-connected, 
decentralized network and not the rigid, prototypical military 
structure they had assumed. AQI was dogmatic and offensive in its 

108
Punk Playthings
ideology but agile and improvised in its actions. It was able to strike 
at disorientating speed with devastating effect. It was entirely 
unpredictable and irrational.
To overcome AQI, McChrystal had to dismantle the “awesome 
machine,” the efficient “military assembly line” that had become 
“too slow, too static and too specialized—too efficient—to deal 
with volatility” (2015, p.90). In its place, McChrystal (2015, p.4) 
embraced the uncomfortable truth that “a problem has different 
solutions on different days” by shifting to an operating rhythm that 
favored intuition, heuristic learning and improvisation over predic-
tive planning and efficiency of execution. In the dynamic swirl of an 
uncertain environment, the impactfulness of doing the right things 
become more important than the efficiency of doing things right.
By the time the Task Force eliminated AQI leader Abu Musab 
­al-Zarqawi in June 2006, it was “learning and adapting quicker than 
the enemy and—finally—hitting them faster than they could regen-
erate” McChrystal (2015, p.251). Central to this resurgence were 
three guiding principles: common purpose, shared consciousness 
and empowered execution. Common purpose afforded all of the 
Task Force’s contributing forces a genuine sense of clarity and 
focus. Shared consciousness broke down silos and introduced lat-
eral transparency, intelligence and insight across the operational 
environment. Empowered execution trusted the teams and indi-
viduals closest to the problem with authority to adapt and respond 
to emergent threats and opportunities, regardless of rank, permis-
sion, or status.
Replacing predictable processes with adaptive frameworks enabled 
McChrystal and the Task Force to confront and overcome, the com-
plexity of unknown unknowns. McChrystal (2015, p.23) explains:
The pursuit of “efficiency”—getting the most with the least 
investment of energy, time, or money—was once a laudable 
goal, but being effective in today’s world is less a question 
of optimizing for a known (and relatively stable) set of vari-
ables than responsiveness to a constantly shifting environ-
ment. Adaptability, not efficiency, must become our central 
competency.
Don’t Trust the Process
The misguided pursuit of efficiency and predictability is not limited 
to the political and military landscapes. It is also a recurring blight 

109
Remake/Remodel
on the creative process, blunting the effectiveness and diluting the 
impact of artists and creators. Even Pixar.
In the afterglow of Toy Story, two defining creative principles 
emerged: “Story Is King” and “Trust the Process.” Story Is King artic-
ulated the why of Pixar: nothing—not technology or commercial 
opportunity—would be permitted to get in the way of telling the 
greatest story possible. Pixar president Ed Catmull took immense 
pride in the way people spoke of how Toy Story made them feel, 
rather than obsessing over the computer wizardry that brought 
it to the big screen (2014, loc.1060). Trust the Process articulated 
the how of Pixar: the working practice that allowed it to navigate 
the inevitable “difficulties and missteps in any creative endeavor” 
(Catmull 2014, loc.1060). Ordinarily skeptical of well-intentioned but 
ultimately hollow maxims, Catmull convinced himself Pixar’s prin-
ciples were the exception due to the studio’s enlightened culture.
More than two years into production—12 months before the film 
was scheduled to be released into theaters—Toy Story 2 was in deep 
trouble. Catmull had been disturbed by “varying degrees of bad” 
in early cuts of the film but assumed “the process will fix things 
for us” (2014, loc.1088, loc.1254). The root of the problem was the 
misguided assumption that because Toy Story 2 was a sequel, Pixar 
could assign inexperienced directors and simply have them follow 
“the process” to replicate the inspiration, innovation and contex-
tual serendipity of the original, a film that “changed movie history” 
(Catmull 2014, loc.1254; Zorthian 2015). Despite their best inten-
tions, the directors—lacking experience and creative ­conviction—
had only succeeded in telling a story that was hollow and predictable 
(Catmull 2014, loc.1102). Upon viewing a rough cut, Toy Story direc-
tor John Lasseter declared the planned sequel a “disaster” (quoted 
in Catmull 2014, loc.1101).
Only months before Toy Story 2 was due to open in theaters, 
the project hung in the balance. For a young company with one 
box-office hit behind it, the stakes were extremely high. Pixar 
chairman Steve Jobs told the entire staff that Toy Story 2’s failure 
would be “game over” for the company (quoted in Jacobs 2011). 
Provoked into action, Pixar rebooted the project—trading blind 
faith in an abstract process for trust in inspired, empowered 
people. The incumbent directors were replaced by Lasseter and 
a creative core team that would be guided by only one principle: 
Story Is King. The next nine months would prove the most inten-
sive, exhausting period in Pixar’s history—Catmull refers to it 
as the “cinematic equivalent of a heart transplant”—but a Pixar-
quality Toy Story 2 would hit its deadline and be released to great 

110
Punk Playthings
acclaim, even outperforming the original at the box office (2014, 
loc.1131, loc.1171).
Reflecting on the experience, Catmull (2014, loc.1253) recognizes 
that trusting a process bred an unintended complacency:
We should trust in people, I told them, not processes. The 
error we’d made was forgetting that “the process” has no 
agenda and doesn’t have taste. It is just a tool—a framework. 
We needed to take more responsibility and ownership of our 
own work, our need for self-discipline and our goals.
Talkin’ All That Jazz
“Anybody can play. The note is only 20 percent.
The attitude of the motherfucker who plays it is 80 percent.”
Miles Davis
(quoted in Tingen 2001)
Game making is fraught with unknown unknowns yet continually 
undermined by reductive assumptions and failures of imagination. 
There is not only a need to embrace uncertainty but, as Boyd sug-
gests, to continually revise, adapt, destroy and recreate our theo-
ries and systems to confront it (Ford 2010, loc.655). As the OODA 
loop illustrates, there are too many unique contextual variables—
ideals, ideas, unfolding circumstances, unfolding interactions with 
environment, outside information, implicit guidance, cultural tra-
ditions, genetic heritage, newly discovered information, ­heuristic 
learning, past experiences, collaborator composition, analysis and 
synthesis—to place your faith in prescriptive playbooks, efficient 
assembly lines, or abstract processes.
Consider Simogo, the Swedish game making duo of Simon Flesser 
and Magnus “Gordon” Gardebäck. They reject onerous documen-
tation, precision planning and the cult of productivity. Instead, they 
improvise, starting out with a bold intention and feeling their way 
to the final experience. Flesser is unapologetic: “The way we make 
games is like jazz music; we improvise and put in new stuff as we 
go along ...  you know where you’re going with it, but you never 
know how long the improvisations will last” (quoted in Nicholson 
2012). The improvisation only stops when Flesser and Gardebäck 
have captured their definitive, distinctive experience: “much like a 
recording artist we want our games to feel Simogo. It should feel 
like something only we could make” (quoted by Nicholson 2012). It 
all sounds gloriously inefficient.

111
Remake/Remodel
Implicit
guidance
and control
Implicit
guidance
and control
Decision
(hypothesis)
Action
(test)
Unfolding
circumstances
Observa-
tions
Feed
forward
Feed
forward
Feed
forward
Feedback
Feedback
Unfolding interaction with environment
Outside
information
Observe
Orient
Decide
Act
Cultural
traditions
Analysis
and
synthesis
Genetic
heritage
New
information
Previous
experiences
FIGURE 3.1  John Boyd’s OODA Loop by author Sean Taylor. (Adapted from a diagram by Patrick Edwin Moran. Licensed 
under Creative Commons Attribution 2.0 Generic via Wikimedia Commons, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:OODA.gif.)

112
Punk Playthings
After the Gold Rush
“There was a shopping mall. Now it’s all covered with flowers.
If this is paradise. I wish I had a lawnmower.”
Talking Heads
(Nothing But) Flowers (1988)
The Age of Abundance
It has never been easier to make a game. There are currently more 
than 7,500 indie games on Steam alone (Steam Spy 2017). And it 
has never been easier to turn professional game maker. Even in 
a relatively small country like the UK, there are over 2,000 active 
video game companies (Ukie 2016, p.12).
The Age of Uncertainty
Between April 2015 and April 2016, the number of indie-tagged 
games on Steam increased by over 50% (Jarvis 2016). In the 
same period, the median average number of copies sold per 
“indie” game fell by roughly the same amount (Jarvis  2016). 
There might well be more indie games but each game is selling 
less. Much less.
According to a report by The Independent Game Developers’ 
Association (TIGA), 65% of game studios in the UK are “microstu-
dios” employing four or fewer people (2016). The same report 
revealed that these microstudios are currently closing down at a 
rate of nearly 100 per year.
It is not just microstudios that are feeling the squeeze. A sector sur-
vey revealed that the average salary for a solo independent game 
developer was just $11,812—around $7,000 less than the mean 
annual wage of a US fast-food worker (Chalabi 2014; Gamasutra 
2014). The same survey—published by Gamasutra—revealed that 
57% of indie game developers (both solo and collectives) recoup 
less than $500 in game sales.
Getting High on Your Supply
The chances of a comedy–drama about two transgender 
­prostitutes—shot exclusively on an iPhone—finding success at the 
box office seems unlikely. But that is exactly what Sean Baker’s 

113
Remake/Remodel
2015 film Tangerine achieved. Baker’s “exuberantly raw and up-
close portrait of one of Los Angeles’ more distinctive sex-trade sub-
cultures” was produced on a budget of just $100,000, yet it went on 
to gross over $700,000 at the US domestic box office (Chang 2015; 
Wikipedia 2016).
And if that seems unlikely, what about a horror film shot for just 
$20 on an iPhone that earned its creator more than $20,000 and 
attracted over half a million viewers on Amazon’s video-streaming 
platform? Just a few years ago, that would have been ridiculous to 
contemplate. But it’s exactly what Justin Doescher achieved with 
his 2016 film, The Break-In (Economist 2017).
In reality, however, Tangerine and The Break-In are outliers. Both 
are comforting and deceptive tales of survivorship bias told at a 
time when “the median box-office return for low-budget films 
in America is a measly 25 cents on the dollar” (Economist 2017). 
What the films demonstrate is that modern tools and technology 
have democratized film production and distribution to the point 
where anyone can make a movie on their own terms. The down-
side of such democratization is, according to screenwriter and 
producer Beanie Barnes, a supply-heavy indie film industry that 
is “cannibalizing itself” (2014). Too many films are flooding into an 
ecosystem at a time when the amount of money made from indie 
films has decreased significantly. As Janet Pierson, head of South 
by Southwest Film Festival, observes: “the impulse to make a film 
has far outrun the impulse to go out and watch one in a theater” 
(quoted by Ball and Menon 2014).
Heads You Don’t Win, Tails You Lose
The Long Tail theory asserts that the cultural and economic shifts 
of the past two decades have dramatically altered the shape of the 
demand curve, reducing the importance of the mass market—and 
mass marketed—hits at the head of the curve and amplifying the 
commercial potential of the infinite number of low-demand niches 
at the tail (see Figure 3.2).
Commercial viability used to be constrained by the physical limi-
tations of the traditional retail, publishing and broadcast sectors. 
But in the internet era, constraints such as physical manufacturing 
overheads, distribution logistics and brick-and-mortar shelf space 
no longer apply. In a digital economy, the need to “lump products 
and consumers into one-size-fits-all containers” inside a single 
mass market is no longer necessary—supply can almost always 

114
Punk Playthings
scale to meet demand—so the focus shifts away from winner-
takes-all ecosystems fixated on blockbuster products and services 
(Anderson n.d.).
Popularized by then–Wired editor-in-chief Chris Anderson, the long 
tail describes a world where “narrowly-targeted goods and ser-
vices can be as economically attractive as mainstream fare” (n.d.). 
A world where physical scarcity is replaced by digital abundance, 
creating an infinite number of viable niche markets, each with 
their own enthusiastic audience, online distribution channels and 
extended half-life. Obscure interests and subcultures—previously 
rejected as unsustainable, unworkable, or unacceptable—are now 
thriving hubs of community and economy.
In the games sector, the long tail removes the need for publishing 
and distribution intermediaries, with creators free to self-publish 
their work and zoom into microscale, niche markets that were not 
previously economically viable. Without the requirement for physi-
cal manufacturing, logistics, or shelf space, game makers can sell 
directly to consumers via low-cost digital distribution mechanisms.
While the long tail might have changed the rules of the game, it 
is wrong to suggest that the balance of power has tipped in favor 
of makers. The primary beneficiaries of long tail economics are 
platform holders and aggregators operating at scale—Amazon, 
Spotify, Netflix, Steam, etc.—consumers and ironically, hit makers. 
In 2016, the top five performers at the box office were all made by 
Disney. Combined, its releases for that year accounted for one-fifth 
of total film revenue worldwide (Epstein 2017).
Within a long tail ecosystem, “it turns out ...  the hits get bigger,” 
according to David Edery (2009). Formerly worldwide games port-
folio manager for the Xbox Live Arcade platform and now CEO of 
the independent studio, Spry Fox, Edery is well placed to offer a 
perspective from both sides of the distribution divide. In his opin-
ion, current ecosystems are even more top-heavy than those of the 
PS3 and Xbox 360 console generation—a period “long-derided for 
its hit-driven nature” (2009).
By solving the distribution problem for creative enterprises, the 
long tail introduced a new one: discovery. The “tyranny of limited 
inventory” still exists but with eyeballs and attention replacing 
physical retail space as the limiting constraint (Koster 2009). For 
game makers, this issue is compounded not just by an extremely 
oversaturated, low-barrier-to-entry ecosystem but also by a lack of 
differentiation regarding genres, mechanics and audio-visual aes-
thetics among self-identifying “indie games.”

115
Remake/Remodel
Direct Action
Independents lacking an established fanbase who launch work into 
long tail ecosystems cede control of their destiny. Their choices are 
to wait patiently—possibly forever—to be picked and promoted by 
the platform holder, hope to be the “needle in the haystack” that 
is discovered organically by enough customers, or partner with 
a traditional publisher and outsource their hopes and dreams to 
an intermediary. Each option is a game of chance with the odds 
stacked against the maker.
The alternative is to stop playing by the rules and instead cultivate 
a meaningful direct relationship with a small but passionate fan-
base. As Wired founder Kevin Kelly astutely observes in his cult 
essay 1,000 True Fans, publishers, studios, labels, aggregators and 
intermediaries are very much a 20th century phenomenon—a con-
sequence of industrialization and the retail trends of the era (2016). 
In contrast, patronage and direct audience relationships are time-
less concepts.
Kelly (2016) argues traditional corporations, publishers and inter-
mediaries are “under equipped and ill-suited” to return to the 
implicit artisanship of the long tail; they are “institutionally unable” 
to find and function within inefficient, unscalable niche markets. 
For example, labels and publishers can retain more than 85% of 
payouts made by music-streaming sites such as Spotify. In 2015, 
the average payout to labels and publishers from Spotify was 
between $0.006 and $0.0084 per stream, yet as little as $0.001128 
found its way to the artist (Dredge 2015). Such behavior is not 
personal; it’s just business. And not particularly good business 
either. The economics of niche products make little sense for tra-
ditional intermediaries incompatible with the long tail economy. 
The effort required to find, understand and connect with obscure 
interest groups outweighs the modest reward. You need mass to 
make millions and most subcultures simply do not scale to that 
size. Kelly (2010) identifies this as “The Shirky Principle,” where 
“institutions will try to preserve the problem to which they are 
the solution.”
Direct relationships with your community—conversational, emo-
tional and transactional—can be transformative. Take Minecraft. 
In the summer of 2009, Markus “Notch” Persson wrote the basic 
game over a weekend and began sharing progress on TIGSource, 
an independent community for game makers and players. One 
month later, he charged people €10 to download a primitive ver-
sion and sold 40 copies in the first weekend (Cheshire 2014). From 
there Persson cultivated a passionate Minecraft fanbase and began 

116
Punk Playthings
releasing updates for the community every Friday. It would not be 
until the summer of 2010—20,000 sales of a “work-in-­progress” 
Minecraft later—that he would quit his day job and start up Mojang 
to develop the game full time (Persson 2010). When sales hit 
200,000 later that year, PayPal suspended Persson’s account, sus-
pecting fraud (Cheshire 2014).
Not everyone can be Minecraft. It’s another outlier example. 
But  with time, patience and sincerity, anyone can capture the 
attention of 241 passionate, like-minded individuals, the aver-
age number of supporters for a successful Kickstarter campaign 
according to Kelly (2016). Similarly, only a small number of creators 
can afford to quit their day job thanks to the passion and generos-
ity of their Patreon patrons. But thousands can make a meaningful 
connection with a small but delighted audience and be rewarded 
for their craft.
Direct relationships are neither a panacea or a one-size-fits-all 
solution. But they are an opportunity to regain ownership from 
centralized hubs of long tail publishing and aggregation. Instead 
of being subjected to popular fads and fashions, oversaturation 
and the tyranny of discovery, they afford the opportunity to find, 
grow and lead a tribe of like-minded people and get rewarded for 
doing so.
Don’t Quit the Day Job
Digital distribution—and the subsequent rise of long tail economics 
and its dominant centralized aggregators—has radically changed 
the rules of game making. In contrast to previous eras, indepen-
dent game developers are overabundant and ever-­increasing. 
Similarly, games themselves are no longer scarce or ephemeral. 
Instead, they exist forever on an overcrowded virtual shelf. Daniel 
Cook, Edery’s Spry Fox co-founder, asks: “What happens when 
demand is fixed and supply is high?” (2016). In his view, a fallow 
period of consolidation and conservatism that precipitates stan-
dardized demand, heightened competition, winner-takes-all mar-
kets, escalating development costs and a culture of risk aversion 
across the games sector. Sound familiar?
According to Cook, to survive as an independent in this harsh new 
reality, game makers must do one of three things: become a genre 
king, dominate a niche market, or develop and manage a brand. 
But “not everyone can stay independent”—unsustainable game 
making enterprises will be left with the choice of becoming either 

117
Remake/Remodel
hobbyists with day jobs who make games for love not money, 
­externally-funded “independent” game makers who get paid 
to make their games for the profit of others, or hired guns who 
perform specialized labor for mega studios and publishers (Cook 
2016). The only other alternative is extinction.
Of those three options, becoming a hobbyist is undoubtedly the 
most appealing to the truly independent of mind. And it’s in step 
with Kelly’s 1,000 True Fans hypothesis. Being a hobbyist is not 
about quitting game making but rejecting an oversupplied main-
stream marketplace and the institutionalized assumption that 
independent game making is a right rather than a privilege. Cook’s 
advice to up-and-coming creators is to “expect a situation closer to 
what we see with writers, painters and musicians” (2016).
Pride and Provenance
In 2016, Ken Wong returned home to Australia to set up Mountains, 
a “craft games studio.” Why “craft” and not “indie”? Well, for Wong 
(2016), craft is a statement against video game monoculture and 
mass-market homogeneity:
You’re not trying to mass produce things that are disposable, 
you’re trying to craft beautiful, bespoke things that are maybe 
a bit more meaningful, or more lovingly made.
With Mountains, Wong intends to explore more human themes 
and craft flawed, vulnerable experiences for the discerning few, 
rather than safe, sanitized games for the masses. Critical of how 
repressed game makers can be in their creative expression, Wong 
wants to challenge the institutional fear of making playful experi-
ences “about life and death and love and sex and sadness” (2016).
Conscious of his privileged position as creator of Monument Valley 
and the security and agency that affords him, Wong shares Cook’s 
view that supply has outstripped demand, that we are “witnessing 
the democratization of an artform” (2015). As a hobby and mode 
of meaningful self-expression, game making has never been more 
accessible or more necessary. But as Wong (2015) highlights, just 
because a medium is accessible, does not mean it owes you a living:
It’s a mistake to assume that an artform is only validated by 
its commercial viability, or that being able to create some-
thing somehow entitles one to income. Making a living by 

118
Punk Playthings
writing  poetry, drawing comics, playing the oboe or skate-
boarding is only possible for a few. This only forces the best 
to strive for ever greater heights, while the rest can enjoy 
expression and experimentation without the distraction of 
monetizing their work.
Products
Popularity
Long tail:
Specific and niche
Short head:
Generic and popular
FIGURE 3.2  The long tail. (Reprinted with permission by Sean Taylor.) 

119
Remake/Remodel
Start a Band, Not a Business
“It’s better to be a pirate than join the navy.”
Steve Jobs
(quoted by Hertzfeld n.d.)
How to Survive an Indiepocalypse
When the game industries speak of the “indiepocalypse,” they 
tend to be referring to an impending extinction event for the indie 
game making subculture. Andy Baio, ex-Kickstarter Chief Technical 
Officer and co-founder of the XOXO Festival, has a wholly differ-
ent interpretation. For Baio, an indiepocalypse is a “global shift in 
how culture is made” (2013). Catalyzed by the democratization of 
creator tools, the means of production and digital distribution, the 
indiepocalypse is a liberating force for “hackers and makers across 
every form of art” that enables them to find, cultivate and mon-
etize a direct, meaningful relationship with a niche fanbase. A fas-
cinating collision of artisanal sensibilities and a DIY punk attitude.
Of course, punk is a term loaded with assumptions and pejorative 
connotations. Like the hipster and the artisan, the punk has become 
a lazy caricature. Like craft, punk as a noun draws on careless nos-
talgic myths, this time of three-chord thrashing performed by angry 
young white men kitted out in a uniform of comedy Mohawks, 
safety pins and Doc Martens boots. But we are not interested in 
punk as a noun, only as a verb. The idea of doing it yourself, grab-
bing whatever is at your disposal and expressing yourself. We share 
Malcolm McLaren’s (2008) interpretation of punk:
I always said punk was an attitude. It was never about having 
a Mohican haircut or wearing a ripped T-shirt. It was all about 
destruction and the creative potential within that.
Digging Your Scene
As an active participant in the alternative music scene since 1978, 
Shellac guitarist and Nirvana producer Steve Albini draws a distinc-
tion between the state of the music industry and the health of the 
music community. Albini (2014) argues the music industry experts 
speak of is “essentially the record industry.” When these experts 
warn “pretty soon nobody will be making music anymore because 
there’s no money in it,” they do so with the selfish assumption 

120
Punk Playthings
that the same old mass-market institutions, processes, distribu-
tion pipelines and income streams that used to make the industry 
money must be restored to their former glories (Albini 2014).
While the music industry—labels, ghost songwriters, promoters, 
publicists, lawyers, accountants, advertising agencies, radio, MTV, 
journalists, big record store owners—were busy manufacturing 
the mainstream, the alternative music communities were doing 
it themselves. Independent bands did not enjoy the “luxuries” of 
mainstream middlemen, so they had to be inclusive and resource-
ful, clustering into local subcultural scenes and forming recording 
collectives, cooperative labels, independent clubs and fanzines. 
Albini grew up within this kind of culture. And it was here his punk 
sensibilities—a desire to make his own records, conduct his own 
business and control his own career—were forged. Alternative 
bands were living out Kelly’s theory of 1,000 True Fans before it 
was conceived, building a direct relationship with their fans and 
patrons. Albini (2014) reckons that by the mid-1990s, Shellac was 
returning a 50% net profit on every record it self-published, earning 
a better per-piece royalty than Michael Jackson, Bruce Springsteen, 
Prince, or Madonna. And so, says Albini, were thousands of other 
bands with a similar punk attitude.
The internet amplifies the potential of the punk. No longer con-
strained by the local maximum, bands are free to indulge them-
selves and develop direct, emotional connections with like-minded 
people around the globe. The music community is now an infinite 
peer-to-peer network of esoteric subcultures and niche markets. 
Or, in Albini’s (2014) words:
Imagine a great hall of fetishes where whatever you felt like 
fucking or being fucked by, however often your tastes might 
change, no matter what hardware or harnesses were required, 
you could open the gates and have it at a comfy mattress at 
any time of the day. That’s what the internet has become for 
music fans. Plus bleacher seats for a cheering section.
Inherent Vice
“It’s what we called punk rock capitalism. Just be really aggressive, 
really ambitious and you can’t have debt.”
Suroosh Alvi (2016)
In 1994, a recovering heroin addict launched a free cultural maga-
zine, Voice of Montreal. This publication was to be Suroosh Alvi’s 

121
Remake/Remodel
way of shining a light on the “depraved underground culture” he 
obsessed over but felt was ignored by the local media (Alvi 2016). 
The Voice of Montreal made no economic sense. Alvi had zero 
experience as a journalist and was launching into a “shrinking 
English market in an economically depressed city” (Alvi quoted in 
Dunlevy  2016). There was barely enough advertising demand to 
sustain the two incumbent alternative publications of the time, the 
Montreal Mirror and Montreal Hour.
The Voice of Montreal was “a laughing stock” but thanks to a 
Canadian Government welfare program, rational economics were 
not a consideration and Alvi believed the cultural conversation he 
could stimulate was more necessary than ever (2016). Nobody was 
inherently curious about “punkish indiscretion, skater culture, sex, 
drugs and music” or the seedy subcultures where they flourished 
(Yakowicz 2014). Nobody was expressing themselves with wonky 
approximations of gonzo journalism and provocative design. 
Nobody was unapologetically speaking directly to and for, Alvi’s 
(2016) generation:
We hadn’t been to journalism school, so the way to do that 
is to get as close to the source as possible. If we are going to 
write about the prostitution community in Montreal, let’s get 
the prostitutes to write that story.
Adopting a punk approach, Voice of Montreal spent the next two years 
bootstrapping itself while Alvi and his co-founders, Gavin McInnes 
and Shane Smith, lived off welfare. Smith played a pivotal role in the 
rise of the magazine. A raconteur who, in Alvi’s words, could “sell 
rattlesnake boots to a rattlesnake,” Smith secured valuable, credible 
advertising from Californian skateboard companies and expanded 
the magazine’s distribution into international ­markets (Alvi 2016). His 
most audacious act of tricksterism was engineering the magazine’s 
divorce from its nonprofit parent company, achieved by planting a 
story in the local press that Village Voice was about to launch a trade-
mark lawsuit over the use of “Voice.” It wasn’t. But, suitably panicked, 
the parent company folded Voice of Montreal. Almost immediately, 
Alvi, McInnes and Smith started the magazine up again under a new 
name. Only this time it was independently owned by themselves and 
operated for profit (Alvi 2016). Bigger, glossier and boosted by $10,000 
(CAD) in family loans, Alvi (2016) recalls the magazine became more 
culturally potent, if not more professional:
We created this really raw magazine. There were a lot of typos 
but it really jumped off the page and it was kind of shocking 

122
Punk Playthings
stuff ... this weird little take on American culture that was 
coming from Montreal and we were sending this magazine to 
San Francisco, Chicago, LA and New York and the Americans 
were eating it up.
In 1998, they sold a percentage of the company in exchange 
for what Alvi describes as a “big fat cheque” (quoted in Dunlevy 
2016). Conscious that the magazine had plateaued and needed to 
get beyond bootstrapping if it wanted to realize its potential, the 
founders courted the interest of Montreal technology entrepre-
neur Richard Szalwinski, persuading him to part with $250,000 
(CAD) for 25% of the company. The self-perpetuated legend goes 
that the deal concluded in a single meeting, without any due dili-
gence and based on an arbitrary valuation “pulled from thin air” 
(Alvi 2016). Szalwinski used his investment to convince the team to 
move operations to New York City and scale beyond its simple print 
magazine to create a multichannel online media platform.
Of course, the simple print magazine in question was Vice, now one of 
the world’s largest and leading digital media and broadcasting compa-
nies. Valued at $4 billion (USD) in 2015, Vice Media now boasts Disney 
as investors, HBO as broadcasting partners and a multimedia empire 
spanning magazines, books, record labels, film production compa-
nies, bars, online video channels, cable network stations, online web 
series, television shows and award-winning documentaries (Dunlevy 
2016). But despite its meteoric—and often crass and controversial—
rise, Smith’s grand vision for Vice Media’s future is as unprofessional 
as its past: “We’re trying not to be shitty” (quoted in Rose 2016).
Skivers and Strivers
Fate did not bring Stuart David and Stuart Murdoch together to 
form Belle and Sebastian; the Scottish band emerged out of the 
“botched capitalism” of 1990s Britain (Taylor 2004). Like most musi-
cians of the time, David had been using unemployment benefit 
as an “unofficial artist’s bursary in the absence of anything more 
legitimate” (2015, p.4). But in 1994 the Conservative government 
began to crack down on “abuses” of the welfare system, coercing 
long-term benefit claimants into training for work programs. David 
(2015, p.4) had been claiming for eight years—ever since his high 
school teacher taught him how to attend school and claim unem-
ployment benefit—and knew he was on thin ice.
Initially resistant, David came round to the idea of joining a ­training 
program when he discovered Beatbox, a Glasgow-based music 

123
Remake/Remodel
industry course for out-of-work musicians. The idea of daily expo-
sure to fellow artists and free access to a recording studio appealed 
and the news that joining the course would “pay” him an additional 
£10 per week benefits, plus travel allowance, only sweetened the deal.
Beatbox was botched capitalism in action. Housed in a warehouse 
in Glasgow’s Finnieston district—a decaying industrial area in the 
west of the city—Beatbox only existed because its organizers could 
not access government funding to set up their personal recording 
studio without even using the space to run a training course for 
unemployed musicians. An afterthought to the recording and pro-
motion of bands the organizers managed, the course was a “total 
shambles” recalls David, with “scores of unemployed musicians sit-
ting around in a dark, airless labyrinth, doing nothing” (2015, p.10). 
Regardless, David found a kindred spirit in the shy but stylized 
Stuart Murdoch—a songwriter slowly getting back to normality 
after spending years unable to work due to chronic fatigue syn-
drome. Bonding over a mutual dislike for blues music, machismo, 
drugs, cigarettes and alcohol, the duo were soon performing at 
open mic spots across the city and recording Murdoch’s songs at 
Beatbox.
The key to writing a great song is, according to Murdoch, “know-
ing what the song’s about before you start” (quoted in David 2015, 
p.43). The same approach extended to the creation of Belle and 
Sebastian itself. This, unlike the making of most of bands, was an 
unorthodox process of curation rather than creation. The band 
existed in its own little universe, shaped as much by Murdoch’s 
ideals as his ideas. He was uninterested in putting together any old 
band to secure a record contract. He wanted to assemble a group 
of like-minded individuals who believed in his songs enough to 
want to be part of Belle and Sebastian. Gradually, over the course 
of a year, the imaginary band in Murdoch’s head came together in 
reality. Stevie Jackson (guitar) asked to join after seeing Murdoch 
and David perform at an open mic show he compèred. Isobel 
Campbell (cello) and Chris Geddes (keyboards) were persuaded to 
join after chance social meetings with Murdoch. The final piece of 
the puzzle was David’s flatmate, Richard Colborn (drummer), who 
had recently moved to Glasgow to study music business at Stow 
College.
Every year, the students of Stow College’s HND Music Business 
course choose a local band and invite them to record a single. 
The class then produce, release and promote the single under the 
tutelage of Alan Rankine, 1980s new wave popstar turned record 
producer. In 1996, the class chose Belle and Sebastian, offering 

124
Punk Playthings
to fund five days of studio time to record a CD single that would 
be released and promoted by the college’s record label, Electric 
Honey. True to form, where others would have snatched at the 
opportunity, Murdoch parlayed the offer into something better 
suited to his grand vision. Murdoch thought CDs were a commod-
ity, so he insisted the single be released on vinyl. Then he dropped 
the bombshell that the band would not be recording a single but 
an entire  album. Rankine was skeptical a whole album could be 
recorded in a week—if The Beatles could do it, so can we, was 
Murdoch’s ­counter—but agreed to the demands (quoted by David 
2015, p.98). He remarked that Murdoch’s stubborn vision reminded 
him of his ex-bandmate in The Associates, the late, great, Billy 
McKenzie:
“Bill always knew what he wanted. Great artists usually do. 
You have to give them room to follow their vision.”
In March 1996, the band entered the legendary CaVa Sound studio 
in Glasgow’s West End to record their debut album. Despite only 
playing one concert as a full band before this session, Murdoch’s 
idealistic approach to sculpting his band—rather than forming any 
old band—created a unique chemistry. In David’s words, a “slightly 
shambolic magic” enabled the band to record the 10 songs that 
would make up Tigermilk in just three days (2015, p.148).
Four months later at the same location, Electric Honey hosted a 
party to launch the album. A mixture of excited record executives, 
Glaswegian indie kids and curious art students were treated to a 
live performance from Belle and Sebastian and a free vinyl copy of 
Tigermilk. The next day, some of the less-appreciated complimen-
tary copies began appearing in local charity shops for £1. But within 
months, the record would be changing hands for up to £850 as fans 
scrambled to get their hands on one of only 1,000 pressed copies 
(David 2015, p.199). In 1999, Tigermilk was rereleased on Jeepster 
Records to give the band’s growing fanbase a chance to own it. 
Jeepster was a London-based independent label bankrolled, ironi-
cally, by the wealth of a stock market trader. Botched capitalism 
indeed.
Premature Incorporation
Simon Parkin argues that the all-too-rapid industrialization of 
games has robbed them of the kind of self-indulgent, experimental 
inception periods that provoked the cultural breadth and diversity 
of other artistic mediums. For games, “the cultural conversation 

125
Remake/Remodel
has always been secondary to the industrial question: how do we 
monetize this?” (Parkin 2014).
Games can be as culturally enriching and credible as any work of 
music, literature, or cinema. Yet game makers censor themselves 
by prioritizing premature incorporation and fiscal sustainability 
ahead of curiosity and cultural expression. Starting a business 
should be the consequence of successful entrepreneurship and 
demonstrable market demand not a vain reaction to a vague idea. 
The opposite of play is work.
Steve Albini believes that bands starting out should accept that 
external assistance or intervention will not be forthcoming and 
consequently learn to make do with the raw materials and oppor-
tunities at hand. It is Albini’s belief that if you’re doing something 
pleasurable in its own right—singing, acting, painting, game 
­making—you have to “expect that society will undercompensate 
you for that on a professional level” (Albini quoted by Friedman 
2015). For every person that wants to be fully compensated, hun-
dreds will willingly do it for nothing.
Operating as an artist who does business but does not believe 
their art owes them a living—as opposed to operating as a busi-
ness who does art to make payroll—is liberating. Starting a band 
deals with the world as it is: game making does not owe you 
a living but it does allow you to explore your indulgences and 
express yourself on your own terms. But prematurely starting 
a business only sees the world as you would like it to be: your 
idea is amazing, its production will be flawless and everyone 
is going to instantly discover, love and buy it. It is worth quit-
ting the day job for, going into debt for, even assuming fiscal 
responsibility for.
The world has enough games and professional game development 
studios. What it needs now is more dilettantes and delinquents 
questioning systemic assumptions, subverting institutions and 
building their own esoteric communities. Avoid premature incor-
poration; bureaucracy is always the enemy of creativity. Start a 
band, not a business.

126
Punk Playthings
Stop Just Making Stuff
“Any survivor of a Sixties art school will tell you that the idea of 
making a product was anathema. That meant commodification.”
Malcolm McLaren (2008)
Objectified
At the end of 2016, there were more than 3 million active apps on 
the App Store and around 80% of them were free (Chapple 2016). 
Studies show that one in four people abandon a mobile app after 
just one use (O’Connell 2016). More stuff, less attention.
You have to ask yourself a question. Do you want to craft meaning-
ful experiences or do you just want to make more stuff, more vapid 
products to toss into the digital landfill?
Are You Experienced?
Robert Hughes placed little financial or aesthetic value on the 
work of Jean-Michel Basquiat. Considered by many “the greatest 
art critic of our time” (Jones 2012), Hughes reckoned Basquiat to 
be not only limited in talent but complicit in his “manufactured” 
role as the “wild child ... curiosity ... noble urban savage” of the 
1980s New York art scene (1988). For Hughes, the rise of Basquiat 
was the story of a “small, untrained talent caught in the buzzsaw 
of artworld promotion,” elevated to absurdly overrated heights by 
the dealers, collectors and critics of the time. Basquiat’s seed of 
unformed, unrefined talent required the “boot camp of four years 
in art school” to develop the “real drawing abilities ... disciplines 
and skills without which good art cannot be made” (Hughes 1988).
Following Basquiat’s untimely death, Hughes (1988) wrote a thought-
ful yet thought-provoking obituary, identifying the “cluster of toxic 
­vulgarities” that, in his opinion, Basquiat’s career appealed to:
“First, to the racist idea of the black as naif or as rhythmic 
­innocent and to the idea of the black artist as ‘instinctual,’ out-
side ‘mainstream’ culture and therefore not to be judged by it: 
a wild pet for the recently cultivated white. Second, to a fetish 
about the infallible freshness of youth, blooming amid the discos 
of the Downtown Scene. Third, to an obsession with ­novelty—
the husk of what used to be called the avant-garde, now only 
­serving the need for new ephemeral models each year to stoke 

127
Remake/Remodel
the market. Fourth, to the slide of art criticism into promo-
tion and of art into fashion. Fifth, to the art-­investment mania, 
which abolished the time for reflection on a ‘hot’ artist’s actual 
­merits; never were critics and collectors more scared of missing 
the bus than in the early’ 1980s. And sixth, to the audience’s 
goggling appetite for self-destructive talent (Pollock, Hendrix, 
Montgomery Clift).”
All this “gunk,” as Hughes (1988) framed it, “rolled into a sticky ball 
around Basquiat’s tiny talent and produced a reputation.”
Brian Eno likes the work of Robert Hughes and Jean-Michel Basquiat. 
In the essay Miraculous Cures and the Canonisation of Basquiat, Eno 
counters the opinion Hughes held of Basquiat, contemplating 
whether a narrow focus on the intrinsic value of Basquiat’s paintings 
was the reason Hughes “doesn’t get him at all?” (1996, p.366). Eno 
argues that criticisms put forward by Hughes were founded on three 
false assumptions: that Basquiat was performing the traditional, 
art-schooled role of artist; that the art world should not indulge 
in myth-making or conspire to construct “genius”; that Basquiat’s 
­co-conspiracy in such acts—“to project himself and make himself pro-
jectible [sic]”—is out of bounds for the artist (1996, p.366). But what 
if, Eno asks, the job of the artist is not to create venerated objects but 
to instead create situations where an audience can enjoy art experi-
ences? Suppose that art is not defined by something inherently inside 
of “it,” but instead, something that happens inside of “you” [the eager 
audience]? If this were true, then we should “stop thinking about art 
as objects and start thinking about them as triggers for experiences” 
(Eno 1996, p.368). Suddenly, Eno (1996, p.368) has given art and its 
inherent aesthetic value has a wholly different interpretation:
The value of the work lies in the degree to which it can help 
you have the kind of experience that you call art. It is then 
possible, within the context of the right experiences, for a 
test tone to become a qualified musical experience. It is also 
possible for you to have quite different experiences from me, 
which says nothing about the test tone and everything about 
our separate perceptions of it, our different expectations and 
cultural predispositions. What we could then agree is that 
there is nothing absolute about the aesthetic value or non-
value of a test tone and that we don't even have to consider 
the question of aesthetic value with a view to arriving at any 
single answer: it could have one value for you and another 
value for me and different ones for both of us at another time. 
It can change value for each of us. More interestingly, we can 

128
Punk Playthings
also say that there is nothing absolute about the aesthetic 
value of a Rembrandt or a Mozart to a Basquiat.
By shifting attention from the intrinsic value of the object to the 
extrinsic value of the subjective experience, art becomes “some-
thing that happens,” a process rather than a quality (Eno 1996, 
p.369). A process whereby the definition of art is diffuse and differ-
ent: art experiences are triggered for different people by different 
art of all shapes, sizes and sensations:
“So I think there’s a whole lot of things that we do which you might 
just call stylization. But what I want to persuade you is that they 
are actually part of this very broad definition of art as I’m using 
it. I made a list of things that I would put under that umbrella. 
Symphonies, perfume, sports cars, graffiti, needlepoint, monu-
ments, tattoos, slang, Ming vases, doodles, poodles, apple stru-
dels. Still life, Second Life, bed knobs and boob jobs.
All of those things are sort of unnecessary in the sense that we 
could all survive without doing any of them, but in fact, we don’t.”
Brian Eno
BBC Music John Peel Lecture (2015)
What then, does all of this have to do with making games? Well, 
it challenges us to think of games not as strictly defined objects 
but as triggers for experiences, little machines that “feed us 
sensations to keep us from the gloom of everyday existence” 
(Eno 1996, p.367).
What If ...
Innovation is simultaneously everywhere and nowhere. As a 
word it has lost its meaning. As a practice it has lost its purpose. 
Anthropologist Grant McCracken suggests that corporate adoption 
of innovation has led to its domestication. Once-wild explorations 
have been tamed by the “tyranny of closed management” and 
the commodification of the “innovation economy” (2012, loc.109). 
Corporations have spent the past decade trying to make inno-
vation systematic and processed, the unintended consequence 
of which has been the delivery of less genuine innovation, not 
more. To counter this creative stagnation, McCracken suggests a 
return to something “a little more practical and a lot more curi-
ous”: the “culturematic” (2012, loc.105). In his book of the same 
name, McCracken describes culturematics as “a little machine for 

129
Remake/Remodel
making culture ...  designed to do three things: test the world, dis-
cover meaning and unleash value” (2012, loc.59). Rejecting the the-
ater of corporate innovation, culturematics are cheap and cheerful 
experiments rather than precisely constructed prototype products 
or quantifiable initiatives. Designed to playfully provoke the world, 
culturematics start by asking: “What if…?” For example, by asking 
“What if I ate all my meals at McDonald’s for a month?” documen-
tary maker Morgan Spurlock created Super Size Me—an entertain-
ing and affecting alternative to the dry academic studies into the 
nutritional impact of fast food. Similarly, by asking “What if I made 
my made my own content for Saturday Night Live?” Andy Samberg 
subverted a comedy institution (McCracken 2012, loc.165).
Typically, when a new comedian joins Saturday Night Live (SNL), they 
enter a ruthless production process where “no one invests so much 
as a second in something that might not work because the clock is 
ticking” (McCracken 2012, loc.71). Struggling for airtime, Samberg 
and SNL writers Akiva Schaffer and Jorma Taccone reached a con-
clusion that “some of these weirder concepts [rejected sketches] 
were things we just needed to film and present because that was 
the way to show people that it was potentially good” (Taccone 
quoted in Fox 2016). Borrowing a camera, Samberg, Schaffer and 
Taccone—longtime friends who wrote and performed under the 
name The Lonely Island—started writing, shooting and producing 
their own SNL Digital Shorts. On December 3, 2005, SNL premiered 
Lettuce, a surreal sketch starring Samberg and Will Forte that cost 
The Lonely Island just $20 to make (Fox 2016).
A culturematic probe is a value detection device that sometimes 
“phones home with data, sometimes with cash” (McCracken 2012, 
loc.195). In the case of The Lonely Island, the culturematic “phoned 
home” with Emmy wins, Grammy nominations and more than 1.7 
billion views on YouTube (Fox 2016). By adopting a playful approach, 
The Lonely Island created a low-budget, high-value SNL laboratory 
where they could test the world, discover meaning and unleash 
value outside of the competitive, costly, time-sensitive production 
process of a live weekly television show. By assuming all of the cre-
ative and financial risks, they were able to gain enough leverage 
to probe “places and do things out of range of the SNL players [the 
ensemble cast]” (McCracken 2012, loc.70). As Schaffer (quoted in 
Fox 2016) explains:
If we made a video for free on our own time and then it comes 
out badly, there's no embarrassment there. Whereas if we 
asked for a big budget and did it in the system and then it 
turned out stinky, maybe we’d never get another shot.

130
Punk Playthings
McCracken’s culturematic framework is pure punk. It rejects the 
corporate template of betting big on the shiny singular idea and 
instead embraces curious exploration and naive DIY productions. 
Culturematics do not rely on market research or offer corporate 
certainty; they are neither functional nor innovative. Culturematics 
are just triggers for playful experiences, often-futile provocations 
of questionable utility that seek, as Eno might say, to “feed us sen-
sations that keep us from the gloom of everyday existence” (1996, 
p.368).
Skål
In 2006, Mikkel Borg Bjergsø was a science teacher with a passion 
for the US craft beer scene and a dislike for the boring industrial 
beers of his Danish homeland. What if, Bjergsø wondered, he 
started releasing the beers he was brewing in his apartment?
His first release was Beer Geek Breakfast, an oatmeal stout brewed 
using a French-press coffee maker. The beer won international 
acclaim on the tasting circuit and brought Bjergsø’s fledgling brew-
ery, Mikkeller, to the attention of leading US craft beer distributors. 
Since that debut brew, Mikkeller has launched over 650 different 
beers and exported to more than 50 countries as part of Bjergsø’s 
mission to “show people ...  what beer can be and, for me, actually 
is” (2014).
Unlike most brewers, Mikkeller does not have its own brewery. 
As a “gypsy brewer” it carefully crafts its recipes then outsources 
actual brewing to other facilities around the world (Weiner 2014). 
Sidestepping the distraction of physical brewing allows Bjergsø to 
concentrate on pushing the boundaries of good taste with culture-
matic questions such as: What quality of fattiness would a beer 
obtain if you sprinkled popcorn into the mash? What would happen 
if you dumped a load of mouth-numbing Sichuan peppercorns in 
during brewing? How much fresh seaweed would lend a beer the 
right umami jolt? (Weiner 2014).
Possessing little commonality with the traditional beer industry 
and its industrially processed beers, Bjergsø draws inspiration 
from “people who have different ways of thinking about flavors 
and aromas. Winemakers, coffee-makers, chefs, other brewers” 
(quoted by Weiner 2014). And when a diversity of influence col-
lides with outsourced brewing, happy accidents can occur. Due 
to a typographical error in Bjergsø’s supplied recipe, one brew-
ery ended up adding 100 times more vanilla sugar to a Mikkeller 
Imperial Stout. The result was 10,000 “spoiled” bottles that Bjergsø 

131
Remake/Remodel
elected to release regardless. “People went crazy” for Beer Geek 
Vanilla Shake, which became one of Mikkeller’s most popular ever 
beers (Bjergsø quoted by Weiner 2014). By delegating the rote pro-
duction process, Mikkeller keeps overheads low, creating more 
space for serendipity and the freedom to pursue its self-sufficient, 
self-indulgent manifesto (2016):
WE AIM TO …
… brew beer that challenges the concept of good beer and 
moves people. We do this by using the best ingredients and 
work with the most talented and creative minds around the 
world.
… make quality beers a serious alternative to wine and cham-
pagne when having gourmet food.
WE FAIL TO …
… calm down. We are always thinking in new ways and ideas, 
always working on the next project. Sometimes it’s hard for 
people to keep up…
… make beer that is watery and tasteless. In our world beer 
challenges people’s taste buds – whether it’s in a bitter, spicy, 
sour or fruity manner.
WE LOVE TO …
… explore the existing beer genres by using the best raw 
material available. The refined product is the aim – not to 
keep down costs. This leads to very special brews by Mikkeller: 
Stouts with Vietnamese Kopi Luwak coffee, chipotle chili, 
lychee fruits – just to name a few.
… cooperate with other breweries around the world, who 
inspires us and teach us new ways of doing things …
WE HATE TO …
…work with people that don’t give a damn. There are so many 
wonderful, passionate and honest people in the beer world, 
why spend time on the rest?
The physical production process may be just a commodity to 
Bjergsø—“you can train a monkey to brew beer” he told the New York 
Times—but aesthetic value is not (quoted by Weiner 2014). Playful 
and iconic, Mikkeller succeeds in being “anomalously cool” in a sea of 
boring beer labels (Weiner 2014). Bjergsø understands that look, feel 
and storytelling are important contributors to the experience of beer: 
“never put a good beer in a bottle that looked bad ...  the beer wouldn’t 
be good anymore” (quoted by Weiner 2014).

132
Punk Playthings
Reinventing Records
“My role models are artists, merchants.
There’s less than ten that I can name in history.
Truman. Ford. Hughes. Disney. Jobs. West.”
Kanye West
(quoted by Eleftheriou-Smith 2016)
“‘Art is never finished, only abandoned’ is an over-familiar phrase. 
Originally attributed to Leonardo da Vinci, it has been the subject 
of numerous cultural remixes through the ages:
A poem is never finished, only abandoned.”
Paul Valéry
(quoted in Keyes 2006)
“Movies aren’t finished, only abandoned.”
David Fincher (2014)
“A painting is never finished, only abandoned.”
Pablo Picasso
(quoted in Keyes 2006)
Each time, the underlying principle remains the same: perfection is 
an impossible goal; better to draw a line under your work and release 
it into the world. It’s a sentiment we agree with, but what does such 
abandonment mean in a hyper-connected world?
The Life of Pablo was a watershed moment for Kanye West and 
the mainstream music industry, an “exemplar of modern celeb-
rity music making,” according to the New York Times (Caramanica 
2016). West did not release his seventh album on February 14, 
2016; he launched its first iteration and began probing the ongo-
ing relevance and validity of the packaged product and the rigid 
release process. Describing the album as a “living breathing 
changing creative expression,” West (2016) released two further 
iterations of The  Life of Pablo within the first month of release, 
alongside warnings of more to come. Instead of abandoning his 
work, West turned it into a piece of emergent transmedia perfor-
mance art, played out on Twitter, YouTube, Tidal, Spotify, Madison 
Square Garden, Saturday Night Live, Periscope and at pop-up 
fashion shows.

133
Remake/Remodel
To claim, as Pitchfork did, that the record contained “no major state-
ments, no reinventions, no zeitgeist wheelie-popping” as it emerged 
from its “protracted and often chaotic roll-out,” is to view The Life 
of Pablo as a commodity instead of an ever-­evolving experience 
(Greene 2016). Similarly, to label the record the “first SaaS” album, 
as TechCrunch did, or liken it to video game patching, like Kill Screen, 
exposes a similar lack of imagination (Tzuo 2016; Solberg 2016). The 
Life of Pablo is far from perfect; it is not West’s best work and will 
likely never be. But to judge it by traditional measures ignores the 
theatrical experience West wrapped around it. At a point where 
the foundations of the mainstream music industry are crumbling, 
Kanye West challenges orthodoxy, probing what exactly it means 
to release a record and curating an experience in which, perhaps, 
the medium is the message.
Shit Happens
“We need to make games that people care about so much,
they can’t not play them.”
Jonathan Blow (2006)
Entrepreneur Joshua Topolsky warns that gimmicks and token 
digitization will not save mainstream media organizations. Root 
problems, Topolsky suggests, are not solved by the superficial 
application of “bots, newsletters, a ‘morning briefing’ app, a ‘lean 
back’ iPad experience, Slack integration, a Snapchat channel, or 
a great partnership with Twitter” (2016). The media’s tried-and-
tested model built on the concept of scarcity and geographic local-
ity is gone. No longer can a few conglomerates control the majority 
of what we read, watch, listen to and play. At the emergence of 
digital, media organizations ceded control to people who did not 
understand or have the best interests of media at heart. The result 
was a media actively trading quality of experience for quantity of 
eyeballs, a deliberate dilution undertaken in the belief that the 
prize was not to be the “best” of something, but to have the “most” 
of something.
This approach, Topolsky believes, is unsustainable in the long term. 
The “best and most important” media is not made to reach the “most 
people … [but] made to reach the right people” (Topolsky 2016). 
For all our faults Topolsky argues, we are humans not “­content con-
sumption machines,” and the current uncertain landscape repre-
sents an “incredible opportunity for the smart people in media to hit 
the reset button and start doing interesting things for discernable 

134
Punk Playthings
audiences again” (2016). Whether that is achieved through brewing 
coffee-flavored beers in your kitchen, filming $20 comedy sketches, 
or cultivating the myth of genius around your “tiny talent,” it is clear 
there is a ready and willing discernable audience waiting impatiently 
for experiences to be triggered. Your choice is either to go and 
delight them, or to continue to shovel shit to the always-distracted, 
ever-decreasing masses.
“Your problem is that you make shit. A lot of shit. Cheap shit. And 
no one cares about you or your cheap shit. And an increasingly 
aware, connected and mutable audience is onto your cheap shit. 
They don’t want your cheap shit. They want the good shit. And 
they will go to find it somewhere. Hell, they’ll even pay for it.”
Joshua Topolsky
Your Media Business Will Not Be Saved (2016)
FIGURE 3.3  Author Chris Lowthorpe enjoys a beer in Mikkeller Bar, 
Copenhagen. (Reprinted with permission from Chris Lowthorpe.)

135
Remake/Remodel
The Work of Play in the Age 
of Digital Reproduction
“Gifts must affect the receiver to the point of shock.”
Walter Benjamin (2009)
The Rational Anthem
In sociology, rationalization refers to the process of replacing 
societal traditions, customs and emotions as behavioral motiva-
tors with efficiency, predictability and calculation. Rooted in Max 
Weber’s 1905 essay collection, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of 
Capitalism, the most visible manifestations of rationalization are 
seen in the rise of 20th century industrialization and bureaucracy.
A more contemporary term is “McDonaldization,” coined by sociolo-
gist George Ritzer to not only describe a pervasive, rationalized fast-
food culture but also the homogeneity of globalization. Ritzer (n.d.) 
identified four pillars of McDonaldization: efficiency, the optimiza-
tion of process, time and human capital; ­calculability, the objective 
quantification of sales and services performance; predictability, the 
consistent and formal application of discipline, order, systemization, 
routine and methodology; and control, the standardization and 
automation of practice, process and product.
They Call Me the Seeker
Economist David Galenson identifies two types of artistic innovator: 
conceptual and experimental. Conceptual innovators are ­“finders,” 
working with methodical certainty toward their goal with a “clarity 
of intent and confidence in their ability” (Galenson 2004). In con-
trast, experimental innovators are “seekers,” who, Galenson notes, 
are characterized by “persistent uncertainty about their methods 
and goals” and an inherent, unarticulated dissatisfaction with their 
work (2004). It is this uncertainty and dissatisfaction that provokes 
experimental innovators to explore and probe their way toward 
their imperfectly perceived objectives, embracing trial, error and 
serendipitous discovery as they go.
We all like to think of ourselves as conceptual innovators, bringing 
sparks of genius to life with methodical precision. But the truth is 
that most of us just aren’t that talented. Conceptual innovators—
such as Pablo Picasso, F Scott Fitzgerald, Bob Dylan, Orson Welles 
and TS Eliot (Galenson 2010)—are the outliers. The rest of us must 

136
Punk Playthings
accept the complexities and frustrations of inefficient, inconsis-
tent, imperfect experimentation.
We do not do enough to debunk the myth of conceptual innova-
tion within game making. We fetishize stories of inspired genius 
and bury the ugly truth of uncertainty and experimentation. From 
the outside, Portal looks, feels and plays like a work of genius, an 
experience like no other that is so tight, refined and wonderfully 
articulated. In truth, the making of this masterpiece was consider-
ably more uncertain, serendipitous and iterative.
Before Portal came its predecessor, Narbacular Drop, a senior-year 
game project from a team of students attending DigiPen Institute 
of Technology. The team—led by designer Kim Swift—set out to 
create an experience that was simple yet unique. Simple because 
the team understood through previous projects that “there are 
never enough hours in a day to do what you’d like” (Barnett et al. 
2008). Unique because every member of the student team needed 
an attention-grabbing game to put on their resumes. And grab 
attention it did. Valve hired the team to remake the game using 
their Source engine just 15 minutes into a demo for Gabe Newell.
Very quickly after joining Valve, the team were introduced to and 
immersed in, a culture of play-testing and iterative design. Where 
Narbacular Drop had followed a linear development process that 
reserved play-testing for the final month of development, Portal 
adopted play-testing as a regular habit. From the very first week 
of development, Swift and her team used play-testing as a means 
of challenging perceived progress and questioning their concep-
tual design assumptions. The insights and observations gathered 
in play-tests fueled sprints of rapid iteration, which in turn created 
the context for the next round of play-testing.
A particular highlight of Portal was its innovative approach to nar-
rative. Through GLaDOS—“part instructor, part antagonist, total 
fruit-loop” (Bramwell 2007)—Portal demonstrated that less narra-
tive could be more. The game rejected exposition for a more subtle, 
sophisticated brand of storytelling closer to Marshall McLuhan’s 
notion of “cool” media: turning the audience into an active constitu-
ent of the experience, responsible for filling in the gaps themselves. 
This approach is all the more interesting because too often games 
typecast themselves as McLuhan’s “hot” media: reducing audience 
participation in the story by feeding them a high definition, high 
exposition narrative (McLuhan 1969).
But the creation of GLaDOS was not inspired genius. It was the 
result of exploration, iteration and constraint. Through play-­testing 

137
Remake/Remodel
it became apparent that Portal was “a little dry” and in need of 
more “flavor and ... entertaining narrative” (Barnett et al. 2008). 
The orthodox response would have been to add more nonplayable 
characters and cut-scenes, but the team had neither the time or 
resources for such “an impressive amount of animation work and 
scene choreography” (Barnett et al. 2008). Instead, they enlisted 
Valve staff writer Erik Wolpaw (Psychonauts, Half-Life 2) to construct 
a compelling narrative through audio alone. Just a week later, 
Wolpaw returned with prototype sample dialog recorded using a 
simple text-to-speech program (Barnett et al. 2008):
It was a series of announcements that played over the newly-
christened “relaxation vault” that appears in Portal’s first 
room. Everyone on the team liked the funny, sinister tone 
of the writing and so Erik continued to write and record 
announcements for other chambers, while still searching for 
the story proper.
During testing, it became apparent these announcements were 
not only incentivizing player progression but providing enter-
tainment and amusement. What was intended as a short-term 
placeholder solution was, in fact, the narrative voice Portal had 
been seeking all along. By juxtaposing the sterile environments 
and logical problem-solving with a surprising, playful narrative, 
much-needed personality had been injected into the experience 
(Barnett et al. 2008):
The guide, now named GLaDOS, would simply talk to players 
throughout their experience—praising them, taunting them 
and, whenever possible, trying to make them feel guilty for 
the nonstop acts of defiance and mayhem that game players 
are conditioned to commit routinely in game environments.
Our hope was that by the end of the Portal, players would 
know GLaDOS better than any boss monster in the history of 
gaming. Though we knew at some point the player would have 
to meet and destroy her, we thought it would be even more 
satisfying if players got a chance to cause her some emotional 
pain along the way.
Oscillate Wildly
Powers of Ten takes us on a mesmerizing journey through scale 
and shifting perspectives. This classic short film by Charles 
and Ray Eames illustrates the universe “as an arena for both 

138
Punk Playthings
continuity and change, of everyday picnics and cosmic mystery” 
(Eames Office 2013). Beginning with a closeup shot of a picnic in 
a Chicago park, the camera steadily moves out to reveal the edge 
of the known universe and then back toward Earth, eventually 
down to molecular level in the hand of a man sleeping at the pic-
nic. Selected for preservation by the Library of Congress for being 
“culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant,” Powers of Ten 
is a simple yet compelling illustration of the power of scale and 
perspective (Eames Office 2013). It is also completely unrelated 
but perfectly illustrative of how shifting scales and perspectives 
can inform game making.
Too often game makers are distracted by the design detail of 
the product to the detriment of the experience’s wider cultural 
context. As Dan Hill (2012, loc.432) explains in Dark Matter and 
Trojan Horses: A Strategic Design Vocabulary, there is a need for 
designers to ­continually shift perspectives, to “deliver definition 
of and insight into, the question as much as the solution, the 
context as much as the artefact, service or product.” Hill labels 
the context “the meta” and the artifact “the matter.” He urges 
continual oscillation between the two. That Portal emerged 
from the deliberate practice of such emergent and contextual 
iteration is unsurprising. As a company, Valve places a cultural 
premium on “highly collaborative people” with the capability to 
“deconstruct problems on the fly and talk to others as they do 
so, simultaneously being inventive, iterative, creative, talkative 
and reactive” (Valve 2012). Purposeful innovation does not occur 
in a vacuum. It is an ongoing dialog between the maker and 
the player, an ever-shifting perspective focusing upon both the 
­matter—and its necessary attention to detail—and the meta: 
the wider cultural context.
Delicious
Cooking in front of customers changed the way David Chang 
looked at food. Short on money and space in its formative years, 
Chang’s Momofuku Noodle Bar had an open kitchen that meant 
Chang spent his days not only cooking for his diners but watching 
them experience his food. Because of this he instantly knew what 
worked and what did not and would be reimagining and remixing 
his food every day in search of great dishes.
What is a great dish? For Chang (2016), it “hits you like a Whip-It: 
there’s a momentary elation, a brief ripple of pure pleasure in 
the spacetime continuum.” The first dish to consistently taste 

139
Remake/Remodel
this delicious was his Momofuku pork bun. A “slapped together” 
impromptu addition to the menu, the dish saw Chang take some 
pork belly, top it with hoisin sauce, scallions and cucumber and put 
it all inside some steamed bread. It was Chang’s interpretation of 
Peking duck buns and was an instant hit: “People went crazy for 
them. Their faces melted. Word spread and soon people were lin-
ing up for these buns” (2016).
A mediocre cook but a brilliant chef, Chang compensates for his 
lack of rational technique or conceptual genius with a genuine love 
of food, a sense of purpose and an innate curiosity that extends 
beyond the monocultural boundaries of haute cuisine. It is this 
curiosity that led him to his “unified theory of deliciousness”—a 
riff on Douglas R Hofstadter’s theory of strange loops—a math-
ematical notion of systems that “shift from one level of abstraction 
(or structure) to another” before they unexpectedly fold back upon 
themselves, despite feeling like they are “departing ever further 
from one’s origin” (Hofstadter 2007, pp.101–102). A strange loop 
provokes a Powers of Ten-like journey of shifting scales and per-
spectives. And for Chang, his unified theory of deliciousness con-
textualizes that journey: delivering taste sensations to the diner 
in the moment while simultaneously, unexpectedly, transporting 
them back to a past experience or emotion. This deliciousness 
can be easily achieved by serving up something explicitly nostal-
gic, but Chang argues what separates “good dishes from the truly 
slap-yourself-on-the-forehead ones” is the ability to evoke this sort 
of sensation with a dish that looks and smells different but tastes 
overwhelmingly familiar. That is his—­delicious—strange loop. In 
the case of the Momofuku pork bun, Chang took the American 
love of the BLT sandwich and filtered it through his love and 
­understanding of Peking duck buns to create something seemingly 
exotic and unknown yet completely familiar and comforting to the 
Western palate. Steamed bread + fatty meat + cool crunch = trans-
cultural blockbuster (Chang 2016).
Cultural Consumption
The answer to the needlessly complicated question of what we 
should eat is, in fact, so simple Michael Pollan (2009, loc.108) 
believes it can be explained in seven words:
Eat food. Not too much. Mostly plants.
A food journalist, Pollan came to this realization while research-
ing his 2008 book, In Defense of Food. In the follow-up, Food Rules, 

140
Punk Playthings
Pollan states (2009, loc.80) there are only three things you need to 
know about diet and nutrition:
	
1.	 Populations that eat a “Western diet”—lots of processed 
“foods,” additive fats and sugars and refined (modified) 
grains—are more likely to suffer from “Western diseases” 
like type 2 diabetes, obesity and cancer.
	
2.	 Populations that eat a culturally contextual, natural diet—
regardless of geographic location or nutritional composi-
tion—are much less likely to suffer from chronic diseases.
	
3.	 Those who quit the industrialized Western diet see dra-
matic health improvements.
But if it is that simple, why has this harmful industrial rationalization 
of our diet been allowed to happen? Because it is more efficient, 
argues Pollan, “the more you process any food, the more profitable 
it becomes” (2009, loc.105). By way of demonstration, Pollan (2009, 
loc.459) highlights that it was not until “industry took over the jobs 
of washing, peeling, cutting and frying the potatoes—and cleaning 
up the mess” that the French fry achieved ubiquity.
Food Rules presents 64 simple guiding principles for eating healthy 
and happily. For example, rule number 19 states: “If it came from 
a plant, eat it; if it was made in a plant, don’t.” This principle helps 
make a case for eating as a cultural experience, rather than the 
efficient consumption of “industrial novelties” and heavily pro-
cessed “edible food-like substances” (Pollan 2009, loc.142). In the 
latter part of the book, Pollan develops the theory that “why” and 
“how” you eat—the unspoken rituals that govern a person’s (and a 
culture’s) relationship with food and eating—have as much bear-
ing on your health as “what” you eat. To illustrate the point, Pollan 
cites the French paradox: the nutritional mystery of a population 
that consumes “all sorts of fatty foods and washes them down with 
red wine” but is “healthier, slimmer and slightly longer lived” than 
consumers of a typical Western diet (2009, loc.524). For the French, 
Pollan argues, eating is not a rational necessity but a cultural expe-
rience consisting of languid communal meals, small portions, small 
plates, no second helpings and no snacking. No doubt Pollan’s rule 
43 (2009, loc.508) also helps: “Have a glass of wine with dinner.”
A Certain Ratio
Formed in resistance to the opening of Italy’s first McDonald’s, the 
Slow Food movement is a literal reaction to McDonaldization. A 
self-styled “avant-garde’s riposte” to the industrialized “fast life,” 
the movement seeks to shift society away from the fast-food 

141
Remake/Remodel
culture it has become accustomed to with the promotion of three 
interconnected principles: good—quality, flavorsome and healthy 
food; clean—production that does not harm the environment; 
fair—accessible prices for consumers and fair conditions and pay 
for producers.
In the original Slow Food Manifesto (1989), the movement argued 
that  producing food must be considered a gastronomic act. 
Extending this notion to game making begs the question: what if 
we considered producing games to be a playful act, as opposed to 
a rational procedure? How would such a contextual shift reframe 
the process of game making? Would efficiency remain a worthy 
pursuit? Would iteration become a natural consequence of deliber-
ate co-creation? Would we still feel compelled to make rationalized 
games instead of delicious playthings?
Experiences such as Monument Valley, Dear Esther, Threes, Hotline 
Miami and Journey provide a glimpse of an answer. With more in 
common than simply being case studies in this book, each embod-
ies an alternative way of making and selling games in the postin-
dustrial era by:
••
Starting out with bold, visionary ideals but much looser ideas 
of how exactly the experience would look, sound and feel
••
Rejecting mainstream conformity for something more 
experiential
••
Embarking on an inefficient but highly effective journey of 
experimental innovation
••
Using iteration to craft a holistic experience that obsessed 
as much about the wider cultural context as it did its atten-
tion to design detail
••
Developing their own theory of deliciousness that con-
founds expectations and provokes playful, perspective-
shifting experiences that resonate deeper than the average 
game.

142
Punk Playthings
Threes: A Case Study in 
Itinerant Iteration
In early December 2012, Asher Vollmer, Puzzlejuice creator and 
University of Southern California alumnus, opened up Microsoft 
Word and began writing a story. But the page remained blank; he just 
couldn’t get the words out. Frustrated—“it didn’t come easy to me, 
which was annoying because games have always come easy to me” 
(Volmer quoted by Kerr 2014)—he began playing with the arrow keys 
on the keyboard and watching the cursor move around the screen.
Inspired by this simple, playful interaction, Volmer prototyped 
Threes the same night and shared it with his Puzzlejuice collabora-
tor, Greg Wohlwend. Provoked into action, Wohlwend began visual-
izing how this simple yet delightful functional prototype could look 
and feel as an iPhone game. Within a day, Volmer and Wohlwend 
had captured the substance (core gameplay) and style (visual look 
and feel) of Threes. In their own words, they were “fairly close to the 
final product” (Vollmer and Wohlwend 2014).
So, why did it take them another 423 days to release the game? And 
even longer to curate the experience in a way that appealed to the 
widest possible audience?
The Long, Hard, Stupid Way
Designer and illustrator Frank Chimero (2011) speaks of the surpris-
ingly difficult time he had writing his first book and his attempts to 
turn this struggle into a positive lesson instead of “a thing to be 
down about.” To illustrate, Chimero references a scene in the HBO 
show Treme where David Chang—playing himself in a cameo role—
criticizes his Momofuku sous-chef for trying to cut a corner, telling 
him: “We don’t work like that here. We do things the long, hard, 
stupid way” (quoted by Chimero 2011).
In other words: we don’t optimize for efficiency; we do whatever 
it takes to communicate the intended experience best. Chimero 
(2011) explains:
I think that, from the perspective of someone who makes 
things—and I bet that a lot of people out there are also folks 
who make things in some capacity—when you work the long, 
hard, stupid way, it looks a lot like toiling and worrying and 
starting over and scratching good ideas to look for better 
ones. It’s staying up late; it’s waking up early; it’s all of those 

143
Remake/Remodel
sort of romanticized things. All of those actions are inspired 
by just caring a lot. That’s not to say that you can’t be efficient 
and care about your work: I think that’s totally possible. But 
I don’t know how to do that, because I have to do things the 
long, hard, stupid way.
Propelled by the progress of its first 24 hours, Threes set off on 
its own long, hard, stupid way. Vollmer’s original prototype was—
unapologetically—a slide puzzle with numbers. Over the next year, 
its simplicity was diluted with gameplay features such as holes, 
mouths, flags, planets, atoms, arrows and walls (Vanhemert 2014). 
At the same time, its elegance was obfuscated by contrived visual 
metaphors that saw the numbers replaced with rolls of sushi, broc-
coli and “The Argoyles,” argyle-patterned monsters who fed off 
number tiles (Vanhemert 2014).
Vollmer and Wohlwend were always searching for that one thing 
to enrich an experience that was engaging in the moment but 
lacking the timeless “easy to learn, a lifetime to master” quality 
of a great puzzle game. This search proved challenging and other 
­commitments—coupled with diminishing iteration returns—
slowed momentum. Three months after the highs of the first pro-
totype, weighed down with extra rules, features and noise, Vollmer 
concluded “Threes, in its current state, is not worth releasing” 
(Vollmer and Wohlwend 2014). The project was put on hold indefi-
nitely and lay abandoned for the next four months.
In June 2013, Vollmer was sitting in a coffee shop when he had 
a random thought: “What if you’re just combining/upgrading 
Argoyles?” (quoted by Vanhemert 2014). This breakthrough—
later known as “merge mode”—stripped the game back to its 
playful core: slide the like-numbered tiles together to combine. 
Repeat for high score. By stripping away all of the extrane-
ous details accrued over months of experimentation, Vollmer 
had stumbled upon a game that was even simpler, tighter, 
purer, more intuitive than his original prototype. He had found 
Threes as we know it today: a tiny game that you can “play 
over and over  again  and  constantly get better at” (quoted by 
Vanhemert 2014).
This newfound simplicity and clarity of purpose came at a signifi-
cant cost to the charm and character of the experience. Wohlwend 
found it “soulless” (Vollmer and Wohlwend 2014). Stubbornly, 
the duo wanted to deliver a game with “more personality than 
just numbers” and was determined to make the monsters work 
(Vollmer and Wohlwend 2014). Instinctively, Wohlwend believed 

144
Punk Playthings
the game needed warmth and charm to “balance out the harsh-
ness of the rules and gameplay mechanics,” yet the pair struggled 
to find the right balance between visual form—monsters—and 
visual ­function—merge mode (Vollmer and Wohlwend 2014). If 
players could not read the numbers on the tiles, then the game 
was unplayable. But Wohlwend could not find the elusive harmony 
between personality and legibility.
You’ve Got a Friend in Me
Months passed before Zach Gage—Wohlwend’s Ridiculous 
Fishing collaborator and early Threes champion—prompted the 
visual breakthrough (Vollmer and Wohlwend 2014). Why, Gage 
wondered, did the personality of the monsters and the legibility 
of the numbers have to compete against each other on the tile 
face? What if the monsters were displayed on the bottom edge 
of the tile, freeing up the tile’s face to display its number? After 
months of wrong turns and dead ends, Gage’s fresh perspective 
proved the key to balancing form and function. This subtle yet 
significant breakthrough enabled Wohlwend to hone in on the 
final—now iconic—look and feel of Threes in a couple of days. 
After almost a year of hard work—and harder thinking—Threes 
had mutated into the game Vollmer and Wohlwend had always 
been—sometimes unknowingly—striving for. They were almost 
there. Almost ...
In early December 2013, Adam Saltsman (Canabalt) identified an 
exploit. Employing a “corner strategy”—exploiting the corners 
of the game board to cheat the game system—Saltsman could 
achieve ridiculously high scores with little thought or effort. It was 
a fringe strategy but nevertheless a design flaw that undermined 
the game’s potential for meaningful strategy and mastery. After 
brainstorming with Wohlwend, Saltsman and Gage, Vollmer was 
able to patch the exploit by “finding the delicate balance between 
randomness and the tools the players have to mitigate it” (quoted 
by Vanhemert 2014).
The importance of negating the corner strategy would only 
become apparent in the months after release. For now, with this 
final tweak, Threes had arrived at a “beautiful place” (Vollmer 
quoted by Vanhemert 2014). Less than two months later, 423 
long days after the initial prototype, Threes—“the perfect 
mobile game ...  one of the most elegantly designed games since 
Tetris” according to Ken Wong (quoted by Dormehl 2014)—was 
unleashed upon the public.

145
Remake/Remodel
Subtraction and Sensibilities
Upon release, Eurogamer compared Threes to “one of those hipster 
restaurants ...  delightful food ...  terrifyingly smug surroundings” 
(Sorrell 2014). In an otherwise glowing review, it criticized the game 
for its “inevitable” and “profoundly and offensively banal” aesthetic 
(Sorrell 2014).
From the outside, it’s an easy—if lazy—assumption to make. Even 
Wohlwend admits, “it looks like the entire time we were striving 
for simplicity and minimalism” (quoted by Kuchera 2014). But the 
truth was very different. For the majority of the game’s production, 
Vollmer and Wohlwend rejected simplicity and minimalism and 
aimed for something grander. It was not the makers but Threes itself 
that resisted complexity, determined to be nothing more than a 
“cold mathematical brain game” (Vollmer quoted by Webster 2014). 
As Vollmer (quoted by Kuchera 2014) explained when discussing 
Threes release with Polygon:
Every time I added anything like that [new concepts, new 
mechanics, new themes], it always felt unwieldy and unnatu-
ral. It just didn’t want to be there. Every time I took that stuff 
out it felt like a good game again.
This tension between the game and its makers is what makes 
Threes so expressive, comfortable and confident in its skin. When 
Vollmer and Wohlwend finally accepted Threes for what it was, they 
did so with a tremendous clarity of purpose. To get to their desired 
destination, they had taken an extremely long, hard, stupid way. 
Vollmer himself admits that he would not have been confident 
enough to craft Threes as we know it “with just a week of working 
on it” (quoted by Kuchera 2014).
It’s Ain’t What You Do (It’s the Way that You Do It)
In the preface to How Music Works, David Byrne (2012, loc.54) dis-
cusses how the same piece of music can be either “an annoying 
intrusion, abrasive and assaulting, or you could find yourself danc-
ing to it.” For Byrne, it all depends on “where you hear it—in a con-
cert hall or on the street—or what the intention is.” The colliding 
actions, interactions and reactions of the artist, audience, venue, 
medium and mood not only determine if a piece of music delivers 
in its intention but “what it is” (Byrne 2012, loc.56).
The same theory can be applied to games. A playful experience 
is not defined solely by play itself but by the curated microcosm 

146
Punk Playthings
it exists within: How is it distributed and sold? Who is it for? How 
should it make them feel? Where should they experience it? How 
should they perform? What will they see and hear? How will they 
feel? Is it a solo or collective experience?
Typically, game makers avoid such hard questions, rejecting delib-
erate curation for the familiar “make first, think later” approach. 
That’s why many gaming experiences feel disjointed and under-
whelming within the context they are experienced. It speaks to the 
courage and conviction of Vollmer and Wohlwend that Threes—the 
experience rather than the “packaged product”—and all its contrib-
uting inputs and outputs were a constant consideration through-
out development.
Soon after the launch of Threes, Greg Wohlwend (2014) wrote 
a short essay lamenting that a lot of independent game makers 
use their dislike of marketing—“a bad word and a shitty thing”—to 
abdicate all responsibility for connecting with and selling to their 
intended audience. Dismissing the use of traditional marketing and 
disconnected marketing specialists to raise awareness—“old and 
weird and they don’t work for us anyhow”—Wohlwend encouraged 
makers to start showing their work—and stories of how this work 
came to be—as an extension of doing their work.
For Threes, Vollmer and Wohlwend searched for the single sentence 
that would perfectly describe the game—that is, “a tiny puzzle 
that you can play forever”—for eight months. They agonized over 
every screenshot, icon, tagline and tutorial for aesthetic context. 
According to Wohlwend (2014), such decisions were afforded as 
much energy and attention as making the game itself and the result 
was they “managed to make our game that much richer outside of 
the space it resides in.” In 2015, Vollmer (Vollmer and Wohlwend 
2015) elaborated on this process:
To spread the word about Threes! we kept everything small … 
That’s essentially all we do, though we do it with a lot of heart 
and thought:
••
The emails that we send out to people had our custom 
animated gif explaining the game (you can see it on 
our Threesgame.com website).
••
The website that we put together went through about 
5 revisions.
••
The tagline “a tiny game you can play forever” went 
through hundreds of revisions. We were changing it 
from the time we decided on Threes! as a name (about 
6? months before launch) until the night before launch.

147
Remake/Remodel
We kept things small and understated. Not adding too many 
messages, reviews or images. Nothing flashy. Just Threes!. It’s 
tiny. So we stuck to that and stayed true to it.
Attack of the Clones
Just 21 days after Threes was released, a game called 1024 appeared. 
The same tactile interface, game mechanics and visual minimalism 
that characterized Threes were all present. There were some subtle 
differences—superficial oversimplifications and ­misinterpretations—
but it was undoubtedly a clone. It was also “not very fun” in the opin-
ion of Vollmer and Wohlwend (2014).
Shortly after, 2048 appeared, an iteration of 1024. Freely available 
and open source, 2048 quickly gained mainstream popularity. In 
its first two months, more than 23 million people would play the 
game (Cirulli 2014). Initially, many people used the 2048 source 
code to create “throwaway” remixes. As a pop culture project, it 
was fascinating, spawning weird and wonderful mutations such 
as Numberwang 2048, Large Hadron Collider 2048 and Tetris 2048. 
All flippant, fun, playful memes. But the spirit of the commons 
soon gave way to commerce. Soon app stores were flooded with 
2048 clones and straight-up counterfeit versions of Threes, all car-
rying their own monetization model, typically in-app advertising 
or microtransactions. One counterfeit product even launched six 
days before Threes on the Google Play Store, causing Threes to 
be later dismissed by players as a clone of 2048. For Vollmer and 
Wohlwend, “that all stung pretty bad” (2014).
Subsequently, Vollmer and Wohlwend (2014) have spoken of 
their concern that due to the speed of counterfeiting today, “it 
seems tiny games like Threes are destined to be lost in the under-
brush of copycats, me-toos and iterators.” A pessimistic view 
that, perhaps, ignores the unfair competitive advantage that 
mitigated the impact 2048 had on Threes and its long-term posi-
tion. Threes is an experience with an aesthetic confidence and 
context, designed for a very discerning audience. It was a beau-
tiful, lovingly crafted “gift” for its audience, as Frank Chimero 
would say. Where 2048 is easily beatable due to the presence of 
the aforementioned “corner strategy” exploit, Threes carries an 
unmatched level of personality and potential for mastery. 2048 
is a dumbed-down derivative that did not take the long, hard, 
stupid road; as a result, it severely lacks contextual awareness. 
By taking the shortcut, its creator had no way of knowing the 
thousands of tiny decisions that gave Threes its simple veneer, 
hidden depth and timeless quality of experience.

148
Punk Playthings
Frees!
The stellar success of 2048 left a bitter taste in the mouths of 
Vollmer and Wohlwend. Not only because it could not exist with-
out Threes—and all of the inspiration, energy and iteration that 
went into making it—but also because it served as “a constant, 
overwhelming reminder of our mistake” (Vollmer and Wohlwend 
2015). Confounding their own modest expectations, Threes was 
a stellar success. In the year following its release, the game won 
numerous awards and was downloaded more than a million 
times. No mean feat for a $2.99 paid app in the App Store. But 
successful as Threes was, there was the inescapable feeling that 
it had not fulfilled its potential. For Vollmer, the greater success 
of their “bastard offspring” exposed the “potential for Threes 
and the potential audience and how big it could be” (quoted by 
Cameron 2015). Being behind a paywall had the greatest impact 
on audience size for both Threes ($2.99) and 2048 (free); it was 
the critical factor that “allowed 2048 to eat our lunch” (Vollmer 
and Wohlwend 2015).
Despite the download disparity, Vollmer believed Threes to be the 
better experience: “the original, the best and the game that will 
stick” (Webster 2015). The challenge was to figure out how best to 
find the “right solution for how to bring Threes to a wider audience” 
in a free-to-play model that upheld its style and sensibilities rather 
than just copied the banner advertising model of 2048 (Vollmer 
quoted by Webster 2015).
Along with its brilliant gameplay and beautiful style, a significant 
part of the game’s appeal amongt Apple connoisseurs like John 
Gruber was that it had “no in-app purchase shenanigans” (Gruber 
2014). The challenge Vollmer and Wohlwend faced was how to set 
Threes free without cheapening the aesthetic or undermining the 
experience they had worked so long and hard to establish. Vollmer 
considered a lot of traditional free-to-play games to be “super 
toxic,” encouraging players to avoid supporting or respecting the 
makers of the games they play (quoted by Webster 2015). At the 
other end of the spectrum, he felt games that tried to pursue an 
ethical free-to-play model failed because they gave too much of 
their experience away for free.
To deliver the nicest possible free-to-play experience for Threes, 
both in-app purchases and banner ads were explored then 
discarded because they represented “the worst experience … 
cheap” (Vollmer quoted by Cameron 2015). In the end, Vollmer 
elected to remix one of oldest free-to-play models around: “you 
earn credits by watching [video] ads and then spend them on 

149
Remake/Remodel
rounds of Threes, sort of like an arcade machine” (quoted by 
Webster 2015).
One month after the release of Threes Free, the game had doubled 
its daily income and once again iterated itself toward success 
(Vollmer 2015). For Vollmer (quoted by Cameron 2015), it was a vic-
tory for the craftsman over the copycat:
I would like [mobile game development] to get nicer and less 
antagonistic. The incredibly positive response that we’ve 
received makes it very clear that players are aware of how 
terrible most of these models are, even if they still generate 
a lot of money for a lot of people. Players are now becoming 
more educated about how bad that could be. The more we 
pursue player positive revenue models, the more people will 
be happy to engage with it and the better it will be for the 
industry as a whole.
Punk Provocations
••
What if you stopped indulging yourself and listened to what 
your game wanted instead?
••
What if you stripped your game back to its first playful 
principles?
••
What single adjective describes the experience you’re try-
ing to create?

150
Punk Playthings
FIGURE 3.4  Sushi-themed tiles mock-up from the development of 
Threes. (Courtesy of Greg Wohlwend, Threes Artist, https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AThrees_development_process_art_
mockup_10.png.)

151
Remake/Remodel
FIGURE 3.5  Final version, with tiny faces beneath the tiles, mock-up 
from the development of Threes. (Courtesy of Greg Wohlwend, Threes 
Artist, 
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3AThrees_devel-
opment_process_art_mockup_26.png.)

152
Punk Playthings
Dear Esther: A Case Study in 
Challenging Assumptions
When a professor usually receives a speculative research grant 
from the UK Arts & Humanities Research Council, the assumption 
is that their findings will be captured in a dry academic paper. Dan 
Pinchbeck made a game.
Dear Esther—the game—is a provocative story about love, loss, 
guilt and redemption.
Dear Esther—the production—is a provocative story about chal-
lenging assumptions of what games are, how they are made and 
who can make them.
What if …
In Dear Esther, Pinchbeck explored both the limits and the limita-
tions of the first-person shooter (FPS) genre. In a medium domi-
nated by descriptive, procedural storytelling, how would a game 
feel if its story made no logical sense? In a genre characterized by 
twitch mechanics and visceral machismo, how would a FPS feel 
when stripped of its understood gameplay loops and preconcep-
tions (Briscoe and Pinchbeck 2012a)?
Storytelling in games can be heavy on exposition; gamers expect 
everything to immediately make sense and makers are only too 
happy to explain. Such conservatism, in Pinchbeck’s opinion 
(Briscoe and Pinchbeck 2012b), consistently reduces story to the 
“weakest point of the game”:
It’s really quite an artificial thing. If you look at other art forms, 
if you look at something like a Jackson Pollock painting, it’s not 
important which paint dribble came first or which order you 
should be looking at; it’s just a whole experience.
Do It Yourself
Games research raises questions that usually “fall outside the 
kinds of media produced by the industry” (Pinchbeck 2008). 
Consequently, researchers have two choices: “discuss these ques-
tions theoretically” or “take advantage of the rich culture of mod-
ding and availability of game engines and try and build media 
ourselves to tackle them” (Pinchbeck 2008). Dan Pinchbeck chose 
the latter approach—­labelling it “development-led research”—and 

153
Remake/Remodel
set about creating a Half-Life 2 mod. Keenly aware of the research 
team’s “lack of skills and know-how in terms of the reality of making 
games,” Pinchbeck (2014b) felt the hobbyist, remix-like approach of 
modding would allow his team to bypass technical distraction and 
focus on the storytelling experience. And the DIY ethic went beyond 
self-awareness and tools of choice. Rather than jump straight into 
working inside Source—Valve’s Half-Life 2 engine used by the mod-
ding ­community—the first design of Dear Esther’s Hebridean island 
was simply a “massive lump of clay on a desk in a disused University 
office” that Pinchbeck carved paths and bored tunnels in to figure 
out the experience (Pinchbeck 2014a). Music would play a significant 
part in the storytelling experience, so Pinchbeck enlisted longtime 
collaborator Jessica Curry to score Dear Esther. Rather than retrofit 
the soundtrack at the end of development, Curry wrote parts of the 
score at the very outset; these tracks were then used to inspire and 
inform prototyping, design and storytelling (Pinchbeck 2014a).
Dear Esther’s story is deliberately cryptic. Influenced by William 
S Burroughs, Pinchbeck wanted players to be intrigued and 
immersed within an emotional experience, not engaged in a literal, 
linear one. To subvert the assumptions of an FPS the game was 
stripped of explicit interactivity, forcing the players to immerse 
themselves in the environment and experience rather than directly 
play with it. The result is a “game” where the only (implicit) objec-
tive is to “explore a Hebridean Island, listening to a troubled man 
read a series of letters to a woman named Esther” (Wikipedia 
2016). No tasks, no puzzles, no sense of progression, no rewards. 
Most importantly, no fun.
“If you’re looking for fun—I’ve no idea why you’re playing Dear 
Esther in the first place.”
Lewis Denby
Touched By the Hand of Mod: Dear Esther (2009)
Writing in Rock, Paper, Shotgun, Lewis Denby praised Dear Esther for 
exploring an emotion “few games dare to touch”—unhappiness—
and challenging a gaming monoculture that had become “a little 
too comfortable with enjoying everything we play” (2009).
Who Remixes the Remix?
The release of Dear Esther inspired longtime modder Rob Briscoe. 
An environment artist at EA DICE, Briscoe (2009) had just shipped 
Mirror’s Edge and was looking for a hobby project to occupy 
the six-month sabbatical he had planned to recover from the 

154
Punk Playthings
“crazy burnout” of an 18-month AAA crunch. As well as exhaus-
tion, working on Mirror’s Edge had “spawned some interesting ideas 
about how environmental design could be used to tell a story” and 
to “connect to the player on an emotional level” (Briscoe 2012a).
Briscoe (2009) likened the original rendition of Dear Esther to an 
“interactive painting or story” rather than just another game but 
felt the environment art detracted from the immersive experience. 
This was a weakness that—with his Source engine experience, 
passion for the modding community, AAA production standards 
and desire to tell stories through environmental design—Briscoe 
(2012a) was uniquely positioned to address:
I realized that this was the perfect side-project for me; with 
an overhaul of the visuals and some polish to the design it 
could be something really special and it would also allow me 
to experiment with all of the ideas I’d had stewing in my head.
Briscoe’s intention was to take the groundwork of the original ren-
dition and remake it as a fully fledged, production-quality mod, a 
notion that Dan Pinchbeck was fully supportive of when Briscoe 
pitched the idea.
The Long and Winding Road
Briscoe initially estimated it would take only a matter of months 
to remake Dear Esther. Free from his EA commitments and with 
enough savings to support himself, Briscoe began exploring envi-
ronmental design ideas, finding visual direction and stress testing 
the limitations of the engine in earnest. By the summer of 2009, 
Briscoe (2012a) was “happy with how it was shaping up” but increas-
ingly aware his initial time estimation was unrealistic. Conscious of 
dwindling savings, Briscoe briefly considered abandoning the proj-
ect and returning to full-time employment but was persuaded to 
continue by the enthusiasm and excitement shown by the mod-
ding community. They were not the only people impressed with his 
work-in-progress; it was around this time Briscoe (2012a) rejected 
an unsolicited job offer from Valve:
On the flight home [from Valve] it began to dawn on me that 
there was something really special about this project, in a 
short time it had managed to rally together a large commu-
nity of really passionate people and caught the attention of 
a company I had long since admired. As tempting as it was 
to take the job, I found my curiosity to see what the project 

155
Remake/Remodel
could grow into was much stronger. I’d never felt as passion-
ate about a project than I did at this point it time and I was 
determined to finish it, no matter what.
Re-energized and reassured that his savings could stretch to 
12 months of full-time focus—maybe 18 months if he really tight-
ened his belt—Briscoe continued building out his remake. By June 
2010, he had added a lot of his “ideas, designs and interpretations” 
into the game and reached out to Dan Pinchbeck for reassurance 
that the remake was not “drifting too far from his [Pinchbeck’s] 
original vision” (Briscoe 2012a). Pinchbeck was not only supportive 
of the iterations but now convinced that the remake was too good 
to ignore and suggested licensing Source outright and releasing the 
remake as a standalone title rather than a mod. Briscoe was appre-
hensive. He saw the remake as a hobbyist project, deliberately free 
from commercial pressures, distractions and considerations. Did 
he want—or need—the heightened expectations and formal obli-
gations? How would the supportive modding community react if 
Dear Esther abandoned them to turn professional?
“In my next development update, I floated the question of what 
the communities’ thoughts would be on Dear Esther going indie, 
with the intention of making my final decision based on that feed-
back. Overall, the response that came back was resoundingly pos-
itive; almost everyone was in favour of it and some even vigilantly 
demanding it!”
Rob Briscoe (2012a)
The community response convinced Briscoe. The Chinese Room—
the notional “studio” moniker Pinchbeck used to release his 
­development-led research projects—was formalized and Dear 
Esther was suddenly a “real” project. Pinchbeck—still working full-
time at the University of Portsmouth—handled the “licensing, 
­funding, paperwork, etc.,” which in turn freed Briscoe to concen-
trate on finishing the remake. If everything went to plan, Dear Esther 
would be released before the end of 2010 with a small amount of 
Briscoe’s savings still intact (Briscoe 2012a).
Things did not go to plan.
Please, Release Me
At the start of 2011, things were “not looking good” (Briscoe 
2012a). Pinchbeck had secured funding through the University of 
Portsmouth—who would retain the intellectual property—but 

156
Punk Playthings
Dear Esther still did not have a commercial Source engine license. 
Valve rarely licenses its engine for standalone games, so negotia-
tions were not a priority and painfully slow. The software giant was 
sympathetic to The Chinese Room’s independent—professional 
hobbyist—status, but arriving at a mutually agreeable licensing 
fee took a long time (Briscoe 2012a). Eventually, Valve and the 
university reached an agreement. All that remained was for the 
contract to be “stamped and paid for by the university” (Briscoe 
2012a). Confident, The Chinese Room went ahead and announced 
the forthcoming standalone release of Dear Esther to the press and 
their community, unaware of what was to follow:
“In March we were hit with a devastating blow; we’d lost our fund-
ing. To cut a long story short, the University’s legal department 
had some issues with some of the standard liability clauses in 
the Engine License and refused to sign it. Basically, if there was a 
chance that someone, somewhere, could sue them over the game, 
they didn’t want to take the risk and after weeks of Dan trying 
to cut through all of the bureaucratic red tape, they eventually 
pulled out completely.”
Rob Briscoe (2012a)
After two years of hard work, Dear Esther was in limbo. Briscoe’s 
savings had dwindled to almost nothing and he was forced to sell 
his possessions and live out of a single room in his apartment to 
save on heating and electricity. Just as it began to look like game 
over, Pinchbeck executed his Plan B. Already in discussions with 
the Indie Fund about investment for a separate project when the 
university deal collapsed, he decided to pitch them Dear Esther 
(Briscoe 2012a).
The Indie Fund is a benevolent collective of successful game mak-
ers on a mission to “support the growth of games as a medium by 
helping indie developers get financially independent and stay finan-
cially independent” (Indie Fund 2017). Members of the collective 
include Kellee Santiago, Jonathan Blow and Rami Ismail. According 
to Briscoe, the Indie Fund was reluctant at first—concerned by the 
potential commercial value of a mod remake—but were won over 
when given a chance to play Dear Esther. Just a few weeks later, 
the paperwork was signed and the monies transferred. By sum-
mer 2011, The Chinese Room not only had a full Source license but 
enough remaining funds to commission Jessica Curry to remaster 
the original soundtrack. Pinchbeck even persuaded the University 
of Portsmouth to transfer over Dear Esther’s intellectual property 

157
Remake/Remodel
rights to The Chinese Room. All that remained was for Briscoe to 
port the game over to the latest Source engine code. But moving 
from the Orange Box to the Portal 2 version of the engine left Dear 
Esther “completely broken” and Briscoe had no choice but to start 
living off an extended overdraft and credit card debt while he 
restored the project to working order (2012a).
Pinchbeck (2013) estimated Dear Esther would need to sell around 
20,000 copies to return the Indie Fund investment and modestly 
compensate Briscoe and Curry. But if the game were less success-
ful, Briscoe (2012a) would be left in serious debt:
In retrospect it was the stupidest thing I’ve ever done, at the 
time I had no income and if the game failed, no way of paying 
it off. It was irrational, but at the time, all I could think about 
was finishing the game and keeping a roof over my head in 
the meantime.
Feeling the pressure, Briscoe began working 18-hour shifts, seven 
days a week to finish the game as quickly as possible. By October, 
Dear Esther had been submitted for consideration at the 2012 
International Games Festival (IGF) and by November it was in beta. 
In February 2012—three years after Briscoe began his remake—
Dear Esther was finally released on Steam. It became profitable in 
just five hours, much to Briscoe’s (2012a) surprise and relief:
It finally felt like all of the hard work, blood, sweat and tears 
had been worthwhile, but most importantly, that the instinct 
I’d felt all along that there was something special about Dear 
Esther was proving to be true.
One month later, Dear Esther won the prize for Excellence in Visual 
Arts at the IGF ceremony during the Games Developer Conference 
in San Francisco.
“No-one got paid for Dear Esther until release. Rob lived off ASDA 
pot noodles, Jess and I were both holding down other jobs. We 
paid our freelance coder and Nigel, but if the game hadn’t sold, 
we’d have sunk two years into it for nothing. Doing it for the money 
is always a bad reason for doing it, but watching the figures on 
the first night of sales and realizing that the risk had paid off was 
one of the most amazing feelings ever. We still can’t quite believe 
how many units it sold in that first 24 hours.”
Dan Pinchbeck (2014a)

158
Punk Playthings
Ascension
When setting out to remake Dear Esther, Briscoe (2012b) assumed 
that to “really draw people into the visuals” the environment 
would have to be as photorealistic as possible. But the practical 
constraints of the engine—the photorealistic approach was a per-
formance killer—provoked him into experimenting with a more 
illustrative style. Drawing inspiration from impressionism and its 
captivating mix of reality and surreality, Briscoe (2012b) developed 
a naturalistic and painterly style that concentrated on immer-
sion and perception rather than “HDR, motion blur or JJ Abrams 
lens flare” and other photorealistic tropes. Briscoe even coined 
the phrase “emotional signposting” to emphasize that the job of 
the environment design went beyond conveying orientation and 
­information. Its  purpose was to “create a framework of feeling 
for the playing,” subtly steering how the experience feels and mak-
ing the player feel in the moment (Pinchbeck 2014a).
Just as integral to this emotional signposting was Jessica Curry’s 
music. Its sparse and pastoral otherworldliness juxtaposed won-
derfully with Briscoe’s picturesque landscapes and Pinchbeck’s 
ambiguous storytelling. Curry’s work—which would go on to win 
a host of awards—was remarkable. First, the choral composi-
tions were at odds with Curry’s spiritual outlook: “I am an athe-
ist who absolutely loves church music (try and unpick that one!). 
They say that the devil gets all the best tunes—well, I would dis-
agree” (quoted by Smal 2016). Second, it emerged from a position 
of blissful ignorance. A graduate of the National Film and Television 
School, Curry had never scored a video game before Dear Esther, 
so unknowingly broke a host of game soundtrack “best ­practices.” 
Third, Curry’s arrangements were entirely interpretive—­provoked 
by her ­personal experiences of playing the game—rather than a 
response to explicit direction from Pinchbeck. Curry did not even 
visit the Hebrides to research the game, instead expressing an 
imagined psychogeographic interpretation of the island.
“Jessica’s work with the music has really brought the whole game 
together in a way I never thought possible. She’s done some amaz-
ing things with the music to help portray the atmosphere and 
emotions throughout the journey across the island. I don’t think 
I’ve ever seen music establish such a symbiotic relationship with 
the environment and story before, so for me it’s really ground-
breaking stuff. The music is no longer just a backdrop, but an inte-
gral part of the storytelling process.”
Briscoe and Pinchbeck (2012b)

159
Remake/Remodel
Players Are People Too
Dear Esther stands accused of many things and pretentiousness 
is often one of them. But is that a negative? Games are often too 
eager to fit neatly into a box and signpost their supposed authen-
ticity. Already stripped of the assumptive machismo and mechan-
ics of an FPS, Pinchbeck (2014b) saw no reason for Dear Esther to 
underestimate its players: “gamers are smart and you shouldn’t 
talk down to them. They can take big ideas and complex stories 
and they are hungry for interesting, new experiences.”
Working to the mantra that “if it is for everyone, then it is for no-one,” 
The Chinese Room did not assume their players were morons but 
trusted them to be smart, curious and imaginative people seeking 
out uncompromising emotional experiences (Curry 2012). This trust 
manifested not just in the high concept but in the brevity of inter-
activity and the pace of storytelling. An intimate experience, Dear 
Esther enables players to relate to the story and its characters “on a 
human level rather than as agents of action” (Stuart 2016).
“We think this is one of the key reasons why Dear Esther flew. 
You could feel the passion in the game and it didn’t make con-
cessions. For every person throwing their toys out of the pram 
about some weird ‘is it a game or not?’ debate, which I honestly, 
genuinely, still find utterly baffling, there was a building crowd of 
fans who took Dear Esther for what it was, a story told with heart 
and conviction.”
Dan Pinchbeck (2014b)
But Is It a Game?
Dear Esther has enjoyed widespread critical and commercial suc-
cess, receiving several prestigious awards and selling over a million 
copies. Yet one question, playfully summarized by the Guardian’s 
Keith Stuart (2016), persists:
Stripped of traditional ludic elements, walking sims like Dear 
Esther give the player room to really investigate the feel of 
every location.
There are no puzzles, no enemies. You’re alone on a remote 
Hebridean island with little evidence of life beyond the cawing 
gulls and the odd glimpse of a shadowy figure on the horizon. 
There is one path to follow, which guides you over the dunes 
and into caves lit by phosphorescent flora. The story unravels, 

160
Punk Playthings
not through the completion of tasks, but through a ponder-
ing, poetic narration and scattered letters.
Are you playing a game?
For Pinchbeck (2013), the answer is a resounding yes; his argument 
being games are “architectures for an emotional experience” and 
not spoonfed “exercise[s] in mechanics, in pattern manipulation, 
in goals and solutions.” Pinchbeck (2016) argues it is reductive to 
equate a lack of visceral stimulation or overt interactivity with a 
lesser experience:
I think it’s one of those things that once you start unpick-
ing it, it starts coming apart at the seams. If it’s all about a 
game has to have mechanics well then you start to go, well, 
Space Invaders, is that less of a game than Far Cry because 
it’s got fewer mechanics? Or, if a game is about having a fail 
state then does that mean that a game that doesn’t punish 
you for dying, like a Far Cry game where it happens really 
trivially, does that make it less of a game than Bloodborne 
where the stakes for death are higher? Whichever way you 
come at it, you start unpicking those strands and it doesn’t 
really make sense apart from the “feeling” of what a game 
ought to do.
The success of Dear Esther and the flurry of thought-provoking 
“­walking sims” that followed in its wake—Proteus, The Stanley 
Parable, Firewatch, et al.—has not provided a definitive answer to 
Stuart’s loaded question. But it has highlighted the absurdity of the 
­argument. The failure to question the assumptions of what consti-
tutes “playing a game” is a failure of imagination. Eclectic skeptics like 
The Chinese Room not only look at the diverse world around them 
and see the opportunity to bring interesting, previously unexplored, 
playful experiences to life, they also challenge gaming orthodoxy and 
exceptionalism in the process. Genuinely emotional playful experi-
ences are not about mechanistic doing but resonant feeling. You can 
only love what you feel.
Practical Provocations
••
What if you stripped an established genre of its game 
mechanics and preconceptions?
••
What if you remixed rather than reinvented the wheel?
••
What if you told a story through your environment and 
ambiance?

161
Remake/Remodel
FIGURE 3.6  Dear Esther concept art by Ben Andrews. (Reprinted with permission from The Chinese Room, ©thechine-
seroom 2017. All rights reserved.)

162
Punk Playthings
FIGURE 3.7  A screenshot from Dear Esther. (Reprinted with permission from The Chinese Room, ©thechineseroom 
2017. All rights reserved.)

163
Chapter 4
Success Doesn’t Suck
Abstract
Be a sellout! The modern game maker must simultaneously be the 
playful provocateur, the sincere trickster, the spellbinding story-
teller, the community builder and the artisanal merchant. Being 
just one out of five—the isolated, stubborn maker—is no longer 
enough. Define yourself by vision and purpose rather than rigid 
business models or orthodox corporatism; prioritize building net-
works of passionate patrons over mindlessly building more games. 
Cultivate and curate on-demand, in-demand playful experiences.
This chapter argues that there is nothing glamorous in the clichés 
of the starving artist or the incorruptible, unsullied indie dev. We 
do live in a post-McLuhan world and the stories of how your things 
get made and how people find them are as significant to the experi-
ence as the game itself (Temkin n.d.).

164
Punk Playthings
It’s Just a Business Model
“Our challenges seem complex. It will always be this way. But as 
long as we remember our first principles and believe in ourselves, 
the future will always be ours.”
Ronald Reagan
Farewell Address to the Nation (1989)
Be singular about your purpose, not your business model. Business 
models are impermanent, based on assumptions that may or may 
not be true. Remember, today’s truths are tomorrow’s fallacies. Don’t 
get too attached and set in your ways. Test assumptions and explore 
new options. Keep your eye on the ball. Be nimble and adaptable. 
Try different models for different projects. Be the disruptor, not the 
disrupted. Purpose and principles give the flexibility to overcome 
uncertainty. Best practice is the last refuge of the soon-to-be extinct.
Imagine
“A journey is like marriage. The certain way to be wrong is to think 
you control it.”
John Steinbeck
Travels with Charley (1962)
All successful enterprises need a business model. According to Lean 
practitioner and author Ash Maurya, developing the right business 
model is initially more important than developing the right product 
or service. For Maurya, the business model is the product (2012, p.7). 
Even so, widespread misconceptions persist about the nature of 
business models. The antidote to such confusion might be to identify 
what a business model is not. For example, it is not a complex math-
ematical formula plotted on a whiteboard or spreadsheet that dic-
tates all future action; it is instead a compelling story that describes 
how an enterprise works (Magretta 2002). A business model also 
should not be confused with a strategy. A competitive strategy out-
lines how your business will outperform the competition; a business 
model is a set of principles describing what your business is and 
how it will run (Magretta 2002). Businesses need to know who their 
customers are and what they value; they must know what they will 
get paid for and what economic logic will underpin how they deliver 
value to customers at an appropriate cost (Drucker 1994; Magretta 
2002). A successful business model identifies a better way of doing 

165
Success Doesn’t Suck
this than existing alternatives and tells a more compelling story in 
the process. And like the best stories, great business models are a 
product of the human imagination.
Peter Drucker identified that business models—or “theories of busi-
ness” as he called them—are based on assumptions. He argued 
these fall into three categories: assumptions about the environment 
or context a business exists in define what it gets paid for; assump-
tions about the specific mission of the business determine what 
success looks like; assumptions about the competencies needed to 
achieve this mission identify where a business must excel to become 
successful (1994). All these assumptions must integrate success-
fully to work. But assumptions can be mistaken or invalidated by 
environmental change. That’s why Steve Blank’s The Four Steps to 
the Epiphany, Alexander Osterwalder’s Business Model Canvas, Eric 
Ries’s Lean Startup and Ash Maurya’s Running Lean have become so 
popular. These approaches recognize the importance of business 
models and advocate identifying and testing assumptions to give an 
enterprise the best chance of success. But even if you find the right 
model at startup, all theories of business are perishable and even-
tually become obsolete (Drucker 1994). To become successful then 
maintain success and avoid disruption, businesses must continually 
monitor and test their assumptions. You must be willing to iterate 
or even abandon your approach when circumstances dictate, or use 
alternative approaches for new products or services. If you diagnose 
problems early, you might sustain a business through incremental 
innovations. But if these innovations end up delivering smaller and 
smaller returns, you might need to do something more drastic. The 
most important thing is always to be clear about your central pur-
pose and principles. If you know your destination, you can always 
adapt the route or change the mode of transport to get there.
In and Out The Eagle
“We never wrote a manifesto but we had one. The Eagle would be the 
sort of place where you could get a decent pint and a decent steak 
sandwich. There would be no bullshit. No optics. No tabs. No tips. 
And we would never forget it’s a pub. It was fairly simple.”
Michael Belben
Co-founder of The Eagle (2017)
Michael Belben and David Eyre were fed up. After working in 
high-end restaurants in London’s Covent Garden throughout the 
1980s, they now wanted a restaurant of their own, but rents were 

166
Punk Playthings
prohibitively high. They were also fed up with the dire food mostly 
available in London, particularly in the pubs they loved (Belben 
2017). Unless you could afford upmarket restaurants like Alistair 
Little, Kensington Place, or The River Cafe (infamously known for 
“peasant food at plutocrat prices”), the choice was poor in those 
days. Belben and Eyre worked in good restaurants but couldn’t 
afford to eat in them. Frustrated, the two friends decided they 
would open somewhere they—and people like them—would want 
to go. It would have food similar to The River Cafe but prices would 
be considerably lower. It would be a place where you could get sim-
ple but intelligent food without the frills. And it would have to be in 
a cheap area of London. In 1990, they found where.
Standing stoically on the corner of Farringdon Road and Baker’s 
Row in Clerkenwell, The Eagle is an attractive but relatively unre-
markable London pub. Unless you know its history, you could 
almost be forgiven for walking past without a second glance. When 
Belben and Eyre discovered it, the pub was struggling to keep 
the doors open. At that time many London pubs were doing the 
same. The damage was often self-inflicted. Pubs could be unwel-
coming places then, especially if you were female. They ran mostly 
on cigarette smoke, stale beer fumes and unbridled testosterone. 
And even if you could get food, it was usually terrible. Bangers and 
mash featuring sausages of unknown origin and congealed gravy, 
or a ploughman’s lunch of processed ham, third-rate cheddar and 
a solitary pickled onion exhibiting signs of rot. Belben and Eyre 
were not the only ones fed up. Something had to change.
And change it did. In 1989, the UK Monopolies and Mergers 
Commission ordered the big breweries to sell over 14,000 “tied” 
pubs to increase competition (Slade 1998). Belben and Eyre knew 
this was their opportunity. If they could find a decent pub with a 
cheap lease, maybe they could afford to open their restaurant. 
They heard about The Eagle and headed to Clerkenwell to inves-
tigate. Now one of London’s most desirable and expensive areas, 
in 1990, Clerkenwell was seriously down at heel. Belben recalls the 
reason they chose that pub in that area was simply economics: “It 
was all we could afford. It was cheap because this area was deso-
late then” (Belben 2017). This was a risky approach. Not only would 
Belben and Eyre be opening a restaurant in a pub, but they would 
be doing it in the middle of a recession, in the middle of a gastro-
nomic wasteland, miles from the bright lights of the West End.
The two friends were under no illusions it would be easy. With little 
capital, they had to do everything on the cheap. Friends helped 
clean the place up and do some basic decorating. The crockery and 
cutlery came from car boot sales. The furniture came from similar 

167
Success Doesn’t Suck
sources, with 40 church chairs sourced from a British Legion sale 
Belben drove past while in the Peak District. None of it matched. 
Belben (2017) recalls that what became The Eagle’s much-copied 
aesthetic was simply a creative response to financial restrictions: 
“It was deliberate. I’d always been a great believer in making do but 
doing it in a stylish way.” There would be no tablecloths, no credit 
cards, no reservations, no jukebox, no tabs and no tips. Staff would 
receive a decent wage—Belben and Eyre had both experienced the 
horrors of surviving solely on tips—but service would be paired 
back and upselling banned: “We didn’t want it to get expensive. We 
didn’t do starters. We didn’t do puddings. It was the ­concept ... we 
called it ‘one plate dining.’ You want a pint or a nice glass of wine 
and a plate of great food. And any other selling traditionally done by 
waiters was out” (Belben 2017).
Eyre would initially produce the food—soups, hearty dishes with 
proper sausages from the Italian deli next door, Bife Ana (the sig-
nature marinated steak sandwich that remains on the menu today) 
and fresh salads—from the kitchen in a tiny room behind the bar. 
Stews and casseroles would be cooked in the upstairs flat (Belben 
2017). Instead of menus, chalkboards would announce the food. 
The offer would also be adapted for each service to minimize waste; 
if Eyre ran out of an ingredient for one dish, he would reimagine 
what he had left into something else. Olive oil would replace butter 
on the tables, sea salt and freshly ground pepper would oust indus-
trial condiments in sachets. A short, satisfying and affordable wine 
list—plus a couple of good rums—would augment a few decent 
beers. In January 1991, the two friends emptied out their pockets 
to put some small change in the till, then opened the doors.
The Eagle was an immediate success. Belben had started an “infor-
mal campaign” a few months earlier by sending friends and jour-
nalists a Christmas card in comic form, announcing The Eagle as a 
futuristic antidote to bad pubs and their bad food. Then he made 
a flyer and spent days pounding the streets of Clerkenwell. He vis-
ited the Guardian newspaper and every other office he could find, 
encouraging receptionists to come for lunch and bring their work-
mates (Belben 2017). He also tirelessly phoned food critics, cajoling 
them to visit an area they had probably never been to, profession-
ally or otherwise. There was no formal advertising, only dedicated 
hustling. But it paid off. The receptionists came and brought their 
colleagues. And in February, Emily Green from The Independent ven-
tured to Farringdon Road and wrote the pub’s first review, describ-
ing “voguish Italian food” and quality ingredients (Green 1991). This 
enticed more critics and regular customers through the doors. And 
the former loved the place almost as much as the latter. Soon it 

168
Punk Playthings
became noticeable how many women were regulars, rare in pubs 
at the time. The great food, reasonable prices, utilitarian service, 
casual atmosphere and stripped-back aesthetic made The Eagle 
both affordable and welcoming to everyone.
The Eagle was the antithesis of snobby, expensive fine dining. Here 
people could see “all of the costs were on the plate, so they knew 
they were getting value for money” (Belben 2017). This was crucial 
in the middle of a deep recession when expense accounts were 
slashed and lunch became funded from the personal pocket. Just 
three months after opening, the pub had banked more money 
than had been predicted for a year. Belben and Eyre now extended 
the kitchen into the bar to allow everything to be cooked in the 
pub. This also added a bit of theatre as flames flashed and meat 
sizzled from the grills. More food critics arrived, including Jonathan 
Meades from The Times. Meades praised The Eagle for its “big fla-
vours and rough edges”—later the title of its seminal cookbook—
and quickly perceived that it heralded a revolution in eating out. 
He thought it was “certain to be copied sooner or later ...  ineptly 
copied, of course, with no understanding of what makes it tick. It is 
not a former pub, it still is a pub—but one whose owners have writ-
ten the rules” (Meades 1991). He could not have known how pre-
scient his words were. A few short years on, critic Charles Campion 
reviewed The Eagle for the London Evening Standard magazine, 
where he infamously described it with a hyphenated portmanteau: 
“gastro-pub.” A business model had been born.
The term gastropub is today redundant, sometimes even used 
pejoratively. It is often perceived as an embarrassing hangover 
from the 1990s, on a par with Britpop, the “Rachel cut,” and Jamie 
Oliver. But the redundancy of the term is a result of The Eagle’s 
innovations. In the years following its opening, new food-focused 
pubs proliferated across London. All of them looked to The Eagle as 
a conceptual template and business model. First, a rundown pub 
with character would be found. Then it was given a lick of paint, 
filled with mismatched furniture, plates and cutlery, plus a couple 
of old standard lamps with judiciously tilted shades. Chalkboards 
went up, good, uncomplicated food was cooked and the customers 
flooded in, thrilled they could eat and drink well for a fair price in a 
casual atmosphere. Many of these initial gastropubs were founded 
by people who “apprenticed” at The Eagle. In fact, David Eyre has 
described The Eagle as a “stud farm for chefs,” due to the influence 
its entrepreneurial alumni exercised on London’s food scene. The 
pub was also copied—as Jonathan Meades predicted—by corpo-
rate chains, including 1990s favorite All Bar One. Belben was inad-
vertently complicit in this: “the guy who was [All Bar One] brand 

169
Success Doesn’t Suck
manager came in and took me out for dinner. I explained about the 
church chairs and the blackboard menu, of course, he was writ-
ing away. All Bar One was basically the chain interpretation of The 
Eagle. And what a horrible thing that was” (2017). But despite this 
bastardization—maybe even because of it—the gastropub concept 
continued to spread; today thousands are found not only across 
the UK but also in Europe, North America and beyond.
Belben doesn’t mind the “g-word” but Eyre is not so keen: “You 
don’t have gastro-hotels. You don’t have gastro-bars. It sounds 
like a belch” (Mesure 2016). Whatever their feelings, the term has 
come to define a particular business model. But this was not the 
result of any complex mathematical modeling. It was a product 
of the imagination of two entrepreneurs with a clear and simple 
­purpose: “to open somewhere we wanted to go where you could 
get a decent pint and a decent steak sandwich” (Belben 2017). This 
purpose was supplemented by a set of principles based on hon-
esty. Belben says: “Honesty is the thing that sums it up. You can 
apply it to everything. The idea itself is honest. The deal that you 
have with the customer is honest. You don’t try and sell them more 
food than they need. There’s an honesty in that. The style is genu-
ine” (2017). The two friends combined their purpose and principles 
with a series of assumptions that understood their business con-
text and ­environment—a recession, a cheap area with no reputa-
tion for food but lots of journalists and creatives, the existing pub 
offer, their lack of capital—and informed the no-frills, low-touch 
economic logic that underpinned the enterprise. They created a 
compelling story that resonated throughout the culture and helped 
transform London’s gastronomic landscape.
The Eagle has now transcended the gastropub—probably because 
it never was one in the first place; it was simply a pub with great 
food. And that pub has survived hundreds of imitators, celebrating 
its quarter century in 2016. This is a real achievement in a challeng-
ing industry increasingly subject to fads, trends and sky-high costs. 
Chris has been visiting The Eagle since the mid-1990s, becoming 
highly skilled in poaching a table the second its occupants make 
the slightest indication of departure. For him and many others, 
The Eagle is a beloved constant. Of course, things have changed. 
David Eyre sold his share to Mike Belben after seven years, when 
life at The Eagle got too busy. Belben has continually reevaluated 
his assumptions and made incremental innovations where neces-
sary. The Eagle now takes credit cards and you can reserve a table 
if there are more than six of you; it opens for Sunday lunch, has a 
website and even an Instagram account. New additions pop up on 
the menu from time to time and the wine list refreshes. But that’s 

170
Punk Playthings
about it. The atmosphere is as relaxed as ever, the food as good. 
And as economic uncertainty hovers on the immediate horizon, 
The Eagle’s honest, quality without the frills business model seems 
more relevant than ever. Clerkenwell has changed almost beyond 
recognition, becoming one of London’s coolest areas and a gastro-
nomic heartland. Much of that is down to two young guys, who 26 
years ago had the crazy idea to serve great food with big flavors in 
a pub with rough edges.
Don’t Leave Luck to Heaven
“Cats like me have become extinct. Cannae adapt, so cannae 
survive.”
Daniel “Spud” Murphy
Porno by Irvine Welsh (2002)
Video games would not be the same without Nintendo. The com-
pany has been an innovator many times over, not only with con-
soles, peripherals and game content but also with its business 
models. As a result, there has been widespread discussion of the 
company’s nongame origins and the way it transitioned to extraor-
dinary success in the video game market. But although the com-
pany was not always in the business of games, it has always been 
in the business of play.
When people discover Nintendo was founded in 1889—and that 
clearly video games were not its original offer—they are often 
­astonished. They shouldn’t be. Video games are simply an evo-
lutionary stage in a much longer history of games and play. That 
Nintendo Koppai began by handcrafting decorative playing cards 
called hanafuda (flower cards)—used in popular games based 
mostly on image association—is not particularly astonishing. 
Neither is the much lauded “conceptual leap” from cards and toys 
to video games that Nintendo executed in the 1980s. Games were 
a new and increasingly popular form of playful entertainments and 
Nintendo had a long history of making playful and entertaining 
products. Join up the dots and the video game pivot clearly makes 
sense. But what is astonishing is the way Nintendo went about 
entering the video game market. It combined unwavering purpose 
with hard-nosed business realism and a promiscuously adaptable 
approach to business models. And a little creative genius.
Hiroshi Yamauchi became president of Nintendo in 1949, after 
a series of complicated successions. In the mid-1950s, after a 
trip to meet Walt Disney executives in the US, he developed 

171
Success Doesn’t Suck
a single-minded vision to transform the playing card company he 
inherited into a global entertainment giant (Ryan 2013). Hiroshi 
controlled Nintendo with an imperial hand, seldom praising suc-
cess and always criticizing mistakes; he was ruthlessly ambitious 
(Kent 2001; Donovan 2010). In the early years, he implemented 
innovations such as the first plastic coated playing cards in Japan, a 
partnership with Disney to reproduce its characters on Nintendo’s 
cards and a successful expansion into making and selling toys. 
There were also failures, including “love hotels” and an instant 
rice product. But Hiroshi learned from these, realizing he had 
strayed too far from his competencies and those of his company. 
Nintendo’s strengths were its excellent distribution network and 
retail stores across Japan, plus its expertise in designing and mak-
ing playful entertainments. By the mid-1970s, Hiroshi’s learning 
made him confident these competencies would help him conquer 
the new video games market.
Japan had been slow embracing video games, particularly in the 
home. Nintendo first entered the market with the coin-op arcade 
game EVR Race. It was a failure, mostly because it used unreli-
able technology. But by 1977, the Pong phenomenon had hit Japan 
and various manufacturers launched a succession of Pong home 
consoles. These included the Color TV Game console by Nintendo, 
which shipped over a million units. This initial success sent a strong 
signal that the company could make money from games, but still 
the Japanese market remained insular until 1978, when Taito’s 
Space Invaders became a global sensation. Hiroshi observed this 
and realized how much money Taito had made. So he decided 
Nintendo must start making coin-op arcade games again. But that 
was not all. Space Invaders also confirmed Hiroshi’s hunch that the 
real future of Nintendo lay in video games. He issued orders for 
workers to stop everything and concentrate on making the best 
video game products on the market (Donovan 2010, p.154).
Nintendo’s first major success, Game and Watch, was the product 
of a business model underpinned by the “lateral thinking of with-
ered technology.” Espoused by Gunpei Yokoi, Nintendo’s chief toy-
maker, this philosophy involved shunning the latest technology and 
finding new, innovative uses for mature technologies that could be 
mass-produced cheaply (Donovan 2010, p.155). Yokoi had spotted a 
“salaryman” playing with his LCD pocket calculator on the commute 
home and realized it would be possible to make a portable game 
using similar technology. Because LCD was a mature technology, it 
would be cheap to make and therefore affordable to buy, presenting 
lower barriers to entry. Incorporating the functionality of a watch 
and alarm clock would also attract customers and add value.

172
Punk Playthings
Yamauchi had defined Nintendo’s purpose: to dominate the global 
video game market. After the success of its Pong console, he knew 
the company was competent at making, distributing and selling 
playful entertainments in the form of video games. Yokoi had now 
identified assumptions about context and environment—who 
the customer was and what they wanted—plus discovered what 
Nintendo would get paid for. In other words, he had identified the 
problem and the solution. And as part of that solution, Yokoi had 
also identified an economic logic that underpinned how Nintendo 
would deliver value to the customer at an appropriate cost. The 
company had developed its first business model for video games.
Game and Watch was an instant success. Launching in April 1980, the 
handheld console sold over 30 million units over the next 11 years, 
laying the groundwork for other handhelds such as GameBoy and 
Nintendo’s further penetration into the games sector (Donovan 2010; 
Ryan 2013). But Yamauchi was not satisfied. To achieve his goal he 
now wanted to replicate the success Atari enjoyed with its VCS/2600. 
Again, Nintendo used the “withered technology” approach for its 
new home console. The Famicom—launched in 1984—was ordered 
to be a year ahead of the competition but also affordable (Donovan 
2010). This goal was achieved using more mature technology—­
similar processors and components to the aging Atari—but engi-
neering innovations in graphics and RAM that had not been possible 
just a few years earlier. Famicom was a massive success in Japan, but 
it was merely a step toward developing a new business model for 
Nintendo’s global domination of video games.
Nintendo had achieved massive commercial success and cultural 
impact with 1981s Donkey Kong, an arcade smash soon ported to 
Game and Watch. Created by novice designer Shigeru Miyamoto, in 
collaboration with Gunpei Yokoi, Donkey Kong was the first Nintendo 
game to break North America, due to its innovative characterization 
and gameplay. Yamauchi had ordered the Famicom to emulate the 
Atari by being cartridge based, so he decided the console would ship 
with Donkey Kong plus two more Miyamoto games. And it was these 
games that were key to the new business model. Yamauchi believed 
the console was “just a tool to sell software”; Nintendo would make 
its real money from the higher margins afforded by selling games 
(Donovan 2010, p.158). This approach delivered instant success but 
soon there was a problem: Famicom had become so popular that 
Nintendo could not make games fast enough. Yamauchi took quick 
and drastic action by opening up the console to other publishers 
and developers, revolutionizing the entire industry in the process. In 
return for allowing licensees to make games for Famicom, Nintendo 
demanded upfront payment for manufacturing cartridges, a cut 

173
Success Doesn’t Suck
of the profits and the right to veto any game it did not like. Some 
licensees initially balked at these terms, but the booming market for 
Famicom games forced them to change their minds. This was a good 
situation for Nintendo, as the new licensing model ensured it always 
made a profit because licensees paid manufacturing costs whether 
a game sold or not. Nintendo was well on the road to dominating the 
Japanese games market.
Yamauchi and Nintendo had already achieved success by pivoting 
business models for new products and contexts. But when Famicom 
was first touted in the US—redesigned as the Advanced Video 
System (AVS)—it was an instant flop. Yamauchi, still focused on his 
single purpose of global domination, told son-in-law and president 
of Nintendo of America Minoru Arakawa to find a solution. With 
bad timing, the AVS had been revealed in 1984, just as the US home 
console market collapsed. Business experts now argued video 
games had been simply a fad, so retailers failed to order Nintendo’s 
new console. But Arakawa disagreed with the experts. He believed 
people had not lost their desire to play games—the arcades were 
booming and so was the PC market—they had just got bored of 
the substandard games that had become the norm on the Atari. 
Based on this assumption, he decided to iterate Nintendo’s busi-
ness model still further for the US market. First, Arakawa would 
have the Famicom/AVS redesigned into a high-quality stand-alone 
entertainment system. Then he drew upon Nintendo’s toy-making 
competencies and added a light gun and robot, helping retailers 
think of the new Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) more as a 
toy than a video game console. But still, orders remained scarce.
Crucially, Arakawa then decided to embrace the licensing model from 
Japan, turning the platform into a closed system by adding a secu-
rity chip. This would enable Nintendo to control the quality of every 
game played on the NES. From now on, everything would revolve 
around the principle of quality and Nintendo controlling that quality 
throughout the value chain (Donovan 2010). Buoyed by this pivot, 
Arakawa and his small team also adopted the innovative approach 
of hustling the US market one big city at a time, starting with the 
toughest nut to crack: New York City. The US operation had adapted 
its purpose. Now instead of “global domination” or “conquering 
the US,” the mission was simply to make the NES a success in one 
smaller market. Nintendo of America believed it had the right solu-
tion to playing games at home but still had to convince retailers and 
customers. The team did this by describing only an “entertainment 
system” when selling the product, not mentioning video games. It 
conducted all the merchandising, restocking and customer dem-
onstrations. And it began a major regional advertising campaign in 

174
Punk Playthings
the New York area. Most importantly, Arakawa offered all retailers 
a money back guarantee on consoles that did not sell. This was a 
huge risk but Arakawa remained convinced his core assumption—
that people still wanted to play high-quality video games—was right.
It was. After three months of exhausting work by the team, New 
York retailers sold over 50,000 units that Christmas (Kent 2001). 
Even better, most did not return the consoles after the holidays but 
continued to stock them. Arakawa and his team then moved on to 
Los Angeles, Chicago and San Francisco, with increasing success. 
As more high-quality games were released for the NES by Nintendo 
and its licensed publishers, demand increased exponentially and 
the console quickly conquered the US market. The story was similar 
in Europe. Nintendo would eventually become the principal player 
in the global games market for the rest of the 1980s and well into 
the next decade, gaining a 90% share of the US home video game 
market by 1990 (Kellon 2014). Its new business model—based 
on quality and licensing—would professionalize and reconfigure 
the global games industry, becoming the dominant model for all 
console development (Donovan 2010, p.177). But Yamauchi’s goal 
had not been realized by “leaving luck to heaven”—the supposed 
English translation of Nintendo—but by the exact opposite: a sin-
gle-minded purpose, clear principles and a willingness to adapt 
business models when the environmental context changed.
The Restaurant of Dreams
Anyone with even a passing interest in gastronomy will be aware 
of the restaurant explosion of the past few years. It has notably 
occurred in nations not traditionally known for gastronomic prow-
ess: the Nordic countries, Australia and New Zealand, the UK and 
the US. In the US particularly, this golden age of restaurants has 
seen an explosion in “Hot New Food Towns” and “chef-driven, 
ambitious, fine-casual dining spaces that straddle the gap between 
neighborhood fixtures and destinations,” according to American 
food writer Kevin Alexander (2016). But after a year of traveling the 
US talking to chefs and restaurant owners, Alexander now believes 
the US restaurant bubble is set to burst.
Focusing on the now-closed AQ restaurant in San Francisco, 
Alexander outlines problems affecting restaurants across the 
nation. When AQ opened, it was an immediate critical success, gar-
nering awards and becoming a finalist for the Best New Restaurant 
in America. The restaurant initially increased revenue year on year 
but in its second year of operation, profits started to decrease. 
By  2016,  the  projected  annual revenue was $1.6 million, down 

175
Success Doesn’t Suck
$1 ­million from the year before. Instead of 240 covers served every 
night, the restaurant was now serving 100 (Alexander 2016). As the 
year progressed, the owners began to realize the game was up. 
AQ was no longer sustainable. With a heavy heart, they closed the 
doors.
Alexander identifies increasing labor and health care costs as a 
major factor in the impending crash. But he also blames market 
saturation, adherence to trends, business models based on faulty 
assumptions, rigid concepts and extortionate startup costs. All 
these are present in the demise of AQ. When the restaurant opened 
in late 2011, there were 3,600 restaurants in San Francisco; by 2016 
there were 7,600 (Alexander 2016). That is rapid market saturation. 
AQ’s on-trend hyper-seasonal approach also featured a menu that 
changed daily and decor that changed to match the mood of each 
new season. And while seasonality is laudable, as part of a business 
model it can be problematic. Traditionally, produce bought locally 
in season is cheaper than out-of-season food with longer supply 
chains. However, when seasonality becomes a trend and every 
chef wants the freshest local produce, the price shoots up. It’s basic 
supply and demand. Also, when everything is cooked from scratch 
using fresh produce, wastage is an issue. Alexander quotes a New 
Orleans chef describing the current trend for restaurants making 
absolutely everything—bread, charcuterie, pickles, etc.—as “self-
flagellating chef martyrdom at its best” (2016). The chef describes 
the substantial labor and raw materials required, adding that these 
items can usually be sourced cheaper and better from local spe-
cialists (think The Eagle and its Italian sausages from the local deli). 
Add 13 months and $1 million for startup into this mix and the cost 
implications of such an approach become substantial. And when 
you’re paying to redecorate your $1 million restaurant every three 
months, it’s no wonder things spiral out of control.
Now we’re fans of good restaurants and scratch-made food with 
fresh local ingredients, but there are obvious flaws in this kind of 
business model. First, using so much time and money at startup 
before you have any evidence people want what you’re offering is 
dangerous. It is the Field of Dreams approach: if you build it, they 
will come. Here assumptions about who your customer is and what 
they want only get tested after spending tremendous amounts of 
cash. The owners of AQ even admit that they had absolutely “no 
idea what to expect” on opening (Alexander 2016). It turned out 
people did want what AQ offered—but only for a moment before 
they abandoned it for the latest on-trend establishment. Being on-
trend in your operating environment can be dangerous. If a suc-
cessful business model has to present a better alternative to the 

176
Punk Playthings
way things are—plus tell a more compelling story—this is difficult 
when everybody is doing the same thing and telling the same tale. 
And trends are by nature ephemeral. The hyper-seasonal menu 
that changed daily and involved scratch-making everything was 
also a costly obsession. Alexander (2016) quotes AQ’s owners 
as saying “If there was something new at the market, even just 
for a couple of weeks, chef was going to use it in a dish.” This is 
cooking as selfish-making that ignores issues of either demand or 
organizational sustainability. The assumptions being made—and 
the economic logic underpinning this making-centered business 
model—are questionable at best. Worse, when these assumptions 
began to be invalidated, it appears no attempts to adapt the busi-
ness model were made. Things just carried on until it was too late.
Alexander’s article resonates for a few reasons. First, it describes 
the exact opposite of the business model that brought sustainable 
success to The Eagle, providing a template for Belben and others to 
adapt and scale with other businesses. Second, there are striking 
commonalities between what is happening to mid-level indepen-
dent restaurants such as AQ and what is occurring in the indepen-
dent games sector. There is no longer any doubt that the recent 
explosion of indie studios has led to a saturated marketplace 
where companies are struggling to scale or even sustain them-
selves. As discussed previously, this is a bubble where indie studios 
and games have become both genre and trend. And like the hyper-
seasonal trend—also now a genre—when everyone is doing the 
same thing, it is more challenging to stand out and be discovered. 
Further, when a trend becomes mainstream, operators following 
that trend have to pander to mainstream customer expectations. 
And this usually leads to a fast, destructive race to the bottom. 
But if you’re ploughing your individual furrow—perhaps inadver-
tently—or deliberately spearheading your own trend, this can be 
avoided. What you offer might not be for everyone, but as long as it 
resonates with enough people, who cares? Better to be defined by 
your principles and what you believe in than by a “proven” business 
model or established trend come genre. Another chef quoted by 
Alexander believes “the restaurant world is so saturated nowadays 
...  it requires so much extra work to keep yourself relevant” (2016). 
If you substitute “indie game making” for “restaurant,” that state-
ment remains equally valid.
The Maker Makes
The Field of Dreams approach is depressingly persistent through-
out the game sector, where selfish and wasteful making is often 

177
Success Doesn’t Suck
encouraged through endless building of prototypes and “vertical 
slices” with little purpose. This can be exacerbated by the inces-
sant game jams that have become so popular. These are fun and 
useful for developing competencies in making but should not be 
confused with a sustainable business model. The odd one-hit won-
der exception celebrated in the game media proves the rule. If you 
endlessly build stuff purely for the sake of it, the people will not 
come. That only happens when you have a compelling story you 
can hustle and tell. The NES would have remained gathering dust 
in a warehouse if Minoru Arakawa and his team had not got out 
of the building and hustled—one city after another—to sell it. The 
Eagle would have failed if Michael Belben had not tirelessly hustled 
local office workers and respected food critics. Jazz masters like 
John Coltrane and Miles Davis loved to jam, but they didn’t con-
fuse it with making and selling an album. They knew they needed 
people who could hustle, who had the knowledge and chutzpah 
to package, promote and sell their wonderful but often challeng-
ing music to the public. Endless jam sessions did not change the 
culture and make these artists household names, Birth of the Cool 
and A Love Supreme did.
The wishful thinking approach also persists in many of the “incu-
bation” or “hub” initiatives that are currently proliferating. Here 
people are given a limited funding runway, then encouraged to 
use it in the service of mindless making instead of testing their 
assumptions. By the time anyone mentions business models, cus-
tomers, or selling things, it’s too late. The young companies—yes, 
they are often also forced to waste resources “making” companies 
too—then disappear without trace. It should be no surprise this 
approach is espoused in many incubators or hubs because many of 
these utilize the same model themselves. Huge budgets are wasted 
on shiny buildings that demand extensive build-outs, rather than 
developing and running heuristic programs that encourage inno-
vative and sustainable enterprise. That is because many of these 
initiatives are not honest in intent. Several are simply self-aggran-
dizement projects for people with big egos. Again, there is much to 
learn from The Eagle here. With a clear purpose, honest principles 
and a low-touch business model that repurposes existing spaces 
and demands minimal expenditure on refurbishment, there would 
be more money to fund transformative programs for promising 
entrepreneurs and startups. Maybe then, meaningful long-term 
change might occur instead of communities getting lumbered with 
half-empty, costly yet cut-price facsimiles of the Google campus, 
useful for glossy PR photographs but completely useless at encour-
aging sustainable enterprise.

178
Punk Playthings
This Year’s Model
Whatever you’re doing, it is clear you need some form of business 
model to guide action. You need a compelling story to tell about your 
business, product, or service. You need purpose and principles to 
drive your business model and constant testing and monitoring of 
assumptions to check it still works. If your assumptions are holding, 
then your model is currently sustainable, perhaps requiring the odd 
tweak to keep it resilient. But if your assumptions are invalidated, it 
is time to change. Remember what the Japanese concept of wabi-
sabi says: “Nothing lasts, nothing is finished, nothing is perfect.” The 
trick is never to leave things to chance or until it’s too late, when the 
resources are almost gone and your destination is nothing but a blur 
receding on the horizon.

179
Success Doesn’t Suck
FIGURE 4.1  Side A of the original flyer for The Eagle. (Reprinted with 
permission from Michael Belben. © The Eagle 1991.)

180
Punk Playthings
FIGURE 4.2  Side B of the original flyer for The Eagle. (Reprinted with 
permission from Michael Belben. © The Eagle 1991.)

181
Success Doesn’t Suck
FIGURE 4.3  Nintendo Donkey Kong Game and Watch. (Courtesy of 
Roger Dahl, https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File%3ANintendo_
Donkey_Kong_Game_and_Watch.png.)

182
Punk Playthings
Let Me Be Your Fantasy
“We tell ourselves stories in order to live.”
Joan Didion
The White Album (1979)
Not only do we tell ourselves stories in order to live, we tell them 
to feel alive. And when we are not telling stories, we want them 
told to us. Reason and logic are the bedrocks of scientific method 
and constructed argument, but they are not much fun without a 
compelling narrative. We want to be entertained. We want to find 
meaning. We want to find something intelligible in the incompre-
hensible. It is how we know we are alive. And sometimes, it is a way 
to escape our lives. Andy Warhol believed everyone must have a 
fantasy. And he was right. Why else would we spend so much time 
talking about “living the dream,” American or otherwise? Stories 
and fantasies are powerful. And once you realize this, learning to 
construct and tell them becomes essential. But always remember: 
never let the facts get in the way of a great tale.
Riders on the Storm
“And your very flesh shall be a great poem.”
Walt Whitman
Leaves of Grass (1855)
Since the beginning of Judaism, the Abrahamic religions have told 
stories of God. Religion gave purpose and meaning to whole cul-
tures and societies. But by the late 18th century, another world-
view was becoming dominant in Western Europe: the triumphant, 
rationalist, humanist Enlightenment (Hobsbawm 1962). The storm 
of the industrial revolution was accelerating everything. Science 
was rationalizing the natural world through categorization and 
positivist ideas of objective “truth” were peaking. Long-held reli-
gious “certainties”—now unprovable by science—began to be 
eroded. And as tales of God and the afterlife began to lose their 
grip, a small group of radicals searched for new secular stories to 
tell, new meanings to find, new ways of looking at and living in the 
world. They were the Romantics.
Romanticism might begin with Jean-Jacques Rousseau and young 
German poets such as Goethe, but it was in Britain where it fully 
bloomed. The initial wave included William Blake and Robert 
Burns, followed by the Lake Poets—Coleridge, Wordsworth and 

183
Success Doesn’t Suck
Southey—then the more dramatic second wave of Byron, Percy and 
Mary Shelley, Keats and the Brontës. Romanticism also crossed the 
Atlantic, becoming an American proposition in the works of Irving, 
Cooper, Melville, Hawthorne and Whitman. The Romantics had 
been affected by the advances of rationalism and science, believing 
these could never satisfy the metaphysical dimensions of human 
existence. They feared mechanization, unthinking industrializa-
tion and the rationalization of everything—including nature—were 
enslaving people through imposed rules such as the enclosure of 
the fields or the tyranny of the mechanized clock (Ackroyd 2011a).
Defining Romanticism is hard, but its innovations and legacies still 
surround us. Marshall Berman (1984) argued that the creative break-
throughs of Romanticism nourished—and continue to ­nourish—a 
legion of revolutions, constituting a force at the heart of modernity 
that drives people to fight oppression. Certainly, the Romantics 
believed in the uniqueness of the individual, in the decency of com-
mon people and their right to liberty, free from oppression by mon-
archs and tyrants—essentially the founding principles of modern 
liberal democracies. In the face of dominant rationalism, they also 
valued individual feelings and emotions and specifically the potential 
of the individual imagination to transform the world through creative 
expression. It was Romanticism that articulated the first modern 
understanding of creativity. It believed in creative genius and its 
darker fellow traveler, melancholy. The Romantics extolled the vir-
tues of imaginative tales of beauty, emotion, fantasy, mythology and 
gothic romance, because they believed that the creative imagination 
enabled people to transcend their circumstances (Forward n.d.). 
Romanticism also celebrated the beauty and sublimity of nature in 
all its awesome splendor, giving birth to both our learned enjoyment 
of the natural world and subsequent environmental movements 
(Ackroyd 2011b). Fundamentally, the Romantics were exploring how 
to understand, live and find meaning in an increasingly secular and 
rational world. And to find that meaning, they put trust in the power 
of a good story. Some even became the story.
Welcome to the Pleasuredome
“It may be bawdy ... but is it not life?”
Lord Byron
Don Juan (1824)
We live in a world of celebrity and secular icons. Our cultures 
elevate music and film stars, sports players, chefs, even the odd 
game designer, to the status of demigods. But the inventor of this 

184
Punk Playthings
modern notion of celebrity was none of these things. He was a 
poet. Famously described as “mad, bad and dangerous to know,” 
Lord Byron was relentless in his pursuit of self-knowledge and self-­
gratification (Ackroyd 2011c). He was a leading light of the Romantic 
movement who believed “the great object of life was sensation—to 
feel that we exist” (cited in Marchand 1974, p.109). Byron refused 
to be forced into any rigid mold, preferring instead to craft his 
own. He was infamous for his recklessness with money, complete 
lack of moderation in love and sexual relationships across gen-
der divides. After his travels through Europe, Byron wrote his first 
major work of poetry. Published in 1812, Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage 
told tales of a noble but disaffected, smart yet cynical wanderer, 
who traveled distant lands in search of experiences after an ear-
lier life of pleasure seeking and erotic excess. Byron was clearly 
recognizable in his debauched protagonist but decided to pub-
lish anyway (MacCarthy 2003). This decision would make him an 
overnight sensation, celebrated throughout Regency London and 
beyond. But according to Peter Ackroyd, it was his next decision 
“that would help define our modern world ... he chose to embrace 
celebrity, to live his life in public. This was his way of giving mean-
ing to his own existence” (2011c). In a new secular world without 
God and religion, Byron would find that meaning in the worship 
of fans.
Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage captured the imagination of its readers 
and Byron began to receive sacks of fan mail, most containing 
amorous proposals for trysts and assignations. To relieve debts, 
Byron had married Annabelle Millbanke, but he had also contin-
ued to conduct numerous affairs. Most notoriously there were 
rumors of an incestuous relationship with his half-sister, Augusta. 
Instead of dispelling these and moderating his behavior, Byron 
added fuel to the fire by accepting many of the salacious propos-
als he received. As his fame grew, scandalous scenes occurred 
at his Piccadilly house and in the local parks. Rumors of Byron’s 
voracious infidelities became rife. Finally, in early 1816, his wife’s 
legal representatives requested a separation. Practically unheard 
of at the time, this made things even worse. At first, Byron used 
the ensuing scandal to enhance his public image, reveling even 
deeper in being a “bad boy.” But eventually, the maverick roman-
tic image he had constructed began to work against him, par-
ticularly with the Establishment. Tales of debauchery, incest and 
homosexuality persisted. Whether these were true or not was 
now beside the point. In collusion with the press, Byron had con-
structed an image the rumors fitted only too well. It was time for 
a sharp exit.

185
Success Doesn’t Suck
Leaving England in April 1816—after signing the official separation 
document—Byron would never return. Instead, he would again wan-
der Europe, perpetuating his personal romantic myth. He spent time 
with his friend Percy Bysshe Shelley—another Romantic adept at 
self-mythologizing—and Shelley’s future wife, Mary. For a time they 
lived in a house by Lake Geneva. Here Mary would write Frankenstein 
and John William Polidori would invent the modern vampire liter-
ary genre, both inspired by conversations with Byron (Frayling 
1992). After a while, Byron continued on his quest, traveling to Italy 
where he would write his masterpiece, Don Juan. This was a serial-
ized tale of another cynical but smart, rebellious yet romantic hero. 
These repeated conventions came to define the classic “Byronic 
hero” today found everywhere from literature to video games. Don 
Juan celebrated liberty, reimagined the legend of the prolific lover, 
decried the earlier generation of Romantics as conservative sell-
outs and launched satirical attacks on the Establishment (Foreward 
n.d; Drummond n.d.). It was punk before punk was invented. Loved 
by some, hated by others, it was deeply provocative. Byron then 
moved on to Greece. Determined to liberate the Greek people from 
their subjugation under the Ottoman Empire, he sold his estate 
in Scotland to help fund the Greek insurgency and traveled to the 
island of Missolonghi to await battle. But the poet’s quest for liberty 
failed to end in romantic glory. While waiting for battle to commence 
in April 1824, Byron developed an infection and died.
Despite his somewhat mediocre end, Byron remains the arche-
typal romantic hero. In Greece he is still revered as such. And there 
is little doubt he and the Romantics laid the groundwork for many 
aspects of our modern societies. Byron believed freedom and sen-
sational experience were the keys to creative imagination. And 
Romanticism considered this imagination the key to a meaning-
ful life. Those with such imaginations were presented as geniuses, 
driven by flashes of creative inspiration, accompanied by periods of 
melancholy. This became the foundation for our most enduring (if 
deeply flawed) understanding of creativity: the individual creative 
genius. Byron was also obsessive about his public image, carefully 
casting himself as the rebellious yet romantic hero valiantly chal-
lenging the status quo with his creative genius. He courted con­
troversy while simultaneously attempting to control information 
and images that did not fit the fantasy (Drummond n.d.; Ackroyd 
2011c). Byron was an expert in public relations, a spin doctor 
over 150 years before the term was invented (Safire 1986). Before 
Beatlemania there was Byronmania. And like The Beatles, Byron’s 
phenomenal fame was not just the byproduct of artistic work, it 
was also the result of a carefully crafted and storied public image. 

186
Punk Playthings
Every 18th century girl—and no doubt a few boys—dreamed of 
Lord Byron. He became their fantasy, his very flesh a great poem.
Fairy Tales and Centerfolds
“I think people are more apt to believe photographs, especially 
if it’s something fantastic. They’re willing to be more gullible. 
Sometimes they want fantasy.”
Cindy Sherman 
(quoted in Sussler 1985)
Cindy Sherman is fantasy and reality. The difficulty comes in dis-
tinguishing one from the other. Sherman is celebrated for “fero-
ciously ironic photographs starring herself in different roles” that 
play with notions of identity and storytelling (Hughes 1997, p.615). 
But though millions have seen her in this work, few would recog-
nize the “real” Cindy Sherman. That is because there are hundreds 
of Cindy Shermans: the vulnerable small-town girl in the big city, 
the virgin on the verge of womanhood, the exploited porn star, the 
damsel in distress, the Renaissance muse, or simply the “everyday” 
American woman. Sherman is all these, yet none of them.
Sherman’s breakthrough work, 1978s Untitled Film Stills, com-
prises 69 photographs posing as stills from a variety of B movies, 
European art house films, or film noirs. Sherman “stars” in each, 
masquerading in different costumes and placing herself in implied 
situations, often stereotypical for female characters in film. The 
pictures are highly ambiguous, with “Sherman” always looking 
away from the camera. That each image is untitled adds to the 
ambiguity by refusing to impose or fix meaning with anchoring 
text. The photographs are disorientating yet strangely alluring. 
Each invites the viewer to map a story onto an isolated image. Joan 
Didion believes “we all live by the imposition of a narrative line 
upon disparate images” (1979, p.11), that we impose stories as an 
exercise in sense making, particularly when we are disorientated. 
Sherman describes how “some of the women in the outdoor shots 
could be alone, or being watched or followed ...  or just come from 
a confrontation or a tryst” (Galassi 2003). It is this disorientating 
ambiguity that invites us to engineer a narrative fantasy to make 
sense of the unsettling images. And Sherman is complicit in this 
fantasy. For not only is she the subject of the photographs but 
the artist, the instigator, the provocateur. By dressing up and mas-
querading, Sherman is exploring her own imagination and provid-
ing a trigger for that of others. She is a willing co-conspirator in the 
fantasies of strangers.

187
Success Doesn’t Suck
Throughout her career, orthodoxy has foregrounded the feminist 
aspects of Sherman’s work. But she argues feminism is not necessar-
ily what drives her. When interviewed about Untitled Films Stills, she 
said the work was about “the way I was shooting, the mimicry of the 
style of black and white grade-Z motion pictures that produced the 
self-consciousness of these characters, not my knowledge of feminist 
theory” (quoted in Sussler 1980). More recently she has emphasized 
the centrality of dressing up, playful masquerade and performance 
in her work. She recalled how, from a young age, she would “spend a 
couple of hours turning myself into somebody else with makeup or 
clothes” whenever she felt moody or depressed, describing this as 
a form of catharsis (quoted in Smith 2004). An exhibition catalogue 
described her “obsession ...  with ­dressing up, shopping, applying 
makeup and changing characters ...  a girl who wore makeup when 
she was sick in bed and made cutout paper-doll clothes of every-
thing in her closet to plan her outfits” (Smith 2004). And it is this 
chameleon-like behavior that gives real insight into Cindy Sherman’s 
work. Simon Schama (2012) argues that “no living artist ...  has more 
exactly nailed the masquerade we perform when we go about our 
business, public and private, social and erotic. No one has caught the 
futile compulsion to self-brand, to lock down an identity, with quite 
Sherman’s psychological acuteness.” For not only is Sherman’s work 
a conspiratorial fantasy constructed between her and the viewer, it 
is an exploration of the fantasies each of us lives every hour of every 
day. It is a playful acknowledgement of that greatest fictional con-
struct and performance: our individual self.
The Heart Is Deceitful above All Things
“It was fiction. It said that on the cover.”
Laura Albert 
(quoted in Langer 2013)
In 1999, Chris purchased a book called Sarah in a London book-
store. It was a tale of “lot lizards,” sleazy pimps and truckers in West 
Virginia. The book explored themes of identity, gender, abandon-
ment, abuse and poverty. It might sound difficult and depressing 
but the novel had magical realist qualities and humorous touches; 
it was an interesting read. Sarah soon became something of a sen-
sation, praised in literary circles, loved by celebrities and inspiring a 
host of songwriters. As a result, author JT LeRoy began to be feted 
as a fresh, authentic voice in American literature, a new William 
Burroughs or Flannery O’Connor (Feuerzeig 2016; Rose 2016). But 
authentic was a poor choice of word to describe JT.

188
Punk Playthings
The JT LeRoy story is now the stuff of legend. As the author’s 
fame exploded, revelations about his past emerged. His work was 
increasingly depicted as thinly veiled autobiography. More books 
and contributions to literary journals, magazines and newspapers 
only served to further reinforce LeRoy’s supposed authenticity. In 
the early stages of success JT (or Jeremiah Terminator) was reclu-
sive and mysterious. Public readings were conducted by fans on 
the premise that he was pathologically shy. Communications with 
him took place exclusively by phone, email, or fax. This was read-
ily accepted because LeRoy had every reason to avoid the lime-
light. After all, his life had been an ordeal of being “pimped out as 
a cross-dressed prostitute by his mother at truck stops through-
out the South” (Beachy 2005). The lack of public appearances even 
worked in LeRoy’s favor. His reclusiveness fueled the myth and 
made fans ever more curious and devoted. Among these fans was 
a long list of celebrities, from Courtney Love to Gus Van Sant and 
Lou Reed. And, of course, Bono.
With such a level of attention, anonymity was no longer an option. 
As success went global, JT started appearing in public, always 
wearing sunglasses, hats, wigs and shapeless clothes. More 
emerged about his background. JT had multiple personality dis-
orders. He was an HIV-positive junkie. He had developed a taste 
for ­literature from poetry-reading johns in hillbilly truck stops, 
communicated using a fax machine from modem-equipped rest-
rooms, suffered abuse as a child at the hands of close family 
members. Sometimes JT felt like a he, sometimes a she. JT was the 
embodiment of innocence laid low by the evils of a heartless capi-
talist system. Now the author was trying to save himself through 
his art; he needed all the help he could get. Whatever the realities 
were, one thing was certain: JT LeRoy was the ultimate fantasy for 
the liberal-minded.
And that is just what he turned out to be: a fantasy, alter ego, avatar. 
The real author was Laura Albert, a mother in her early thirties. In 
her troubled teens, Laura started to phone crisis lines masquerad-
ing as a range of characters, including Jeremiah Terminator. Albert 
discovered listeners were more sympathetic when she imper-
sonated a boy. In fact, after multiple calls, psychologist Terrence 
Owens encouraged Terminator to write down his experiences as 
a form of therapy. This was the beginning of Laura Albert’s liter-
ary fantasy. Like JT, Albert had endured sexual abuse. But the rest 
was fiction. She had never been to West Virginia—or even a truck 
stop—but for the next decade she would tell tales of JT’s teenage 
prostitution and abuse in these liminal spaces where the American 
Dream becomes nightmare. Albert would play JT in phone calls, 

189
Success Doesn’t Suck
faxes and emails, then assemble an expanding troupe of charac-
ters to star in a multilayered and increasingly absurd performance. 
Her sister-in-law, Savannah Knoop, would play JT LeRoy in public. 
Her husband, Geoffrey Knoop, acted as aspiring musician friend 
Astor. Albert herself played JT’s British assistant and roommate, 
Speedie—in the least-believable gaw-blimey Cockney accent since 
Dick van Dyck. She also played wannabe rock star Emily Frasier, who 
wrote lyrics for JT’s band. For a few years, nobody really questioned 
this impossible cast of misfits. But as the fiction became more fan-
tastical and complex, it started to contradict itself and spiral out 
of control. Albert increasingly wanted to escape the world she had 
created—perhaps even get some recognition for her work—and 
began to tell confidants the truth. Or her version of it. Journalists 
also became suspicious. Finally, articles in the New Yorker and New 
York Times revealed that JT LeRoy and the whole absurd parade had 
been an elaborate hoax. The literary world and a gaggle of celebri-
ties had been duped. The fantasy was over.
Once the hoax was busted, Laura Albert was castigated by the lit-
erary world as a liar. She was someone who had deliberately con-
structed a fantasy world to “trick” people and become famous. She 
found herself subject to a lawsuit and abandoned by the celebrity 
“friends” who had swarmed around JT. She withdrew for a time. It 
is still difficult to tell how deliberate the hoax was. Albert describes 
her penchant for creating characters as something she has always 
done to cope with a range of insecurities. She says the fantasy 
was as accidental as it was deliberate; once she started creating 
characters and spinning stories, she could not stop. However, she 
remains unapologetic. She describes JT as an avatar and believes 
“we should all be able to assume different voices. That’s the idea 
of art, to be able to go to new worlds” (quoted in Langer 2013). 
Albert also points out that she never said the stories in the books 
were true: “It was fiction. It said that on the cover” (Feuerzeig 2016; 
Langer 2013). And as if to emphasize this fiction, she continually 
describes the moment the hoax was uncovered as “the big reveal.”
Ultimately, “the truth” about JT LeRoy is unknowable and mostly 
irrelevant. But the whole episode illuminates how much people 
want—and often need—to believe in fantasies. And how much 
they are willing to participate in their construction. Celebrities 
in the art and literary worlds are so afraid of “losing their edge” 
that when something new and compelling comes along, they just 
have to be part of it. If the backstory is edgy, fits with their self-
image and sense of moral authority, even better. As Albert says, 
“A lot of people signed up for the parade. The parade came to 
town and they loved it and it helped them. And when the reveal 

190
Punk Playthings
came, they could get attention for being injured” (quoted in Langer 
2013). Those in the public eye were the most aggrieved at being 
“duped” or “tricked.” Leroy’s ordinary readers seemed ambivalent. 
They had wanted to be entertained by a fiction and the accom-
panying performance had fulfilled—maybe even surpassed—their 
desires. That LeRoy was also a fiction was entertaining in itself. But 
the credulous celebrities and experts had been complicit in the 
­fantasy. As  self-appointed cultural gatekeepers, they legitimized 
the JT LeRoy lie to enhance their own fantastical images. They had 
wanted to believe.
The Magic Cellar
The 2015 documentary Sour Grapes tells the story of oenophile 
Rudy Kurniawan. During the 2000s, Rudy performed perhaps the 
greatest wine fraud in history. He used his connoisseur knowl-
edge to create fake bottles of expensive rare and vintage wines—
particularly Burgundies—by blending relatively cheap bottles of 
Californian and French wines, then mimicking the labels, bottles 
and aging process through a DIY setup in his California home. In 
the process, Rudy conned millions of dollars from individual wine 
collectors and respected auction houses for years. In 2009, billion-
aire Bill Koch filed a lawsuit after discovering Rudy had swindled 
him out of $4 million for fake wine. The FBI got involved and in 2012 
Kurniawan was arrested. He is currently serving 10 years in a cor-
rectional facility.
Rudy Kurniawan was a successful con artist not because he was a 
master forger. He wasn’t. Sure, his sophisticated palate helped him 
approximate the taste of the wines he was forging, but he was also 
pretty slapdash. Most of the labels he made had spelling mistakes 
or incorrect details. Often he released more bottles of a rare wine 
than were ever made. And many of his approximations were simply 
not that good. But again, Kurniawan was successful because people 
wanted to believe in him. He had crafted an elaborate image and 
backstory that harnessed his victims’ deepest fantasies. He was 
independently wealthy, dressed in expensive clothes, drove fast 
cars, had an art collection featuring the obligatory Damien Hirst 
and in the process created the myth that he was the go-to expert 
in the specialist domain of fine wine. He was what the majority of 
the people he conned either wanted to be or fantasized they were: 
rich, cultured experts.
Rudy understood that wealth plus cultural pretensions equaled 
opportunity. If he could tell a good enough story well enough for 

191
Success Doesn’t Suck
long enough, he could make a lot of money. What he did not quite 
realize—at least initially—was how simple it would be to become 
the “Great Gatsby of Generation X” (Atlas and Rothwell 2016). He 
could not have known how easily the experts, auction houses and 
wine collectors would be fooled. Nor how unwilling to admit their 
blunders they would be once suspicions were raised. If you watch 
the documentary and read about the case, it is clear that even now 
victims will not admit they were deceived. In the film, some main-
tain that although Rudy tricked hundreds of people, the wine that 
he sold them was the real deal. This is because they have too much 
skin in the game. People who consider themselves experts, who 
spent hundreds of thousands of dollars on wine that is still in their 
cellar, are unlikely to admit it is worthless. Or that their expertise 
is not much better. Revealingly, the person who finally busted the 
scam, Bill Koch, is so wealthy that the $4 million he lost did not par-
ticularly matter. For Koch, it was the principle of the thing.
Kurniawan fashioned “a collaboration between forger and dupe” 
(Atlas and Rothwell 2016). He told a great story, sucking people into 
the fantasy he was creating by mirroring their own. He hoodwinked 
gatekeepers—various wine experts and auctioneers—because 
they allowed themselves to be fooled. All this rare, expensive wine 
on the market was too good for business. And when gatekeepers 
are thinking too much about money, they become liable to compro-
mise. Rudy was clearly a conman with very questionable morals—
but he was also a magic seller.
Epilogue
Of course, we’re not advocating conning people. We celebrate 
hustlers, not hucksters. But we do admire people who can craft 
images, narratives and situations that connect with other ­people—
stories that make people forget reality and believe, if only for a 
little while. George Orwell (1944) once praised Charles Dickens for 
“telling small lies in order to emphasize what he regards as a big 
truth.” Other writers in uncertain times have realized this, too. In 
the social and cultural maelstrom of the 1960s, a bunch of maver-
ick journalists speculated that to connect, to emotionally resonate 
with their generation, just reporting “the facts” in a reasoned and 
supposedly objective way no longer cut the mustard. This cluster 
included Tom Wolfe, Norman Mailer, Truman Capote, Jimmy Breslin, 
Hunter S Thompson and Joan Didion—some of the greatest writers 
of the 20th century—and their approach became known as New 
Journalism. Author Marc Weingarten identifies the major tenet of 
New Journalism as the blurring of facts in order to arrive at some 

192
Punk Playthings
greater emotional or philosophical truth. Weingarten calls it “jour-
nalism that reads like fiction and rings with the truth of reported 
fact. It is the art of fact” (2006, loc.193). New Journalism caused 
an uproar with traditional journalists and editors, who thought its 
artistic license and subjective stance dishonest and heretical. But 
it connected immediately with a younger and more countercultural 
audience. And it is this ability to connect that is now so crucial in 
our postrational world.
Outliers like Trump or Brexit occur because their advocates tell 
better stories than the rationalized narratives of the liberal estab-
lishment. A phalanx of experts marshalled “the facts” against 
both but failed miserably. We have lost count how many times we 
heard experts laden with statistics predicting the adverse effects 
Brexit would have on the UK. These may turn out to be true but 
the statistical facts crumpled in the face of subjective fantasies. 
Conservative MP Michael Gove was only half right when he said 
“people ...  have had enough of experts” (Sky News 2016). The 
experts were part of the problem, sure, but it was the data and 
statistics that pissed many people off. They were told there was no 
arguing with the data—the new deity of the early 21st century—so 
they chose to ignore it instead. People decided they would rather 
believe romantic myths than listen to rational arguments based 
on number-crunching. It turns out the Romantics were right: sci-
ence and rationalism have never been enough. Whatever you’re 
trying to do—whether it is selling games, running for office, or 
resisting authoritarianism—you had better tell the best story. It’s 
not optional. It’s not a luxury. Stories win elections and referenda. 
Stories connect. Stories resonate. Stories always trump statistics—
because we need them in order to live.

193
Success Doesn’t Suck
Patronize Me, Please
“I think people have been obsessed with the wrong question, 
which is, ‘How do we make people pay for music?’ What if we 
started asking, ‘How do we let people pay for music?’“
Amanda Palmer
The Art of Asking (2013)
Corporate Events
The most significant consequence of the internet revolution is the 
democratization of production and distribution. In the industrial 
era, power was derived from control over the means of production 
and the scarcity of distribution, in other words: supply. The inter-
net era fundamentally changes how and where economic value is 
generated. As a result, power now resides in demand (Thompson 
2017).
Artist Cory Arcangel calls it the “fourteen-year-old Finnish-kid syn-
drome,” the modern phenomenon where any teenager with an 
iPhone can make something attention-grabbing (quoted by Chen 
2017). It would be complacent to think game making is not well on 
its way to similar democratization, as tools such as GameMaker, 
Twine, Source, Construct and Scratch already demonstrate.
As we explored in previous chapters, the demise of industrial ratio-
nalization and the revival of the artisan is a positive step. The nos-
talgic fetishization of craft as a noun, however, is most definitely 
not. In a demand-driven economy, the artist still starves. It is the 
creative entrepreneur—the silo-smashing maker, marketer and 
merchant—who eats well.
Rather than taking your cue from the wolves of Wall Street or the 
techno-libertarians of Silicon Valley, Bruce Nussbaum suggests 
you take a closer look at the artisans of Bushwick and Rivington 
Street and their “indie capitalism” (2011). Swapping in the econom-
ics of efficiency and control for the economics of creativity and 
chance, Nussbaum argues these indie capitalists—we prefer “cre-
ative entrepreneurs”—are perfectly positioned to capitalize on the 
highly networked heterogeneity of the internet era (2013).
For Nussbaum, a defining characteristic of the indie capitalist is 
their reframing of capitalism as a social movement rather than 
a free market phenomenon. In such a space, social networks 
become the “basic building blocks of the economy,” blurring the 
distinction between “creators, curators, founders and consumers” 

194
Punk Playthings
and cultivating an environment that is far more communal and 
experiential than it is clinically transactional (2013). Kickstarter, 
Nussbaum believes, perfectly illustrates his thesis. Not only is 
Kickstarter a transformative model for crowd funding but also 
for crowd building; it is a way to attract and organize an audience 
of like-minded people as well as a mechanism to capitalize on an 
existing audience. Such dialogic spaces make creators, capitalists 
and patrons of us all (Nussbaum 2013).
Democracy in Action
There is little argument that “the democratization of innovation” is 
a vapid slogan. As we discussed in the previous chapter, not only 
has innovation become conflated with invention, but it has become 
domesticated by corporations and hijacked by bottom-feeding cre-
ative consultants, gurus and experts. And what has democracy 
done for us lately, anyway? Zero-hours contracts, the erosion of 
egalitarianism and social welfare, myopic technocracy and populist 
insularity. Wonderful! Within such a context, it is easy to be cynical 
and dismiss the likes of Nussbaum, but it is important not to lose 
sight of the fact that innovation has been democratized and the 
opportunities this affords game makers are very real.
In mass-focused, manufacturer-centric innovation—a legacy of 
the industrial era—users rely on corporations to act as their “often 
very imperfect” agents, with homogenous results designed to meet 
the needs of and capture profits from, a mass market (von Hippel 
2006, loc.35). But in the internet era—when user needs are more 
explicitly nuanced and individuals have the agency as well as the 
means of production and distribution—it is often more effective 
to just do it yourself. User-centric punk innovation extends beyond 
clinical commerce: communities of practice and patronage cluster 
around innovations, using open-source organization and coopera-
tion to increase the speed and effectiveness of design, develop-
ment and distribution. In many ways, user-centric innovation is the 
antithesis of the Field of Dreams strategy, catalyzing a Boydian-like 
OODA loop of continual feedback, iteration and curious mutation.
Sublime Interventions
Spelunky is the personification of user-centric innovation. A proce-
durally generated mashup of platformer and roguelike, Spelunky 
was designed and developed by Derek Yu and released in 2008 
as freeware via niche online forum The Independent Gaming 

195
Success Doesn’t Suck
Source (TIGSource), where its merits divided the community but 
delighted Braid creator Jonathan Blow. Championed to Microsoft 
by the ever-altruistic Blow, the game was remade and released on 
Microsoft Xbox Live Arcade (XBLA) in 2012. Interestingly, Yu elected 
not to simply rebuild Spelunky Classic but instead remix the original 
to create “fan fiction,” Yu’s rationale being that creating an original 
game is a very different creative act than reimagining an existing 
one. He preferred to be liberated by a mindset that “offers the same 
kind of bliss as lying on the grass and pointing out what the clouds 
remind you of” (2016, loc.1182). The XBLA version enjoyed (more 
than) reasonable critical acclaim and commercial success, but it 
would take an unsolicited user-initiated innovation for Spelunky to 
fully express itself.
Four months after Spelunky’s XBLA release, Yu received a serendip-
itous email from JS Joust designer Doug Wilson (2012), describing a 
whole new way to experience Spelunky:
About a month ago, Nifflas and I started a daily tradition—a 
ritual, if you will. Every night, each of us gets one—and only 
one—Spelunky run. The other sits and watches, cheering along 
and providing advice. On rare days we’ll indulge in a few prac-
tice runs, but it’s only the “official” run that really ­matters—at 
least to us!
This ritual has been deeply enjoyable for several reasons. First, 
the tradition gives us something to look forward to every eve-
ning. Second, the “stakes” of the game feel so much more real 
when you only get one shot. One error and you’re done for 
the day. Nerve-wracking, but invigorating! Third and perhaps 
most importantly, I find that it’s far more rewarding to play 
the game with somebody spectating—a witness with whom 
to share your triumphs and tribulations. After all, Spelunky is 
all about the stories you the player end up producing. As my 
hero Hannah Arendt puts it: “The presence of others who see 
what we see and hear what we hear assures us of the reality 
of the world and ourselves.”
Jokingly, before each run, we make a little prayer to Derek Yu, 
the game’s creator. (For example: “Derek Yu, please grant us 
plentiful bombs and protect us from dark levels. Amen.”) The 
prayer has itself become a key part of our daily ritual—to the 
point where we feel like we’ve almost created a Spelunky reli-
gion/cult. Like, why do bad things happen to good Spelunky 
players? And does Derek Yu even exist? Spelunky theology is 
tricky!

196
Punk Playthings
Wilson and “Nifflas” (game maker Nicklas Nygren) had turned 
Spelunky into an experience beyond the game’s maker-defined 
boundaries. Excited by the framing and convinced by Wilson’s 
“boundless enthusiasm” for this new way to play, Yu developed a 
Daily Challenge mode for the impending Steam version of Spelunky 
that riffed on Wilson’s DIY innovation. Of course, Wilson’s ritual 
only works if you have two or more people in the same physical 
space, so Yu once again turned to the community. Capturing the 
zeitgeist of Let’s Play videos and Twitch and YouTube streaming, 
Yu turned the Daily Challenge from physically constrained local 
spectator sport to worldwide-networked broadcast experience. By 
seeding prerelease copies with prominent streamers to build buzz, 
Spelunky would sell 61,408 copies in its first month on Steam—
more than double its XBLA performance—and more than half a 
million copies in its first two years of release (Yu 2016, loc.1781). PC 
Gamer’s Game of the Year in 2013 and ranked third on Eurogamer’s 
“Games of the Generation” list, Spelunky has sold over 1 million 
copies across all platforms and, more importantly, “every day, play-
ers are still drinking their daily cup of Spelunky coffee by playing the 
Daily Challenge” (Yu 2016, loc.1783).
Small Batch and Neat
In the summer of 2010, childhood friends Tom Gerhardt and Dan 
Provost began collaborating on a passion project—a tripod mount 
for the iPhone 4—on evening and weekends. After a couple of 
months sketching concepts, modeling designs and 3D printing 
prototypes, Gerhardt and Provost had an iteration worth making. 
They called it the Glif and it was an “elegant and simple” design they 
were both proud of (Gerhardt and Provost 2012, loc.74).
In the industrial era, this is where the story would have ended. 
Physically manufacturing the Glif would involve the process of injec-
tion molding, requiring considerable upfront investment. In the 
internet era, however, Gerhardt and Provost simply pitched their 
product on Kickstarter. Based on nothing more than a hunch, the 
unknown duo launched their Glif Kickstarter campaign in October 
2010 with a modest funding goal of $10,000. Without spending a 
dime on advertising, they met their goal in just 12 hours and by the 
end of the 30-day campaign they had raised $137,417.
Gerhardt and Provost did not set out to create a legitimate busi-
ness enterprise, nor did they dream of getting rich quick with a 
side income. They just wanted to embrace their love of iPhone pho-
tography and make a product that would scratch their own itch. 
And  with completely unrelated day jobs—Gerhardt a software 

197
Success Doesn’t Suck
engineer and Provost an interaction designer—the duo had zero 
experience or expertise in industrial design, manufacturing, or 
retail when they pitched the Glif. All they had was a compelling 
pitch to catch the attention of like-minded people.
The campaign video for Glif was only 127 seconds long, yet it made 
a lasting impression on almost every iPhone aficionado who saw 
it. While the Glif was not for everyone—it was made for a par-
ticular phone (iPhone 4 only), a narrow use case (it was “just” a 
tripod mount to let you take better photos) and would only work 
under a specific set of conditions (naked: no case or screen pro-
tector allowed)—it was for someone. Too often, creators forget 
that patrons are people too, with their individual worldviews, 
biases and peccadilloes. But Gerhardt and Provost did not. They 
embraced individuality, making the Glif as opinionated, deceptively 
simple, beautifully designed and luxurious as the Apple product it 
served. That is why it resonated.
Kickstarter success is most often predicated on telling a resonant 
story: what desire is this fulfilling, who is it for, who is it not for, 
why should they care, how will it be brought to life? Gerhardt and 
Provost (2012) understand that as a patron you’re “not buying a 
thing, you’re buying a thing made by this person.” This is a sub-
tle but important distinction between curating storied, interac-
tive journeys and quietly placing your product on someone else’s 
overcrowded digital shelf. As Gerhardt and Provost (2012, loc.180) 
insightfully surmise:
People want to know where things come from and who is 
behind the design. Products do not exist in a vacuum; they 
are designed and created by humans, which we sometimes 
forget.
Conscious of the often-ignored fact that good design and great 
products do not sell themselves, the duo were proactive in their 
marketing outreach. They focused on winning the hearts and 
minds of Apple influencers—such as Daring Fireball’s John Gruber—
rather than taking the more traditional route of paid public rela-
tions or mainstream press lobbying. Active documentarians and 
writers, the duo used the campaign and the subsequent journey 
from prototype to commercial product to show their patrons “how 
the sausage is made,” consequently building a deliberately human, 
thoughtful relationship with their backers. Arguing “you’re not a 
faceless corporation, so why act like one?” Gerhardt and Provost 
were honest, direct and passionate (2012, loc.820). They did not try 
to gloss over their lack of experience or expertise in certain areas, 

198
Punk Playthings
nor did they temper their geeky enthusiasm for making the Glif 
for fear of appearing unprofessional. The duo liken crowdfund-
ing to “having 5,000 bosses” (Gerhardt and Provost 2012, loc.335). 
Fortunately, they choose their superiors wisely.
A few months after the successful Glif campaign, Gerhardt and 
Provost quit their day jobs to go full time. To this day, they remain 
the only employees of Studio Neat and are completely focused on 
making things they care deeply about and are invigorated to work 
on. Gerhardt and Provost describe their agile venture as “small 
batch,” in tribute to craft bourbon distilleries and their obsessive 
pursuit of handcrafted quality over mass-market proliferation and 
profit.
Since its initial success, Studio Neat has continued to curate its 
own microcosm of passionate patrons by simultaneously scratch-
ing its own itches and tapping into latent niche markets in desper-
ate need of a little beautifully designed, handcrafted luxury. So 
far, Studio Neat adventures include cool tools for hobbyist cocktail 
connoisseurs, Apple TV remote stands hand-milled in Texas from 
a single piece of walnut and possibly the best wide-grip iPad stylus 
in the world. Genuinely uninterested in scaling to the mainstream, 
attracting venture capital, or abandoning its patrons in search 
of mass-market customers, Studio Neat is driven by the pursuit 
of one simple guiding principle: solve interesting problems and 
delight like-minded people. In doing so, it will continue to blur the 
lines between maker, marketer and merchant.
Punk Patronage
“BrewDog is an alternative small company, part owned by the 
people who love the beers we made. They are our shareholders, 
our best customers, our friends and the heart and soul of our 
business.”
James Watt
Co-founder, BrewDog (2015)
Stretched to their banking credit limit but in need of an injection of 
capital to sustain their growth, our old friends at BrewDog decided 
to apply their punk approach to crowdfunding.
Equity for Punks was an innovative, alternative approach to busi-
ness finance where BrewDog sold equity stakes in the company 
online to fans rather than professional investors. “Fast, furious 
and ruthlessly effective,” Equity for Punks was “game changing” for 

199
Success Doesn’t Suck
the Scottish brewery and its co-founders, Martin Dickie and James 
Watt, helping them to fund their intensive expansion plans without 
having to dilute their clarity of purpose or control over its execu-
tion (Watt 2015, p.73).
As a concept, Equity for Punks was dismissed out of hand by the 
first seven legal companies BrewDog consulted. In their “expert” 
opinion, what BrewDog wanted to do was impossible. Undeterred, 
the company pressed ahead, gambling BrewDog’s entire future on 
making it work. Inspired by rejection, BrewDog launched Equity 
for Punks with “all guns blazing,” hiring a 1940s tank, plastering it 
with BrewDog logos and parking it outside the Bank of England and 
London Stock Exchange. James Watt (2015, p.76) wanted to send a 
message:
Equity for Punks was not about tinkering with the established 
order. We wanted to strap on the dynamite. This was more 
Guy Fawkes than Rockefeller.
Since 2009, BrewDog has launched four Equity for Punks crowd-
funding campaigns, creating over 46,000 patrons and raising in 
excess of £15 million in the process. Yet for Watt the real beauty of 
Equity for Punks is not the financial investment but the emotional 
one. As a scheme, Equity for Punks deeply strengthens the bond 
between the brewery and the people who enjoy its beers. In con-
trast to professional investment, crowdfunding means BrewDog 
investors are its best customers, most passionate ambassadors 
and co-conspirators in the brewery’s growth and success (Watt 
2015, p.73):
We revel in the fact that people as passionate about craft beer 
as we are now own a slice of our business. No greedy hustlers, 
no fat cats (or dogs), no investment banks, no venture capital-
ists, no overbearing parent. Just loads of people who passion-
ately love great beer.
Nowhere is their ideal of playful punk patronage better articulated 
than in DIY Dog, an open-source recipe book of every BrewDog beer 
ever created (BrewDog 2016):
With DIY Dog we wanted to do something that has never been 
done before as well as paying tribute to our homebrewing roots. 
We wanted to take all of our recipes, every single last one and 

200
Punk Playthings
give them all away for free, to the amazing global home brewing 
community.
We have always loved the sharing of knowledge, expertise 
and passion in the craft beer community and we wanted to 
take that spirit of collaboration to the next level.
So here it is. The keys to our kingdom. Every single BrewDog 
recipe, ever. So copy them, tear them to pieces, bastardise 
them, adapt them and most of all enjoy them.
They are well-traveled but with plenty of miles still left on the 
clock. Just remember to share your brews and your results. 
Sharing is caring.
Oh and if you’re from one of the global beer mega corpora-
tions and you’re reading this, your computer will spontane-
ously combust, James Bond style, any second now.
So leave the building immediately and seriously consider your 
life choices.
DIY Dog gives away all of the BrewDog magic formulas for free. In 
theory, anyone can now do it themselves and make a BrewDog beer. 
If making alone is responsible for the success of the brand, then 
BrewDog has not only radically democratized brewing but accel-
erated their own demise. But it is not the sole metric of success. 
Making is just making, a small—admittedly, crucial—­component 
of a greater experience. And it is the greater experience that is 
responsible for the thousands of punks that patronize BrewDog.
Strange Currencies
Money is not the only measure of value. This is a lesson The Stanley 
Parable co-creator William Pugh learned by self-funding Crows 
Crows Crows—his experimental game making studio—instead of 
signing with a publisher or taking outside investment.
Rather than spend multiple years developing a long-form game 
that “would likely be mediocre” and “crushed by the expectations 
of The Stanley Parable,” Pugh (2017) took the decision to release a 
flurry of short-form playful experiences for free. By trading short-
term profit for long-term patronage, Pugh and his team were able to 
build a 50,000-strong email list within a single year. Through these 
releases, Crows Crows Crows has not only developed the production 
repertoire and rhythm to support future production of long-form 
content, but it has also built a passionate following that is ready and 
willing to lend its patronage when that time finally comes.

201
Success Doesn’t Suck
In the process, Crows Crows Crows has also created a unique, play-
ful tone of voice to complement its prolific tone of action, as evi-
denced by the “UNPROFESSIONAL RANT ZONE” Pugh inserted into 
a Gamasutra guest editorial (2017):
OKAY WELCOME TO THE UNPROFESSIONAL RANT ZONE YOU 
FUCKING BORING GAMASUTRA READING FUCKER!! HERE 
I WILL EXPLAIN TO YOU IN MY REAL UNPROFESSIONAL VOICE 
WHAT THE SITUATION WITH EMAILS IS:
FUCK OFF WITH YOUR BULLSHIT MARKETING BULLSHIT EMAIL 
LIST THAT YOU HALF-HEARTEDLY ASK PEOPLE TO SIGN UP 
TO ON YOUR WORDPRESS SITE THEN POST BULLSHIT THAT 
PEOPLE WILL READ SOMEWHERE ELSE ANYWAY—DON’T YOU 
FUCKING DARE EMAIL YOUR FANS SOME BORING DRY WHITE 
BREAD PRESS COPY THAT SENDS THEM TO SLEEP!! I AM 
LOOKING AT YOU LITERALLY EVERYBODY WHO’S EVER SENT 
ME AN EMAIL!!
EMAILS FROM COMPANIES ARE LIKE “HAVE YOU FOUND JESUS 
CHRIST” LEAFLETS YOU GET HANDED IN THE STREET. NOBODY 
GIVES A FUUUCK—NOBODY GIVES A FUCK YOU FUCKING 
STUPID BUSINESS IDIOTS WHY AM I TELLING YOU THIS YOU 
DUMB FUCKING IDIOTS FUCK YOU. FUCK YOU. YOU NEED TO 
BE EXUDING YOUR STYLE & IDENTITY THROUGH YOUR EMAIL 
SHAPED PORES AND YOU NEED TO FUCK YOUR EMAIL LIST IN 
A CONFIDENT AND VIGOROUS AND CREATIVE MANNER THAT 
INVOLVES EVERYTHING THEY WANT INCLUDING:
••
ORIGINAL FUCKING CONTENT MADE BY THE CORE 
CREATIVE TEAM THAT UTILISES AND SUBVERTS THE 
FUCKING ANCIENT MEDIUM IT IS PRESENTED IN
••
SOME FUCKING COOL SHIT LIKE THE TEMPLE OF NO—
PLEASE DEDICATE ACTUAL RESOURCES TO MAKE 
THINGS PEOPLE WILL ACTUALLY ENJOY NOBODY 
GIVES A FUCK ABOUT THE NEW BARRY THE BIRD 
CHARACTER REVEAL UNLESS YOU’RE BLIZZARD
••
DO NOT FUCKING LET YOUR STUCK-ON-LIFE-SUPPORT-
PR-MARKETING-MANAGER FROM THE 8TH CIRCLE OF 
CONVERSION TOUCH ANY OF YOUR COPY—IT IS TO BE 
HANDLED BY -> -> -> THE CREATIVE TEAM <- <- <-
YOUR COMMUNICATION DICTATES THE PERCEIVED REALITY 
OF YOUR COMPANY SO PLEASE NEVER EVER SEND ME 
SOMETHING THAT HASN’T HAD ACTUAL PRODUCTION TIME 
SCHEDULED FOR IT’S CREATION!! AND I WANT SHIT FROM 

202
Punk Playthings
THE  CORE CREATIVE TEAM  PLLEEEEAAAASSSSEEEEE!!!!!! 
PLEASE FOR THE LOVE OF HOLY FUCKING CHRIST YOU IDIOTS 
SIGN UP TO THE CROWSCROWSCROWS.COM EMAIL LIST IF YOU 
WANT REALLY GOOD FREE GAMES THIS IS JUST PROMOTION 
FOR MY STUDIO THIS IS JUST PROMOTION FOR MY STUDIO 
THIS IS JUST PROMOTION FOR MY STUDI– [sic]
Pugh is part of a new wave of tricksters unafraid to turn the act 
of game making into a community-driven performance act. 
Through “performative game development,” Vlambeer also turned 
Nuclear Throne into a self-sustainable venture while it was still in 
the early stages of production (Sheffield 2014). By live streaming 
development directly to patrons twice weekly, Nuclear Throne was 
“informed by the community, while also informing the community 
about game development,” simultaneously blurring the lines and 
strengthening the bond between creator and patron to create a 
more impassioned, invested and educated community of backers 
(Sheffield 2014).
Modern Love
Writing about the “Creative Apocalypse That Wasn’t,” Steven 
Johnson (2015) highlights the irony of artists who once complained 
about the “rapacious pursuit of consumer dollars” by their indus-
try paymasters now complaining the same industries are not 
profitable enough for them to exist within. Seeing this complaint 
as short-sighted, Johnson argues that the death of longstanding 
centralized institutions—“record labels or studios or publishing 
­conglomerates”—would not represent a doomsday event, the gen-
uine dystopian scenario would be the “the death of music or mov-
ies” themselves (2015). It is the ongoing prosperity of creatives and 
artisans that is truly important for culture and society; the indus-
tries they have been forced to operate within don’t really matter. 
Any cuddly reinvention of industrialized institutions is, in reality, a 
ruthless act of self-preservation masquerading as egalitarianism. 
There is no better time to cut the umbilical cord and build your own 
communities of practice, patronage and playful experiences.
Punks and provocateurs: seize the moment, smash the monocul-
ture, do it yourself!

203
Success Doesn’t Suck
FIGURE 4.4  You can copy BrewDog’s recipe for making Jack Hammer 
but can you re-capture the definitive drinking experience? (Reprinted 
with permission from BrewDog, Copyright © 2016 BrewDog. All Rights 
Reserved.)

204
Punk Playthings
Devolver Digital: A Case 
Study in Amplification
Devolver Digital is a publisher for game makers who don’t need 
one. An antidote to the monolithic, monocultural game publisher, 
Devolver has pioneered a new kind of maker–publisher dynamic 
based on personal relationships, creative freedom and fair 
contracts.
Small, nimble and self-funded, Devolver takes risks with the artists 
it works with, the deals it offers and the niche titles it publishes. 
Its reward is a hard-won reputation as a mainstream purveyor of 
“magnificently handcrafted games”; our reward is a new wave of 
exciting, sustainable, independent game makers.
Twenty-Four-Hour Party Playthings
“If video games are in their ‘indie period,’ where is our Factory 
Records?”
Jamin Warren
Kill Screen (2012)
Factory Records needs little reintroduction. The iconic Manchester 
record label was set up in 1978 by that “freewheeling, free-thinking 
bundle of contradictions,” Tony Wilson (Morley 2007). Using a curi-
ous cocktail of “regional pride, entrepreneurial elan and seductive 
brand of quasi-situationist hedonism,” Wilson brought Joy Division, 
New Order, Happy Mondays and the Haçienda to the world (King 
2012).
For Factory—and its contemporaries of the 1980s—the mission 
extended beyond breaking provocative acts and distributing great 
records. Independent record labels were the self-appointed antith-
esis of the mainstream music industry and the postindustrial 
gloom of Thatcher’s Britain; they embodied a set of ideals, cultural 
theories and aesthetic sensibilities. The Smiths signed to an inde-
pendent instead of a major label because, according to guitarist 
Johnny Marr, “The very act of being on Rough Trade at the time was 
a statement in itself” (quoted by King 2012).
In a world oversaturated by indie games, indie game makers and 
now, indie publishers, Warren’s question regarding the where-
abouts of our Factory Records seems more pertinent than ever. 
Perhaps, Devolver Digital—“the closest thing to an indie record 
label our industry has” (Roberts 2015)—provides an answer?

205
Success Doesn’t Suck
Highly Devolved
Devolver Digital was founded in 2009 by Mike Wilson, Harry A Miller 
IV, Rick Stults, Nigel Lowrie and Graeme Struthers after the global 
financial crisis forced the sale of their previous venture, Gamecock 
Media Group. In some ways, Devolver Digital is the continuation of 
the good work that began with Gamecock. A Miramax-type studio, 
Gamecock helped independent game makers publish their work by 
doing “all the stuff a developer needs a publisher to do, but none 
of the stuff that they don’t need a publisher to do” (Wilson 2007). 
In other ways, Devolver is more of a contextual iteration. Where 
Gamecock had external investors—the catalyst for its ultimate 
demise—Devolver Digital is wholly independent and was initially a 
side project funded by day jobs. Where Gamecock wanted to scale 
and take the major labels on at their own game, Devolver prefers 
to stay small and leave the major publishers to eat themselves. 
Where Gamecock was built to solve a problem for independents in 
the boxed product retail era, Devolver foresaw the shift to smaller 
games, infinite niches and digital distribution and it positioned 
itself accordingly (Jagneaux 2016).
Since the release of its first title—Serious Sam HD: The First 
Encounter—Devolver Digital has published over 50 more. And 
it has worked with game makers as diverse and distributed as 
Vlambeer (Netherlands), Croteam (Croatia), Roll7 (UK), Le Cartel 
Studio (France), Ojiro Fumoto (Japan), Free Lives (South Africa), 
Coffee Powdered Machine (Argentina), Jay Tholen (US), Terri 
Vellmann (Brazil) and No Code (Scotland). With a ludography zig-
zagging between the sublime and the ridiculous, it is hard to define 
Devolver. There are ludicrous first-person shooters (Serious Sam 
HD), retro arcade games (Luftrausers), pigeon dating simulators 
(Hatoful Boyfriend), philosophical puzzle games (The Talos Principle), 
surreal point-and-click tragi-comedies (Dropsy) and psychological-
horror text adventure homages to Stranger Things (Stories Untold). 
The only common theme is that each release is a magnificently 
handcrafted provocation that somehow, feels distinctly “Devolver.”
There may be a feel of what is Devolver, but there is no prescrip-
tive checklist criteria or style guide. Devolver Digital seeks out mav-
ericks and misfits capable of setting themselves apart from the 
modern “indie” homogeny through attitude, aesthetic and/or expe-
rience. According to Nigel Lowrie, the games Devolver is attracted 
to do not have to be revolutionary or perfect, they just have to 
“strike us in some indescribable way” (quoted by Roberts 2015).
At their peak, the independent record labels of the 1980s were a 
vital, vibrant “source of popular experimentation and improvisation 

206
Punk Playthings
that connected with a wide audience” (King 2012). The Devolver 
Digital mission is similar: help interesting independents create 
exciting experiences and expose them to a wider, willing audience.
You Don’t Need a Publisher
Nigel Lowrie (2016) argues that “nobody needs a game publisher” 
because “self-publishing is better than a bad agreement.” If game 
makers do seek a publisher, it should only be because they believe 
their target publishing partner can perform the dirty work involved 
in producing and publishing a successful game better than they 
could themselves. In contrast to the majority of publishers—even 
self-styled “indie publishers”—Devolver has a devastatingly simple 
strategy: scout interesting game makers and help them make and 
sell their work. They do not promise the world, nor do they enforce 
oppressive contracts or demand creative control in return for their 
support. Devolver (Wilson quoted by Messner 2016) cultivates per-
sonal relationships with the game makers it works with, relation-
ships built around fair contracts, creative freedom and honesty:
The traditional method of dealing with difficult talent is to 
buy them. The publishers then own their intellectual property 
and can continue to crank out sequels with less uppity game 
developers. That’s the point of owning the developer, you 
never have to listen to them.
In contrast to this traditional command-and-control publisher rela-
tionship, the role Devolver plays is simply one of enabler. It affords 
game makers space, time and resources to “have an impact in their 
lives and help them bring their project to life” and involves itself in 
that process only as much as the artist chooses (Struthers quoted 
by Jagneaux 2016). This model works because Devolver invests in 
teams and their potential rather than seductive paper ideas or fully 
formed products. The scope of Devolver’s involvement varies from 
project to project, but one thing it always brings is creative free-
dom laced with brutal honesty. The close personal relationships 
Devolver cultivate affords the opportunity to “argue like friends” 
with teams, challenging them on important things like time and 
money and telling them things they sometimes don’t want to hear 
but need to. But, says Lowrie (quoted by McKeand 2016), at all 
times the team reserves the right to tell Devolver to “fuck off.”
Without Devolver Digital, Enter the Gungeon—the 2016 hit retro 
dungeon crawler—would likely have run out of money and its 
maker, Dodge Roll Games, would have been “forced to release the 

207
Success Doesn’t Suck
game too early,” admits Dave Crooks from the Washington, DC, 
developer (quoted by Jagneaux 2016). Crooks praises Devolver for 
not only pushing them to release a better game but also curating a 
better promotional campaign and exposing the game to a far wider 
audience through trailers and demos in Best Buys and GameStops 
around the US.
“When it comes to how we position ourselves and how we do 
things, we do whatever’s best for the developer and getting their 
games out there, because ultimately they’re the ones who want to 
find success and hopefully they will want to work with us again. 
They’ve trusted us with their livelihood and their art, so we have 
to be good stewards of that.”
Nigel Lowrie
(quoted by McKeand 2016)
Artists and Repertoire
Another thing that sets Devolver apart from other game 
­publishers—and reinforces its independent label credentials—
is a commitment to artists and repertoire (A&R). The A&R divi-
sion of a record label are responsible for scouting talent, bringing 
them to the label and overseeing their development as recording 
artists. While major record labels have significantly scaled back 
on A&R—shifting toward a more conservative signing policy in a 
desperate bid to conserve the music business they understand 
and profit from—independents continue to use good A&R to their 
unfair advantage.
It is an unfair advantage for Devolver Digital, too. No other game 
publisher comes close to matching its commitment to uncovering 
talent and potential. Devolver may receive 10 new pitches every 
week but Lowrie still regularly trawls “everything from TIGSource to 
IndieDB and Steam Greenlight,” as well as spending time walking the 
floors of festivals, to uncover hidden gems (Jagneaux 2016).
Titan Souls started as a small prototype made for Ludum Dare—
the long-running, online 48-hour game jam event. Devolver Digital 
stumbled upon it, played it, liked its potential, sought out its 
­creators—UK independent studio Acid Nerve—and offered to help 
the Mancunian duo turn it into a full game. Fifteen months later, Acid 
Nerve released its commercial debut simultaneously on Playstation 
4, Playstation Vita, PC and Mac. Signed for its potential and funded 
through development without any dilution of creative control, it is 
difficult to see how Titan Souls would have realized its vision without 
the patronage and parenting of Devolver. This emphasis on personal 

208
Punk Playthings
relationships runs throughout the history of Devolver Digital. Its first 
release, Serious Sam 3, came about due to a longstanding relation-
ship with the game’s makers, Croteam. A long-term relationship 
with Vlambeer and the publishing of Luftrausers happened when 
Devolver approached the Dutch duo to “remix” Serious Sam. In turn, 
it was Vlambeer who tipped Devolver off that Jonathan “Cactus” 
Söderström—a Swedish avant-garde game maker—had decided 
that, after years of self-publishing free experimental games, he 
wanted to do something commercial (McKeand 2016).
Playful and Provocative
Devolver did not know what kind of game Söderström planned 
when it signed him up. According to founding partner Graeme 
Struthers, it only “knew who Cactus [Söderström] was” and “If the 
guy wanted to make a chess game we would have said yes” (quoted 
by Purchase 2012). What Dennaton Games—a collaboration 
between Söderström and artist Dennis Wedin—had in the works 
was not chess but “exceptional top down f***-em-up” (Purchase 
2012)—Hotline Miami.
“I had no idea what kind of game was going to drop into our lap at 
that point. When I got my build, I was just so happy. The music 
and the colour palette—it all just really came together for me in 
one magic burst of pixel joy. I didn’t connect with feeling queasy 
or worried by the violence, let alone thinking about the underlying 
story. I was just having a blast.”
Graeme Struthers
Devolver Digital (quoted by Edge Magazine 2013)
After experimenting with music, drawing and short film in his 
teens, Söderström settled upon game making as his creative outlet. 
Armed with a copy of GameMaker, he began releasing games under 
the pseudonym Cactus. Since 2004, he has published over 40 video 
games, mostly small in size and avant-garde in nature.
In 2011, Söderström teamed up with Dennis Wedin to make the 
psychedelic Keyboard Drumset Fucking Werewolf. Encouraged by 
the collaboration, Söderström and Wedin began developing Life/
Death/Island but abandoned it when the scope outgrew their 
finances. After years of giving his games away for free, Söderström 
needed to put a game out that would make some  money. 
Trawling  Söderström’s  considerable archive, Wedin came across 
an abandoned prototype called Super Carnage, a simple, top-down 

209
Success Doesn’t Suck
shoot ’em up. Created when Söderström was just 18, it was a “teen-
age boy’s game: sick and violent and little more than that” (Edge 
Magazine 2013). However, viewed through mature eyes and aspi-
rations, its potential was apparent. Before starting development, 
Söderström and Wedin watched a bunch of movies, including 
the Miami drug wars documentary Cocaine Cowboys and Nicolas 
Winding Refn’s visceral neo-noir movie Drive. Both helped shape 
the thesis at the heart of Hotline Miami and its subsequent success: 
“What if Super Carnage wasn’t merely a game in which you killed 
people, but a game that posed questions about what it meant to 
kill people in a game?” (Edge Magazine 2013).
In his review of Hotline Miami—“The First Postmodern Videogame?”—
Joseph Bernstein (n.d.) called out the “conservative sphere of refer-
ence” deployed by independent game makers. Bernstein observed 
the tendency for independent games to be “creative iterations of 
games their creators played growing up, often spectacularly cre-
ative ones, but still, iterations” (n.d.). It is here, knowingly, where 
Hotline Miami—an “unimpeachable” aesthetic document, as viewed 
by Bernstein—distances itself from the average independent game. 
Scratch beneath the superficial influence of Smash TV and the origi-
nal Grand Theft Auto and you can see the deeper cultural connections 
to the likes of Cocaine Cowboys. Söderström himself admits that he 
was “pretty tired of crappy games that don’t really want to do any-
thing special, just make more of the same and don’t try new things.” 
Instead, he wanted to “express something interesting that you want 
to share with other people” (quoted by Procter n.d.).
Hotline Miami is an expression of Söderström’s concern with the 
way games portray violence as a “clean act,” and how this absolves 
the player of any responsibility (quoted by Webster 2012). To chal-
lenge this portrayal and abdication of responsibility, Söderström 
adopts a Peckinpah-like approach to making violence feel disturb-
ing and discomforting to the audience:
“We wanted to show violence in real terms. Dying is not fun and 
games. Movies make it look so detached. With ‘The Wild Bunch,’ 
people get involved whether they like it or not. They do not have 
the mild reactions to it.”
Sam Peckinpah
 (quoted in Ebert 1969)
As Edge (2013) rightly argued, Hotline Miami is a “deliriously vio-
lent … nihilistic murder simulator” that at the same time poses a 
powerful and searching question to the player: “do you like hurt-
ing people? And if you don’t, why are you still playing?”

210
Punk Playthings
Hit the Road
Hotline Miami did not need a publisher but it undoubtedly benefit-
ted from the partnership with Devolver Digital. Six months before 
its October 2012 release, Hotline Miami went on tour, visiting 
independent-minded game expos and festivals. At the inaugural 
Rezzed in Brighton, Hotline Miami won “Game Of The Show” from 
both Eurogamer and Rock, Paper, Shotgun, with the latter calling it “a 
work of bloody art [that] stood out a mile even at a show already 
full of wonders” (Meer 2012).
From that point forward, the momentum kept gathering as the game 
delighted crowds at both the Eurogamer Expo and Gamescom. 
Relatively unknown outside of the Devolver inner circle before Rezzed, 
the exposure built a following among press and players, creating a 
demand that culminated in a gushing launch day review in Eurogamer 
and 130,000 copies in the first seven weeks of release (Purchase 2012).
The sales figures would have been even higher but for the download-
ing of bootleg copies through torrenting. Instead of trying to fight 
the piracy, Dennaton embraced it, releasing a patch to fix some bugs 
present in the bootleg version. Whether a customer or a pirate, it 
was important that everyone got to play the best version of Hotline 
Miami (Purchase 2012). This stance mirrors Devolver’s attitude toward 
streamers and YouTubers. In a world where megacorp monoliths—
even the saintly Nintendo—serve desist notices and demand a share 
of revenue, Devolver encourages anyone and everyone to use foot-
age of their games with no rules or restrictions. If the question is “can 
I stream and monetize Devolver Digital games?” the answer is always 
“yes” (Kuchera 2015). For Devolver, streamers and YouTubers are a 
critical function of modern publicity—so much so that Lowrie (2016) 
counsels independent game makers that should their potential pub-
lisher’s PR strategy does not include streamers and YouTubers, they 
should “walk out of the door, lock that door and set the building on fire 
because they don’t know what they are doing.”
Reigns
Industry experts will tell you that the mobile market is an “indie-­
hostile” space where “paid apps are truly dead”; even if you have a hit, 
unless it’s a free-to-play cash cow, you cannot gross enough money to 
turn a profit (Fahey 2016; Haro 2016). Devolver Digital disagrees.
Handcrafted by Nerial and published by Devolver, Reigns is a strategic 
card game that sold over a million copies in its first quarter of release. 
The majority of these sales were made on mobile app stores at the 

211
Success Doesn’t Suck
premium price of $2.99 (Reigns 2016a, 2016b). Written and devel-
oped on a tiny budget by François Alliot—in collaboration with Mieko 
Murakami (art), Disasterspace (audio direction), Matéo Lugo (music) 
and Eric Van Amerongen (sound design)—Reigns is a playful, playable, 
political satire inspired by the absurdity of Brexit—the 2016 referen-
dum where British citizens voted to exit the European Union on indefi-
nite terms at an undefined future date. Alliot (2016) set out to mock 
the way societies confront the complexities of the modern world by 
reducing them to political binaries in the vein of Tinder:
It’s troubling to think that a deep and complex decision involv-
ing the future of a whole continent was defined by the same 
mechanic as a casual dating service: a binary choice made 
disappointingly simple, crushing every nuance that a complex 
subject demands. Swipe either right or left. Accept the huge 
geopolitical consequences.
The core strength of Reigns is that the entire experience—every 
aspect of production—was defined by this provocative perspec-
tive. Every aesthetic contribution—its tone, audio-visual style, 
smart writing, subtle depth of gameplay, tactility and how it makes 
the player think and feel—are all in service of its satirical message. 
Alliot admits that Nerial did not set out to make the perfect game 
but to amplify an experience; the joke that modern political com-
plexity had been reduced to a series of yes/no, in/out, right/left, 
good/bad binary questions.
Alliot did not want a publisher for Reigns; he just wanted to work with 
Devolver Digital. A unique game needed a unique partner, Alliot 
(2016) thought, someone “akin to one of those cool indie record 
labels” who could help the game reach the audience it deserved:
The essence of the label is hard to define: You don’t know what 
sort of crazy game they’re going to release next, but you know it 
will have something special. All their games share some sort of 
edge or sharpness associated with a promise of depth behind 
the pitch. It’s not a formula producing copycat games; there’s 
really not much in common between, for  instance, Hotline 
Miami and Hatoful Boyfriend. Still ... both of them are definitely 
Devolver. They share that spirit, that wit. They love to scratch the 
very homogenous word of “gaming,” and preferably not gently.
For 
a 
“dynasty-management-slash-narrative-game-à-la-Tinder” 
targeting a simultaneous multiplatform release, it was critical to 
have a partner who knew how to get things shipped onto various 
platforms and operated beyond lazy marketing demographics. 

212
Punk Playthings
For Alliot (2016), that partner had to be Devolver because no one 
else had a proven track record of persuading players to take a 
chance on an esoteric game and demonstrating that the “carefully 
erected frontiers between devices and gamers are not that real.” 
Without Devolver’s help, Reigns would likely have been just another 
mobile misfire languishing in the digital landfill.
Magnificently Handcrafted Games
Devolver Digital continues to prove it is possible to consistently 
connect interesting, niche games to a broader audience and make 
a profit doing so. At the same time, it disproves the anachronistic, 
top-down model of traditional publishers and demonstrates that 
personal purposeful partnerships—independent-thinking labels, 
not corporatized publishers—represent the future. Ask Nigel 
Lowrie (2016) and he will tell you that independent game makers 
“don’t need a fucking publisher” but that the right partner can 
make a real difference.
In his obituary for Factory Records founder Tony Willson, Paul 
Morley (2007) said: 
“Without Wilson there may well have been in some form Joy 
Division and Factory and New Order and the Hacienda and 
Happy  Mondays. There may well have been Peter Saville’s 
dream designs and Martin Hannett’s timeless production and 
a  Manchester that managed to move on from its sad post-­
industrial decline. But none of it would have been so far-fetched, 
so dramatic and so fantastic.”
Devolver Digital may not be our Factory Records but without it 
sustainably esoteric independent game making would not be so 
vibrant, so provocative, or so fantastic.
Practical Provocations
••
Which independent record label best matches your ideals, 
cultural theories and aesthetic sensibilities? Who is their 
equivalent for game making?
••
What if your primary reference point was a documentary?
••
What if you remixed an old prototype as cultural commentary?

213
Success Doesn’t Suck
FIGURE 4.5  The Devolver Digital logo starring Fork Parker, their 
fictional chief financial officer. (Reprinted with permission from 
Devolver Digital, ©Devolver Digital 2017. All rights reserved.)

214
Punk Playthings
FIGURE 4.6  A screenshot from Reigns. Made by Nerial, published by 
Devolver Digital. (Reprinted with permission from Devolver Digital, 
©Devolver Digital 2017. All rights reserved.)

215
Success Doesn’t Suck
FIGURE 4.7  Cover art for Stories Untold from Glasgow’s No Code. 
(Reprinted with permission from Devolver Digital, ©Devolver Digital 
2017. All rights reserved.)


217
Conclusions
An Ending (Ascent)
“As soon as the ‘d word’—as in definitive—passes your lips, the 
other ‘d word’ is true. You’re dead.”
Simon Schama
The Rest Is History (2000)
Defiantly Maybe
Throughout the writing of this book, a card sat tantalizingly in the 
“to do” list of our Trello board. It said simply: “Conclusion.” That 
card represented a destination, a place where our thinking would 
converge into something concrete, into those neat takeaways that 
help us readers avoid thinking too much. But when we came to 
write those conclusions, we realized there were no neat answers, 
no fixed truths, no definitives. There were only more questions and 
triggers for action.

218
Conclusions
(Just Like) Starting Over
“You can be your own enemy
Or you can choose to be free ...”
Marshall Jefferson presents Truth
Open Our Eyes (1988)
So this is an ending—not the end. What follows is our manifesto. 
It might seem strange that the manifesto resides at the end of the 
book, but we didn’t want to crack the code before you received the sig-
nal. And we wanted to finish with some food for thought. Plus, we’re 
all about the unorthodox, as you know. Our manifesto intersects with 
core themes within this book, but instead of explicitly fixing them in 
definitive conclusions, it articulates stimuli and starting points. We 
believe in the manifesto now but can’t promise we’ll think the same in 
six or twelve months; what appears here has already evolved notice-
ably from the original written more than two years ago. But we’re 
good with that. Adaptive evolution always trumps rigid stagnation. 
And by placing the manifesto at the end, we hope to keeps things more 
open-ended, offering space for new interpretations, fresh ideas, pro-
vocative triggers for speculation and creative action. Yours, we hope.
If you’ve got thoughts to share or stories to tell, let us know. We’re 
always up for discussing ideals and ideas or revising our thinking. 
That’s because creating playful experiences people want is complex. 
Contemporary game making—like anything in this world—is not a 
rigid either/or proposition. Anyone who thinks it is should stop now. 
There are no fixed rules, no certainties, no magic bullets. People who 
tell you different are merely hucksters. Game making is both effec-
tive and wasteful, rewarding and frustrating, comforting and risky, 
creative and mundane, simple and difficult, ugly and beautiful. It’s a 
fluid adventure of living in flux, in the cracks and spaces, somewhere 
between the gutter and the stars. Embrace these uncertainties and 
contradictions. It’s not always easy, but it can be done—as those men-
tioned in the preceding pages demonstrate. But doing so demands a 
heuristic mindset, unorthodox thinking and a deep-seated desire to 
do it yourself. In other words: true independence. And if we have man-
aged to convince you only of this within these pages, then perhaps 
this is not an ending at all but simply a new beginning.

219
Conclusions
The Punk Playthings Manifesto
Uncertainty and change surround us. Game makers exist in a state 
of flux—with all that was solid melted into air. We must embrace 
the unknown and adapt. Seeking refuge in old certainties leaves 
us blind and immutable, groping for answers and retreating into 
orthodoxy.
Orthodoxy manifests in numerous ways: prescriptive processes 
deny adaptability, knowledge silos result in bunker mentalities, 
defined industry pathways negate artistic expression, identity 
ghettos restrict opportunity. All propel our medium and its arti-
facts into a creative cul-de-sac that negates meaning, resonance 
and sustainability.
Games are simultaneously eating and starving themselves. We 
need more diversity and sustenance in our diet. Know your context 
and become a curious explorer, ruthless remixer and imaginative 
conspirator. Be open, expressive and insightful. Be maverick, fluid 
and playful. Be truly independent of mind.
Here’s how:
••
Remember, everything is connected. Context is vital. 
Nothing exists in a vacuum
••
Smash the monoculture. Eat culture, all you want, mostly 
not games. Expand your cultural capital, then remix and 
represent it
••
Always adapt. Nothing is certain, nothing lasts forever. 
Fluidity beats rigidity. Only dead processes can be packaged
••
Celebrate ideals over ideas. Find your purpose. Creativity 
and innovation will follow
••
Value people over process. Mavericks over rules. Individuals 
over the mass
••
Form a band, not a company. You must speculate not 
incorporate. Go easy, step light, stay free
••
Don’t follow the yellow brick road. There’s more to life 
than established pathways. Take the road less traveled and 
arrive somewhere new
••
Refute gaming exceptionalism. Games are no better 
or worse than any other medium. There are exceptional 
games, but there’s nothing exceptional about games

220
Conclusions
••
Don’t give up your day job. Put on a show, find fans, procure 
patronage. Don’t get caught in the lifestyle business trap
••
Sell out. Money isn’t the root of all evil; the worship of it 
is. Money can liberate creativity and experimentation. Get 
some, do good things
••
Do it yourself. Always. Real punks are creative entrepreneurs.

221
References
Introduction
Anderson, C. (2012) Quarrel vs. The Game Industry: Who’s Right? [Internet] 
Gamasutra, January 25, 2012. Available from: http://www.gamasu-
tra.com/blogs/ColinAnderson/20120125/90784/Quarrel_vs_The_
Games_Industry_Whos_Right.php [Accessed March 30, 2017].
Carmel, R. (2011) Opinion: Is XBLA Past its Prime? [Internet]. Gamasutra, 
October 3, 2011. Available from: https://www.gamasutra.com/
view/news/37653/Opinion_Is_XBLA_Past_Its_Prime.php [Accessed 
March 30, 2017].
Morrissey, S.P. and Marr, J. (1983) Jeane. The Smiths et al. with Sandie 
Shaw. Recorded February 1984 [Vinyl]. RTT 130. London: Rough 
Trade.
Playboy. (1969) Playboy Interview: Marshall McLuhan: A Candid 
Conversation with the High Priest of Popcult and Metaphysician of 
Media. In: Mcluhan, E. and Zingrone, F., eds. (1997). Essential McLuhan. 
London: Routledge. pp. 233–270.
Public Image Limited. (1986) Rise. Public Image Limited et al. [Vinyl]. VS 
841/12. London: Virgin Records Ltd.
Sawyer, K. (2006) Explaining Creativity: The Science of Human Innovation. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

222
References
Seabrook, 
J. 
(2006) 
Game 
Master 
[Internet]. 
The 
New 
Yorker, 
November  6, 2006. Available from: https://www.newyorker.com/
magazine/2006/11/06/game-master 
[Accessed 
December 
15, 
2016].
The Beloved. (1990) Hello. The Beloved et al. [Vinyl]. YZ 426T. London: WEA 
Records Ltd.
Turner, F. (2008) From Cyberculture to Counterculture: Stewart Brand, the 
Whole Earth Network, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism. Chicago, IL: 
The University of Chicago Press.
Wolf, G. (1996) Steve Jobs: The Next Insanely Great Thing [Internet]. Wired, 
February 1, 1996. Available from: https://www.wired.com/1996/02/
jobs-2/ [Accessed March 31, 2017].
Chapter 1: The Road Less Traveled
No Gods, No Masters
Chadwick, W. (1990) Women, Art and Society. London: Thames and 
Hudson.
Encyclopedia Britannica (2016). Georgia O’Keeffe [Internet]. Available from: 
https://www.britannica.com/biography/Georgia-OKeeffe [Accessed 
December 15, 2016].
House of Cards – Chapter 34. (2015) [Internet]. House of Cards, Season 3 
Episode 8.TV Program: Netflix UK [Accessed February 14, 2017].
Imagine ... Georgia O’Keeffe: By Myself. (2016) [TV Programme]. BBC, BBC1, 
July 26, 2016 22:45.
Kent, S.L. (2000) The Ultimate History of Video Games: From Pong to Pokemon 
and Beyond. New York: Three Rivers Press.
Messinger, L. (2004) Georgia O’Keeffe (1887–1986) [Internet]. Available 
from: 
https://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/geok/hd_geok.htm 
[Accessed December 15, 2016]
NPR. (2017) How I Built This: Atari & Chuck E. Cheese’s: Nolan Bushnell. 
[Podcast]. NPR, February 27, 2017. Available from: http://www.npr.
org/podcasts/510313/how-i-built-this [Accessed March 18, 2017]
Ogilvy, D. (2013) Confessions of an Advertising Man. Harpenden: 
Southbank.
Seabrook, J. (2006) Game Master [Internet]. The New Yorker, November 6, 
2006. Available from: https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/​2006/​
11/06/game-master [Accessed December 15, 2016]
Tate. (2016) Georgia O’Keeffe Exhibition at Tate Modern [Internet]. Available 
from: http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/georgia-​
okeeffe [Accessed December 14, 2016]
Tungate, M. (2007). Ad Land: A Global History of Advertising. London: Kogan 
Page.
Verlhac, P.H. and Dherbier, Y.B. eds. (2006). Paul Newman: A Life in Pictures. 
San Francisco, CA: Chronicle Books.

223
References
I Wanna Be Adored
Adejobi, A. (2016). Independent vs Major Label: What Adele’s £90m Sony 
Music Deal Means for XL Recordings [Internet]. International Business 
Times, July 19, 2016. Available from: http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/
independent-vs-major-label-what-adeles-90m-sony-music-record-
deal-means-xl-recordings-1571439 [Accessed December 14, 2016]
BPI. (2016) Certified Awards Finder [Internet]. The British Phonographic 
Industry. Available from: https://www.bpi.co.uk/certified-awards.aspx 
[Accessed December 14, 2016].
Ellison, R. (1965) Invisible Man. London: Penguin.
Ellis-Petersen, H. (2016) Adele Signs £90m Contract with Sony [Internet]. 
The Guardian, May 23, 2016. Available from: https://www.
theguardian.com/music/2016/may/23/adele-set-to-sign-90m-sony-
deal [Accessed December 14, 2016].
Gamasutra Staff. (2013) Indie Game Development on the Rise in a Big Way 
[Internet]. Gamasutra, February 28, 2013. Available from: https://www.
gamasutra.com/view/news/187540/Indie_game_development_on_
the_rise_in_a_big_way.php [Accessed December 14, 2016].
Goldman, D. (2010). Music’s Lost Decade: Sales Cut in Half in 2000s [Internet]. 
CNN Money, February 3, 2010. Available from: http://money.cnn.
com/2010/02/02/news/companies/napster_music_industry/ 
[Accessed December 14, 2016].
Ingham, T. (2015) Don’t Dismiss Adele’s Success as a Miracle. You’re Better 
than that [Internet]. Music Business Worldwide, November 27, 2015. 
Available from: https://www.musicbusinessworldwide.com/dont-
dismiss-adeles-success-as-a-miracle/ [Accessed December 14, 
2016]
Jonze, T. (2011a). XL Recordings: The Record Label that’s Tearing Up the Rule 
Book [Internet]. The Guardian, February 16, 2011. Available from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/feb/16/richard-
russell-xl-recordings-dizzee-rascal-prodigy [Accessed December 
14, 2016]. 
Jonze, T. (2011b) How Adele Conquered the World [Internet]. The Guardian, 
April 6, 2011. Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/
music/2011/apr/06/adele-music-interview [Accessed July 27, 2017].
Juul, J. (2010) A Casual Revolution: Reinventing Video Games and Their Players. 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Mateos-Garcia, J. and Bakhsh, H. (2014) A Map of the UK Games Industry 
[Internet]. London: Nesta/Ukie. Available from: http://www.nesta.
org.uk/publications/map-uk-games-industry [Accessed December 
14, 2016].
Music for Misfits: The Story of Indie. (2015) [TV Programme]. BBC, BBC4, 
October 9, 2015, 22:00.
Parker, L. (2011) Rise of the Indie Developer [Internet]. GameSpot, February 14, 
2011. Available from: https://www.gamespot.com/articles/the-rise-of-
the-indie-developer/1100-6298425/ [Accessed December 14, 2016].

224
References
PIAS. (2016) Richard Russell: The Highlights from His Award Speech [Internet]. 
PIAS, September 7, 2016. Available from: https://www.pias.com/blog/
richard-russell-highlights-aim-awards-speech/ [Accessed December 
14, 2016].
Rolling Stone. (2012) Adele’s “21” Earns XL Recordings $67 Million Profit 
[Internet]. Rolling Stone, October 16, 2012. Available from: http://
www.rollingstone.com/music/news/adeles-21-earns-xl-records-67-
million-profit-20121016 [Accessed December 14, 2016]
Stewart, K. (2012). Us and the Game Industry – How Indie Games Are the New 
Counterculture [Internet]. The Guardian, March 12, 2012. Available 
from: https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2012/
mar/12/us-and-the-game-industry-feature?CMP=share_btn_fb 
[Accessed March 21, 2017].
Sullivan, C. (2012) Adele’s Expected Brit Awards Underline Success of Indie 
Labels [Internet]. The Guardian, February 20, 2012. Available from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/feb/20/adele-brit-
awards-indie-success [Accessed December 14, 2016]
Teather, D. (2007). Still Kicking After All These Years [Internet]. The Guardian, 
July 13, 2007. Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/
business/​2007/jul/13/musicnews.pop [Accessed December 14, 2016]
TIGA. (2016) March of the Micro-Studios [Internet]. TIGA, August 22, 2016. 
Available from: https://tiga.org/news/march-of-the-micro-studios 
[Accessed November 20, 2016].
Ukie. (2016) UK Video Games Fact Sheet [Internet]. Ukie, November 4, 
2016. Available from: http://ukie.org.uk/research#Fact%20Sheet 
[Accessed November 20, 2016].
Witt, S. (2015). What Happened When Music Got Free: The End of an Industry, 
The Turn of a Century, and Patient Zero of Piracy. New York: Viking.
Weapons of Mass Destruction
BARB. (2017). TV Since 1981 [Internet]. The Broadcasters Audience Research 
Board. Availble from: http://www.barb.co.uk/resources/tv-facts/tv-
since-1981/1981/top10/ [Accessed July 27, 2017].
Brammer, J.P. (2016) “The Latino Vote” Didn’t Overwhelm Trump Because We’re 
Not All the Same [Internet]. The Guardian, November 9, 2016. Available 
from: https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/
the-latino-vote-didnt-overwhelm-trump-because-were-not-all-the-
same [Accessed January 5, 2017].
Buchanan, R. (1998) Branzi’s Dilemma: Design in Contemporary Culture. 
In: Buchanan, R., et al., eds. The Designed World: Images, Objects, 
Environments. Oxford: Berg. pp. 13–28.
Cohn, D. and Caumont, A. (2016) Demographic 10, Trends that Are Shaping 
the U.S. and the World [Internet]. CNN, November 9, 2016. Available 
from: 
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/03/31/10-
demographic-­trends-that-are-shaping-the-u-s-and-the-world/ 
[Accessed January 5, 2017].

225
References
Davies, R. (1966). I’m Not Like Everybody Else. The Kinks et al. Recorded May 
1966, Pye Studio No.2, London. [Vinyl]. 7N 17125-B. London: Pye 
Records.
Dex, R. (2013) Are You Taking the Piss? Hacienda Urinals Go on Sale for £15,000 
[Internet]. The Independent, September 5, 2013. Available from: http://
www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/music/news/are-you-
taking-the-piss-hacienda-urinals-go-on-sale-for-15000-8800535.
html [Accessed July 27, 2017].
Gretton, R. (1992) I Wanted A Place Where I Could Ogle Women. Interviewed 
by Jon Savage, March 1992. In: Savage, J., ed., The Hacienda Must Be 
Built. Woodford Green: International Music Publications.
Hook, P. (1992) Why Is the School Bully the School Bully? Interviewed by Jon 
Savage, March 1992. In: Savage, J, ed., The Hacienda Must Be Built. 
Woodford Green: International Music Publications. p. 24.
Krogstad, J.M. (2016) 2016 Electorate Will Be the Most Diverse in U.S. History 
[Internet]. Pew Research Centre, February 3, 2016. Available from: 
http://w w w.pewresearch.org/fact-tank /2016/02/03/2016-
electorate-will-be-the-most-diverse-in-u-s-history/ [Accessed January 
5, 2017].
Krogstad, J.M. and Flores, A. (2016) Unlike Other Latinos, About Half of 
Cuban Voters in Florida backed Trump [Internet]. Pew Research Centre, 
November 15, 2016. Available from: http://www.pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2016/11/15/unlike-other-latinos-about-half-of-cuban-
voters-in-florida-backed-trump/ [Accessed January 5, 2017]
Krogstad, J.M. and Lopez, M.H. (2016) Hillary Clinton Won Latino Vote But 
Fell Below 2012 Support for Obama [Internet]. Pew Research Centre, 
November 29, 2016. Available from: http://www.pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2016/11/29/hillary-clinton-wins-latino-vote-but-falls-
below-2012-support-for-obama/ [Accessed January 5, 2017].
Luhby, T. and Agiesta, J. (2016) Exit Polls: Clinton Fails to Energize African-
Americans, Latinos and the Young [Internet]. CNN, November 9, 2016. 
Available from: http://edition.cnn.com/2016/11/08/politics/first-exit-
polls-2016/ [Accessed January 5, 2017].
Morris, S. (1992) That Was the Longest Walk of My Life. Interviewed by Jon 
Savage, March 1992. In: Savage, J., ed., The Hacienda Must Be Built. 
Woodford Green: International Music Publications. p. 25.
Peter York’s Hipster Handbook. (2016) [TV Programme]. BBC, BBC Four, 
November 10, 2016 00:00.
Pickering, M. (1992) A Lot of the Best DJs and the Best Clubs ....  Interviewed 
by Jon Savage, March 1992. In: Savage, J., ed., The Hacienda Must 
Be Built. Woodford Green: International Music Publications. 
pp. 30–32.
Tyson, A. and Maniam, S. (2016) Behind Trump’s Victory: Divisions by 
Race, Gender and Education [Internet]. Pew Research Centre, 
November  9, 2016. Available from: http://www.pewresearch.org/
fact-tank/2016/11/09/behind-trumps-victory-divisions-by-race-
gender-education/ [Accessed January 5, 2017].

226
References
Williams, R. (1963) Culture and Society 1780–1950. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin.
Wilson, A.H. (1992) New Arms for Amputees, He Was a Lovely Man. 
Interviewed by Jon Savage, March 1992. In: Savage, J., ed., The 
Hacienda Must Be Built. Woodford Green: International Music 
Publications. pp. 18–19.
Yesterday
Articles of Style. (2015) The Art of Bespoke Denim [Internet]. Available from: 
https://articlesofstyle.com/61683/the-art-of-bespoke-denim-feat-
camillo-love/ [Accessed November 4, 2016]. 
Berman, M. (2010) All That Is Solid Melts Into Air: The Experience of Modernity. 
London: Verso.
Carpenter, E. (2011) Social Making. In: Charny, D. ed., Power of Making: The 
Importance of Being Skilled. London: V&A Publishing. pp. 48–56.
Craft Check. (2016) FAQ/WTF/BBQ [Internet]. Available from: http://www.
craftcheckapp.com/ [Accessed December 7, 2016].
Frayling, C. (2011) We Must All Turn to Crafts. In: Charny, D. ed., Power of 
Making: The Importance of Being Skilled. London: V&A Publishing. pp. 
28–38.
Frayling, C. (2013) On Craftsmanship: Towards a New Bauhaus. [Kindle 
Paperwhite]. London: Oberon.
Garrett, S. (1988) Cut and Thrust: The Disco Mix Club. The Face, April 1988. 
London: Nick Logan. p. 34.
Hospitality Ireland. (2016) IFAI and HSE Investigating Mislabelling of Craft Beer 
in Pubs [Internet]. Available from: http://www.hospitalityireland.com/
ifai-hse-investigating-mislabeling-craft-beer-pubs/32997 [Accessed 
November 4, 2016].
Lee, Y. (2013) A Conversation with Roy Slaper [Internet]. Heddels, September 17, 
2016. Available from: https://www.heddels.com/2013/09/conversation-
roy-slaper-roy-denim/ [Accessed November 8, 2016].
Lennon, J. and McCartney, P. (1966) Yesterday. The Beatles et al. Recorded 
June 1965, EMI Studios London. [Vinyl]. GEP 8948. London: 
Parlophone.
Murphy, M. (2016) Heineken Claims Products Sold as Fake Craft Beer 
[Internet]. FFT.ie, September 22, 2016. Available from: http://www.
fft.ie/heineken-claims-products-sold-as-fake-craft-beer/13442 
[Accessed November 5, 2016].
Pye, D. (1968) The Nature and Art of Workmanship. In: Adamson, G. ed., 
(2010). The Craft Reader. Oxford: Berg. pp. 341–354.
Roy Denim. (2016). Story [Internet]. Available from: http://www.roydenim.
com/story [Accessed November 8, 2016].
Sellers, J. (2016) Anthony Bourdain on Beer Snobs, Bad Food Trends and 
Roadhouse [Internet]. Thrillist, October 27, 2016. Available from: 
https://www.thrillist.com/entertainment/nation/anthony-bourdain-
interview-appetites-cookbook [Accessed March 21, 2017].

227
References
Wong, K., et al. (2014a) Behind the Scenes: Monument Valley [Internet]. 
Available from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K2P-YKsHpNs 
[Accessed January 10, 2016].
Wiener, M.J. (1992) English Culture and the Decline of the Industrial Spirit 
1850–1980. London: Penguin. 
Williams, R. (1973) The Country and the City. London: Chatto and Windus.
Williams, M. (2013) Get to Know the Goodness that is Levis Made and Crafted. 
[Internet]. A Continous Lean, August 28, 2013. Available from: http://
www.acontinuouslean.com/2013/08/28/get-to-know-the-goodness-
that-is-levis-made-crafted/ [Accessed August 3, 2017].
Wong, K., et al. (2014b) The Making of Monument Valley [Internet]. Available 
from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KT-JDV6KT4g [Accessed 
January 10, 2016].
Canon Fodder
Clarens, C. and Hirsch, F. (1997) Crime Movies. Boston, MA: De Capo 
Press.
Fitzmaurice, L. (2015) Quentin Tarantino: The Complete Syllabus [Internet]. 
Vulture, August 28, 2015. Available from: http://www.vulture.
com/2015/08/quentin-tarantino-the-complete-syllabus.html 
[Accessed January 5, 2017].
Legend, T. (1968) Time Will Pass You By. Tobi Legend et al. [Vinyl]. Mala 591. 
New York: Mala Records.
Levi-Strauss, C. (1966) The Savage Mind. Chicago, IL: The University of 
Chicago Press.
Public Enemy. (1989) Fight the Power. Public Enemy et al. [Vinyl]. ZT 42878. 
Los Angeles, CA: Motown.
Rosenbaum, S. (2014) Is Curation Overused? The Votes Are In [Internet]. 
Forbes, March 28, 2014. Available from: https://www.forbes.
com/forbes/welcome/?toURL=https://www.forbes.com/sites/
stevenrosenbaum/2014/03/29/is-curation-over-used-the-votes-
are-in/&refURL=&referrer=#373aabd9398c [Accessed January 5, 
2017].
Stetsasonic. (1988) Talkin’ All That Jazz. Stetsasonic et al. [Vinyl]. TB 918. 
New York: Tommy Boy Records.
Thornton, S. (1995) Club Cultures: Music, Media and Subcultural Capital. 
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Today with Bill Grundy. (1976) Interview with The Sex Pistols. [TV Program]. 
Thames Television, ITV, December 1, 1976 18:00.
Williams, A. (2015) So What Do You Do: Ryan Schreiber, Founder and CEO 
of Pitchfork? [Internet]. MediaBistro, October 15, 2015. Available 
from: 
https://www.mediabistro.com/interviews/so-what-do-
you-do-ryan-schreiber-founder-and-ceo-of-pitchfork/ [Accessed 
January 5, 2017].
Willis, S. (1997) High Contrast: Race and Gender in Contemporary Hollywood 
Films. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

228
References
thatgamecompany: A Case Study in Aesthetics
Alexander, L. (2012) Changes at Thatgamecompany: Santiago Departs, New 
Game Underway [Internet]. Gamasutra, March 29, 2012. Available 
from: https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/163491/Changes_at_
Thatgamecompany_Santiago_departs_new_game_underway.php 
[Accessed November 9, 2016].
Bramwell, T. (2009) Flower [Internet]. Eurogamer, February 9, 2009. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/flower_4 
[Accessed October 23, 2016].
Boyer, B. (2009) MIGS: First Details on Thatgamecompany’s Flower Debut 
[Internet]. Gamasutra, November 29, 2009. Available from: https://
www.gamasutra.com/php-bin/news_index.php?story=16414 
[Accessed September 12, 2016].
“B_Squared”. Journey Apologies [Online Forum Comment]. Available from: 
http://www.thatgamecompany.com/forum/viewtopic.php?t=1897 
[Accessed October 27, 2016].
Caoili, E. (2012). Journey developer no longer tied to Sony, thanks to new funding 
[Internet]. Gamasutra, June 14, 2012. Available from: https://www.gama-
sutra.com/view/news/172404/Journey_developer_no_longer_tied_to_
Sony_thanks_to_new_funding.php [Accessed November 14, 2016].
Carless, S. (2009). GDC Europe: Thatgamecompany’s Santiago On Flower’s 
Emotional Search [Internet]. Gamasutra, August 17, 2009. Available 
from: https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/115822/GDC_Europe_​
Thatgamecompanys_Santiago_On_Flowers_Emotional_Search.php 
[Accessed November 22, 2016].
Chaplin, H. (2009) Video Game Grad Programs Open Up the Industry. [Internet]. 
NPR, March 23, 2009. Available from: http://www.npr.org/templates/
story/story.php?storyId=102246406 [Accessed October 5, 2016].
Chen, J. (2006) Flow in Games. MFA thesis, University of Southern California, 
2006. Available from: http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.
php?storyId=102246406 [Accessed October 14, 2016].
Chen, J. (2007) Flow in Games (and Everything Else) [Internet]. Communications 
of the ACM, 50(4), 31–34. Available from: http://www.jenovachen.
com/flowingames/p31-chen.pdf [Accessed October 14, 2016].
Chen, J. (2009). The Beautiful Game [Internet]. Interviewed by Mary 
Jane Irwin. Gamesindustry.biz, February 19, 2009. Available 
from: http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/the-beautiful-game 
[Accessed October 21, 2016].
Chen, J. (2012a) A Personal Journey: Jenova Chen’s Goals for Games [Internet]. 
Interviewed by Ed Smith. Gamasutra, May 18, 2012. Available from: 
https://www.gamasutra.com/view/feature/170547/a_personal_
journey_jenova_chens_.php [Accessed October 5, 2016].
Chen, J. (2012b) Game Designer Jenova Chen on The Art Behind His “Journey” 
[Internet]. Interviewed by Kevin Ohannessian. Fast Company, March 
12, 2012. Available from: https://www.fastcompany.com/1680062/
game-designer-jenova-chen-on-the-art-behind-his-journey 
[Accessed November 1, 2016].

229
References
Chen, J. (2013) An Interview with Jenova Chen: How Journey’s Creator Went 
Bankrupt and Won Game of the Year [Internet]. Interviewed by Dean 
Takahashi. Venturebeat, February 8, 2013. Available from: https://
venturebeat.com/2013/02/08/an-interview-with-jenova-chen-how-
journeys-creator-went-bankrupt-and-won-game-of-the-year/view-
all/ [Accessed October 10, 2016].
Chen, J. (2015) Jenova Chen: Journeyman [Internet]. Interviewed by Simon 
Parkin. Eurogamer, July 21, 2015. Available from: http://www.
eurogamer.net/articles/2012-04-02-jenova-chen-journeyman 
[Accessed October 4, 2016].
Clements, R. (2009) Flower Review [Internet]. Available from: http://www.
ign.com/articles/2009/02/09/flower-review [Accessed October 22, 
2016].
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990) Flow: The Psychology of Ultimate Experience. 
New York: Harper and Row.
Dyer, M. (2012) How Thatgamecompany Struggled to Save Journey [Internet]. 
IGN, 
August 
14, 
2012. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ign.com/
articles/2012/08/14/how-thatgamecompany-struggled-to-save-
journey [Accessed November 14, 2016].
Fullerton, T., et al. (2006). That Cloud Game: Dreaming (and Doing). 
Innovative Game Design [Internet]. Proceedings of the 2006 ACM 
SIGGRAPH Symposium on Videogames. ACM. Available from: http://
sandbox.siggraph.org/archives/papers/ThatCloudGame.pdf 
[Accessed November 20, 2016].
Govan, P. (2009) Flower: The Interactive Poem/Videogame [Internet]. Wired, 
February 26, 2009. Available from: https://www.wired.com/2009/02/
flower-the-inte/ [Accessed October 22, 2016].
“Jo Pierce”. (2012) Journey Apologies [Online Forum Comment]. Available 
from: 
http://www.thatgamecompany.com/forum/viewtopic.php?​
t=1897 [Accessed October 27, 2016].
Khaw, C. (2012) What Went Wrong During the Making of Journey [Internet]. 
Gamasutra, 
August 
15, 
2012. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.
gamasutra.com/view/news/175966/What_went_wrong_during_the_
making_of_Journey.php [Accessed November 10, 2016].
Liang, A. (2009) Flower Review [Internet]. Available from: http://www.1up.
com/reviews/flower [Accessed October 9, 2016].
McCartney, G. (2012) An Emotional Connection to the Games we Play 
[Internet]. Available from: https://news.usc.edu/35337/making-an-
emotional-connection-to-the-games-they-play/ [Accessed October 1, 
2016].
“Monk”. (2012) Journey Apologies [Online Forum Comment]. Available from: 
http://www.thatgamecompany.com/forum/viewtopic.php?t=1897 
[Accessed October 27, 2016].
Museum of Modern Art (MoMA). fl0w [Internet]. Gallery Label from Applied 
Design, March 2, 2013–January 31, 2014. Available from: https://
www.moma.org/collection/works/164921 [Accessed October 20, 
2016].

230
References
Parker, L. (2013) A Journey to Make Video Games Into Art [Internet]. 
New  Yorker, August 2, 2013. Available from: https://www.
newyorker.com/tech/elements/a-journey-to-make-video-games-
into-art [Accessed November 1, 2016].
Parsons, Z. (2006) Something Awful – The Littlest Developers [Internet]. 
Available from: http://www.somethingawful.com/news/the-littlest-
developers/ [Accessed November 14, 2016].
Postrel, V. (2003) The Substance of Style: How the Rise of Aesthetic Value 
Is Remaking Commerce, Culture, and Consciousness. New York: 
HarperCollins.
Santiago, K. (2009) Interview: Kellee Santiago Talks thatgamecompa-
ny’s Road Ahead [Internet]. Interviewed by Brandon Sheffield. 
Gamasutra, July 1, 2009. Available from: https://www.gamasu-
tra.com/view/news/24110/Interview_Kellee_Santiago_Talks_
Thatgamecompanys_Road_Ahead.php [Accessed October 11, 
2016].
Santiago, K. (2010a) Fellows Friday with Kellee Santiago [Internet]. 
Interviewed by Alana Herro. Available from: https://blog.ted.com/
fellows-friday-with-kellee-santiago/ [Accessed September 27, 2016].
Santiago, K. (2010b) thatgamecompany’s Kellee Santiago [Internet]. 
Interviewed by Phil Elliott. Gamesindustry.biz, July 2, 2010. Available 
from: 
http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/thatgamecompanys-
kellee-santiago-interview [Accessed September 20, 2016].
Santiago, K. and Hunicke, R. (2010) Interview: thatgamecompany’s Santiago, 
Hunicke, On Designing for the Love [Internet]. Interviewed by Patrick 
Dugan. Gamasutra, January 26, 2010. Available from: https://www.
gamasutra.com/view/news/26910/Interview_ThatGameCompanys_
Santiago_Hunicke_On_Designing_For_The_Love.php 
[Accessed 
November 22, 2016].
thatgamecompany. (2017a) Journey [Internet]. Available from: http://
thatgamecompany.com/games/journey/ [Accessed October 10, 
2016].
thatgamecompany. (2017b) Something New from TGC [Internet]. Available 
from: http://thatgamecompany.com/general/something-new-from-
tgc/ [Accessed December 4, 2016].
Warren, J. (2013) Is Journey Creator Jenova Chen the Videogame 
World’s Terrence Malick [Internet]. Kill Screen, February 12, 2013. 
Available  from: https://killscreen.com/articles/journey-creator-
jenova-chen-videogame-worlds-terrence-malick/ 
[Accessed 
November 19, 2016].
Wikipedia. (2016a) Thatgamecompany [Internet]. In: Wikipedia: The Free 
Encyclopaedia. Unknown eds. Available from: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Thatgamecompany [Accessed October 20, 2016].
Wikipedia. (2016b) Journey (2012 Video Game) [Internet]. In: Wikipedia: 
The Free Encyclopaedia. Unknown eds. Available from: https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Journey_(2012_video_game) 
[Accessed 
October 20, 2016].

231
References
Chapter 2: Ideals Over Ideas
What Side Are You On?
Bauhaus: The Face of the 20th Century. (1994) [Film]. Directed by Frank 
Whitford. Germany: Art-Haus Musik.
BrewDog. (2010a) Hop Propoganda 05 [Internet]. Available from: https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Journey_(2012_video_game) [Accessed August 
22, 2017].
BrewDog. (2010b) Hop Propoganda 02 [Internet]. Available from: https://www.
brewdog.com/files/1425988310HopProp02.pdf [Accessed August 22, 
2017].
BrewDog. (2015) The BrewDog Charter. In: Equity for Punks AGM 
Update [Internet]. Available from: https://www.brewdog.com/
files/1425988310HopProp02.pdf [Accessed December 7, 2016].
Classic Rock. (2010) Interview with Malcolm McLaren. Classic Rock, June 2010, 
Issue 145. s.l.
Cobain, K. (1991) In Bloom. Nirvana et al. From the LP: Nevermind. 
Recorded April 1990–June 1991. [Vinyl]. DGC 424 425-1. New York: 
DGC Records.
Debord, G. (1967) Society of the Spectacle. Translated from French by Ken 
Knabb, 2004. London: Rebel Press.
Didion, J. (1979) The White Album. London: Penguin.
Gropius, W. (1919) Bauhaus Manifesto and Program of the Weimar State 
Bauhaus [Internet]. Available from: https://www.bauhaus100.de/en/
past/works/education/manifest-und-programm-des-staatlichen-
bauhauses/ [Accessed December 7, 2016].
McLaren, M. (2008) This Much I Know [Internet]. The Guardian, November 
16. Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/
nov/16/malcolm-mclaren-punk-vivienne-westwood [Accessed March 
30, 2017].
McLuhan, M. and Fiore, Q. (1967). The Medium is the Massage: An Inventory 
of Effects. New York: Bantam Books.
McLuhan, E. and Zingrone, F. eds. (1997) Essential McLuhan. London: 
Routledge.
Savage, J. (1991) England’s Dreaming: The Sex Pistols and Punk Rock. London: 
Faber.
Schama, S. (2006) Power of Art. London: BBC Books.
Approximate Authenticity
Amis, M. (1989) London Fields. London: Jonathan Cape.
Basu, J. (2014) Dishoom – An Iranian Cafe in London [Internet]. Asian 
News, May 23, 2014. Available from: https://asianlite.com/lifestyle/
dishoom-an-iranian-cafe-in-london/ [Accessed February 9, 2017].
Bauman, Z. (2007) Liquid Times: Living in an Age of Uncertainty. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.

232
References
Cobb, R. ed. (2014) The Paradox of Authenticity in a Globalized World. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Cook, R. (2001) Robin Cook’s Chicken Tikka Masala Speech [Internet]. The 
Guardian, April 19, 2001. Available from: https://www.theguardian.
com/world/2001/apr/19/race.britishidentity [Accessed February 9, 
2017].
Cronberg, 
A.A. 
(n.d.) 
Conversations 
on 
Slowness: 
Nigel 
Cabourn 
Interview. [Internet]. Vestoj, n.d. Available from: http://vestoj.com/
conversations-on-slowness/ [Accessed February 9, 2017].
De Tocqueville, A. (1856) The Old Regime and the Revolution [Internet]. Archive.
org. Available from: https://archive.org/details/oldregimeandrev00​toc-
qgoog [Accessed March 27, 2017].
Edensor, T. (2006) Automobility and National Identity: Representation, 
Geography and Driving Practice [Internet]. Theory, Culture & 
Society 21(4–5), 101–120. Available from: http://journals.sagepub.
com/doi/pdf/10.1177/0263276404046063 [Accessed February 9, 
2017].
Featherstone, E. (2016) Dishoom’s Co-founder on Our Love Affair with Indian 
Food [Internet]. The Guardian, June 17, 2016. Available from: https://
www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/jun/17/dishoom-
cofounder-love-affair-indian-food [Accessed February 9, 2017].
Fielding, S.A. (2014). Currying Favour: Authenticity, Cultural Capital and 
the Rise of Indian Food in the United Kingdom. In: Cobb, R. ed., The 
Paradox of Authenticity in a Globalized World. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Giddens, A. (1991) The Consequences of Modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Gieben, B.E. (2013) Late Flowering Lust: Andrew Weatherall on the 
Asphodells [Internet]. The Skinny, January 15, 2013. Available from: 
http://www.theskinny.co.uk/clubs/interviews/late-flowering-
lust-andrew-weatherall-on-the-asphodells [Accessed February 9, 
2017].
Hiscock, J. (2002) What Makes a Brand British? [Internet]. Campaign, 
June 6, 2002. Available from: http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/
article/makes-brand-british-first-six-week-series-looking-british-
brands-past-50-years-jennifer-hiscock-explores-brands-capitalise-­
perceptions-britishness/147546#LWCgUkw4yW6lpzJt.99 [Accessed 
February 9, 2017].
Khaleeli, H. (2012) The Curry Crisis [Internet]. The Guardian, January 8, 2012. 
Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/
jan/08/britains-curry-crisis-chefs-immigration [Accessed February 
9, 2017].
Love, M. (2013) The New Mini Hatch: Car Review [Internet]. The Guardian, 
December 1, 2013. Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/
technology/2013/dec/01/new-mini-hatch-car-review 
[Accessed 
February 9, 2017].
Peterson, R. (1999) Creating Country Music: Fabricating Authenticity. 2nd ed. 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

233
References
Telegraph. (2015) British Tourists Flock to India under New e-Visa System 
[Internet]. The Telegraph, December 16, 2015. Available from: http://
www.telegraph.co.uk/travel/destinations/asia/india/articles/
British-tourists-flock-to-India-under-new-e-visa-system/ [Accessed 
March 14, 2017].
Walton, J. (1992) Fish and Chips and the British Working Class: 1870–1940. 
London: Leicester University Press.
Wilson, B. (2017) Who Killed the Curry House? [Internet]. The Guardian, 
January 12, 2017. Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/
lifeandstyle/2017/jan/12/who-killed-the-british-curry-house 
[Accessed February 9, 2017].
Yelp, Inc. (2016) The Yelp Top 100 UK Eateries [Internet]. Yelp, February 10, 
2016. Available from: https://www.yelpblog.com/2016/02/the-yelp-
top-100-uk-eateries [Accessed February 9, 2017].
Bunker Busting
Ashley-Smith, J. (2000) Science and Art: Separated by a Common Language? 
[Internet]. Available from: http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/journals/
conservation-journal/issue-36/science-and-art-separated-by-a-
common-language/ [Accessed February 6, 2017].
Brand, S. (1995) How Buildings Learn: What Happens after They’re Built? 
New York: Penguin.
Dash, A. (2016) It’s More Than Just “Teach Kids to Code” [Internet]. A Blog 
about Making Culture, September 14. Available from: http://anildash.
com/2016/09/its-more-than-just-teach-kids-to-code.html [Accessed 
February 6, 2017].
Drucker, P. F. (1989) The New Realities. New York: Routledge.
Ferguson, N. (2015) Kissinger 1923–1968: The Idealist. London: Penguin.
Garfinkel, S. (1987) Building 20: The Procreative Eyesore [Internet]. Available 
from: 
http://anildash.com/2016/09/its-more-than-just-teach-kids-
to-code.html [Accessed February 2, 2017].
Gould, S. J. (2004) The Fox, the Hedgehog and the Magister’s Pox: Mending 
the Gap between Science and Humanities. New York: Harmony 
Books.
Hockney, D. (2006) Secret Knowledge: Rediscovering the Lost Techniques of 
the Old Masters. 2nd ed. London: Thames and Hudson.
Jones, J. (2014) DIY Vermeer Documentary Utterly Misses the Point About Old 
Masters [Internet]. The Guardian, January 28. Available from: https://
www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/
jan/28/tims-vermeer-fails [Accessed February 6, 2017].
McLuhan, E. and Zingrone, F. ed. (1997) Essential McLuhan. New York: 
Routledge.
Musashi, M. (2011) The Book of Five Rings [Kindle Paperwhite]. 
Translated  from Japanese by T. Cleary. Boston, MA: Shambhala 
Publications.

234
References
O’Neill, F. and Palazzo-Corner, S. (2016) Rembrandt’s Self-portraits 
[Internet]. Journal of Optics, 18(8). Available from: https://www.
theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2014/jan/28/
tims-vermeer-fails [Accessed February 6, 2017].
Richmond, S. (1984) The Interaction of Art and Science [Internet]. 
Leonardo, 17(2), 81–86. Available from: http://www.jstor.org/
stable/1574993?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents [Accessed February 
6, 2017].
Snow, C.P. (1961) The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution. London: 
Cambridge University Press.
Teitelbaum, M.S. (2014) The Myth of the Science and Engineering 
Shortage  [Internet]. The Atlantic, March 19, 2014. Available from: 
https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2014/03/the-
myth-of-the-science-and-engineering-shortage/284359/ [Accessed 
February 6, 2017].
Turner, F. (2006) From Counterculture to Cyberculture: Stewart Brand, the 
Whole Earth Network, and the Rise of Digital Utopianism. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, E.O. (1999) Consillience: The Unity of Knowledge. New York: Vintage 
Books.
Monument Valley: A Case Study in Craftwork
Bernstein, J. (2014) The Unlikely Story Behind The Making Of “Monument 
Valley” [Internet]. Buzzfeed, April 10, 2014. Available from: https://
www.buzzfeed.com/josephbernstein/the-unlikely-story-behind-
the-making-of-monument-valley?utm_term=.ps4BPzo68#.
bulvJbNrn [Accessed October 22, 2016].
Blake, J. (2015) Monument Valley Gets “Insane” Boost from House of Cards 
[Internet]. BBC, March 13, 2015. Available from: http://www.bbc.
co.uk/newsbeat/article/31875551/monument-valley-gets-insane-
boost-from-house-of-cards [Accessed October 25, 2016].
Bradley, D. (2017) Monument Valley Talk: “The Kind of Game Apple Would Make 
If They Made Games” [Internet]. PocketGamer.biz, April 24, 2017. Available 
from: 
http://www.pocketgamer.biz/news/65579/monument-​valley-
interview/ [Accessed May 1, 2017].
Catmull, E. (2008) How Pixar Fosters Collective Creativity. Boston, MA: 
Harvard Business School Publishing.
Dormehl, L. (2014) Inside Monument Valley: How “Impossible” Sketches Became 
An Amazing Game [Internet]. Cult of Mac, April 10, 2014. Available 
from: https://www.cultofmac.com/273790/inside-monument-valley/ 
[Accessed October 23, 2016].
Dredge, S. (2011) Whale Trail iOS Game Tops 38k First-Weekend Sales in Pursuit 
of Angry Birds [Internet]. The Guardian, October 24, 2011. Available 
from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/appsblog/2011/
oct/24/whale-trail-iphone-ipad-ustwo [Accessed October 20, 2016].

235
References
Gray, D. (2013) Extremely Welcome Attention [Internet]. Available from: 
https://monumentvalleygame.squarespace.com/blog/2013/12/11/
unexpected-awesomeness [Accessed October 21, 2016].
Gray, D. (2014) Interviewed by Myke Hurley. Building Monument Valley, with 
Daniel Gray. [Podcast]. Inquisitive, November 18, 2014. Available from: 
http://www.relay.fm/inquisitive/14 [Accessed October 20, 2015].
Gray, D. (2015) Monument Valley in Numbers [Internet]. Available from: 
https://monumentvalleygame.squarespace.com/blog/2015/1/15/
monument-valley-in-numbers [Accessed October 21, 2015].
House of Cards – Chapter 31. (2015) [Internet]. House of Cards, Season 3 
Episode 5. Available from: Netflix UK. [Accessed January 20, 2017].
Kollar, P. (2014) Monument Valley: The Quest for a Game Everyone Can Finish 
[Internet]. Polygon, March 18, 2014. Available from: https://www.
polygon.com/2014/3/18/5522874/monument-valley-everyone-finish 
[Accessed April 4, 2017].
McFarland, N. (2015) Interviewed by 52 Insights. Neil McFarland: A 
Monument to Gaming. 52 Insights [Internet]. Available from: http://
www.52-insights.com/neil-macfarland-a-monument-to-gaming/ 
[Accessed October 29, 2016].
Miller, M. (2012) Interviewed by Daniel McFerran. Interview: Whale 
Trail Creator Us Two talks Mobile Game Development. Know Your 
Mobile, February 9, 2012 [Internet]. Available from: http://www.
knowyourmobile.com/games/16138/interview-whale-trail-creator-
ustwo-talks-mobile-game-development [Accessed October 21, 2016].
Miller, M. (2013) Interviewed by Keith Andrews. We Didn’t Want to “Shoe-
Horn” in F2P: Us Two’s Mills on Opting for Ads in Blip Blup [Internet]. 
PocketGamer, May 24, 2013. Available from http://www.pocketgamer.
biz/interview/51104/we-didnt-want-to-shoe-horn-in-f2p-ustwos-
mills-on-opting-for-ads-in-blip-blup/ [Accessed October 27, 2016].
Mistry, M. (2013) Blip Blup: A Journey into Puzzle Games [Internet]. 
Available from: https://ustwo.com/blog/blip-blup-a-journey-into-
puzzle-games/ [Accessed October 19, 2016].
Schafer, T. (2014) Monument Valley Is the Most Elegant Game I’ve Played… 
[Twitter], April 11, 2014. Available from: https://twitter.com/timoflegend/­-
status/454651464460156928 [Accessed October 23, 2016].
Sheffield, B. (2014) When Quality Comes Before Making Money: Developing 
Monument Valley [Internet]. Gamasutra, October 19, 2014. Available 
from: 
https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/228094/When_
quality_comes_before_making_money_Developing_Monument_
Valley.php [Accessed November 22, 2016].
Wong, K. (2014a) Monument Valley Out Now [Internet]. Available from: https://
ustwo.com/blog/monument-valley-out-now/ [Accessed October 21, 
2016].
Wong, K. (2014b) Why Does It Take So Long to Make New Levels [Internet]. 
Available 
from: 
https://monumentvalleygame.squarespace.com/
blog/2014/8/3/why-does-it-take-so-long-to-make-new-levels 
[Accessed October 21, 2016].

236
References
Wong, K. (2014c) Monument Valley Is Apple’s iPad Game of the Year [Internet]. 
Available 
from: 
https://monumentvalleygame.squarespace.com/
blog/2014/12/8/monument-valley-is-apples-ipad-game-of-the-year 
[Accessed October 21, 2016].
Wong, K. (2014d) Seven Weeks of Monument Valley [Internet]. Available from: 
https://monumentvalleygame.squarespace.com/blog/sevenweeks 
[Accessed October 21, 2016].
Wong, K. (2014e) On Top of the World [Internet]. Available from: https://
monumentvalleygame.squarespace.com/blog/2014/4/7/on-top-of-
the-world [Accessed October 21, 2016].
Wong, K. (2014f) Monument Valley Prints Now Available [Internet]. 
Available from: https://monumentvalleygame.squarespace.com/
blog/printsavailable [Accessed October 21, 2016].
Wong, K. (2015) Escher and Monument Valley [Internet]. Available from: 
https://monumentvalleygame.squarespace.com/blog/2013/11/28/
inspiration [Accessed October 21, 2016].
Chapter 3: Re-Make, Re-Model
Into the Unknown
Boyd, J.R. (1996) The Essence of Winning and Losing [Unpublished lecture 
notes] [Internet]. Available from: https://monumentvalleygame.
squarespace.com/blog/2013/11/28/inspiration [Accessed March 28, 
2016].
Catmull, E. (2014) Creativity, Inc.: Overcoming the Unseen Forces That Stand in 
the Way of True Inspiration [Kindle]. New York: Random House.
Fallows, J. (2016) The Next Article You Should Read on the GOP Race: 
Military-Strategist Assessment of the Trump Wave. The Atlantic, 
January 8, 2016. Available from: https://www.theatlantic.com/
notes/2016/01/the-next-article-you-should-read-on-the-gop-
race-military-strategist-assessment-of-the-trump-wave/423240/ 
[Accessed March 27, 2017].
Ford, D. (2010) A Vision So Noble: John Boyd, the Ooda Loop, and America’s 
War on Terror [Kindle]. Daniel Ford.
Foster, N. (2008) Norman Foster: My Green Agenda for Architecture [Video 
file]. Available from: https://www.ted.com/talks/norman_foster_s_
green_agenda [Accessed December 7, 2016].
Hammonds, K. (2002) The Strategy of the Fighter Pilot [Internet]. Fast 
Company, May 31, 2002. Available from: https://www.fastcompany.
com/44983/strategy-fighter-pilot [Accessed December 7, 2016].
Kaplan, B. (2011) Oren Jacob, Entrepreneur and Former Pixar CTO, Talks About 
Scaling Pixar, the Crisis Around Toy Story 2 and his First-Hand Encounters 
with Steve Jobs [Internet]. Available from: https://www.twilio.com/
blog/2011/11/oren-jacob-pixar-steve-jobs-twilio-conference.html 
[Accessed December 7, 2016].

237
References
Larivé, M.H.A. (2014) Failure of Imagination – Rumsfeld’s interpretation of 
American foreign policy. [Internet]. Foreign Policy Association,  April 27, 
2014. Available from: http://foreignpolicyblogs.com/2014/04/17/
failure-of-imagination-rumsfelds-interpretation-of-american-­
foreign-policy/ [Accessed March 28, 2017].
McChrystal, S. (2015) Team of Teams: New Rules of Engagement for a Complex 
World [Kindle]. London: Penguin.
McLaughlin, D. (2015) Military Strategist Explains Why Donald Trump Leads – 
And How He Will Fail [Internet].  December 16,  2015. Available from: 
http://thefederalist.com/2015/12/16/military-strategist-explains-
why-donald-trump-leads-and-how-he-will-fail/ [Accessed March 27, 
2017].
Nicholson, B. (2012) Simogo and How Its Sausage Is Made [Internet]. 
Available from: http://toucharcade.com/2012/02/29/simogo-and-
how-its-sausage-is-made/ [Accessed December 7, 2016].
Parton, H. (2016) Donald Trump Is an Evil Genius: How He Abandoned 
Political Strategy and Won Over the GOP’s Bloodthirsty Base 
[Internet]. Salon,  February 25, 2016. Available from: https://www.
salon.com/2016/02/25/donald_trump_is_an_evil_genius_how_
he_abandoned_political_strategy_and_won_over_the_gops_
bloodthirsty_base/ [Accessed November 30, 2016].
Rumsfeld, D. (2002) DoD News Briefing – Secretary Rumsfeld and Gen. Myers 
[Internet]. United States Department of Defence, February 12, 2002. 
Available from: http://archive.defense.gov/Transcripts/Transcript.
aspx?TranscriptID=2636 [Accessed March 20, 2017].
Shafer, J. (2016) The Fighter-Jock Doctrine that Explains Why Trump Is Winning 
[Internet]. Politico,  March 23, 2016. Available from: http://www.
politico.com/magazine/story/2016/03/donald-trump-2016-fighter-
jock-213761 [Accessed March 27, 2017].
Stokols, E. (2016) Inside Jeb Bush’s $150 Million Failure [Internet]. 
Politico,  February 20, 2016. Available from: http://www.politico.
com/magazine/story/2016/02/jeb-bush-dropping-out-set-up-to-
fail-213662 [Accessed November 30, 2016].
Tingen, P. (2001) Miles Beyond: The Electric Explorations of Miles Davis, 
1967–1991. New York: Watson-Guptill.
Zorthian, J. How Toy Story Changed Movie History [Internet]. Time, November 
19, 2015. Available from: http://time.com/4118006/20-years-toy-story-
pixar/ [Accessed March 28, 2017].
After the Gold Rush
Anderson, C. (n.d.) The Long Tail, in a Nutshell [Internet]. Available from: 
http://www.longtail.com/about.html [Accessed November 29, 2016].
Ball, M. and Menon, P. (2014) Future of Film, Part III: Saving Independent 
Filmmaking [Internet]. Available from: https://redef.com/original/
future-of-film-part-iii-saving-independent-filmmaking 
[Accessed 
November 29, 2009].

238
References
Barnes, B. (2014) America’s Next Wal-Mart: The Indie Film Industry 
[Internet] Salon,  February 22, 2014. Available from: https://www.
salon.com/2014/02/22/americas_next_wal_mart_the_indie_film_
industry/ [Accessed November 29, 2016].
Byrne, D., et al. (1988) (Nothing But) Flowers. Talking Heads et al. Recorded 
1987. [Vinyl]. 12EM 53. London: EMI.
Chalabi, M. (2014) What Do McDonald’s Workers Really Make Per Hour? 
[Internet]. FiveThirtyFive,  May 22, 2014. Available from: https://
fivethirtyeight.com/features/what-do-mcdonalds-workers-really-
make-per-hour/ [Accessed March 8, 2017].
Chang, J. (2015). Film Review: ‘Tangerine’ [Internet]. Variety, January 15, 
2015. Available from: http://variety.com/2015/film/news/sundance-
film-review-tangerine-1201414093/ [Accessed March 8, 2017].
Cheshire, T. (2014) Changing the Game: How Notch Made Minecraft a Ault Hit 
[Internet]. Wired, September 15, 2014. Available from: http://www.
wired.co.uk/article/changing-the-game [Accessed November 29, 
2016].
Cook, D. (2016) Autumn for Indie Game Markets [Internet]. Gamasutra, 
October 16, 2016. Available from: https://www.gamasutra.com/
blogs/DanielCook/20161121/285971/Autumn_of_Indie_Game_
Markets.php [Accessed March 13, 2017].
Dredge, S. (2015) How Much Do Musicians Really Make from Spotify, iTunes 
and YouTube? [Internet]. The Guardian, April 3, 2015. Available from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/03/how-much-
musicians-make-spotify-itunes-youtube [Accessed November 28, 
2016].
Economist. (2017) It Is Easier than Ever to Fund an Indie Film, but Harder 
than Ever to Get People to See It [Internet]. Economist, February 
25, 
2017. Available from: https://www.economist.com/news/
business/21717422-median-box-office-return-low-budget-
films-america-measly-45-cents [Accessed March 8, 2017].
Edery, D. (2009) The Hits Get Bigger [Internet]. Available from: http://www.
edery.org/2009/08/the-hits-get-bigger/ [Accessed November 28, 
2016].
Epstein, G. (2017) Mass Entertainment in the Digital Age Is Still About 
Blockbusters, Not Endless Choice [Internet]. The Economist,  February 
11, 2017. Available from: https://www.economist.com/news/special-
report/21716467-technology-has-given-billions-people-access-vast-
range-entertainment-gady [Accessed February 15, 2017].
Gamasutra. (2014) Gamasutra Salary Survey 2014 [Internet]. Available 
from: https://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21716467-
technolog y-has-given-billions-people-access-vast-range-
entertainment-­gady [Accessed November 28, 2016].
Jarvis, M. (2016) Average Indie Game Steam Sales Halve Year-on-Year 
[Internet]. Develop Magazine,  April 28, 2016. Available from: http://
www.develop-online.net/news/average-indie-game-steam-sales-
halve-year-on-year/0219745 [Accesssed November 28, 2016].

239
References
Kelly, K. (2010) The Shirky Principle [Internet]. Available from: http://kk.org/
thetechnium/the-shirky-prin/ [Accessed April 4, 2017].
Kelly, K. (2016) 1,000 True Fans [Internet]. Available from: http://kk.org/
thetechnium/1000-true-fans/ [Accessed December 10, 2016].
Koster, R. (2009) Great Article on Indie Biz [Internet]. Available from: 
http://www.raphkoster.com/2009/08/04/great-article-on-indie-biz/ 
[Accessed November 29, 2016].
Persson, M. (2010) 20000! Wow. :) [Internet]. Available from: https://notch.
tumblr.com/post/709098848/20000-wow [Accessed November 29, 
2016].
Steam Spy. (2017) Genre Search: Indie [Internet]. Available from: http://
steamspy.com/genre/Indie [Accessed March 8, 2017].
TIGA. (2016) March of the Micro-Studios [Internet]. TIGA, August 22, 2016. 
Available from: https://tiga.org/news/march-of-the-micro-studios 
[Accessed November 20, 2016].
Ukie. (2016) UK Video Games Fact Sheet [Internet]. Ukie,  November 4, 
2016. Available from: http://ukie.org.uk/research#Fact%20Sheet 
[Accessed November 20, 2016].
Wong, K. (2015) Mobile Isn’t the Games Industry You Recognize, and That’s 
Great [Internet]. Polygon,  October 29, 2015. Available from: https://
www.polygon.com/2015/10/29/9631436/mobile-ustwo-monument-
valley-Bugbyte [Accessed March 13, 2017].
Wong, K. (2016). Interviewed by Christopher Dring. “In Games, People Shy 
Away from Life and Death and Love and Sex” [Internet]. GamesIndustry.
biz, October 31, 2016. Available from: http://www.gamesindustry.
biz/articles/2016-10-31-in-games-people-shy-away-from-life-and-
death-and-love-and-sex [Accessed March 13, 2017].
Start a Band, Not a Business
Albini, S. (2014) Steve Albini on the Surprisingly Sturdy State of the Music 
Industry – In Full [Internet]. The Guardian,  November 17, 2014. 
Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/17/
steve-albinis-keynote-address-at-face-the-music-in-full 
[Accessed 
March 16, 2017].
Alvi, S. (2016a) Interviewed by Guy Raz. How I Built This: Vice: Suroosh Alvi. 
[Podcast] NPR,  October 10, 2016. Available from: http://www.npr.
org/podcasts/510313/how-i-built-this [Accessed February 20, 2016].
Baio, A. (2013) The Indiepocalypse [Internet]. January 31, 2015 Available from: 
http://waxy.org/2013/01/indiepocalypse/ [Accessed March 8, 2017].
David, S. (2015) In the All-Night Café: A Memoir of Belle and Sebastian’s 
Formative Year [Kindle]. London: Little Brown.
Dunlevy, T. (2016) Long Read: How a Little Magazine Called VICE Conquered 
the Media World [Internet]. Montreal Gazette,  February 29, 2016. 
Available 
from: 
http://montrealgazette.com/storyline/long-read-
how-a-little-magazine-called-vice-conquered-the-media-world 
[Accessed February 21, 2017].

240
References
Friedman, M. (2015) Steve Albini Shows That Punk Rock Ethics Are Good Business 
[Internet].  July 7, 2015. Available from: https://www.psychologytoday.
com/blog/brick-brick/201507/steve-albini-shows-punk-rock-ethics-are-
good-business [Accessed March 16, 2017].
Hertzfeld, A. (n.d.) Pirate Flag [Internet]. Available from: https://www.
folklore.org/StoryView.py?story=Pirate_Flag.txt [Accessed March 28, 
2017].
McLaren, M. (2008) This Much I Know [Internet]. The Guardian, 
November 16, 2008. Available from: https://www.theguardian.
com/lifeandstyle/2008/nov/16/malcolm-mclaren-punk-vivienne-­
westwood [Accessed March 16, 2017].
Parkin, S. (2014) Why Indie Gaming’s Obsession with Moneymaking Hurts Us 
All [Internet]. The New Statesman, July 14, 2014. Available from: https://
www.newstatesman.com/culture/2014/07/why-indie-gaming-s-
obsession-moneymaking-hurts-us-all [Accessed February 20, 2017].
Rose, L. (2016) Vice’s Shane Smith Asks, “You Think I Could Hoodwink Bob Iger, Jeff 
Bewkes and Rupert Murdoch?” [Internet]. Hollywood Reporter, February 
3, 2016. Available from: http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/features/
vices-shane-smith-asks-you-861226 [Accessed February 20, 2017].
Taylor, S. (2004) The A to X of Alternative Music. London: Continuum 
International.
Yakowicz, W. (2014) Vice Media: From Voice of Montreal to Voice of the 
Millennial Generation [Internet]. Inc., November 24, 2014. Available 
from: https://www.inc.com/will-yakowicz/vice-media-finds-success-
by-telling-different-story.html [Accessed February 21, 2017].
Stop Just Making Stuff
Blow, J. (2006) Game Design Rant 2006: “There’s Not Enough Innovation in 
Games!” [Internet]. Available from: http://number-none.com/blow/
slides/rant_2006.html [Accessed March 28, 2017].
Bjergsø, M.B. (2014). Better Beer for The World [Video]. Available from: 
https://creativemornings.com/talks/education-better-beer-for-the-
world/1 [Accessed December 11, 2016].
Caramanica, J. (2016) Kanye West Is Fixing His Album in Public. You’ll Want 
to Read the Edits [Internet]. New York Times, February 19, 2016. 
Available from: https://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/21/arts/music/
kanye-west-life-of-pablo-tlop.html [Accessed December 13, 2016].
Chapple, C. (2016) App Store Trends for November 2016: Average of 792 Games 
Submitted Every Day [Internet]. PocketGamer.biz,  December 5, 2016. 
Available from: http://www.pocketgamer.biz/news/64575/app-store-
trends-for-november-2016/ [Accessed December 13, 2016].
Eleftheriou-Smith, L.M. MTV VMAs 2016: Read Kanye West’s Speech in Full 
[Internet]. The Independent,  August 29, 2016. Available from: http://
www.independent.co.uk/news/people/vmas-2016-mtv-kanye-west-
speech-in-full-read-transcript-video-music-awards-a7214956.html 
[Accessed March 28, 2017].

241
References
Eno, B. (1996) A Year with Swollen Appendices: Brian Eno’s Diary. London: 
Faber & Faber.
Eno, B. (2015) Brian Eno’s BBC Music John Peel Lecture 2015 [Podcast]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/
vmas-2016-mtv-kanye-west-speech-in-full-read-transcript-video-
music-awards-a7214956.html [Accessed December 10, 2016].
Fincher, D. (2014) “Movies Aren’t Finished. They’re Abandoned.” – David 
Fincher on Why He Hates Watching His Films [Internet]. Available from: 
https://www.filmindependent.org/blog/movies-arent-finished-
theyre-abandoned-david-fincher-on-why-he-hates-watching-his-
films/ [Accessed March 28, 2017].
Fox, D.J. (2016) How the Lonely Island Changed the Internet, Comedy, and 
Especially Internet Comedy [Internet]. Vulture, June 1, 2016. Available 
from: http://www.vulture.com/2016/05/lonely-island-changed-the-
internet-comedy.html [Accessed December 13, 2016].
Greene, J. (2016) The Life of Pablo [Internet]. Pitchfork, February 15, 2016. 
Available from: https://pitchfork.com/reviews/albums/21542-the-
life-of-pablo/ [Accessed December 13, 2016].
Hughes, R. (1988) Requiem for a Featherweight [Internet]. New Republic, 
November 21, 1988. Available from: https://newrepublic.com/
article/105858/hughes-basquiat-new-york-new-wave 
[Accessed 
December 10, 2016].
Jones, J. (2012) Robert Hughes: The Greatest Art Critic of Our Time [Internet]. 
The Guardian,  August 7, 2012. Available from: https://www.
theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2012/aug/07/
robert-hughes-greatest-art-critic [Accessed December 13, 2016].
Keyes, R. (2006) The Quote Verifier: Who Said What, Where, and When. 
New York: St. Martins Press.
McCracken, G. (2012) Culturematic. Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review 
Press.
McLaren, M. (2008) This Much I Know [Internet]. The Guardian,  November 
16, 2008. Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/lifeand-
style/2008/nov/16/malcolm-mclaren-punk-vivienne-westwood 
[Accessed March 16, 2017].
Mikkeller. (2016) Our Vision [Internet]. Available from: http://mikkeller.dk/
brewery/ [Accessed December 11, 2016].
O’Connell, S. (2016) 23% of Users Abandon an App After One Use [Internet]. 
Available 
from: 
http://info.localytics.com/blog/23-of-users-­
abandon-an-app-after-one-use [Accessed December 13, 2016].
Solberg, D. (2016) Kanye West Is Patching His Latest Album Like a Videogame 
[Internet]. Kill Screen, March 21, 2016. Available from: https://
killscreen.com/articles/kanye-west-is-patching-his-latest-album-
like-a-videogame/ [Accessed December 13, 2016].
Topolsky, J. (2016) Your Media Business Will Not Be Saved [Internet]. Available 
from: 
https://medium.com/@joshuatopolsky/your-media-business-
will-not-be-saved-1b0716b5010c#.pzlem4t7e [Accessed December 13, 
2016].

242
References
Tzuo, T. (2016) Kanye West’s “The Life of Pablo” Is the First SaaS Album 
[Internet]. TechCrunch, March 17, 2016. Available from: https://
techcrunch.com/2016/03/17/kanye-wests-the-life-of-pablo-is-the-
first-saas-album/ [Accessed December 13, 2016].
Weiner, J. (2014) A Fight Is Brewing [Internet]. New York Times, March 26, 2016. 
Available from: https://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/30/magazine/a-
fight-is-brewing.html [Accessed December 11, 2016].
West, K. (2016) Fixing Wolves 2day…. [Internet]. Twitter, March 15, 2016. 
Available 
from: 
https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/709872​
072604913664 [Accessed December 13, 2016].
The Work of Play in the Age of 
Digital Reproduction
Barnett, J., et al. (2008) Thinking with Portals: Creating Valve’s New IP 
[Internet]. Gamasutra,  November 4, 2008. Available from: https://
www.gamasutra.com/view/feature/132233/thinking_with_portals_
creating_.php [Accessed February 12, 2017].
Benjamin, W. (2009) One-Way Street and Other Writings (Vol. 966). London: 
Penguin.
Bramwell, T. (2007) Portal Review [Internet]. Eurogamer, October 10, 2007. 
Available from: http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/portal-review 
[Accessed February 11, 2007].
Chang, D. (2016) The Secret Code to Unleashing The World’s Most Amazing 
Flavors [Internet]. Wired, July 19, 2017. Available from: https://www.
wired.com/2016/07/chef-david-chang-on-deliciousness/ 
[Accessed 
March 15, 2017].
Eames Office. (2013) Powers of Ten and the Relative Size of Things in The Universe 
[Internet]. October 9, 2013. Available from: http://www.eamesoffice.
com/the-work/powers-of-ten/ [Accessed February 16, 2017].
Galenson, D. (2004). A Portrait of the Artist as a Young or Old Innovator: 
Measuring the Careers of Modern Novelists [Internet]. The National 
Bureau of Economic Research, January 2004. Available from: http://
www.nber.org/papers/w16024 [Accessed February 13, 2017].
Galenson, D. (2010) Understanding Creativity [Internet]. The National 
Bureau of Economic Research, May 2010. Available from: http://
www.nber.org/papers/w16024 [Accessed February 13, 2017].
Hill, D. (2012) Dark Matter and Trojan Horses: A Strategic Design Vocabulary 
[Kindle]. Moscow: Strelka. 
Hofstadter, D.R. (2007) I Am a Strange Loop. New York: Basic Books.
McLuhan, M. (1969) Playboy Magazine Interview. Playboy Magazine March 
26, 1969.
Pollan, M. (2009) Food Rules: An Eater’s Manual [Kindle]. London: Penguin.
Ritzer, George. (n.d.) What is McDonaldization? [Internet]. Available 
from: http://www.mcdonaldization.com/whatisit.shtml [Accessed 
February 14, 2017].

243
References
Slow Food. (1989) Slow Food Manifesto [Internet]. Available from: http://
www.mcdonaldization.com/whatisit.shtml [Accessed February 14, 
2017].
Valve. (2012) Valve: Handbook For New Employees [Internet]. Available from: 
http://www.mcdonaldization.com/whatisit.shtml [Accessed March 29, 
2017].
Threes: A Case Study in Itinerant Iteration
Byrne, D. (2012). How Music Works [Kindle]. London: Canongate Books.
Cameron, P. (2015). Mending the Developer/Player Relationship with 
Threes Free-to-Play [Internet]. Gamasutra, June 22, 2015. Available 
from: 
https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/246612/Mending_
the_developerplayer_relationship_with_Threes_freetoplay.php 
[Accessed October 31, 2016].
Chimero, F. (2011) The Long, Hard, Stupid Way [Internet]. Available from: 
http://www.frankchimero.com/writing/the-long-hard-stupid-way/ 
[Accessed November 22, 2016].
Cirulli, G. (2014) 2048, Success and Me [Internet]. Available from: http://
web.archive.org/web/20150102213534/http://gabrielecirulli.com/
articles/2048-success-and-me [Accessed November 9, 2016].
Dormehl, L. (2014) Monument Valley’s Creator Picks His Top iOS Games 
[Internet]. Cult of Mac, April 13, 2014. Available from: https://www.
cultofmac.com/274255/monument-valleys-creator-picks-top-ios-
games-exclusive/ [Accessed November 11, 2016].
Gruber, J. (2014) Threes [Internet]. Available from: https://daringfireball.
net/linked/2014/02/10/threes [Accessed November 2, 2016].
Kerr, C. (2014) Threes Creator Asher Vollmer on Growing Up, Going Indie, 
and the Dangers of Cloning [Internet]. Pocketgamer, October 9, 2014. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.pocketgamer.biz/interview/60034/
threes-creator-asher-vollmer-on-growing-up-going-indie-and-the-
dangers-of-cloning/ [Accessed November 10, 2016].
Kuchera, B. (2014) Why It Took a Year to Make, and Then Break Down, an 
Amazing Puzzle Game [Internet]. Polygon, February 6, 2014. Available 
from: 
https://www.polygon.com/2014/2/6/5386200/why-it-took-
a-year-to-make-and-then-break-down-an-amazing-puzzle-game 
[Accessed November 11, 2016].
Sorrell, M. (2014) Threes! Review [Internet]. Eurogamer, March 5, 2014. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2014-03-05-
threes-review [Accessed November 10, 2016].
Vanhemert, K. (2014). Design Is Why 2048 Sucks, and Threes Is a Masterpiece 
[Internet]. Wired, May 7, 2014. Available from: https://www.wired.
com/2014/05/threes-game-design/ [Accessed November 9, 2016].
Vollmer, A. (2015) We Released a Free Version of @ThreesGame One Month 
Ago and Here’s How It’s Doing. July 20, 2015 [Twitter]. Available 
from: 
https://twitter.com/AsherVo/status/623264369242013700 
[Accessed October 20, 2016].

244
References
Vollmer, A. and Wohlwend, G. (2014) The “Threemails”. [Internet]. Available 
from: http://asherv.com/threes/threemails/ [Accessed November 11, 
2016].
Volmer, A. and Wohlwend, G. (2015) We Are the Folks That Made Threes, 
a Popular Mobile Puzzle Game Cloned by the Even More Popular 
2048, AMA [Internet]. Available from: https://www.reddit.com/r/
IAmA/comments/3x9b2n/we_are_the_folks_that_made_threes_a_
popular/ [Accessed November 9, 2016].
Webster, A. (2014) By the Numbers: “Threes” Is Your New iPhone Addiction 
[Internet]. The Verge, February 6, 2014. Available from: https://www.
theverge.com/2014/2/6/5361708/threes-ipad-iphone-puzzle-game 
[Accessed November 11, 2016].
Webster, A. (2015) One Year Later, Mobile Puzzle Game Threes Is Going Free 
[Internet]. The Verge,  June 11, 2015. Available from: https://www.
theverge.com/2015/6/11/8722909/threes-free-to-play-launch-ios-
android [Accessed November 2, 2016].
Wohlwend, G. (2014) Show Business: Marketing for Those That Hate 
Marketing [Internet]. Available from: https://aeiowu.tumblr.com/
post/80292757667/show-business-marketing-for-those-that-hate 
[Accessed November 9, 2016].
Dear Esther: A Case Study in 
Challenging Assumptions
Briscoe, R. (2009) Mods and the Motherland! [Internet]. Available from: 
http://www.littlelostpoly.co.uk/mods-and-the-motherland/ 
[Accessed September 14, 2016].
Briscoe, R. (2012a) A Retrospective/Post-Mortem on Dear Esther [Internet]. 
Available from: http://www.littlelostpoly.co.uk/my-retrospectivepost-
mortem-on-dear-esther/ [Accessed September 14, 2016].
Briscoe, R. (2012b) Interview with Martin Davies. Back To The Source: Dear 
Esther Reborn [Internet]. Gamesindustry.biz, March 1, 2012. Available 
from: http://www.gamesindustry.biz/articles/2012-03-02-back-to-
the-source-dear-esther-reborn [Accessed September 26, 2016].
Briscoe, R. and Pinchbeck, D. (2012a) Interviewed by Lewie Procter. 
Interview: Dan Pinchbeck & Rob Briscoe on Dear Esther [Internet]. 
Available 
from: 
http://indiegames.com/2012/01/interview_dan_
pinchbeck_rob_br.html [Accessed September 23, 2016].
Briscoe, R. and Pinchbeck, D. (2012b) Interviewed by John Polson. Road 
to the IGF: Thechineseroom’s Dear Esther [Internet]. Gamasutra, 
February 20, 2012. Available from: https://www.gamasutra.com/
view/news/40391/Road_to_the_IGF_Thechineserooms_Dear_Esther.
php [Accessed September 21, 2016].
Curry, J. (2012) Interviewed by Emily Reese. Jessica Curry and Dear Esther 
on Top Score [Podcast]. Top Score, October 4, 2012. Podcast. Available 
from: https://www.classicalmpr.org/story/2012/10/03/jessica-curry-
dear-esther-top-score [Accessed November 2, 2016].

245
References
Denby, L. Touched By the Hand Of Mod: Dear Esther [Internet]. May 15, 2009. 
Available from: https://www.rockpapershotgun.com/2009/05/15/
touched-by-the-hand-of-mod-dear-esther/ [Accessed September 13, 
2016].
Indie Fund. (2017) About Indie Fund [Internet]. Available from: https://
indie-fund.com/about/ [Accessed April 3, 2017].
Pinchbeck, D. (2008a) Dear Esther [Internet]. July 7, 2008. Available from: 
https://developer.valvesoftware.com/wiki/Dear_Esther 
[Accessed 
September 15, 2016].
Pinchbeck, D. (2013) Interviewed by Rainer Sigl. “Games Are Architectures 
for an Emotional Experience” – An Interview with Dan Pinchbeck 
[Internet]. Available from: http://videogametourism.at/content/
games-are-architectures-emotional-experience-interview-dan-
pinchbeck [Accessed September 24, 2016].
Pinchbeck, D. (2014a) Dear Esther- Two Years In... (Part One) [Internet]. 
Available from: http://www.thechineseroom.co.uk/blog/blog/dear-
esther-two-years-in-part-one [Accessed September 13, 2016].
Pinchbeck, D. (2014b) Dear Esther- Two Years In... (Part Two) [Internet]. 
Available from: http://www.thechineseroom.co.uk/blog/blog/dear-
esther-two-years-in-part-two [Accessed September 13, 2016].
Pinchbeck, D. (2016) Interviewed by James Pickard. Talking “Walking 
Sims”: The Chinese Room’s Dan Pinchbeck on the Pointlessness of the 
Debate [Internet]. Available from: http://www.pcgamesn.com/dear-
esther/dan-pinchbeck-interview-are-walking-sims-games [Accessed 
November 3, 2016].
Smal, P. (2016) Jessica Curry: A Musical Journey Towards [Everybody’s Gone to] 
“the Rapture” [Internet]. Gamasutra, March 31, 2016. Available from: 
https://www.gamasutra.com/blogs/PieterSmal/20160331/269062/
Jessica_Curry_A_musical_journey_towards_Everybodys_Gone_to_
quotthe_Rapturequot.php [Accessed September 13, 2016].
Stuart, K. (2016) How Walking Sims Became as Important as the First-Person 
Shooter [Internet]. The Guardian, September 20, 2016. Available from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/20/how-walk-
ing-sim-first-person-shooter-dear-esther [Accessed November 23, 
2016].
Wikipedia. (2016) Dear Esther [Internet]. In: Wikipedia: The Free 
Encyclopaedia. Unknown eds. Available from: https://en.wikipedia.
org/wiki/Dear_Esther [Accessed September 20, 2016].
Chapter 4: Success Doesn’t Suck
Abstract
Temkin, M. (n.d) Aeiowu-a-Lot-of-Indies-Dont-Want-to-Market [Internet]. 
Available from: http://blog.maxistentialism.com/post/80593829689/
aeiowu-a-lot-of-indies-dont-want-to-market [Accessed May 1, 2017].

246
References
It's Just a Business Model
Alexander, K. (2016) There’s a Massive Restaurant Industry Bubble, and It’s 
About to Burst [Internet]. Thrillist,  December 30, 2016. Available from: 
https://www.thrillist.com/eat/nation/american-restaurant-industry-
bubble-burst [Accessed March 1, 2017].
Belben, M. (2017) Interview with Michael Belben. Interviewed by Chris 
Lowthorpe. The Eagle, February 26,  2017. [In Person].
Donovan, T. (2010) Replay: The History of Video Games. Lewes: Yellow Ant.
Drucker, P. (1994) The Theory of Business [Internet]. Harvard Business Review, 
September–October 1994. Available from: https://hbr.org/1994/09/
the-theory-of-the-business [Accessed March 1, 2017].
Green, E. (1991) The Whammy Awards Go to the Italians. The Independent, 
February 9, 1991.
Kellon, L. (2014) Sega vs. Nintendo: Sonic, Mario and the 1990s Console Wars 
[Internet]. BBC News, May 13, 2014. Available from: http://www.bbc.
co.uk/news/technology-27373587 [Accessed March 1, 2017].
Kent, S.L. (2001) The Ultimate History of Video Games. New York: Three Rivers.
Magretta, J. (2002) Why Business Models Matter [Internet]. Harvard Business 
Review, May 2002. Available from: https://hbr.org/2002/05/why-
business-models-matter [Accessed March 1, 2017].
Maurya, A. (2012) Running Lean: Iterate from Plan A to a Plan That Works. 
2nd ed. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly.
Meades, J. (1991) Popped In, Pigged Out. The Times, August 3, 1991.
Mesure, S. (2016) The Eagle: Britain’s First Gastropub Celebrates Its 25th 
Birthday [Internet]. The Independent, 2016. Available from: http://
www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/the-eagle-britains-
first-gastropub-celebrates-its-25th-birthday-a6804221.html 
[Accessed March 1, 2017].
Reagan, R. (1989) Farewell Address to the Nation [Internet]. Washington, DC: 
The White House. Available from: http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/
ws/?pid=29650 [Accessed March 27, 2017].
Ryan, J. (2013) Super Mario: How Nintendo Conquered America. London: Penguin.
Slade, M.E. (1998) Beer and the Tie: Did Divestiture of Brewer-Owned Public 
Houses Lead to Higher Beer Prices? [Internet]. The Economic Journal, 
108, 
565–602. 
Available 
from: 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1111/1468-0297.00305/pdf [Accessed March 1, 2017].
Steinbeck, J. (1962) Travels with Charly: In Search of America. London: Penguin.
The Eagle. (2017) The Eagle Alumni [Internet]. Available from: http://www.
theeaglefarringdon.co.uk/alumni [Accessed March 1, 2017]. 
Welsh, I. (2002) Porno. London: Jonathan Cape.
Let Me Be Your Fantasy
Ackroyd, P. (2011a) The Romantics: Liberty. BBC4. Available from: https://
learningonscreen.ac.uk/ondemand/index.php/prog/005737E0 
[Accessed February 15, 2017].

247
References
Ackroyd, P. (2011b) The Romantics: Nature. BBC4. Available from: https://
learningonscreen.ac.uk/ondemand/index.php/prog/005737E0 
[Accessed February 15, 2017].
Ackroyd, P. (2011c) The Romantics: Eternity. BBC4. Available from: https://
learningonscreen.ac.uk/ondemand/index.php/prog/005737E0 
[Accessed February 15, 2017].
Atlas, R. and Rothwell, J. (2016) Sour Grapes [Internet]. Directed by Reuben 
Atlas and Jerry Rothwell. USA. Met Film Production. VOD. Available 
from: 
http://www.sourgrapesfilm.com/screenings 
[Accessed 
March 1, 2017].
Beachy, S (2005). Who Is the Real JT LeRoy? A Search for the True Identity of 
a Great Literary Hustler [Internet]. New York. Available from: http://
nymag.com/nymetro/news/people/features/14718/ 
[Accessed 
March 1, 2017].
Berman, M. (1984) The Signs in the Street: A Response to Perry Anderson 
[Internet]. New Left Review, March–April 1984. Available from: 
https://newleftreview.org/I/144/marshall-berman-the-signs-in-
the-street-a-response-to-perry-anderson [Accessed March 1, 
2017].
Byron, G.G. (1824) Don Juan [Internet]. Archive.org. Available from: https://
archive.org/details/donjuan05byro [Accessed August 4, 2017].
Didion, J. (1979) The White Album. London: Penguin.
Drummond, C. (n.d.) Lord Byron: 19th Century Bad Boy [Internet]. Available 
from: https://www.bl.uk/romantics-and-victorians/articles/lord-byron-​
19thcentury-bad-boy [Accessed March 1, 2017].
Feuerzeig, J. (2016) The J.T. LeRoy Story [Internet]. Directed by Jeff Feuerzeig. 
Amazon Instant Video. VOD. Available from: https://www.amazon.
co.uk/d/Amazon-Video/Author-JT-LeRoy-Story-Jeff-Feuerzeig/
B01M0HU6BU [Accessed March 1, 2017].
Forward, S. (n.d.) The Romantics [Internet]. Available from: https://www.bl.uk/
romantics-and-victorians/articles/the-romantics [Accessed March 1, 
2017].
Frayling, C. (1992) Vampyres: Lord Byron to Count Dracula. London: Faber & 
Faber.
Galassi, P. (2003) Cindy Sherman: The Complete Untitled Film Stills. New York: 
The Museum of Modern Art.
Hobsbawm, E. (1962) The Age of Revolution: 1789–1848. London: Abacus.
Hughes. R. (1997) American Visions: The Epic History of Art in America. 
London: Harvill.
Langer, A. (2013) Laura Albert [Internet]. Interview, July 22, 2013. Available 
from: 
http://www.interviewmagazine.com/culture/laura-albert#_ 
[Accessed March 1, 2017].
MacCarthy, F. (2003) Byron: Life and Legend. London: Faber and Faber.
Marchand, L.A. ed. (1974) Byron’s Letters and Journals. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Orwell, G. (1944) A Hundred Up: The Centenary of Martin Chuzzlewit. The 
Observer, February 13, 1944.

248
References
Rose, S. (2016) JT LeRoy Unmasked: The Extraordinary Story of a Modern 
Literary Hoax [Internet]. The Guardian, July 20, 2016. Available from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/20/jt-leroy-story-­
modern-literary-hoax- [Accessed March 1, 2017].
Safire, W. (1986) On Language: Calling Dr. Spin [Internet]. New York 
Times,  August 31, 1986. Available from: http://www.nytimes.
com/1986/08/ 31/magazine/on-language- calling- dr-spin.
html?Src=longreads [Accessed March 1, 2017].
Schama, S. (2012) Cindy Sherman Talks to Simon Schama [Internet]. Financial 
Times, February 3, 2012. Available from: https://www.ft.com/
content/1cec0df6-4d4f-11e1-8741-00144feabdc0 [Accessed March 1, 
2017].
Sky News. (2016) [Television Broadcast]. Sky News, June 3, 2016.
Smith, R. (2004) Art Review: The Ever-Shifting Selves of Cindy Sherman, 
Girlish  Vamp to Clown [Internet]. New York Times, May 28, 2004. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2004/05/28/arts/art-
review-the-ever-shifting-selves-of-cindy-sherman-girlish-vamp-to-
clown.html?ref=cindysherman&_r=0 [Accessed March 1, 2017].
Sussler, B. (1985) Cindy Sherman Interview with Betty Sussler [Internet]. 
BOMB Magazine, No. 12, Spring 1985. Available from: http://bomb-
magazine.org/article/638/cindy-sherman [Accessed March 1, 2017].
Weingarten, M. (2006) The Gang That Wouldn’t Write Straight: Wolfe, 
Thompson, Didion, and the New Journalism Revolution [Kindle 
Paperwhite]. New York: Three Rivers Press.
Whitman, W. (1855) Leaves of Grass [Internet]. Archive.org. Available from: 
https://archive.org/details/LeavesOfGrass1855Edition 
[Accessed 
August 4, 2017].
Patronize Me, Please
BrewDog. (2016). DIY Dog [Internet]. Available from: https://www.
brewdog.com/diydog [Accessed February 2,7 2017].
Chen, A. (2017) Brad Troemel, The Troll of Internet Art [Internet]. New 
Yorker, January 30, 2017. Available from: https://www.newyorker.
com/­magazine/2017/01/30/brad-troemel-the-troll-of-internet-art 
[Accessed February 26, 2017].
Gerhardt, T. and Provost, D. (2012) It Will Be Exhilarating [Kindle]. Austin, 
TX: Studio Neat.
Johnson, S. (2015) The Creative Apocalypse That Wasn’t [Internet]. New 
York Times, August 19, 2015. Available from: https://www.nytimes.
com/2015/08/23/magazine/the-creative-apocalypse-that-wasnt.
html [Accessed February 20, 2017].
Nussbaum, B. (2011) 4 Reasons Why the Future of Capitalism Is Homegrown, 
Small Scale, and Independent [Internet]. Fast Company, December 5, 
2011. Available from: https://www.fastcodesign.com/1665567/4-­
reasons-why-the-future-of-capitalism-is-homegrown-small-scale-
and-independent [Accessed February 28, 2017].

249
References
Nussbaum, B. (2013) How “Indie” Capitalism Will Replace Our Stagnant 
Economic System [Internet]. Wired, March 5, 2017. Available from: 
https://www.wired.com/2013/03/how-to-put-the-indie-in-­
capitalism/ [Accessed February 26, 2017].
Palmer, A. (2013) Amanda Palmer: The Art of Asking [Video]. TED 2013, 
February 2013. Available from: https://www.ted.com/talks/amanda_
palmer_the_art_of_asking [Accessed March 20, 2014].
Pugh, W. (2017) William Pugh’s Journey from the Stanley Parable into 
Crows Crows Crows [Internet]. Gamasutra, January 19, 2017. 
Available from: https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/288395/
William_Pughs_journey_from_The_Stanley_Parable_into_Crows_
Crows_Crows.php [Accessed February 27, 2017].
Sheffield, B. (2014) Vlambeer’s Performative Game Development – The Way 
of the Future [Internet]. Gamasutra, March 17, 2014. Available from: 
https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/213339/Vlambeers_
Performative_Game_Development_the_way_of_the_future.php 
[Accessed February 28, 2017].
Thompson, B. (2017) Manifestos and Monopolies [Internet]. Stratechery, 
February 21, 2017. Available from: https://stratechery.com/2017/
manifestos-and-monopolies/ [Accessed February 26, 2017].
Von Hippel, E. (2006) Democratizing Innovation [Kindle]. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Watt, J. (2015) Business for Punks: Break All the Rules – The BrewDog Way 
[Kindle]. London: Penguin.
Wilson, D. (2012) Spelunky Glory, Videogame Rituals, and Nifflas’ Miracle 
[Internet]. Available from: https://gutefabrik.com/blog/?p=2016 
[Accessed March 14, 2017].
Yu, D. (2016) Spelunky (Boss Fight Books 11) [Kindle]. Los Angeles, CA: Boss 
Fight Books.
Devolver Digital: A Case Study in Amplification
Alliot, F. (2016) How We Mixed Tinder and Politics to Make a Premium Hit on 
Mobile [Internet]. Polygon, September 15, 2016. Available from: https://
gutefabrik.com/blog/?p=2016 [Accessed September 15, 2016].
Bernstein, J. (n.d.) Hotline: Miami, The First Postmodern Videogame? 
[Internet]. Kill Screen. Available from: https://killscreen.com/articles/
kill-screen-review-hotline-miami-first-postmodern-videogame/ 
[Accessed July 7, 2016].
Edge Magazine. (2013) The Making of Hotline Miami [Internet]. Available 
from: http://willingtobe.com/the-making-of-hotline-miami [Accessed 
November 24, 2016].
Fahey, R. (2016) Mobile Has Become an Indie-Hostile Market [Internet]. 
Gamesindustry.biz, August 26, 2016. Available from: http://www.
gamesindustry.biz/articles/2016-08-24-mobile-has-become-an-
indie-hostile-market [Accessed September 5, 2016].

250
References
Haro, S. (2016) The #1 app in US Paid Apps List Is on Position #235 
in the Top Grossing List. Paid Apps Are Truly Dead [Twitter]. 
August 
11, 
2016. 
Available 
from: 
https://twitter.com/sulka/
status/763725926819651584?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw 
[Accessed 
September 1, 2016].
Jagneaux, D. (2016) How Devolver Digital Came to Rule the World of Indie 
Games [Internet]. Playboy, July 5, 2016. Available from: http://www.
playboy.com/articles/how-devolver-digital-came-to-rule-the-world-
of-indie-games [Accessed October 7, 2016].
King, R. (2012) How Indie Labels Changed the World [Internet]. The Guardian, 
March 22, 2012. Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/
music/2012/mar/22/indie-record-labels-changed-world 
[Accessed 
October 10, 2016].
Kuchera, B. (2015) Devolver Digital Shows Nintendo How It’s Done with 
YouTube Monetization Statement [Internet]. Polygon, January 30, 2015. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.polygon.com/2015/1/30/7952605/
devolver-digital-nintendo-youtube [Accessed August 20, 2016].
Lowrie, N. (2016) You Don’t Need a F-ing Publisher. Game Developers 
Conference (GDC), San Francisco, CA. March 15, 2016. Available 
from: 
http://www.gdcvault.com/play/1023495/You-Don-t-Need-a 
[Accessed October 8, 2016].
McKeand, K. (2016) Meet Devolver Digital, Gaming’s Own Death Row Records 
[Internet]. The Telegraph, August 31, 2016. Available from: http://
www.telegraph.co.uk/gaming/what-to-play/meet-devolver-digital-
gamings-own-death-row-records/ [Accessed October 9, 2016].
Meer, A. (2012) Rezzed: Our, and Your, Game of the Show [Internet]. 
July 18, 2012. Available from: https://www.rockpapershotgun.
com/2012/07/18/rezzed-our-and-your-game-of-the-show/ [Accessed 
August 13, 2016].
Messner, S. (2016) How Devolver Digital Is Redefining Videogame Publishing 
[Internet]. Available from: http://www.pcgamer.com/how-devolver-
digital-is-redefining-videogame-publishing/ [Accessed October 8, 
2016].
Morley, P. (2007) Idealist, Chancer, Loyal Friend: Why I Will Miss Tony Wilson 
[Internet]. The Guardian, August 12, 2007. Available from: https://
www.theguardian.com/music/2007/aug/12/tonywilson 
[Accessed 
October 10, 2016].
Peckinpah, S. (1969) Interviewed by Roger Ebert. Sam Peckinpah: “Dying Is Not 
Fun and Games [Internet]. Chicago Sun-Times, June 29, 1969. Available 
from: http://www.rogerebert.com/interviews/sam-­peckinpah-dying-
is-not-fun-and-games [Accessed June 24, 2016].
Procter, L. (n.d.) Cactus on Hotline Miami: “I’m Pretty Tired of Crappy Games 
That Don’t Really Want to Do Anything Special [Internet]. Available 
from: 
http://www.pcgamesn.com/indie/cactus-hotline-miami-im-
pretty-tired-crappy-games-dont-really-want-do-anything-special 
[Accessed August 27, 2016].

251
References
Purchase, R. (2012) The Hotline Miami Sales Story, and More [Internet]. 
Eurogamer, December 11, 2012. Available from: http://www.euro-
gamer.net/articles/2012-12-11-the-hotline-miami-sales-story-and-
more [Accessed October 13, 2016].
Reigns. (2016a) Thanks! A Majority [Twitter]. September 14, 2016. Available 
from: https://twitter.com/reignsgame/status/776075024763674624 
[Accessed April 3, 2017].
Reigns. (2016b) Reigns Has Crossed 1 Million Copies Sold, Thank You Loyal 
Subjects [Twitter]. December 23, 2016. Available from: https://­twitter.
com/reignsgame/status/812320859968983044 [Accessed April 3, 
2017].
Roberts, D. (2015) Digital Humanity: How Devolver Is the Sub Pop of gaming 
[Internet]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.gamesradar.com/digital-
humanity-how-devolver-sub-pop-gaming/ [Accessed October 8, 
2016].
Warren, J. (2012) If Videogames Are in Their “Indie” Period, Where’s Our 
Factory Records? [Internet]. Kill Screen, March 29, 2012. Available 
from: https://killscreen.com/articles/if-videogames-are-their-indie-
period-wheres-our-factory-records/ [Accessed October 7, 2016].
Webster, A. (2012) Blood and Pixels on the Beach: The Story of “Hotline 
Miami” [Internet]. The Verge, October 1, 2012. Available from: https://
www.theverge.com/2012/10/1/3437500/hotline-miami-dennaton-
interview [Accessed October 12, 2016].
Wilson, M. (2007) Interviewed by Brandon Sheffield. From God to Cock: 
Mike Wilson on GameCock’s Publishing Party [Internet]. Gamasutra, 
August 29, 2007. Available from: https://www.gamasutra.com/view/
feature/1666/from_god_to_cock_mike_wilson_on_.php 
[Accessed 
October 8, 2016].
An Ending (Ascent)
Jefferson, M. (1988) Open Our Eyes (Celestial Mix) [Vinyl]. New York: Big Beat.
Schama, S. (2000) The Rest is History [MP4 File]. BBC2, October 3, 2000. 
London: BBC.


253
Colophon
Font
Open Sans
Style Guide
This book follows The Guardian and Observer style guide.
Available from: https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-​
style-guide-a
References
This book follows Harvard referencing style.
Technical
This book was written in Google Docs, tracked in Trello and dis-
cussed in Slack.


255
Index
A
Acorn, Al, 7–8
adaptive frameworks, 107–108
Adele, 18–19
advertising, 4–5, 8
aesthetics, 49–58, 131
Albert, Laura, 187–190
Albini, Steve, 119–120, 125
Alexander, Kevin, 174–176
Alliot, François, 211–212
Al-Qaida Iraq (AQI), 107–108
alternative music, 44–45, 119–120
Alvi, Suroosh, 120–122
Amazon, 114
Amis, Martin, 74
Anderson, Chris, 114
Apple, 12
App Store, 13, 16, 97, 126
AQ restaurant, 174–176
Arakawa, Minoru, 173–174
arcade games, 6–8
Arcangel, Cory, 193
Arendt, Hannah, 195
art, 2–4, 8, 127–129
artificial intelligence (AI), 85
artisanship, 30–37, 119
artist-as-genius myth, 82–83, 185
artists, 81–82
artists and repertoire (A&R), 
207–208
art/science divide, 81–85
assumptions, 165, 177
Atari, 6, 7–8
audience relationships, 115–116
authenticity, 71–78
automobile industry, 72–73
B
Baio, Andy, 119
Baker, Sean, 112–113
banner ads, 148
Barnes, Beanie, 113
Basquiat, Jean-Michel, 126–128
Bauhaus, 64–66

256
Index
Beatbox, 122–123
Belben, Michael, 165–170
Belle and Sebastian, 122–124
Benjamin, Walter, 135
Berman, Marshall, 183
Bjergsø, Mikkel Borg, 130–131
Blake, William, 182
Blip Blup, 90–92, 95
Blow, Jonathan, 133, 195
Bourdain, Anthony, 32
Boyd, John, 106–107
brands, 72–73
Break-In, The, 113
BrewDog, 68–70, 198–200
Brexit, 71, 192, 211
Briscoe, Rob, 153–158
broadcast media, 21–22
Buchanan, Richard, 26
bucket lists, 38
Building 20, 86, 88
bunker mentality, 81–88
bureaucracy, 125, 135
Burns, Robert, 182
Bush, George H.W., 104
Bush, George W., 104
Bush, Jeb, 104–106
Bush, Vannevar, 86
Bushnell, Nolan, 5–8
business models, 164–178
Byrne, David, 145
Byron, Lord, 183–186
Byronic hero, 185
C
C86 movement, 14
cable television, 22
Cabourn, Nigel, 78
calculability, 135
Campbell, Isobel, 123
canon, 38–39, 40, 41
capitalism, 193–194
casual revolution, 11–12, 13
Catmull, Ed, 92, 109–110
celebrity culture, 183–184
Chang, David, 138–139
checklist culture, 38
Chen, Jenova, 13, 49–58
Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage 
(Byron), 184
Chimero, Frank, 142–143
Clements, Ryan, 53
Clinton, Hillary, 22–24, 27
clones, 147–148
Cloud, 50–51, 52
Colborn, Richard, 123
collaborative projects, 85–86
colleges, 87
commodification, 126–134
common purpose, 108
Communist Manifesto, 64
compartmentalization, 84
con artists, 190–191
conceptual innovators, 135–136
console industry, 12
context, 26–27, 104, 145–146
control, 135
Cook, Daniel, 116
Copernicus, 81
corporate events, 193–194
counterculture, 13
country music, 73
craft beers, 32, 68–70, 130–131, 
198–200
craft/craftmanship, 30–37, 
117–118, 193
creative control, 17, 19
creative entrepreneurs, 193–194
creative environment, 92–93
creative process, 108–110
creativity, 62–63, 77–78, 125, 185
Crooks, Dave, 207
crowd funding, 194, 196–200
Crows Crows Crows, 200–202
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly, 50
culture, 38–48
celebrity, 183–184
fast-food, 140–141
gaming, 11–12
high, 38, 40
low, 40
peer, 92
popular, 73–74
“two culture” theory, 84, 88
culturematics, 128–130
culture wars, 38–40
curation, 38–48
Curie, Marie, 8
Curry, Jessica, 153, 156, 158
curry houses, 74–77

257
Index
D
David, Stuart, 122–124
Davis, Miles, 110
Dear Esther, 152–160
Debord, Guy, 66–67
deindustrialization, 103
demand-driven economy, 193
democratization, 112–113, 117, 119, 
193–194
Denby, Lewis, 153
detournement, 66–67
development-led research, 
152–153
Devolver Digital, 204–212
Dickens, Charles, 191
Dickle, Martin, 199
Didion, Joan, 63, 182
diet and nutrition, 139–141
digital distribution, 11–13, 
116–117, 193
digital economy, 113–114
direct relationships, 115–116
discovery, 114–116
Dishoom, 75–77
division of labor, 81
DIY Dog, 199–200
Doescher, Justin, 113
Don Juan (Byron), 185
Donkey King, 172
downloadable games, 11–12
Drucker, Peter, 87, 165
E
Eagle, The, 165–170, 177
eclectic skeptics, 2–8
Edery, David, 114
education, 84–85, 87
efficiency, 108–110, 135, 142
Eisenhower, Dwight, 85
electronic information revolution, 
63–64
Ellison, Ralph, 11
emotional experiences, 49–58
emotional signposting, 158
empowered execution, 108
Enlightenment, 83
Eno, Brian, 127–128
Enter the Gungeon, 206–207
Equity for Punks, 198–200
Escher, M. C., 35, 93
experience triggers, 127–128
experimental innovators, 135–137
experimentation, 124–125, 
135–137
experts, 192
extrinsic value, 127–128
Eyre, David, 165–170
F
fabrication, 75
Factory Records, 15, 24–25, 204, 212
“fail fast” approach, 91
fairy tales, 186–187
Falco, Charles, 82–83
Famicom, 172–173
fantasies, 182, 186–192
fast-food culture, 140–141
Field of Dreams approach, 
176–177, 194
film industry, 112–113
Fincher, David, 132
first-person shooters (FPSs), 47, 152
Fitzmaurice, Larry, 42
fl0w, 51–53
Flesser, Simon, 110
flow, 50–53
Flower, 53–54
Flow in Game (Chen), 50–51
fluidity, 88
Food Rules (Pollan), 139–140
Foster, Norman, 104
Frayling, Christopher, 31
freemium model, 91
free-to-play experience, 148–149
French paradox, 140
Freud, Sigmund, 3
G
Gage, Zach, 144
Galenson, David, 135
Galileo, 81
Game and Watch, 171–172
Gamecock Media Group, 205
game culture, 47–48, 50
game developers, independent, 
13–20, 112–118
game industry, 6–8, 11–13, 112–118

258
Index
game jams, 177
game making
uncertainty in, 112–118
unknowns in, 104–110
games research, 152–153
gaming culture, 11–12
gaming experiences, 145–147, 
159–160
Gardeback, Magnus, 110
Garese, Barrett, 32
Garrett, Sheryl, 30
gastropubs, 168–170
Gerhardt, Tom, 196–198
GLaDOS, 136–137
Glif, 196–198
globalization, 71–72, 135
Google, 12
Google Play, 13
Gould, Stephen Jay, 81, 83–84
grand narratives, 39
Gray, Daniel, 92, 93–94, 97, 99
Gretton, Rob, 25–26
Groove Records, 16
Gropius, Walter, 65
Gruber, John, 148, 197
H
Haçienda nightclub, 24–26, 27
high culture, 38, 40
higher education, 85, 87
hipsters, 27, 119
Hirsch, Foster, 42
hobbyists, 117
Hockney, David, 82–83
Hockney-Falco thesis, 82–83
homogeneity, 135
Hook, Peter, 24, 25
Hotline Miami, 209–210
hubs, 177
Hughes, Robert, 126–128
humanities, 84–85
Hunicke, Robin, 57
I
ideals, 61
ideas, 92
imagination, 68
improvisation, 110
in-app purchases, 148
incubation, 177
independence, 11
Independent Craft Brewers of 
Ireland (ICBI), 32
independent game developers, 
13–20, 112–118
Indian food/restaurants, 74–77
indie capitalism, 193–194
Indie Fund, 156–157
Indie Kid, 14
indiepocalypse, 119
indies, 13–20, 112–118
individuality, 23, 27, 197
industrialization, 31, 81, 87, 
124–125, 135
innovation, 85–86, 88, 128–129, 
137–138, 194–196
innovators, 135–137
intellectual property (IP), 12
internet, 120, 193, 194
intrinsic value, 127–128
iteration, 142–149, 165
iterative design, 136
J
Jackson, Stevie, 123
Jaffrey, Madhur, 76
Jahchan, Rudy, 32
jazz music, 110
jeans, 32–34
Jeep, 73
Jenison, Tim, 83
Jobs, Steve, 8, 109, 119
Johnson, Philip, 39
Johnson, Steven, 202
Jones, Jonathan, 83
Journey, 54–57
“just make it” mantra, 62
Juul, Jesper, 11
K
Kelly, Kevin, 115
Kickstarter, 194, 196–198
Kinks, The, 21
Kissinger, Henry, 87
knowledge silos, 81, 88
Koch, Bill, 190, 191

259
Index
Koppai, Nintendo, 170
Kranz, Kurt, 65
Kruger, Barbara, 39–40
Kurniawan, Rudy, 190–191
L
Lake Poets, 182–183
Land Rover, 73
Lasseter, John, 109
Latino voters, 22–24
learning community, 87
learning environment, 92
Lee, Young, 33
Legend, Tobu, 45
Lennon, John, 30
Leonardo da Vinci, 81, 82
LeRoy, J. T., 187–190
Levi’s, 32–33
Liang, Alice, 53
Life of Pablo, The, 132
London Fields (Amis), 74
Lonely Island, The, 129
Long Tail theory, 113–117
Lovelace, Ada, 8
low culture, 40
Lowrie, Nigel, 205, 206, 207, 210
M
mainstreaming, 12
Manchester, England, 24–26, 27
Manhattan Project, 85
manifestos, 62–70, 218–220
marketing, 146, 177
Marx, Karl, 64
masquerade, 186–190
mass effect, 21–27
massing, 21
Maurya, Ash, 164
McCartney, Paul, 30
McChrystal, Stanley, 107–108
McCracken, Grant, 128–129
McDonaldization, 135, 140–141
McFarland, Neil, 97–98
McGee, Alan, 14
McInnes, Gavin, 121
McLaren, Malcolm, 39, 66–68, 126
McLuhan, Marshall, 63–64, 81, 83, 119
meaning, 62–63
media companies, 15, 133–134
Michelangelo, 81, 82
microcasting, 22
microstudios, 112
Mikkeller, 130–131
military-industrial-academic 
complex, 85–86
Miller, Harry, 205
Miller, Matt, 90, 92–93, 96, 98
mimetic interfaces, 11
Minecraft, 115–116
Mini, 72–73
Mistry, Manish, 90–91
mobile apps, 126
mobile games, 91–92, 96–97, 
210–212
modernism, 39, 65
modernity, 31, 35, 183
money making, 19–20
monoculture, 47, 50
Monument Valley, 35, 90–99
Morley, Paul, 212
Morris, Stephen, 25
Mountains, 117–118
Murdoch, Stuart, 122–124
Murphy, Daniel, 170
Musashi, Miyamoto, 88
music industry, 12, 14–20, 66–67, 
119–120, 132–133
music sampling, 40–41
N
Narbacular Drop, 136
narratives, 182–192
narrowcasting, 22
nationalism, 71
negative globalization, 71–72
Netflix, 22, 114
New Journalism, 191–192
Newman, Paul, 2
New Order, 25–26
niche markets, 113–114, 120, 198
Nintendo, 170–174
Nintendo Entertainment System 
(NES), 173–174
Nirvana, 62
Northern Soul, 45–47
nostalgia, 30–33, 35
Nussbaum, Bruce, 193–194

260
Index
O
Office of Scientific Research and 
Development, 86
Ogilvy, David, 4–5, 8
O’Keeffe, Georgia, 2–4, 8, 38
1024, 147
online learning, 87
OODA (Observe, Orient, Decide, 
Act) loop, 106–107, 110
open borders, 71
Open Skies policies, 71
optics, 82–83
orthodoxy, 8, 47–48, 65, 66, 133
Orwell, George, 191
outliers, 113, 116, 192
P
Palmer, Amanda, 193
Parkin, Simon, 124–125
patronage, 115, 198–202
Peckinpah, Sam, 209
peer culture, 92
perfection, 132
Persson, Markus, 115–116
Peterson, Richard, 73
Picasso, Pablo, 132
Pickering, Mike, 25
Pierson, Janet, 113
Pinchbeck, Dan, 152–160
piracy, 12, 210
Pitchfork, 44–45
Pixar, 109–110
Playbook, 104–105
PlayStation Network (PSN), 52
play-testing, 95–96, 136–137
Pollan, Michael, 139–140
polymath, 81–82
Pong, 6, 7–8, 171, 172
popular culture, 73–74
Portal, 136–137
postindustrial society, 27
postmodernism, 38–48
postmortems, 92
Postrel, Virginia, 49
Powers of Ten, 137–138
predictability, 108–110, 135
premature incorporation, 124–125
presidential campaigns, 104–106
presidential election (2016), 22–24, 27
probes, 63–64
prototypes, 177
provocations, 70
Provost, Dan, 196–198
Public Enemy, 38
Pugh, William, 200–202
Pulp Fiction, 42
punk attitude, 119–122
punk brewery, 68–70
Punk Playthings Manifesto, 219–220
punk revolution, 14
punk rock, 66–68
Pye, David, 35
Q
quality control, 17
R
Radia, Adash, 75
Rad Lab, 85–86, 88
Rankine, Alan, 123–124
rationalization, 135, 193
Reagan, Ronald, 164
Rede Lectures, 84
Reid, Jim, 20
Reigns, 210–212
religion, 182
Rembrandt, 81, 82
Renaissance, 81–82, 83
research and development (R&D), 
85–86
restaurants, 74–77, 168–170, 
174–176
Reynolds, Simon, 17
Rhodes, Bernie, 68
Ritzer, George, 135
Romanticism, 31, 182–186
Rotten, Johnny, 38
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 182
rules of engagement, 107–108
Rumsfeld, Donald, 104, 105
Russell, Richard, 16–18, 19
S
Saltsman, Adam, 144
Samberg, Andy, 129
sampling, 40–43

261
Index
Santiago, Kellee, 49–58
Sarah (LeRoy), 187–190
saturated market, 175–176
Saturday Night Live (SNL), 129
Schaffer, Akiva, 129
Schama, Simon, 62, 187, 217
Schreiber, Ryan, 43–44
science, 81–84
scientific revolution, 83
Scott-Heron, Gil, 11
self-publishing, 12, 114, 206
Serious Sam 3, 208
Sex Pistols, 66–67
shared consciousness, 108
Shellac, 119–120
Shelley, Mary, 185
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 185
Sherman, Cindy, 186–187
Shirky Principle, 115
Simogo, 110
Situationists, 66–67
Skål, 130–131
skills gaps, 84–85
Slaper, Roy, 33–34
Slow Food movement, 140–141
Smith, Shane, 121
Snow, CP, 84
Sobchak, Walter, 62
Söderström, Jonathan, 208–209
Sony Santa Monica, 52
Sorrell, Sir Martin, 72
Sour Grapes, 190–191
Space Invaders, 171
SpaceWar! 88
specialization, 81, 84, 85
spectacles, 66–67
Spelunky, 194–196
Spotify, 114
Spurlock, Morgan, 129
Steam, 13, 16, 112, 114
Steinbeck, John, 164
STEM (science, technology, 
engineering and math) 
education, 84–85
Stetsasonic, 40
Stone, Oliver, 85
stories, 182–192
“Story Is King,” 109
storytelling, 152, 153
strategy, 164
streamers, 210
streaming platforms, 22
Struthers, Graeme, 205, 208
Stuart, Keith, 13, 159–160
Studio Neat, 198
Stults, Rick, 205
Super Size Me, 129
supply and demand, 113–114, 
116–117, 175, 193
Swift, Kim, 136
Szalwinski, Richard, 122
T
Taccone, Jorma, 129
Talking Heads, 112
Tangerine, 113
Tarantino, Quentin, 42–43
Tech Model Railroad Club, 88
Teitelbaum, Michael S., 85
television, 21–22
thatgamecompany, 49–58
Threes, 142–149
Tigermilk, 124
Tim’s Vermeer, 83
Titan Souls, 207–208
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 71
Topolsky, Joshua, 133–134
Toy Story, 109
Toy Story 2, 109–110
traditions, 30
tribalism, 63
True Fans, 120
Trump, Donald, 22–24, 27, 71, 
105–106, 192
“Trust the Process,” 109–110
Twitch, 22
“two culture” theory, 84, 88
2048, 147–148
U
uncertainty, 112–118, 135, 136
Underwood, Francis J., 2
universities, 87
unknown unknowns, 104–110
Untitled Film Stills, 186–187
US Declaration of 
Independence, 64
user-centric innovation, 194–196

262
Index
US presidential election (2016), 
22–24, 27
ustwo Games, 90–98
V
Valéry, Paul, 132
value, 126–134, 200
Valve, 12, 136, 137, 138, 154, 156
venture capital, 15
Vermeer, Johannes, 83
Vice Media, 122
video games
flow in, 50–53
Nintendo and, 170–174
virtual reality, 12
Voice of Montreal, 120–122
Vollmer, Asher, 142–149
W
wabisabi, 178
Warhol, Andy, 182
Warren, Jamin, 204
Watt, James, 198, 199
Weatherall, Andrew, 77–78
Weber, Max, 135
Wedin, Dennis, 208–209
Weingarten, Marc, 191–192
West, Kanye, 132–133
Western canon, 38–39, 40, 41
Western diet, 140
Westwood, Vivienne, 67
Whale Trail, 90
Whitman, Walt, 182
Williams, Raymond, 21, 23, 31
Willson, Tony, 212
Wilson, Doug, 195–196
Wilson, Mike, 205
Wilson, Tony, 24–25
wishful thinking approach, 177
withered technology approach, 172
Wohlwend, Greg, 142–149
Wong, Ken, 34–35, 92–95, 117–118
Wright Brothers, 8
X
XL Recordings, 16–20
XOXO Festival, 119
Y
Yamauchi, Hiroshi, 170–174
Yokoi, Gunpei, 171
You’re Gonna Wake Up One Morning, 
67–68
YouTube, 22
YouTubers, 210
Yu, Derek, 194–196
Z
al-Zarqawi, Abu Musab, 108

