
Mantesh

Copyright 2013 Al Kavadlo
A Dragon Door Publications, Inc production
All rights under International and Pan-American Copyright conventions.
Published in the United States by: Dragon Door Publications, Inc
5 East County Rd B, #3 • Little Canada, MN 55117
Tel: (651) 487-2180  • Fax: (651) 487-3954
Credit card orders: 1-800-899-5111 • Email: support@dragondoor.com • Website: www.dragondoor.com
ISBN 10:  0-938045-86-5        ISBN 13:  978-0-938045-86-1
This edition first published in May, 2013
Printed in China
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any means without the prior written consent of the
Publisher, excepting brief quotes used in reviews.
Book design and cover by Derek Brigham • www.dbrigham.com • (763) 208-3069 • bigd@dbrigham.com
Photos by Colleen Leung and Jordan Perlson
Additional Photos: Magnus Unnar, Trevor Reid, Kartik Tamhane, Abdiel Munoz, Danny Kavadlo
Cover Photo: Magnus Unnar
Back Cover Photo: Jordan Perlson
Models: Al Kavadlo, Danny Kavadlo, Adrienne Harvey, Lauren Sison, Kristin Leung, Meng He, Jasmine Brooks
Illustration by Billy Hongkong (www.BillyHongkong.net)
DISCLAIMER:  The author and publisher of this material are not responsible in any manner whatsoever for any
injury that may occur through following the instructions contained in this material. The activities, physical and
otherwise, described herein for informational purposes only, may be too strenuous or dangerous  for some people
and the reader(s) should consult a physician before engaging in them. 
Mantesh

—TABLE OF CONTENTS —
Foreword by Jason Ferruggia
Introduction: Wrestling With Fitness
1
Chapter One: Progressing To Proper Push-ups
11
Chapter Two: Knowing Squat
25
Chapter Three: Bridging The Gap
43
Chapter Four: Advanced Push-ups
67
Chapter Five: Advanced Squats
99
Chapter Six: Full Inversions
111
Chapter Seven: Owning The One Arm Push-up
132
Chapter Eight: Troubleshooting The Pistol Squat
147
Chapter Nine: All Together Now
175
Appendix A: Bonus Exercises
183
Appendix B: Sample Routines
201
About The Author
209
Mantesh


’m kind of jealous. I know I shouldn’t be but I am. I wish I had authored a book
that was this badass and visually stunning. 
About a year ago my good friend Derek Brigham (who did the amazing job with the
layout and design of Pushing the Limits!) emailed me to tell me I had to check out a new
project he worked on. It was a book called Raising The Bar by Al Kavadlo. 
I came to find that like me, Al is an East Coaster, covered in tattoos with a love for old
school professional wrestling and bodyweight training. Immediately I was interested.
What I didn’t know at the time was that Al did a lot of his workouts in the exact same
park I once lived across the street from and spent several months training at. 
It was the spring of 2005. For the previous ten years I’d been running my own hardcore
training center in New Jersey called Renegade Gym. Even though New York City was
only a half hour away I’d never spent more than 24 hours there. I was too busy coaching
for twelve hours a day on the gym floor. But that was about to change. A few things hap-
pened with my business that made it possible for me to do something I’d always wanted
to do- move into New York City. I sold my house in the suburbs and relocated to the East
Village; 1st and Avenue A to be exact.  
After finding a gym to train clients I was faced with the even more difficult challenge of
finding a place to train myself. I always kept Renegade stocked with the best and most
unique equipment available so I’d become spoiled. An average public gym with a bunch
of machines and testosterone sapping music wasn’t going to cut it. I had to look else-
where. Little did I know when I found my apartment, that Tompkins Square Park, which
was right across the street, would later become famous on YouTube as the home to some
of the most impressive masters of bodyweight strength training the world has ever seen. 
FOREWORD:
By Jason Ferruggia
Mantesh

One day, after growing tired of checking out one chrome and fern place after another I
decided to go train in the park. Bodyweight exercises had always been a staple in my pro-
grams but never the main focus. At the very least I figured I could make do on them for a
while. When I got to Tompkins I started doing the basics like chins and dips. There were
a few other guys at the park doing the same. After thirty minutes or so I was about to
head back to my apartment when four guys started warming up on the bar. 
These dudes were ripped and jacked. They moved with effortless ease and were doing
things I’d never seen before. I decided to extend my workout so I could hang around and
watch. By the time this mind-blowing display was over I was convinced that I wouldn’t
be heading back inside to the gym anytime soon. 
Since the day I started training back in the late 80’s I was always a fan of guys like
Arnold and Bill Kazmaier. My workouts were largely influenced by Iron Game legends
such as John McCallum, Ed Coan, Arthur Saxon and Dorian Yates.  That meant that
loading up a bar and hoisting heavy weight was a mainstay in all of my programs. 
We had a few big barbell lifts each week and the rest of the program was made up of
dumbbells, strongman and bodyweight exercises. I’d always admired the physiques of
male gymnasts and was inspired by their training. That’s why we always did tons of dips,
chins, inverted rows, glute ham raises, pushups and single leg squat variations. But I’d
never forgone the barbell completely. The bodyweight exercises were thought of simply
as “assistance work.” Chins and dips were the potatoes and veggies. Squats or bench
presses were the steak. 
Until that day in Tompkins Square Park. 
I’d suffered my fair share of injuries over the years and decided I could use a break. I
was living in a new city so it seemed like a good time for a completely new style of train-
ing. I decided I’d train outside for the entire summer. Give it a solid twelve-week run
where I didn’t touch a weight and see what would happen. Every day I went across the
street and trained alongside guys who would later become legends on YouTube. I pushed
myself to get better, to try new variations of exercises, to keep getting stronger. And I
loved every minute of it. 
By the time Fall rolled around I’d improved dramatically on all bodyweight exercises
and shockingly, was able to run faster and jump higher than ever before. I didn’t gain
much size but it was the summer and I wasn’t really eating for that goal. However, I cer-
tainly didn’t lose any, as I’d always feared. If anything I was carrying the exact same
amount of muscle and noticeably less bodyfat. 
At that point I was 100% convinced that anyone could get strong, ripped and jacked
on nothing but bodyweight training. The added bonus is that it doesn’t beat you up like
traditional barbell work does. 

Even my guys who are obsessed with pushing up their squats and bench presses know
that we use exercises like chin ups and pushups as a measuring stick. If your numbers on
the barbell lifts are going up but your performance on bodyweight exercises is going down
that means you aren’t gaining true functional strength; you’re simply gaining bodyfat and
improving your leverages. 
So you could say that bodyweight training keeps you honest. 
Pushing the Limits! is the book I wish I had when I first started working out. Knowing
Al’s secrets and various progressions would have saved me years of wasted time, frustra-
tion and injuries. As awesome as Raising the Bar was I think Al has taken it to another
level with Pushing the Limits! The variations of The Big Three and progressions Al lays
out will keep you busy for years.
I love the fact that Al stresses slowly working your way through one level to the next
and explains how connective tissue doesn’t adapt as quickly as muscles do. In the instant
gratification world we live in this is critically important. To remain injury free and able to
train long into the future you absolutely have to heed his words and deliberately work
your way through each step without ever trying to rush them.
A lot of times people see certain bodyweight exercises performed and think they’re too
easy so they disregard their effectiveness. This won’t be the case when you work up to the
hardest progressions Al has in store for you. Even the strongest lifters will be challenged
to the max. Other times people see advanced bodyweight exercises and think that there’s
no way they’d ever be able to perform such a circus trick. That’s simply because they don’t
know the proper steps to take to get there. 
Al will teach you those in Pushing the
Limits!, and a few months from now you’ll
be doing things you never would have
dreamed possible. You also look, feel and
perform a whole lot better than you do
right now. 
In strength,
Jason Ferruggia


“Only tose
who will risk
going too far
can possibly ﬁnd t
how far one can go.”
 
 ¯T.S. Eliot


1
s a kid, I was a huge pro wrestling fan. There is just something magical
about watching larger-than-life musclemen kick the crap out of each
other (or at least pretend to in a way that’s convincing enough for a
child to accept). As a result, I idolized guys like Hulk Hogan, “Macho
Man” Randy Savage and “Mr. Perfect” Curt Hennig. Even once I figured out that pro
wrestling was staged, I still admired these men for their strength, power and charisma. Of
course I wanted to be just like them!  
For me, it was never a question of trying to motivate myself to work out, it was only a
question of trying to convince my mother that I could do so without getting hurt or stunt-
ing my growth — that old wives’ tale is still so pervasive.
When I was around eleven years old, we made a deal that I would be allowed to start
lifting weights when I turned thirteen. In fact, my parents even agreed to buy me a weight
set, a bench and a pull-up bar for my thirteenth birthday. Since I had older brothers, we
already had a rusty old barbell and a couple of dumbbells lying around in the basement
that had been passed down from one of my uncles. I’m don’t remember them really get-
ting much use, though. Besides, I wanted to get my own set of weights! I knew very little
about strength training at the time, and like most people I was convinced that a skinny
kid like me would need to lift weights in order to get big and strong.
Big? Maybe.
Strong? Not so much.
I NTRODUCTION:
Wrestling
With Fitness

2
Growing Pains
I waited for my thirteenth birthday with great anticipation. I probably nagged my mom
about the weights every day for the next two years. She didn’t budge though. I had to wait
it out for what seemed like an eternity. At the time I hated it, but in retrospect making me
wait was one of the best things my mother ever did for me.
I went through a growth spurt when I was 12 and by
the time I turned 13 I was already my full height of 5’11’’
— but I barely weighed 130 pounds! It was finally time
to put some muscle on this frame. (At least we didn’t
have to worry about working out stunting my growth
anymore.)  
Since I was really into the idea of getting huge and
muscular like my wrestling idols, over the years I dedi-
cated myself to bodybuilding and tried every (legal) sup-
plement I could find in an attempt to make that happen.
Though weight training was a lot of fun, I never got
quite as jacked as those guys. No matter how much I
tried and how many supplements I ate, it never seemed
enough. Years later, when I decided to pursue a career as a
personal trainer, I was concerned that my lack of mass
would hurt my chances. After all, most of the trainers I saw
at gyms back then were a lot bigger and stronger looking
than I was.
Turns out I wound up doing pretty good as a
trainer in spite of not being as huge as the
Macho Man. In fact, a few years into my career,
I abandoned the idea of building mass alto-
gether, instead choosing to focus on having fun
with my training. By that time I had bulked up
to 190 pounds but I didn’t feel as good as I
thought I would. Bodybuilding made me stiff
and slow. I could leg press almost half a ton but
couldn’t do a back bridge, a handstand push-up
or even run a respectable mile. I always had
stomach aches from drinking protein powder
and eating excessively in an attempt to build
mass. Eventually my objectives changed from
lifting heavy and getting as huge as possible to feeling good,
enjoying life and performing better. I’ve found that pursu-
ing bodyweight training allows me to do those things more
than bodybuilding-style weight training ever did.
By age 13, I was already my
full height of 5’11’’ — but I
barely weighed 130 pounds!
My first year as a trainer.
Gotta pay your dues before
you pay the rent.

3
Jacked Or Ripped
Different people naturally have different body types. While nobody can gain muscle
without some effort, some people can put on bulk easier than others. As much as I des-
perately wanted to get as big as possible when I was younger, I was fighting my body type.
Though I didn’t want to accept this truth in my formative years, genetics is an undeniable
factor in how our bodies look. Just like I can’t do much to
change having been born with brown eyes, I’ve also always had
small wrists, narrow hips and narrow shoulders. These bony ref-
erence marks are good ways of measuring a
person’s frame. Frame size and body fat per-
centage are two very different things, however.
You can’t just look at the size of someone’s
body, as most people are carrying more fat than
you might realize.  
If you are having a hard time finding your
wrist bones, shoulder blades and/or hip bones,
it means you are carrying a lot of excess body
fat. Someone can have a large frame but still be
lean while another person with a small frame
may still be fat (Arnold Schwarzenegger and
Danny DeVito in Twins come to mind).  
If you want to test the size of your frame,
locate any of those areas and give a good hard
squeeze. Try to grab as much of your flesh as
you can. If you get a hold of anything more
than a few centimeters thick, it isn’t part of
your frame — it’s fat!
“Lean” On Me
People who practice calisthenics come in all
different shapes and sizes; some are big and
some are small. The one thing that all the advanced practitioners have in common, how-
ever, is that they are all relatively lean. Calisthenics is about building strength relative to
your size. Performing bodyweight exercises will gradually shape your body to its most
functionally efficient natural state by building muscle and shedding fat to accommodate
the specific demands of the training.
Because I have a lanky frame, I’m still fairly small and light for how much muscle I am
carrying. Obviously the 13 year old me was way too skinny for his frame at 130 lbs. but 
If you get a hold of anything
more than a few centimeters
thick, it isn’t part of your
frame — it’s fat!

4
the 190-pound me at age 25 was too big! Now at age 33, I am a lean, mean 160 lbs. I’m
pound-for-pound stronger than I’ve ever been and I feel the best that I ever have.
People are sometimes surprised to find out how light I am. I meet lots of athletic guys
with less muscle than I have who still outweigh me by ten or twenty pounds. The reason
I am light in spite of having a lot of muscle is that I have practically no fat on my little
frame! Many people are carrying a lot more excess weight than they realize. A man who
is my height doesn’t need to weigh anywhere near 200 pounds to look strong and mus-
cular.
Beginners and intermediates can experience muscle growth from calisthenics training,
but at a certain point the body will level off size-wise. There is only so far that you can go
naturally where aesthetics are concerned, however strength gains can continue indefi-
nitely. Since a large part of strength actually happens in your brain, there is seemingly no
limit to how strong one can become. Your muscles can only get so big, but the brain has
an amazing way of learning and reinforcing movement patterns that goes beyond the
physical playing field, and into the neurological. Strength isn’t all about muscles — it’s
about knowing how to use your muscles.
Besides, if you could continue to keep getting bigger forever from bodyweight training,
I’d finally be the size of Hulk Hogan by now!
At age 33, I am in
the best shape
of my life!

5
I want you to use every 
muscle in your body for
every rep of every exercise.
Ironically, many of the wrestlers I looked up to as a kid wound up with serious health
problems (or worse) as they got older. By eating clean, staying supplement free and train-
ing for fun and functionality, I’m hoping to avoid those pitfalls.
Total Body Strength
If you’ve spent much time in a commercial gym, you’ve probably noticed most of the
people in the strength training areas using weights and/or machines to try to work each
body part separately from the others. Though performing isolation movements is a cor-
nerstone of bodybuilding training, in calisthenics the opposite approach is more effective.  
I want you to use every muscle in your body for every rep of every exercise.  
Sure, a push-up places more emphasis on the upper-body, while squats are more of a leg
workout, but the rest of the body must support what those muscles are doing. There is no
such thing as a true isolation exercise. If you’re going to work towards a one arm push-up
or pistol squat, you need to understand the concept of total body tension from the get go.
It is the key to performing advanced calisthenics with power, grace and control. I want to
help you bring awareness to how your muscles are interconnected and use them together
to be as efficient as possible in your movement.

6
For The Ladies
There are a lot of misconceptions about women and strength training. For starters, a
lot of women are unnecessarily concerned about gaining mass, but without testosterone
supplementation, it is very unlikely to happen. The women you see in bodybuilding mag-
azines have worked very hard to achieve that aesthetic — they want to look that way! It’s
a bit insulting to all their hard work when weak, chubby women say things like “I can’t
do squats or my legs will get huge!”
In reality, push-ups and squats are
the two best exercises for strengthen-
ing and toning the parts of the body
my female clients tend to be most con-
cerned with: the backs of the arms, the
thighs and of course, the butt. Women
who consistently practice calisthenics
usually wind up with lean, toned
physiques — not huge, rippling mus-
cles like bodybuilders. 

Remember, nobody ever got big muscles by accident. Even for most
men, it takes years of hard work and boatloads of discipline to gain any
significant amount of mass. Many people have gotten big by accident —
but just not their muscles! Don’t kid yourself about your muscle-to-fat
ratio. Bodyweight exercises will not add any significant amount of bulk
to a woman’s frame.

8
The Big Three
In my last book, Raising The Bar: The Definitive Guide to Pull-up Bar Calisthenics, I
broke down pretty much everything there is to do using my favorite piece of workout
equipment, the pull-up bar. In this one, I’ll show you all the essential moves for strength
training with no equipment at all. All you need to start building strength right now is the
floor you are standing on. And if you don’t have any floor, well, then you’ve got much
bigger problems!
In Raising The Bar, I told you there are basically only three exercises to do on the bar
and everything else is just a combination or variation of those moves. Though there are
more than three types of exercises to do on the floor, I’ve chosen to focus this book on the
three that I deem most essential: push-ups, squats, and inversions. While you can build a
strong, aesthetically appealing body with just these exercises, the ultimate bodyweight
strength training program combines elements from both books.
Don’t get me wrong, you will work every muscle in your body by following the advice
in this book; the lats and biceps work as stabilizer muscles during push-ups (especially
one arm push-ups) and all of your back muscles do a considerable amount of work dur-
ing bridges. Heck, you can even get your lats firing during pistol squats if you focus on
keeping your chest upright, but there’s simply no substitute for pull-ups.
Now that we’ve got that out of the way, let’s start Pushing The Limits!

9
I’ve chosen to
focus this book on
the three floor
exercises that 
I deem most 
essential: 
push-ups, squats,
and inversions.


11
he push-up is about as close to a perfect exercise as you can get. Push-ups
require no equipment (even pull-ups require a bar) and they can be modi-
fied in an infinite number of ways. While I couldn’t possibly go over every
single type of push-up that’s ever been done, I’ve chosen to focus on those
I feel are most worthwhile. But first things first, you’ve got to master the basic version —
which might be a hard enough task on its own!
The initial step towards doing a proper push-up is learning how to stand up straight.
Seriously. It’s amazing how many people can’t even do that. Understanding proper spinal
alignment is essential for implementing safe and effective push-up technique.
The three biggest problems I see when observing push-up form in new clients are a for-
ward tilted head, shrugged shoulders and an overly-arched lower back — the same symp-
toms of poor posture that plague people while standing. Bringing your awareness to these
things while you are upright will make the transition to practicing proper push-ups much
easier. Knowing how to fix one will almost automatically wind up fixing the other.
CHAPTER ONE: 
Progressing
to Proper
Push-ups

12
The three biggest problems I see when observing push-up
form in new clients are a forward tilted head, shrugged 
shoulders and an overly-arched lower back.
Working with a personal
trainer can help you
improve your form.

13
Healthy spinal alignment means that the bones in your spine (verte-
brae) line up and fit properly with each one having as much contact as
possible with the ones adjacent to it. Proper spinal alignment forms a
slight inward curve in the lower back (the lumbar spine), a slight out-
ward curve at the upper back (thoracic spine) and again curves slightly
inward at the neck (cervical spine). The term “neutral spine” refers to
the position of your spine when it is in proper alignment. Though your
spine will be a bit curved, you should be able to draw a straight line
down the side of your body passing through the center of your head,
shoulders, hips, knees and ankles. This is the ideal position for your
spine whether you are standing or doing a push-up.
So how do you stand up straight? For
some people it will be as easy as simply
bringing your attention to it. I some-
times catch myself slouching too, but
once I notice, it’s not hard to fix.
However, if you’re having a hard time
figuring out how to stand up straight,
here’s something to try. Stand with your
feet next to each other and start pressing
your heels into the floor. Now squeeze
your butt and think about gently grip-
ping the ground with your toes. Without
looking up, imagine you are reaching
the crown of your head to the ceiling.
Focus on lengthening your spine while
taking a deep breath into your belly.
Slowly exhale while tightening your abs
and lifting your chest. Repeat as neces-
sary.
The initial step towards doing a
proper push-up is learning how
to stand up straight.

14
The Plank
Once you’ve got the hang of proper spinal alignment from standing, the next step is to
learn to do it in a push-up position. Often known as the plank position, I recommend
practicing this isometric hold on both your palms as well as your elbows. (Isometrics are
exercises that require you to hold a fixed position, rather than moving through a range of
motion.) 
People who lack shoulder and arm strength will find it harder to hold the plank on
their hands, while those who lack core strength will likely find the elbow plank to be
more challenging. As the angle of the body gets closer to being parallel with the ground,
it becomes harder for the trunk muscles to stabilize and maintain form, though having
the elbows bent takes some stress off the shoulders and arms.
Remember, the same alignment guidelines apply to the plank as to standing. The key
difference is that when you are horizontal, you have to use your muscles a lot more to
maintain that neutral spine position. You’ll need to squeeze your legs and glutes, suck in
your stomach, and gently bring your shoulder blades down and back. Don’t scrunch your
shoulders or raise your hips in the air. Think about making your spine long, like you are
being stretched out from top to bottom. Keep your shoulders directly over your hands (or
elbows in the case of the elbow plank).

15
Beginners should be able to hold the plank position for at least a couple of seconds, but
if you aren’t able to yet, practice planking from your knees instead of your toes. Once you
can do a standard plank, you should work up to holding the pose for longer amounts of
time. One minute is a good target for a beginner to aim for, while intermediate level
trainees should aim for two. With enough practice, plank holds simply become a test of
will, as a strong body is capable of holding the pose for extended periods of time. The
world record, held by George Hood, is over an hour and twenty minutes!
Nothing like an old fashioned
plank-off challenge!

16
Wall Push-up
If you are new to push-ups, it’s good to start off with wall push-ups. (I know I said the
only equipment we needed was a floor, but I swear I’m not going to get much fancier than
adding a wall into the mix.) A wall push-up just means you are working on holding that
neutral spine position while you lean into a wall and press your body back to an upright
position. This can be a great way
to practice the movement pattern
without having to worry about
using much strength. For a decon-
ditioned individual, however, this
can become a challenging exercise
after enough reps.
Wall push-ups can also be a
good starting point for people
with wrist or shoulder ailments.
Even if your arms and chest are
strong enough to do full push-ups,
you may be better off starting with
wall push-ups if you’ve had joint
trouble of any kind. I urge you to
get your wrists up to speed with
wall push-ups if they are holding
you back from doing full push-
ups.
Everyone knows strength train-
ing is great for your muscles, but a
lot of people don’t realize that
working out also does a lot for
your bones, tendons and other
connective tissue. It’s true though;
strength training makes the entire
body strong. It’s obvious when
you really think about it — your connective tissue needs to be strong to support those
muscles! Sometimes people are so concerned with aesthetic goals that they overlook the
changes that can’t visibly be seen.  
If you have bad shoulders, wrists or elbows, in time your joints can be restored with
lower intensity exercises. Once that is taken care of, you can safely move on. The body
can only be as strong as its weakest link, and connective tissue tends to be slower to adapt
than muscle. Stick with the basics for as long as possible. Don’t let your ego sway you
towards attempting to move on before your body is ready.

17
Since the intensity is fairly low, feel free to go for high repetitions with wall push-ups.
A novice or even an injured person should still be able to start with at least 10 reps,
quickly working to 20 and eventually 50 reps in each set.
Knee Push-up
The knee push-up is a more challenging variation for beginners on the path toward full
push-ups. Knee push-ups involve bending your knees and resting them on the floor
instead of your toes. By shortening the length of your body, the leverage changes, making
the exercise less difficult. Again, this is a great way to practice proper spinal alignment
during a push-up without requiring the full strength needed for a push-up on your toes.  
Though sometimes known as a “girl push-up,” the knee push-up is appropriate for a
beginner of either gender. There is no shame in starting from scratch and practicing knee
push-ups before moving on to full push-ups, even for a man. In fact, I find it quite
respectable when a beginner can keep a humble mindset.

18
Incline Push-up
If wall push-ups and knee push-ups have gotten too easy for you, but full push-ups are
still out of reach, incline push-ups can be a nice intermediate step. In fact, they can be sev-
eral intermediate steps.

The higher your incline, the easier the push-up will be, the lower the incline, the harder
it becomes. A high incline eventually becomes a wall push-up and a low incline eventually
becomes a regular push-up, but there are many little levels in between. You can experi-
ment with various household objects or things you may come across outdoors to find
ways to incrementally lower yourself toward the floor.
19
Keep gradually working
toward a lower incline.

20
Full Push-up
Once you’ve gotten the feel for maintaining proper body alignment while performing
wall push-ups, knee push-ups and/or incline push-ups (and you can comfortably do lots
of reps of those easier variations) you’ll be ready for full push-ups. 
When doing push-ups, I recommend placing your hands just wider than your shoulders
(your thumbs should wind up right beneath your armpits). Keep your elbows fairly close
to your body and point them back; do not flare them out to the sides. Lower until your
chest is just above the floor, pause for a split second and then press yourself back up. 
Many beginners have trouble going low enough on their push-ups. Sometimes this is
also the case for people who’ve practiced for years. Your arms should bend past 90
degrees as measured along the outside of your elbow for the rep to count; the lower the
better. You may find it helpful to place a tennis ball, brick or other object on the ground
under your chest in order to have a reference point for how low to go. You could even try
to touch your chest to the floor if you want to extend the range of motion. The ability to
do clean chest-to-floor push-ups with proper alignment demonstrates excellent strength
and mobility in the upper-
body. You might not be here
yet, but it should be an even-
tual milestone. 
You may choose to place
an object under your
chest to make sure you
are going low enough.

21
Lock It Out
It is essential to do push-ups with a full range of motion. Just as I want you to make
sure that you get all the way down, I also want you to make sure that you get all the way
up. I’ve heard many coaches advise against fully locking out your joints when performing
strength training. While this may be true if you are lifting heavy external weights, it is
most certainly not the case when dealing with bodyweight exercises like push-ups. In fact,
our skeletons are actually designed to support our bodies as much as possible when our
joints are locked. (This same concept is why spinal alignment is important.) Yogis, gym-
nasts and other hand-balancers often support their entire bodyweight on locked out
elbows for extended amounts of time with great results. 
If you don’t get in the habit of performing your push-ups with a full range of motion,
you will not get the most out of them. You could even wind up reducing your active range
of motion in the process. I’ve met lots of guys who practiced limited range of motion in
their strength training and wound up losing the ability to fully extend their arms alto-
gether. If you don’t use it, you’ll lose it!

22
Push Yourself
The push-up is one exercise that you can constantly continue to refine. I’ve probably
done more reps of push-ups in my life than any other single exercise and I still find myself
discovering nuances that I hadn’t previously noticed. It can be surprisingly challenging to
keep yourself completely controlled when performing push-ups. The human body is
never perfectly symmetrical, yet I like to use that ideal as a reference point for form. Aim
for perfection and you might achieve greatness.
Aim for perfection and you
might achieve greatness.

23
Get into a push-up position in front of a mirror and make sure your thumbs
are directly under your shoulders. Your hips, legs and feet should be in a
straight line so you can see your toes directly in between your hands. Now try
performing a couple of slow reps while watching yourself. Once you do a few
of these, stop craning your neck and go back to your neutral spine position.
Visualize your entire body staying straight as you move up and down. Don’t let
your hips go up in the air or shift from side to side. Keep your whole body tight.
The push-up is not just an upper-body exercise!


25
he squat is the king of all lower body exercises. In fact, I could have left the
words “lower body” out of the previous sentence and it would still reflect
my opinion of squats. Without squatting, it’s virtually impossible to build
a functionally strong body. Squats work every muscle in your legs as well
as your abs and lower back. Since your legs are such large muscles, they require lots of
blood and oxygen to perform squats. This makes squatting a great way to give your heart
and lungs a workout too.
Though squatting is typically something that children will do instinctively, most adults
have spent so much of their lives relaxing in chairs (and being lazy in general) that they
have lost the movement pattern entirely. The good news is, the body can usually relearn
it fairly fast (though some people will require more remedial work than others).
There are lots of methods of learning how to perform a squat, but I like to keep things
as simple as possible. As far as I am concerned, there are really only three things you need
to think about when squatting in order to perform the movement correctly: keep your
heels down, stick your butt out and keep your chest upright. If you can do these three
things while performing a full range of motion, there is little else you could do wrong.
CHAPTER TWO: 
Knowing
Squat

26
Though squatting involves bending from both your hips and your knees, when learn-
ing to squat, it helps to think about bending your hips before your knees. Only once your
hips have started moving back should you involve your knees. This can take some prac-
tice if you are new to squats. I mentioned keeping your chest up, but bear in mind that
this doesn’t mean you cannot lean forward. In fact, you have to lean forward in order to
squat or you’ll fall on your butt. The trick is to lean forward from your waist, not
through your spine.
As your hips go behind you, your torso should pitch forward to counterbalance the
weight of your hips moving back. Your ankles should also bend, allowing your knees to
move forward slightly, though your heels must stay on the ground. It can be helpful to
reach your arms out in front of you to assist with this. 
Lean forward from
your waist, not
through your spine.

27
Remember the vertical line I mentioned before that should be running from your ear to
your heel when standing upright? When you are at the bottom of a squat you should still
maintain a straight line from your ear to your heel, only your hips will have moved back
and your knees will wind up a bit in front. You should still be able to draw a straight line
passing through your head, shoulders and heels at the bottom of a squat.
Just like learning to hold a push-up position, when you perform a squat, it takes a lot
more effort to maintain your spinal alignment than it does when you’re just standing
there. As you move your hips out, you will have to contract your lower back and your
abs in order to keep from losing the curve of your lumbar spine. You’ll also need to
engage the muscles of your upper back to keep your thoracic spine in alignment and pre-
vent your shoulders from shrugging upwards. It helps to think about pulling down and
back through your shoulder blades to maintain this posture.  
You should still be able to draw
a straight line passing through
your head, shoulders and heels
at the bottom of a squat.

28
Everybody Get Low
A lot of coaches still perpetuate the myth that deep squatting is inherently dangerous
for the knee joint — this is total malarkey! In an ideal world, everyone would be able to
squat so deep that their hamstrings and calves would be totally flush against one another
at the bottom with their spine in a natural position the whole time. In fact, in many coun-
tries, this is the only way that people can go to the bathroom!
Unfortunately, in America most people are lucky to get half that far without losing
form. The answer to the question “how deep should one squat” then becomes a question
of “how deep can one squat?”

29
For some people this will simply mean that they can only squat until the bottom of
their thigh is level with the ground, which is barely half of the ideal range of motion.
However, if that’s all they can do, then it’s all they should do. Since I prefer to live in real-
ity and not some hypothetical world of textbooks and formulas, the ideal range of
motion for that person is until the bottom of the thigh is parallel to the ground.
When people in the fitness industry talk about squatting to parallel, however, this is not
what they are talking about. True parallel depth means that the top of the thigh is paral-
lel to the ground, which is lower than many people can go right away. The great thing
about squatting, however, is that it becomes an active stretch that can improve your range
of motion, allowing you to eventually work towards deepening your squat. When per-
forming bodyweight squats, always go as low as you can — in time that range of motion
should start to increase.
When performing bodyweight squats,
always go as low as you can — in time that
range of motion should start to increase.

30
Spinal Jeopardy
Though there is more leeway for the spinal alignment in a bodyweight squat than one
performed with a barbell on your back, you’ll get the most out of each rep by keeping
mindful of your spine. Your back is obviously designed to bend and flex, but standing
and moving with a neutral spine is generally a good habit to develop in your strength
training practice.
It helps to think about pulling down
and back through your shoulder
blades to maintain this posture.  

31
Foot Position
A standard squat is typically performed with the feet about hip distance apart.
However, varying the distance between your feet can change the subtleties of muscle
recruitment. Some people will find that a slightly wider stance feels more natural and
allows them to get deeper without losing spinal position. If this is the case for you, feel
free to begin with a wide stance. Turning your toes out slightly can also facilitate opening
your hips, which can help improve the range of motion, too. On the other hand, squat-
ting with your feet parallel and close together can be quite challenging and effective (more
on close-stance squats in Chapter Five).
Try a slightly wider stance with your toes
pointed out if you are having trouble
squatting with your feet parallel.
Squatting with your feet
parallel and close together
can be quite challenging.

32
Bench Squat
If you feel like you are going to fall on your butt when you try to squat, it can help to
use a bench (or other object) to assist (there I go with the equipment again!). You want to
use an object that is sturdy and low. Start with something that will leave you with the top
of your thigh just about parallel to the floor when you’re seated.
To perform a bench squat, simply stand in front of the object and sit back onto it. If
you can’t maintain your balance during the descent, just plop down on the bench, stand
back up and try it again. With practice you’ll get better at controlling yourself on the way
down. Eventually you can move to a lower object. In time, you’ll be squatting ass-to-
ankles without needing to fall back on anything.
Even once you are comfortable with free-standing squats, however, you can still use
bench squats in your routine. Coming to a full stop and resting on an object at the bot-
tom of the rep can offer its own challenge. Initiating the upward movement from a full
stop requires a unique type of strength and stability.
Start with something
that will leave you
with the top of your
thigh just about 
parallel to the floor
when you’re seated.

33
Sumo Squat 
Named for an entirely different wrestling style than the one I loved as a kid, the sumo
squat is an exaggerated wide-stance squat with the toes turned almost all the way out to
place additional emphasis on the muscles of the hips and inner thighs. Similar to a ballet
style plie, sumo squats can potentially be easier for beginners. If you’re having a hard time
maintaining your balance and/or posture when squatting, the sumo squat might be a
good way to ease in. Regardless, it is a worthwhile exercise to have in your arsenal if you
want to give extra attention to your inner thighs.
Though you should be aware of your leg alignment during any type of squat, when
practicing sumo squats, give extra attention that your knees are tracking in line with your
toes and not bowing in towards the middle.
If you’re having a hard time maintaining your
balance and/or posture when squatting, the
sumo squat might be a good way to ease in. 

34
Split Squat 
The split squat is a wonderful variation on the squat that changes the balance as well as
changing the angles at which you are working your muscles. Instead of standing with
your feet next to each other under your hips, a split squat involves standing in a split
stance with one foot in front of your body and one foot behind. The front foot should be
totally flat on the ground while your back foot stays up on the toes. I find it best to keep
the arms relaxed at your sides during a split squat, though some people will find placing
their hands on their hips to be helpful; either way is fine by me.
From here the objective is to keep your torso upright while you lower yourself down
until both knees are bent to approximately 90 degrees, then return to the starting posi-
tion. Think about initiating the movement by bending the knee of the leg that is in back,
otherwise you might wind up with too much flexion in the front knee and not enough in
the other. Your center of gravity should be about halfway between the two legs.

35
Stay upright when
performing split
squats and lunges.

36
Walking Lunge
Once you get the hang of split squats, you can get moving with lunges — literally! The
walking lunge is one of my favorite exercises (I sometimes call them “fun-ges”). A walk-
ing lunge involves stepping forward into each rep, rather than maintaining the split
stance. When performing a walking lunge, it is still essential to maintain your posture and
avoid letting the heel of your front foot come off the ground. Think about breaking the
walking lunge down into three distinct phases. First forward, then down, and then up
and together in one motion. This will help you avoid losing form.
A walking lunge involves stepping forward
into each rep, rather than maintaining the
split stance.

37
Think about breaking the walking lunge down
into three distinct phases. First forward, then
down, and then up and together in one motion.
This will help you avoid losing form.
3
2
1

38
Back Lunge
Another common variation on
the split squat involves stepping
back into the split stance from a
standing position. Compared to
the walking lunge, back lunges
tend to have less impact on your
joints, as people naturally land
harder when stepping forward
than when stepping back, plus you
don’t need much space to do them.
When coming up from a back
lunge, just step right back to where
you started so you can begin the
next rep. Like all the lunge varia-
tions, back lunges can be per-
formed by alternating legs or
repeating each leg for a set number
of reps before switching sides.
Prisoner Squat
When learning to squat, I typically instruct my
clients to reach their arms out in front in order to
counterbalance the weight of their hips going
back. Once you can do that without much trou-
ble, a great way to progress the exercise is to
change the leverage by placing your hands behind
your head. This can also turn the squat into a
stretch for the upper body. Think about actively
retracting your shoulder blades and keeping your
chest up in order to avoid caving inward.

Wall Sit
Also known as the “Chinese chair,” this exercise will challenge you mentally as much
as physically. Stand with your back against a wall, then walk your legs out and squat
down until the top of your thigh is parallel to the ground. Lean against the wall and stay
upright, but don’t use your arms to press on your thighs for assistance — keep them at
your sides or cross them in front of your chest. It’s almost like you are sitting in a chair
with no bottom.
Like the plank, the wall sit is an isometric hold, so stay in position for as long as possi-
ble. Take deep breaths and try to relax your mind. Beginners should be able to manage 30
seconds, eventually building to several minutes. Like holding the plank position, it simply
becomes a question of will after a certain point.
39

40

41


43
ack bridging is probably the most underused exercise in modern fitness,
though it is vital to practice bridging in order to counterbalance the time
you spend sitting with your back bent forward (like right now, probably).
Bridges are also a wonderful introduction to the world of inversions.
Though headstands and handstands generally come to mind before bridges, any posture
that involves your heart being higher than your head is an inversion. Back bridges can
prepare you nicely for full inversions where your legs are in the air, as they give you the
feeling of being upside-down. But unlike most full inversions, they’re also great for
strengthening the muscles of your back, glutes, hamstrings and calves.
A full back bridge involves holding your body face-up on your hands and feet with
your spine fully extended and your hips way up in the air. You want to make sure that the
arc of your spine is relatively even throughout, and not too heavily arched in the lumbar
region. If your upper back is stiff, which is quite common, you’ll need to be especially
mindful of this. I like to perform bridges as isometric holds, gradually trying to ease
deeper into the position with each breath.
CHAPTER THREE: 
Bridging 
The Gap

44
While some people will struggle with the flexibility needed to perform a full bridge,
others will be able to find the hold without much trouble. The better your flexibility, the
closer you’ll be able to get your hands and feet. This is also a simple way to add intensity
to the exercise.
The better your
flexibility, the closer
you’ll be able to get
your hands and feet. 

45
Beginner’s Bridge
Before we worry about adding intensity though, let’s focus on how a beginner can
safely progress. If you’re new to the world of back-bridging, your best bet is to start off
with a partial bridge. Lie on your back with your knees bent, feet flat and arms by your
sides. Roll up onto your shoulders, puff out your chest and try to get your hips as high up
as you can. It also helps to wiggle your shoulder blades together and grab your hands in
a palm-to-palm grip for more leverage to make your arch higher.

46
Straight Bridge
Once you get the hang of the partial bridge, you should start working on a straight
bridge. This time you’re going to sit with your legs directly in front of you, almost like
you were going to perform a seated toe touch, except your hands will be on the ground
just behind your hips. From here, lift yourself up and straighten out your body by con-
tracting your hamstrings, glutes and other posterior musculature. Drop your head back,
press your chest out and try to look behind you. You’ll wind up looking like an upside-
down plank. The
straight bridge will
give you a deep
stretch 
in 
your
chest and shoul-
ders. Even once you
move on to the full
bridge, it’s still a
great exercise to
keep in your rou-
tine for a long time
to come. 

47
Table Top
As an alternative, you may try bending your knees to ninety degrees during a straight
bridge, which will bring you to the table top position. The change in shoulder position
leads to an even deeper opening of the chest, while having your knees bent allows for bet-
ter leverage with the hamstrings and can facilitate deeper glute activation.
Having your knees bent allows for better
leverage with the hamstrings and can
facilitate deeper glute activation.

48
Neck Bridge
This variation starts off in the same position as the partial back bridge except your
palms are placed shoulder width apart on either side of your head with your wrists bent
back behind you. From here, press yourself off your back and roll onto the top of your
head. You might want to place a towel or other soft object between your head and the
ground when starting out.
Though a good deal of your weight will be supported by your skull, this exercise can
do a lot to strengthen your neck muscles. Remember to push your chest forward and arch
your spine as much as possible while contracting your glutes, hamstrings and lower back.
Once you get comfortable with the hand-assisted neck bridge, work toward taking your
hands away for an added challenge.
Though a good deal of your
weight will be supported by your
skull, this exercise can do a lot to
strengthen your neck muscles. 

49
Full Bridge
When you are ready to try a full back bridge, I recommend beginning in the neck
bridge position with your palms flat on the floor a few inches from your ears. Press your
hands into the ground, drive your heels down and push your chest forward. That last
part is particularly important for those of us with tight shoulders, as pushing forward
with the chest will encourage a deeper stretch through the thoracic region. Think about
trying to make your neck and spine lengthen as they bend back. It may help to look in
between your hands to further facilitate opening your upper back and chest, though once
you’re fully in position, you can relax your head and let it hang naturally.
It will likely take some practice, but your intention should be to get the arc of your body
virtually symmetrical on either side of your hips. Think about actively lifting your hips up
as high up as you can to achieve that aesthetic. You may also find that gently shifting your
weight from side to side can gradually open your upper back and help with fully extending
your elbows. Be careful when doing bridges on potentially slippery surfaces, however. It
can be helpful to practice on grass or rubber so that your hands and feet don’t slide.

50
Heels Or Toes?
One of the most common questions I get about bridging is whether it is best to keep
your heels flat or come up on the tips of your toes. Most of the time, it’s ideal to keep your
heels down when bridging, but there are exceptions to every rule. If you find yourself hav-
ing a hard time fully locking out your arms in the bridge, you can try shifting your weight
off your heels to allow some leeway for your chest to press forward. You should be able to
add a bit more extension through your arms this way. Once you’ve achieved that, lower
your heels back down while maintaining the additional stretch in your upper body. Feel
free to repeat the process a few times during an extended hold. 
Keep in mind that while going up on your toes will give you better leverage to open up
your thoracic region, coming off your heels reduces the strength benefits for your legs and
spine. Additionally, when you place your heels back down after deepening the stretch,
you’ll need to be especially mindful of engaging your glutes and lower back extensors or
the added pressure on your spine may be too much. There aren’t always simple right and
wrong answers to everything. Different approaches have their pros and cons. Play around
with various techniques and experiment for yourself.
5
1
2
3
4
If you’re having a hard time 
fully extending your bridge, 
try shifting your weight off your
heels to allow some leeway for
your chest to press forward. 

51
If you’re having a hard time bending your wrists all the way back or you feel
like your hands are going to slip out from under you, try practicing your bridge
right up against a wall. Allowing your hands to rely on the wall for leverage
can be a good way to ease yourself into full bridges.

52
Wall Crawl
Once you can do a full bridge, you can try walking yourself in and out of position by
using a wall, pole or other sturdy, vertical object. Stand a few feet away with your back
to the object, place your hands on your hips, and bend backward as far as you can. Once
you can see the object behind you, reach your arms out and press your hands against it
for support. Slowly walk yourself down into a bridge position, then crawl your way back
to the top. Make sure to squeeze your glutes tight and stretch your arms away from your
body as much as possible. On the way up, aim to pull yourself off the wall with your core
and legs — don’t do too much of the work with your arms.
Make sure to squeeze
your glutes tight and
stretch your arms away
from your body as
much as possible. 

53
1
2
3
4
5
6

54
Drop Back
When you’ve done lots of wall crawling, you may eventually get comfortable enough
that you aren’t relying on the wall much anymore. When you’ve gotten to that point,
you’re ready to attempt to drop back into a full bridge from standing. When starting out,
I suggest using a spotter and/or practicing on a soft surface. You’ll want to think about
pushing your knees and hips forward as you bend back toward the floor. Place your hands
on your lower back, and look behind you, gradually going deeper with each breath. Keep
trying to look farther and farther behind your back until you can almost see the floor. At
this point, remove your hands from your back and reach for the ground. 
At this point, remove your hands from
your back and reach for the ground. 

55
Stand-to-Stand Bridge
Once you get the hang of the drop back, you can attempt to return to an upright posi-
tion by reversing the movement. This is often referred to as a stand-to-stand bridge. From
the full bridge position, think about pushing your knees forward as you contract your legs,
lower back and glutes while pushing off
the floor with your hands. This is another
exercise where having a spotter to support
you can be very helpful. A difficult move
to execute cleanly, the stand-to-stand
bridge is a wonderful display of strength,
flexibility and total body control.
1
2
3
A difficult move to execute cleanly, the stand-to-stand
bridge is a wonderful display of strength, flexibility 
and total body control.

56
Walkover
Unlike the stand-to-stand bridge, when you perform a walkover you return to an
upright position from the bridge by continuing backward in the same direction after you
drop back. This can be a very difficult move, especially for people who are tight through
the upper back and shoulders.
If you want to learn a walkover, start by getting comfortable reaching one leg into the air
while holding a bridge position. From here, you may eventually be able to kick with your
other leg and get your hips over your shoulders to bring yourself back around to a stand-
ing position. Using a bench to elevate your feet can be a good way to practice toward a full
walkover. Again, it can also help to have a spotter.

57
Single Leg Bridge
Once bridge holds have gotten less challenging for you, try holding a bridge on just one
leg. It’s a great way to build additional strength in your glutes and hamstrings as well as
adding a stability challenge. The beginner bridge position becomes an intermediate exer-
cise when held on one leg, the straight bridge becomes advanced and a full bridge becomes,
well, a lot harder!
Even once you get comfortable
with straight bridges and full bridges,
single leg bridge work from the begin-
ner position can be very valuable.
Your best bet is to begin the whole
progression again on one leg. Keep in
mind that you’ll need to bring your
leg in toward the middle, halfway
between the width of your arms, in
order to maintain your balance. 
1
2
3
The beginner bridge position becomes
an intermediate exercise when held on
one leg, the straight bridge becomes
advanced and a full bridge becomes a
lot harder!

58
Feet Elevated Bridge
If you want to build monstrously strong shoulders while simultaneously increasing
their range of motion, try holding a bridge with your feet elevated. Raising your feet
changes the exercise in two ways: it takes some of the stress off your lower back by
decreasing the degree to which it must bend, and in doing so it also puts more of the
weight in your hands. This makes the feet elevated bridge more work for your shoulders,
while the change in leverage also allows you to push your chest out farther to intensify
the stretch in your thoracic spine. If the hardest part of holding a standard bridge is the
range of motion in your upper body, this is a great variation to practice. I recommend
using a bench that’s about a foot and a half high. The higher up your feet are, the harder
it gets to support your bodyweight. Eventually you’re just in a handstand. 

59
Bridge Push-up
Though I generally like to treat bridges as isometric holds, the exercise can be performed
for reps. Going in and out of the bridge can be a nice way to add intensity for someone
who feels like they can get into and hold the full bridge easily. If the full range of motion
doesn’t come easily for you, however, you’re probably better off just holding the top posi-
tion, as the peak contraction will likely be the most worthwhile part of the movement.
With practice, your body can eventually loosen up and accept this position more comfort-
ably for longer amounts of time. On the other hand, the bridge push-up is pretty much a
combination of two of my favorite exercises, so I can’t really be mad at it.

60
Single Arm Bridge
A bridge can also be performed on just one arm. Though this doesn’t apply much from
the beginner bridge position, an advanced practitioner who is looking for a challenge can
attempt to lift one arm after getting into a full bridge. Aim to gradually move your weight
onto that arm to prevent from falling. Once you get the hang of that, you might try press-
ing into the bridge using just one arm. This can be surprisingly difficult, so be patient.
You can also do a straight bridge with one arm. I recommend starting with a wide stance
for this variation, though with practice you may be able to perform the exercise with your
feet together.

61
One Arm/One Leg Bridge
When you’ve been practicing single leg bridging and single arm bridging long enough,
you may eventually be able to put the two together. The cross-stability required for this
move is tremendous, and it also requires major posterior chain power. I recommend easing
into the one arm/one leg bridge very gradually. Start by picking up one hand first and then
try lifting your opposite foot. Make sure to think about bracing your entire body. If you can
hold this variation for even a few seconds, you are off to a good start. In time, you can work
towards lifting the hand and foot simultaneously and holding it for longer periods of time.
If you can hold this variation for even a few
seconds, you are off to a good start.

62
Bridge Partners
Once you get familiar with the full bridge and its variants, you might experiment with
using a training partner to provide additional resistance. Get into a full bridge, then have
your partner gently press down on your hips. This will force you to contract your poste-
rior chain harder in order to stay up. After 5-10 seconds of resistance, have your partner
back off. You should instantly feel your bridge opening up and becoming stronger. In exer-
cise science, this concept is known as proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation. Basically,
pushing against your partner’s resistance causes your stretch inhibitors to relax once the
resistance is removed, allowing you to ease deeper into the hold.
After 5-10 seconds of resistance, have your partner
back off. You should instantly feel your bridge
opening up and becoming stronger. 

63
Additionally, contracting your bridge against resistance will cause your body to adapt in
the same way that adding resistance to any exercise would — you’ll get stronger. As that
happens, you can have your partner gradually put more of their weight on you with each
training session. Eventually you may even be able to support their entire body weight.
Remember to take your time with these progressions; back bridging can be fun but it’s
not a game! Many people will need to stick with the earlier progressions for several weeks
or longer before attempting a full bridge. Trying too much, too soon can often lead to
injury.  
Things like partner bridges can make you super strong, but it takes practice and dedica-
tion to get there. Put in the work and the rest will take care of itself. With consistent train-
ing, ordinary people can do amazing things.
Pushing against your partner’s resistance causes your
stretch inhibitors to relax once the resistance is
removed, allowing you to ease deeper into the hold.

64

65


67
here are a lot of different variations on the push-up. Every time I think I’ve
seen them all, a video pops up somewhere on the internet with someone
busting out something new! I’ve done my best here to focus on the most
common (or at least the most essential) variations on the push-up, though
I urge you to explore the boundaries of where you can go with this exercise. 
CHAPTER FOUR: 
Advanced
Push-ups

68
Diamond Push-up
Generally speaking, the closer you keep your hands during push-ups, the harder the
exercise is going to be, it’s simply a matter of leverage. The classic “diamond push-up” is
probably the most well known of the close grip push-up variations. Before you start
working on these, make sure you can do at least twenty standard push-ups. In fact, don’t
do any of the exercises in this chapter until you can do those twenty.
A diamond push-up involves keeping your hands close enough to touch the tips of your
index fingers and thumbs to each other, making a diamond-like shape of those four dig-
its. Be careful not to flare your elbows out when you perform diamond push-ups, as
doing so can be troublesome for your joints and less effective for your muscles. You’ve
gotta keep your elbows right by your sides. I actually find it preferable to keep my hands
in more of an arrowhead shape with my thumbs tucked in, rather than a traditional dia-
mond. This makes angling my elbows closer to my torso more natural.
I find it preferable to
keep my hands in more
of an arrowhead shape
with my thumbs tucked
in, rather than a 
traditional diamond.

69
When performing diamonds (or arrowheads), make sure to go all the way down until
your hands touch your chest with your forearms grazing your ribs at the bottom. It’s also
important to stay aware of your alignment. It’s common for people to leave their hips too
low when performing this exercise. I recommend doing the mirror drill from Chapter
One when you are beginning with diamond push-ups. When you do the drill with your
hands close together, your feet should line up with your hands in the mirror. Keep your
abs, legs and glutes tight. Remember, a push-up is always a moving plank. 
Keep your abs,
legs and glutes
tight. Remember,
a push-up is
always a moving
plank. 

70
Yoga Push-up
Another variation on the close grip push-up involves keeping your elbows in by your
ribs like a diamond push-up but with your hands at shoulder width instead of right next to
each other. This is a yoga style push-up or “chaturanga” as yogis call it. It can be a slightly
easier variation for beginners before going for a full diamond or arrowhead push-up.  
If you can do 20 standard push-ups, but attempting a diamond is giving you too much
trouble, try yoga push-ups first. They’re not as difficult for your muscles and they’re also
a bit easier on the wrists.

71
Hinge Push-up
A hinge push-up is a great way to add a unique stability challenge to your push-up
while also increasing the range of motion. Begin in a standard push-up position, then
lower yourself to the ground. Instead of pressing yourself back up from there, however,
shift your weight onto your elbows at the bottom. You’ll wind up in a forearm plank with
your palms flat on the floor in front of your shoulders. From here, tighten up your body,
pull your elbows off the floor, slide forward and press yourself back to the top. Your toes
and feet will need to flex back and forth as you slide in and out. The hinge push-up
requires a lot of trunk stability, so remember to keep your abs, back and glutes engaged
throughout.
The hinge push-up requires a
lot of trunk stability, so
remember to keep your abs,
back and glutes engaged
throughout.
1
2
3
4
5

72
Feet Elevated Push-up
Just like I told you how you can make a full push-up easier by angling your body with
your hands against a wall or other inclined surface, the opposite holds true as well. If you
want to make your push-up more difficult, you can try elevating your feet. The higher up
you put your feet, the harder the exercise becomes. Eventually if you walk up far enough
you’ll be doing a handstand push-up!
The higher up you put your feet,
the harder the exercise becomes. 

73
Knuckle Push-up
Doing push-ups on your fists is totally badass, plus knuckle push-ups allow for a big-
ger range of motion than flat palm push-ups. That extra few inches of depth can make
repping out a lot more challenging. 
While some people’s wrists may need time to acclimate to the extra work required to
maintain stability during a knuckle push-up, for others, the neutral wrist position can
actually make the push-up less stressful than having the wrists bent back. The skin on
your hands may be sensitive when starting out, so the simple discomfort of supporting
your weight on your knuckles might be an additional obstacle. You may want to start out
practicing on a soft surface for this reason.
Doing push-ups on your fists is totally badass,
plus knuckle push-ups allow for a bigger range
of motion than flat palm push-ups.

74
Fingertip Push-up
Hand strength is some of the most functional strength you can have. From carrying
groceries to opening jars and packages, we use our hands in day to day activity more than
any other part of our body. If you want strong hands, fingertip push-ups are an essential
exercise. As the hands are a key component of so many exercises, practicing fingertip
push-ups can help your training across the board.
If you don’t have the strength to do fingertip push-ups yet, I recommend practicing the
isometric plank position on your fingertips. Start with a few seconds at a time — eventu-
ally you should be able to build to a 10 second fingertip plank. Once you’ve achieved
that, you’ll be ready to start practicing fingertip push-ups. Begin with just a few reps,
slowly adding more over time.
I recommend practicing the
isometric plank position on
your fingertips.

75
It’s important to note
that the term “fingertip
push-up” is a bit of a
misnomer. You don’t
actually want to be all
the way on the tips of
your fingers, but rather
on the pads of them with
the tips slightly bent
back. Some people’s dig-
its will wind up bending
back more than others.
This is not a huge deal.
Just don’t allow any part
of your palm to touch
the ground if you want it
to be legit.
If you aren’t able to hold the
plank on your fingertips, try placing
one hand flat on a slightly elevated
object while the opposite hand is
supported on the fingertips. Hold
for several seconds, then switch
hands.

76
Wrist Push-up
Wrist push-ups, aka back of the hand push-ups, have been helping athletes perform
better for quite some time. Martial artists, gymnasts and other people looking to take
their body to the limit of its physical potential have long been known to benefit from
training wrist push-ups. Though this can be a potentially hazardous exercise, with
increased risk can come increased benefits. Just like knuckle push-ups, I recommend
training on a soft surface, as the skin on the backs of your hands will likely feel sensitive
and chafe easily when starting out. In time you can condition yourself to performing
them on pavement, but you have to give your body time to adapt to new stimuli. With
that in mind, the most you’ll want to work on this move in the beginning is once or twice
a week. After a while your wrists will adapt and become stronger, then you can add more
volume as you see fit.
Though this can be a potentially hazardous exercise,
with increased risk can come increased benefits. 

77
One And One Push-up
Before going for a full wrist push-up, you might try a push-up with one hand on the
palm and the other backwards. I call this a “one and one” push-up. Some people may feel
more comfortable with their backward hand facing inward rather than completely upside
down (see photo). To keep things balanced, switch which hand is face up on alternating
sets. After a couple of sessions (or longer depending on individual conditioning) you may
be ready to progress to full back of the hand push-ups.
Before going for a full wrist
push-up, you might try a 
push-up with one hand on the
palm and the other backwards. 

78
Handstand Push-up
A handstand push-up is almost an entirely different exercise than the standard push-
up. While a typical push-up involves pressing in the horizontal plane, a handstand push-
up closer resembles an overhead press. The emphasis moves away from your chest and
into your shoulders. Additionally, having your body in a vertical position means you are
lifting much more of your total body weight than you are with your feet resting on the
ground. The handstand push-up is a double whammy — you’re lifting more of your
weight with a smaller primary muscle group!
I recommend getting to at least thirty standard push-ups before attempting a hand-
stand push-up (probably more). There’s no set number that’s right for everyone, but this
is not an appropriate exercise for a beginner trainee.
When you are ready to start learning handstand push-ups, practice with your legs rest-
ing against a wall. This will help with the balance and it will also improve your leverage,
making the move less taxing on your muscles. 

79
Just like any push-up, it’s
important not to flare your
elbows out to the sides. Keep
them pointed behind you
instead. I recommend look-
ing a few inches in front of
your hands, rather than right
in between them as you
lower yourself down and
press back to the top. If
you’ve ever pressed a barbell
over your head, you know
that you have to move the
bar around your face so you
don’t smack yourself in the
chin or the nose. The hand-
stand push-up is essentially
the same movement pattern
turned upside down. 
When you are ready to
start learning handstand
push-ups, practice with
your legs resting 
against a wall.
Though I recommend eventually working towards learning this skill freestanding, you
should get to the point where you can perform ten consecutive handstand push-ups
against a wall before attempting to do so. (More on handstands in Chapter Six.)

80

81
1
2
4
5
3

82
Pike Push-up
Typically I tell people not to let their butt go up in the air when they do a push-up, but
there are exceptions to every rule. The pike push-up is a helpful intermediary step
between the standard push-up and the handstand push-up, and as the name suggests, you
actually want to pike your hips as high as they can go throughout the range of motion.
The start position looks just like the yoga pose known as downward facing dog (you
should feel a stretch in your hamstrings). From here, lower the top of your head towards
the ground, keeping your hips up high, just like they would be in a handstand push-up.
Doing this variation with your feet elevated also works well as a precursor to the full
handstand push-up.
The start position looks just
like the yoga pose known
as downward facing dog.

83
Doing this variation with your feet elevated
also works well as a precursor to the full
handstand push-up.

Hindu Push-ups 
and Dive Bombers
Hindu push-ups and dive bombers are
two variations that start in the same posi-
tion as the pike push-up. Once you lower
your head to the floor, however, you don’t
simply press back to the top. Instead,
quickly drop your hips, swoop your torso
up and look in the air, all in one smooth
motion. The bottom position for the
exercise looks like the yoga pose known
as upward facing dog (you should feel a
stretch in your chest,
neck and abs). Don’t
allow your shoulders to
shrug.
If you’re doing a
Hindu push-up, you’ll
keep your arms straight
as you raise your hips
back up in the air and
push your chest towards
your thighs to resume
the pike position. If
you’re doing a dive bomber, you’ll
reverse the swoop movement to return
to the start position. For most people,
the dive bomber is the more difficult of
the two.
84
1
2
3
4

85
Archer Push-up
The movement of an archer push-up goes from side to side as well as up and down.
Begin with your hands much wider than you would for a standard push-up, then slide
yourself toward one side while you extend your opposite arm. Push yourself back to the
center and then go to the other side. Fee free to play around with gradually moving your
arms out farther on each rep to allow for a full range of motion. The position you’ll find
yourself in at the bottom should look almost like an archer drawing a bow and arrow. This
is one of the first techniques you can use to eventually build toward a one arm push-up.
This is one of the first techniques you can use to
eventually build toward a one arm push-up.

86
Uneven Push-up
An uneven push-up involves keeping your hands on two separate surfaces of different
heights. You can play around with how much of your weight is placed on the upper arm
versus the lower arm. Gradually conditioning one arm to bear most of the weight this way
can be another helpful technique to work towards a one arm push-up.

87
Staggered Push-up
Any type of push-up where you have one hand closer to your body than the other is a
staggered push-up. Variations can include one hand in and one hand out or one hand low
and one hand high. You can also experiment with staggered foot positions. It is helpful to
practice pushing your body weight from many different angles. This way you are unlikely
to find yourself in a situation where you cannot utilize your strength effectively.
The Spiderman push-up is one of the best
known types of staggered push-up.

88
Pseudo Planche Push-up
Just like keeping your hands close together changes the leverage of a push-up, keeping
them down by your hips also makes the exercise more difficult. The lower you place your
hands, the harder the exercise becomes. In this variation, the hands are all the way down
by your hips. Try rotating your wrists out to the sides or backwards if you lack the flexi-
bility to bend them back far enough. You might even try placing the top of your hand on
the floor (see photo). When practicing pseudo planche push-ups, you want to put as much
of your weight as possible on your arms.
If you can’t bend your wrists back
very far, feel free to play around
with other hand positions.

89
Planche Push-up
One of the most coveted moves in advanced calisthenics, a planche push-up is a varia-
tion on the gymnastics planche, which involves holding the body outstretched above the
ground on only the hands. It’s like a push-up floating on air! It’s one of those moves that
always blows people away the first time they see it performed. 
While gymnasts will hold the planche with their arms locked out at the elbows the entire
time, the planche push-up involves lowering yourself down and pressing yourself back up
like you were doing a regular push-up — only without your feet ever touching the ground.
This is actually less difficult than holding the top position, as the leverage is more in your
favor with the elbows bent. In an ideal planche push-up, the body would remain totally
straight, though in practice, it is normal for some arching of the back and bending of the
knees to take place.
You may also turn your
hands out to the sides to get
them in position to do a
planche push-up.

Plyometric Push-up
The term “plyometrics” is just a fancy way of talking about explosive movements. Any
time you get airborne while doing an exercise, it’s a plyo. The most common types of ply-
ometrics are jumps (more on them in the next chapter) but you can also catch some air
with your arms.
There are many different types of plyometric push-ups, and you need to be very strong
to do any of them. The most common type of plyometric push-up is the clap push-up. As 
90

the name implies, the objective is to clap your hands in the air at the top of your push-up
and return them to the ground before you fall on your face. But just in case, you might
want to practice on a soft surface when starting out. Also be mindful to absorb the impact
during the lowering phase and avoid landing with your elbows extended.
When performing plyo push-ups, aim to be as explosive as possible. Your objective
should be to push your body as far away from the ground as you can. While speed is an
important part of performing a clap push-up, getting your body high enough is what will
eventually allow you to perform a behind-the-back clap, double clap or superman push-up.
91

92

93

94

95

96

97


99
he basic squat is a fantastic exercise, though with enough practice you’ll
eventually get to the point where you can do hundreds of them in a row.
Unlike the basic push-up, which will start to get quite challenging for
even the fittest guys after 50 reps or so, one could theoretically go on
and on indefinitely with bodyweight squats without hitting muscular failure if they had
the mental tenacity to deal with the discomfort. Your legs are built to withstand a lot
more work than your arms. Hell, even on a recovery day, they still have to carry you
around everywhere!
CHAPTER FIVE: 
Advanced
Squats

Close Squat
Just like a push-up, bringing your feet closer together can increase the difficulty of a
squat. An ideal close squat involves keeping your feet and knees together while squat-
ting all the way down until your hamstrings are pressed against your calves. These can
become a wonderful active stretch as well as a serious core exercise when performed
properly. As with a standard squat, it may help to start out with a bench behind you to
help achieve a full range of motion. You can also work towards narrowing your feet
over time in order to get from the traditional shoulder-width stance into a heels-
together close squat.
100
An ideal close squat involves
keeping your feet and knees
together while squatting all the
way down until your hamstrings
are pressed against your calves. 

101
Bulgarian Split Squat
Manipulating leverage is the key to varying the intensity of bodyweight exer-
cises. By elevating your rear foot while performing a split squat, you not only
change the leverage of the exercise, you also turn it into an active stretch for the
hip flexors and quads of your elevated side, as well as the hamstrings of the lower
leg. Make sure your stance is deep enough to keep the heel of your front foot
planted on the ground through the whole range of motion. As it places most of
your weight on your front leg, the Bulgarian split squat is a great introductory
exercise toward eventually doing a one legged squat. Like a normal split squat, do
your best to stay upright when you perform this variation

Side-to-Side Squat
Also known as the “cossack” squat, the side-to-side squat is a strength and stability
challenge as well as a fantastic active stretch. As one leg winds up taking on most of the
load, side-to-side squats are also a helpful precursor to one legged squats.
Begin in an exaggerated wide stance squat position with your toes turned out. Slowly
shift your weight towards your left foot while bending from your hips and your left knee.
Your right leg will stay straight and your right foot will roll onto the heel with your toes
pointed up. You should feel a stretch in your groin when you get to the bottom. The more
you focus on pointing the toes of your straight leg up, the deeper you will be able to get
into the squat on the opposite side. Like any type of squat, your intention should be to get
down as low as you can without sacrificing your posture (no shrugging). Keep your abs
tight, reach your arms in front for balance, and make sure the heel of your squatting leg
stays down the whole time. When coming up, press into that heel to activate your glutes.
The side-to-side squat is essentially the lower body equivalent of the archer push-up,
though due to the nature of the hip joint, it is more of a flexibility challenge. Like archer
push-ups, I like to do side-to-side squats alternating legs, but you may do one side at a
time if you are trying to give one of your legs some extra attention.  
102
The side-to-side squat
is essentially the lower
body equivalent of the
archer push-up.

Tuck Jump
Plyometric squats can build tremendous strength and power in your legs as well as pro-
vide you with a cardiovascular effect similar to sprinting. 20 consecutive tuck jumps will
get anyone’s heart racing. Just typing it is making my pulse rise!
When you do a tuck jump (or any other type of jump squat), you don’t need to go all
the way down at the bottom. This is one instance in which I am cool with people doing
partial range of motion on their squats. Just get down a few inches, jump as high as you
can and tuck your knees to your chest. Though your legs obviously do most of the work,
tuck jumps can be a full body exercise, so use your arms to generate momentum.
Remember to stay light on your feet and avoid landing with locked out knees.
103
20 consecutive 
explosive tuck jumps
will get anyone’s
heart racing.

104
Box Jump
A box jump is another great lower body plyometric exercise. It’s similar to the tuck
jump except you are jumping onto a box or other object as opposed to just leaping into
the air. (This exercise does in fact require something other than the floor, but if you don’t
have anything to jump on, you’ll do just fine with tuck jumps.) As with the tuck jump,
make sure you land with your joints soft to minimize the impact.

105
Jump Lunge
Lunges are one of my favorite leg exercises, but like everything in life, you don’t want
your leg routine to become, well, routine.
Start out with a stationary jump lunge by lowering yourself down into a split squat and
jumping up at the top, gently landing back into the bottom position with your knees bent.
Do several in a row, then switch legs.
The cycle lunge is a more advanced jump lunge. It starts out the same as the stationary
jump lunge, but once you’re in the air, you’ll have to quickly switch your legs before land-
ing. Continue to alternate
legs with each rep, going
from one right into the
next. You can swing your
arms for momentum or
keep them at your sides. It
might take a little practice
to land comfortably with-
out losing your balance.
You can swing your arms
for momentum or keep
them at your sides.

106

107
Broad Jump
Another fun plyometric squat variant, the broad jump is essentially
the same as the tuck jump except you are jumping forward, not
upward. You still want to lift your legs high as you jump, however, as
this will help you clear more distance. Leaving your legs dangling isn’t
as aerodynamic. You’ll need a lot of space to practice broad jumps —
I recommend a park or field. 

108

109


111
rue bodyweight mastery means being able to control your muscles and
maintain your bearings in any position. Full inversions open up a whole
new playing field for bodyweight training without involving any equip-
ment at all. Since gravity only works in one direction, it’s good to some-
times turn yourself upside down to work your muscles from the opposite end. 
We’ve already been over the bridge, which is arguably the most important inversion
in terms of building strength and flexibility, but full inversions with your legs off the
ground are important for building proprioceptive awareness, balance and core
strength. Inversions also benefit the body’s circulatory system. Though there are many
different types of inversions, I’ve chosen to focus on the positions that I find most use-
ful for building strength, body awareness and alignment.
In addition to the physical challenge, full inversions can often be psychologically
overwhelming for beginners. It’s scary to turn yourself upside down at first! Tackling
this fear can be very empowering, however. Once you start to get the hang of these
exercises, your increased confidence can carry over into other aspects of your life. With
that in mind, tread slowly and listen to your body.
CHAPTER SIX: 
Full
Inversions

112
Shoulder Stand
The shoulder stand is the most basic inversion and the easiest for most people to learn.
Begin by lying on your back, then pull your legs to your chest and try to get your hips in
the air. You’re going to need to grab your lower back and gradually wiggle your body to
an upright position. It might be a deep stretch on the back of your neck; do not push if
there is pain. Ease in and breathe deeply. Think of lengthening your entire body while
tightening your abs and extending your legs. You may not be able to achieve a perfectly
straight shoulder stand at first, but with practice, it should eventually become a relatively
easy move.

113
Tripod
Once you can get the feel for the tripod, the headstand will soon follow. To practice,
kneel down and place your palms on the floor below your shoulders. Now rest your head
on the floor a few inches above your hands. You’ll want to make contact with the ground
on the top of your head, not the back of the head or forehead. Rise up onto your toes and
slowly try to lift your feet and bring your knees to rest on the backs of your arms.
When you do a shoulder stand, you have five points of contact with the ground: two
elbows, two shoulders and the back of your head (plus the backs of your arms, I sup-
pose). The tripod allows you just three contact points: the top of your head and your
hands (hence tripod). Some people may have a challenge getting acclimated to the feeling
of being upside-down. Nonetheless, I still consider it a beginner exercise. Pardon the pun,
but if you’re worried about being upside down, it’s probably all in your head!
The tripod allows you just three contact points:
the top of your head and your hands.

114
Tripod
Headstand 
The easiest type of headstand for most
people is the tripod headstand. From the tri-
pod position, you’ll need to align your hips
directly over your shoulders. Then it’s sim-
ply a matter of lifting your knees off your
arms and reaching your legs up in the air.
Go slowly and start out with a wall behind
you if you are nervous about tipping over.
With practice you’ll be able to lift to this
position without the need to first place your
legs on the backs of your arms. It may also
be helpful to open your legs into a straddle
to help find the balance.
Go slowly and start out
with a wall behind you
if you are nervous
about tipping over. 

115
Elbow
Headstand
Once you get the hang of the tripod
headstand you can try an elbow head-
stand, which is the more commonly seen
method. Though some people find it eas-
ier than the tripod, the elbow headstand
can be more difficult to get into, as you’ll
have your hands behind your head
instead of in front, with your weight rest-
ing on your forearms and elbows. You
won’t be able to start with your legs rest-
ing on your arms this way and you won’t
have as much leeway with spreading the
balance out either. If you have the flexibil-
ity, you can try getting into position by
slowly lifting one leg at a time, otherwise
you’ll have to kick up with your knees
bent before extending your legs upward.
Either way, the key to finding the balance
in this position is to get your hips cen-
tered directly over your shoulders.
The key to finding the balance in this
position is to get your hips centered
directly over your shoulders.

116
Wrist Headstand
When you’ve gotten comfortable holding the basic headstands for extended periods of
time (at least a full minute), you may try moving onto a wrist headstand, which involves
balancing on the backs of your wrists (along with your head) while your arms are
extended in front of your body. At first you might try moving into position by starting in
either a tripod or elbow headstand and then carefully putting your arms out one at a
time, though an advanced practitioner will be able to lift into the full headstand begin-
ning from only their wrists and head.

117
Hands-Free Headstand
When you can hold the wrist headstand for an extended period of time, you can start
experimenting with a hands-free headstand. From the wrist headstand, try to gradually
ease your weight away from your wrists and get your arms off the ground. You may try
picking up one arm and then the other or you can attempt to lift both simultaneously. You
might even try going onto your fingertips and then start lifting one finger at a time. Again,
coming into a straddle position can be less difficult than keeping the body straight. You
may also want to reach your arms out for balance. To hold a hands-free headstand for just
one full second can take years of practice, so keep at it.

118
Forearm Stand
The forearm stand is a great intermediate inversion pose once you’ve gotten the hang of
the basic headstand variations. It requires more upper-body strength than the headstand
and the balance can be trickier to find, though it’s not quite as elusive as the freestanding
handstand. It’s almost like an elbow headstand without your head on the ground.
I recommend getting into position by first kneeling down and getting your forearms
parallel to each other against the floor. From here you can kick your legs up and try to get
your body vertical. It can be helpful to start out practicing with a spotter or a wall behind
you. Look in between your hands when kicking up into position while keeping your
weight centered between your elbows and hands in order to find the balance. Once you’re
locked in, you can start slowly straightening your body.

119
Scorpion
In a traditional forearm stand, the objective is to keep your body straight. In contrast,
the objective of the scorpion hold is to create an arc in the body from the forearm balance
position.  It’s almost like combining a forearm stand with a back bridge.
You’ll need to let your knees bend while compressing your spine and shifting your cen-
ter of gravity to prevent from tipping over. Some people may find this pose easier than a
straight forearm stand while others will find the balance more challenging with their back
arched — we each have our unique strengths and weaknesses. 
Some people may find this pose
easier than a straight forearm
stand while others will find the
balance more challenging with
their back arched.

120
Frog Stand
The two main factors that influence the difficulty of the various headstands, forearm
stands and hand balances are the number of contact points and the position of your body.
Also known as the crow pose, the frog stand limits you to just two relatively small points
of contact — your hands. However, the tucked body position is much easier to control
than the headstand or forearm stand. For this reason, the frog stand is generally easier to
learn than a forearm stand or scorpion, even though those poses allow for more contact
with the ground.  
To practice the frog stand, you’ll need to get into a deep squat and place your hands on
the floor under your shoulders. Bend your elbows, get up on your toes and bring your
knees to rest on the backs of your arms. It’s almost like you are making a little shelf with
your triceps on which to rest your legs. Keep your abs engaged and squeeze your hands
and fingers like you are trying to grip the ground. Look out in front of your body as you
lift up into position, not down at the floor.
When learning the frog stand, it is okay to begin with a deep elbow bend. With prac-
tice you can work towards straightening your arms and bringing your hips up higher.
This will help you prepare to eventually transition to a handstand.
Cannon optional.

121
Handstand
Handstands are the ultimate inversion. They require precision, grace and total body
strength in a way that few other exercises do. Like the other inversions, practicing against
a wall is a nice way to learn, but the freestanding handstand is the real deal. If you aim to
truly master your bodyweight, it is an essential skill.

122
Kicking Up
If you’re going to kick-up into a handstand, make sure you keep your elbows locked
the whole time. I’ve seen quite a few beginners fall on their head during their first kick-up
attempt because they let their arms bend just a little bit. Your arms tend to be stronger
when they are locked out than they are with a bend in them and that’s especially true in
this case.
Start out practicing your handstand
kick-up against a wall, leaving a little
room for your back to arch. It will
likely be easier for you to hold your
handstand this way at first. In time
you’ll work towards getting your
back straighter. With practice you can
work up to gradually taking your feet
off the wall. This will take different
amounts of time for different people.
If you are diligent in your training you
will get there eventually, but don’t
expect it to happen overnight.
If you’re going to kick-up
into a handstand, make
sure you keep your elbows
locked the whole time. 

123
Donkey Kick
Another way to kick into a handstand is to start in a position similar to the top of a
divebomber push-up. From here, bend your legs and jump both feet right up to hip level
with your knees tucked in by your trunk. Then it’s just a matter of extending your legs
into the air. Remember to keep your hips right over your hands. The hips tend to lead the
rest of the body wherever they go.
Try to get your hips right
above your hands before
extending your legs.

124
Facing 
The Wall
Though I recommend people who are
new to handstands start out by practicing
while facing away from a wall, doing the
opposite is worthwhile to practice once
you get the feel of being upside down on
your hands. Getting into a handstand this
way requires more strength than kicking
up, but it can be very helpful with finding
the alignment.
Get into a push-up position with your
feet against a wall, then start gradually
walking your way up the wall until you’re
upside down. Try to get your hands as
close to the wall as you can and press your
chest all the way out. Beginners may start
five or six inches from the wall, but you
should aim to eventually get within an inch
or two. Think about lengthening your
spine to make your body as straight as
possible; you’ll likely feel a stretch in your
shoulders and upper back. Squeeze your
legs and glutes to get your whole body
straight. While I don’t want you to shrug
your shoulders during handstand push-
ups, when holding the top position of a
handstand, shrugging can help you
lengthen your body and get your arms all
the way under your shoulders. This can be
a really helpful stretch if you’re tight in
your upper body.

125
Don’t let your elbows flare out to the sides when practicing your handstand.
Instead focus on keeping them in and back. This will help you fully lock out
your arms and take advantage of your skeletal alignment. Just like when you
stand on your legs, you want your bones to do some of the work when holding
a handstand. Think about actively pressing the ground away from you as you
lengthen your entire body.

126
Press To Handstand
Pressing to a handstand is a much more challenging way to get into position. There are
a few different ways to approach it. The simplest variation is to begin in a frog stand and
try to lift yourself up by extending your legs as you press with your shoulders and arms.
You can kick a bit with your legs to get some momentum if you don’t have the strength
to initiate this move with your arms alone. Be careful not to kick too hard though or
you’ll topple over.
You can also press to a handstand from your feet by bending over, placing your hands
on the ground and shifting your weight forward onto your palms. Some people will find
this easier than pressing from a frog stand, while others will find it more challenging,
depending on individual factors. Feel free to practice from a shoulder-width standing
position or with your legs in a straddle. The closer your feet are to each other, the more
flexibility it requires. You can also bend your elbows a bit if you need to. Though starting
with bent arms will require a bit more upper body strength, it can be helpful for those
who lack the hip and/or shoulder mobility to begin with arms straight.
With either method, you’ll need to grip the ground and engage your core as you raise
your hips and legs up over your hands. Just like the donkey kick, get your hips all the way
over your shoulders in order to find the proper alignment.
1
2

127
4
3

128

129

130
Beginners may find
it easier to hold the
handstand with an
arched back.

131
Try doing a handstand
with your hands close
together for an 
additional challenge.

132

133
he one arm push-up is one of the most badass exercises on the planet. It
demonstrates total body strength and control, and can do wonders for
your pushing output. It’s also an extremely versatile and adaptable exer-
cise. Even within the world of one arm push-ups there are still many dif-
ferent variations and ways to progress things.
Only once you’ve gotten very comfortable with standard push-ups (and worked
through the variations in Chapter Four) should you proceed with this move. You must
also master the close push-up as a precursor to the one arm push-up. I recommend get-
ting to the point where you can do at least 30 consecutive diamond (or arrowhead)
push-ups before beginning one arm push-up training.
It should be noted that the form of a one arm push-up is a bit different from the stan-
dard two arm version. Your legs will need to be farther apart than in a regular push-up
and your hand should be pretty much right beneath your body, rather than off to the
side. The three points of contact (foot, hand, foot) will make a triangular formation.
As a general guideline, the closer your feet are positioned to each other, the harder the
exercise becomes. Begin with your feet nice and wide to help get the feel for the move-
ment pattern. Eventually you may try working toward narrowing your stance.
CHAPTER SEVEN: 
Owning The
One Arm
Push-up

134
Incline One Arm Push-up
A lot of the techniques I recommend for learning the one arm push-up are the same as
what I suggest for beginners who are learning to do push-ups with both arms. My
favorite way to introduce the movement to someone new is to have them begin on an
incline. You can best learn to get a feel for the movement and condition your joints by
practicing one arm push-ups at an angle where you will have increased leverage.
You can best learn to get
a feel for the movement
and condition your joints
by practicing one arm
push-ups at an angle
where you will have
increased leverage.

135
L7 Push-up
Not only is this variation a nice segue toward a one arm push-up, it’s also a helpful
approach toward a close grip wrist push-up. An L7 is to a diamond what the one and one
push-up is to a normal push-up. One arm will rest on the back of the hand instead of the
palm. When done with the right hand turned over, your fingers will look like the letter
“L” and the number “7.” Since having a lot of weight on the backs of the hands can be
uncomfortable, this variation encourages you to push more with the opposite side. Focus
on pushing primarily with your palm-down hand, relying on your opposite wrist primar-
ily for stability.
An L7 is to a diamond what
the one and one push-up is to
a normal push-up. 

136
Self Assisted One Arm Push-up
A self assisted one arm push-up involves reaching your secondary arm out to the side
and resting it on a raised object like a ledge, brick or medicine ball. Again, the idea is to
use your primary arm to do the majority of the work and make up the difference with the
extended arm. This technique is also helpful due to the fact that it teaches you the proper
position for the torso during a full one arm push-up. Though a small degree of rotation
may be unavoidable, aim to keep your upper-body as close to parallel with the ground as
you can.
Though similar to an archer push-up, this variation should be performed one arm at a
time, due to the nature of the opposite hand being elevated. Also keep your movement as
vertical as possible to simulate a one arm push-up, as opposed to moving side to side as
you would in an archer. 
The idea is to use your primary arm to do the
majority of the work and make up the difference
with the extended arm. 

137
Negatives
Performing the lowering phase of a one arm push-up can be a gateway to the full exer-
cise as it helps you learn the movement pattern in a neurological sense. The brain has an
amazing way of learning! Strength isn’t all about muscles — it’s about knowing how to
use your muscles.
Get into the top position of a one arm push-up and squeeze your whole body tight as
you slowly lower yourself down with control. Remember to keep your elbow in by your
side. When you get to the bottom, push yourself back up with both arms, then take one
away and do it again. You may wind up dropping quickly at first, but in time you will
develop better control.
Though a small degree of rotation may be
unavoidable, aim to keep your upper-body as
close to parallel with the ground as you can.

138
One Arm Push-up
The phrase “one arm push-up” is a little misleading. It’s impossible to do any type of
push-up without using your entire body! If you don’t contract your hips, legs, abs and
glutes there’s absolutely no way you can do a proper one arm push-up.  
Make sure you keep your pressing arm
close to your body. Just like a diamond
or close grip push-up, your arm should
gently graze your ribs on the way down
as well as the way up. Your other arm
can be held against your body or placed
behind the back.
Remember that the standard one arm
push-up involves the legs being in a
straddle position. Though some people
will tell you that this isn’t a true one arm
push-up, feet wide is most certainly the
gold standard for the exercise. The torso
remains mostly parallel to the ground,
the elbow stays in and the hips move ever
so slightly towards the pressing arm to
maintain balance as the body lowers
down.
A one arm push-up with the feet
together is a more difficult move, but it’s
so much more difficult to pull off with-
out significant bowing to the side that it
isn’t really practical to use as a training
tool. If you’re going to move your hips to
the side, you might as well straddle your
legs to minimize that movement.
The standard one arm 
push-up involves the legs being in 
a straddle position. 

139
Fingertip, Knuckle And Back Of
The Hand One Arm Push-ups
Obviously, the main thing that makes any of these one arm push-up variations harder
than the standard type is supporting all your weight on the fingertips, knuckles or back of
just one hand. Before attempting any of these variations, I suggest being able to perform
at least 30 reps with the two arm equivalent. You also must be able to do several consec-
utive one arm push-ups on
your palm. The surface you
use can also affect the diffi-
culty of the exercise. Doing
any of these on pavement is
not recommended until
you’ve gotten the feel for
practicing them on gentler
surfaces.
Doing any of these on pavement is not 
recommended until you’ve gotten the feel for 
practicing them on gentler surfaces.

140
One Arm/One Leg Push-up
If you can do a few clean one arm push-ups, it shouldn’t take too much practice to get
the hang of lifting up the leg opposite from your pushing arm. Even though one foot is off
the ground, you still want to keep your legs apart to maintain your balance. You might
find it helpful to reach your free arm away from your body for balance as well.
The cross-stability required for this move is a bit more intense than a standard one
armer, but if you take it slow and steady a little practice can go a long way. Make sure
you use opposing limbs for this variant (right arm/left leg or vice versa).

141
Make sure you use opposing limbs
for this variant (right arm/left leg
or vice versa).

142
Plyo One Arm Push-up
If you practice enough one arm push-ups, you may eventually get strong enough to
catch some air. Like any plyometric exercise, make sure you absorb the impact during the
negative phase of the exercise. Avoid landing with your arm fully locked out on this type
of move.
When you get a feel for the plyo one arm push-up, you might try clapping your hand to
your chest, or waving it out in the air. I recommend getting to the point where you can
perform at least five consecutive one arm push-ups before attempting plyos.
I recommend getting to the point where you
can perform at least five consecutive one arm
push-ups before attempting plyos.

Ultimate One Arm Push-up
In theory, performing a perfect one arm push-up with your feet touching each other
and the body totally straight through the entire range of motion is the hardest push-up
variation there could be. You'll only have two contact points instead of the three you’d
have in a wide stance one arm push-up, and unlike the one arm/one leg push-up — which
is surprisingly easy by comparison — you don’t have a leg in the air to reach out and bal-
ance with.
The core strength and balance required to perform just one rep is only outdone by the
amount of pressing power that your arm will need to generate in order to compensate for
the change in hip position that placing the feet alongside each other entails. It's truly the
ultimate one arm push-up!
143
You'll only have two contact points instead of the
three you’d have in a wide stance one arm push-up,
and unlike the one arm/one leg push-up — which is
surprisingly easy by comparison — you don’t have a
leg in the air to reach out and balance with.

Nobody's Perfect
The truth is, this variation is an ideal that will always stay just out of reach. Nobody
has ever documented a perfectly straight feet-together one arm push-up and I’m not hold-
ing my breath for it to happen any time soon. Perfection is an illusion. There can never be
a truly perfect one arm push-up, but sometimes it’s good to have these ideals in our train-
ing. They motivate and inspire us to push ourselves. However, they can also be trouble-
some when they give us false expectations. Know that a truly perfect one arm push-up is
a very subjective thing. Working out and being fit is about more than any one single skill
and obsessing over perfection can actually impede growth. It’s more practical to get your
reps up with your feet apart than struggle for one rep of an exercise that is purely theo-
retical. Besides, a clean one arm push-up with the legs spread can be plenty challenging
on its own!
144
Perfection is an illusion. There can never be a truly
perfect one arm push-up, but sometimes it’s good to
have these ideals in our training. 

145

146

147
f you do squats for long enough, even advanced variations can eventually
become fairly easy. While you can still get strong by doing high reps of an
exercise, when you've made it into triple digit numbers in one set, it’s proba-
bly better to just find a harder exercise and do fewer reps. At that point, one
legged squats are the best way to progress your lower body strength without the need
for weights or other extraneous equipment.
The pistol squat is the gold standard of single leg squats. It’s one of those rare exercises
that will challenge your strength, flexibility, balance and coordination. It’s an elusive skill
that demands practice, patience and perseverance to master. As a prerequisite, it’s good to
be able to do lots of close stance squats with a full range of motion. Once you’ve mas-
tered those, there are a few easier variations on the one legged squat that can help you on
the road to the pistol. Start with these and take your time. A beginner should not expect
to get a pistol without months or possibly years of dedicated training.
CHAPTER EIGHT: 
Troubleshooting
The
Pistol Squat

One Legged Bench Squat
Just like a novice starting out with two legged squats, using a bench to catch yourself will
help you build the stability and balance to eventually perform a freestanding one legged
squat. Reach your opposite leg into the air and sit back onto an object that will leave you
with a 90 degree angle at your knee. You’ll likely lose control at the bottom the first time —
this is fine. Plop down on the bench if you have to, then squeeze your abs (and your whole
body) as you reach your arms out in front and pitch yourself forward to get up.
148
Squeeze your abs (and your whole body)
as you reach your arms out in front and
pitch yourself forward to get up.

Elevated One Leg Squat
Standing on top of an object while squatting on one leg will allow you to drop the oppo-
site leg off the side of the object as you lower yourself down. This makes the exercise a bit
easier as it lets you relax your free leg and focus all your attention on the squatting leg. It’s
also easier to balance this way as opposed to holding your free leg straight out in front or
behind you. When you’ve built up to a few good reps, you should try moving to something
lower down. Ideally, you’ll be able to find an object just high enough to keep your out-
stretched foot from dragging on the ground.
149
Standing on top of an object while squatting on
one leg will allow you to drop the opposite leg off
the side of the object as you lower yourself down. 

150
Balance Of Power
While balance can be an issue with pistols, the two main things that hold people back
from owning this move are a lack of strength and/or flexibility. Often it is a lack of both
(though guys often mistakenly blame their flexibility when they simply lack the strength).
One way to test to see if you have the requisite range of motion is to try an assisted pistol
squat (aka an “assistol”). If you can lower yourself all the way to the proper bottom posi-
tion while holding onto something in front of you (a pole, door frame, suspension trainer,
etc.), then the issue is not as simple as being inflexible.
Part of what makes the pistol such a fantastic exercise is that it requires harmony between
different areas of the body. The tighter you are in one spot, the stronger you’re going to have
to be in another. If there is tightness or weakness in any part of your legs or core, the pistol
will continue to elude you. People who think a lack of flexibility is their most limiting factor
are only seeing half of the picture. Like the back bridge, the problem that stops many folks
from achieving the pistol is that they are tighter than they are strong. Your quads and hip
flexors on your extended leg must be strong enough to overcome tightness in your ham-
strings and lower back to keep it straight out in front. It need not stay totally parallel to the
ground for the entire range of motion, but that heel definitely shouldn’t touch the ground at
any point during the exercise. For this to happen, you’ll also need to be strong enough
through your abdominals to stabilize your pelvis.

151
In theory, anyone who can do a full range-of-motion barbell back squat with their body
weight on the bar should be able to do a pistol. In practice, this is rarely the case. The core
strength and coordination needed to perform the pistol is very unique and requires skill spe-
cific work. Like anyone else, I had to put in my time and learn the mechanics of this move
the old fashioned way — practice. If I make pistols look easy, it’s only because I’ve been
practicing them for over a decade.
In theory, anyone who can do a full range-of-
motion barbell back squat with their body weight
on the bar should be able to do a pistol. 
In practice, this is
rarely the case. 

152
Total Body Tension
If you still haven’t figured it out, the key to bodyweight exercises is to use your whole
body as one cohesive unit. This is especially true for the pistol — you need to squeeze every-
thing you’ve got!
Beginners may find that their extended leg cramps up when attempting a pistol. This is
quite common so make sure you brace your quads and keep your whole body engaged. You
might try clasping your hands together with your arms straight in front of your chest to gen-
erate additional tension throughout your body. (Sticking your index finger out like a gun is
optional.) Others will prefer to keep their hands apart. Either way, squeeze your abs tight
like you’re bracing for a punch in the stomach during the transition back to the top.

153
Partner Pistol
Having a training partner assist you through the sticking point of a pistol squat is another
helpful technique when you’re on the verge of your first official rep. Clasp hands with your
partner and use them to provide stability through the transition (and pull you out of the
hole if necessary). If your partner can do a pistol themselves, have them go up and down
with you and do your reps as a team. Otherwise they can just pull you up from two legs.

Counterweights
Pistols are one of those rare exercises that can actually be made easier for most people by
adding weight. Holding a dumbbell or kettlebell in front of your chest can keep you bal-
anced by pulling you forward, offsetting the weight of your hips moving back. It’s almost
like having a partner help you through the range of motion. Start with ten or fifteen pounds
and work your way down to lighter weights. Eventually, you will get it free-standing.
Pistols are one of those rare exercises
that can actually be made easier for most
people by adding weight.
154

Raised Heels
Another way to make the pistol less difficult is to practice with the heel of your squatting
leg on a slightly elevated surface (about an inch or so). Wearing a shoe with a raised heel is
probably the easiest way to accomplish this, though you can also slide an object beneath
your bare heel. This minor change in leverage can make the pistol significantly easier.
Though elevating your heel can be helpful for someone who is on the brink of a full-on
pistol, I have mixed feelings about this technique, as it can put your knee into a compro-
mised position if the heel is too high and/or too many reps are performed this way. Keep the
elevation to an inch or less and keep your reps low. This technique should only be used for
practice towards the real deal, not as an alternative to it. The eventual plan is to work up to
flat-footed pistols on a level surface.
Just like the counterweight technique in which you begin
with a heavier weight and work down to a lower one, you can
gradually work away from relying on an ele-
vated heel. Raising the heel of your squatting
leg during a pistol is a bad habit, so don’t use
this technique too often or you could be pre-
venting further progress.
Wearing a shoe with a
raised heel can make
the pistol less difficult.
155

156
Pistol Switch
This drill is designed to help with the balance at the bottom of the pistol squat. If you are
close to achieving a full pistol but struggle with this part of the exercise, practicing the pis-
tol switch may help you get your first legit rep.
Begin in a deep squat position with your knees wide, then lift your right foot and quickly
replace it with your right hand while reaching that leg toward your opposite hand. You’ll
1
2

157
wind up at the bottom of the pistol position but with one hand supporting some of your
weight. From here, reverse back to the initial position and attempt the switch on the left side.  
With some practice, you can work on slowly taking the weight off your hand while you
are on one foot in order to find the balance for the bottom of the pistol squat. Reach your
arms all the way in front of you while you squeeze your abs tight and flex your extended
leg. You’ll likely need to round your back pretty deep at first to keep from falling on your
butt. Also remember to flex as much as possible from the ankle of your squatting leg. Just
don't forget that you want your heel to stay down.
3

158
Hold It
Another helpful technique if you’re on the brink of your first pistol is to practice slow
negatives with brief isometric holds at the key transitional positions on the way down. Stop
when you are a quarter of the way down and hold for a slow three count. Do the same at
the half way and three quarter positions. Eventually make that three count into a five count.
Once you can do that, you’ll have your first pistol very soon.
1

159
2
3

160
Round And Round
Some people have taken issue with the pistol squat due to the fact that it’s virtually impos-
sible to do one without sacrificing your neutral spine position to some extent. A lot of peo-
ple are overly paranoid about their lower back, but as I’ve said, the spine is designed to flex
and extend.
If you are doing squats with weight on your back, you need to maintain a neutral spine.
However, since your spine isn't loaded during a bodyweight pistol, the lumbar curve
shouldn't be an issue, though attempting to minimize that curve will make the exercise
more challenging (which usually leads to increased strength). Additionally, tightening your
stomach and creating abdominal pressure from the inside out further protects and stabilizes
your spine during the pistol.
Like the “perfect” one arm push-up, a perfect pistol with a neutral spine is a nice vision
to have in mind while you perform the exercise, but understand that it is an idealized view
of reality. Just as your hips will inevitably move to the side during a feet-together one arm
push-up, your lower back has to round a bit to perform a pistol.

161
Knees And Toes
The other big concern I hear from people when I tell them to practice pistols is the safety
of their knees. While there is potential for injury with advanced calisthenics, there is poten-
tial for injury with all types of physical pursuits. And the more advanced things become, the
more that risk grows.
Regardless of whether you are lifting weights, doing calisthenics, or racing a triathlon (all
things I’ve done), the keys to avoiding injury are the same: train consistently, progress
slowly and respect your body.
As long as you practice proper form, avoid trying to move to harder variations before you
are ready and keep your training volume appropriate, you should be able to progress to pis-
tols and eventually practice them as a regular part of your training without any joint prob-
lems. In fact, your hips, knees and ankles should get stronger from doing them.

162
Remember that while strength training makes your connective tissue stronger, it can be
slower to act on ligaments, tendons and cartilage as compared to muscle. You must build to
harder exercises gradually over many months and years. You can push the limits but you
must acknowledge them first. Don’t try to get to the full pistol without putting in the neces-
sary work.
Arm Position
As bodyweight training is all about manipulating leverage, there are always subtle ways
to make an exercise easier or more difficult. In a one arm push-up, you can change the lever-
age by positioning your legs closer together or farther apart. To make a pistol squat harder,
you can try gradually working your arms from in front of your body to behind your back.
When learning the pistol, it is best to reach your arms out in front. This will keep your
weight more evenly distributed as you sit back into your squat, making it easier to balance and
maintaining more favorable leverage for your muscles. You may even try holding onto your
toes for balance (doing so will also increase the stretch, an added benefit for many of us).

163
Once you can do several pistols with your hands in front however, try performing a pis-
tol while crossing your arms at your shoulders, placing your hands behind your head, or
harder still — clasping your hands behind your back.

164
Walking Pistol
After you can do a few pistols on each leg, walking pistols are a fantastic way to increase
your reps. The one legged equivalent of the walking lunge, alternating legs while moving
forward will allow each leg a little extra rest between reps, giving you the opportunity to do
more reps in a single set than going one leg at a time. These can become a serious cardio
workout as well once you develop the ability to do lots of reps on each leg. Additionally,
some people might find that the forward momentum of walking in and out of each rep
makes the exercise a bit more manageable.

165
Plyo Pistol
Think you’ve got strong legs? Challenge yourself
to jump at the top of your pistol squat. You may
even try jumping onto an object such as a step or
bench. Start with something nice and low — this is a
very advanced move — try it at your own risk!
3
2
1

166
Shrimp Squat
If you think pistol squats are the be-all-and-end-all of bodyweight leg exercises, think
again. The shrimp squat is a challenging single-leg bodyweight movement that can humble
any sharpshooting pistol squatter.
To perform a shrimp squat, begin in an upright position then bend one knee so you can
grab your ankle behind your back (just like you would if you were stretching your quads).
From here, slowly lower yourself down until your back knee touches the ground behind the
heel of the squatting leg. Try to go down as controlled as possible, though most first timers
will find themselves dropping through the last few inches of the range of motion (you might
want to try this exercise on a soft surface when starting out). If you are having a hard time,
you may choose to begin from the ground up instead. Once you can do a few reps this way,
you should be able to gradually work on getting down with more control.
Just like with pistols, make sure your
heel stays down and remember to
reach your free arm out in front of
you to counterbalance the weight of
your body behind you. 

167
Just like with pistols, make sure your heel stays down and remember to reach your free
arm out in front of you to counterbalance the weight of your body behind you. You’ll also
need to pitch your chest forward on the way up to keep from falling backward.
Once you get the hang of the standard version, you can attempt an advanced shrimp
squat by holding your ankle with both hands. This will put you at a serious mechanical dis-
advantage, plus you’ll no longer be able to use your free arm for balance. It takes a lot of leg
strength to do an advanced shrimp squat, but of course it also takes core strength.
Pitch your chest forward on the way
up to keep from falling backward.

168
Jumbo Shrimp Squat
You can also add difficulty to the shrimp by doing it while standing on a platform. Unlike
the pistol, which is easier when elevated, performing a shrimp this way allows for a bigger
range of motion, as your knee can go deeper than the level of your foot. 
1

169
The flexibility can also become a greater challenge with this variant. You’ll likely need to
allow your bottom knee to come forward as you pass below the depth of the elevated object
on which you’re positioned.
2
3

170
Hover Lunge
Another challenging aspect of the shrimp is the flexibility — your quads and hip flexors
will need to be quite mobile to achieve this move (especially in the no-handed version). If
you’re struggling with this aspect of the exercise, you could try an easier variation where the
back leg simply hovers behind you. It’s looks sort of like a back lunge but your rear foot
never touches the ground.

171
If your legs are strong, yet you lack the ability to do a pistol, the issue may be
core strength. As anyone who’s attempted a pistol knows, part of the challenge
is keeping the non-squatting leg straight out in front. The L-sit is an excellent
move to help you get a feel for using your core to assist your quads and hip
flexors in keeping the legs extended. (More on L-sits in Appendix A.)

172

173

174

175
odyweight training and strength training with weights both operate
under the same principle of progressive overload. Regardless of modal-
ity, the way one grows stronger is to start with a relatively low amount of
resistance and gradually add more as the body adapts to the movement.
In weight training, exercises can be learned with just an empty bar to get a feel for
proper technique before progressing (adding weight). This allows the lifter to learn the
form without having to overcome much resistance. Due to the nature of bodyweight
training, however, learning a new exercise must be approached a bit differently. Since
there is no way to do a pistol squat or one arm push-up without a significant amount
of resistance, we instead must practice less challenging variations in which the body is
positioned in such a way so as to create more or less favorable leverage.
Over time, progressive variations can gradually bring you closer to the full exercise.
In fact, the exercises can be made harder indefinitely for as long as the body can con-
tinue to adapt. The key to pushing the limits is to realize that there are actually no lim-
its at all!
Since you can’t always add resistance to bodyweight exercises quite as gradually as
sticking five more pounds on a barbell, it’s okay to give yourself some leeway with form
when you begin working toward new exercises that are on the fringes of your capabili-
ties. Just don’t get carried away with thinking you’ve mastered an exercise because you
can bang out a couple sloppy reps. Once you can do a few repetitions of a new move-
ment, focus on cleaning up your form before going for anything more difficult.
CHAPTER NINE: 
All Together
Now

176
Designing Workouts
Programming is one of the most over-thought parts of working out. While I know it
can be overwhelming to look through a book of exercises if you don’t know where to
start, it should actually be pretty simple for anyone to implement a progressive calisthen-
ics training program. There is no magic formula that is perfect for everyone — you’ve got
to listen to your body and be prepared to make adjustments as you go. Start exploring
and see for yourself what these different exercises feel like.
If you can perform a given exercise, keep on practicing and refining it until it is no
longer a challenge, then find a harder variant. If you can’t perform the exercise, practice
easier variations for a while to build strength, then return to the harder movement a few
weeks (or months) later to assess your growth.
There are sample routines at the end of this book, but I want you to stray from them
and experiment for yourself. They are only a guideline. But before all that, I need to
address a few questions I expect you may be having at this point.

177
How Many Reps?
One of the most common questions I get asked it how to know when it is time to move
onto a harder variation of an exercise. My answer is usually something like, “When you
are ready,” but most people are not satisfied with that answer. They want a rep range.
While there are general linear patterns, everyone’s progress will be unique. Don’t
become upset if you struggle with certain exercises. We all have strengths and weaknesses
and bodyweight training tends to make it pretty obvious what our shortcomings are.
As a general rule, however, the less intense an exercise is, the more reps you are going
to need to be able to perform before progressing. That’s why the range I’d suggest for
wall push-ups is 40-50 reps before moving to knee push-ups, but the range from knee
push-ups to full push-ups is 30-40. From full push-ups to close grip push-ups, the range
goes down to 20-30. By the time you get to high level moves like one arm push-ups, it
takes only around 5-10 reps to advance to the point where you can begin exploring plyo
one-arm push-ups and eventually, the “perfect” one arm push-up (which in its idealized
form is virtually unattainable).

178
Of course, each rep in a set of one arm push-ups requires a lot more strength than reps
in a set of wall push-ups — so the overall output can actually be higher even though it’s
fewer reps. Additionally, as you build more strength you’ll continue to improve on the
earlier steps in the progressions. You should still use them in the same training session as
a warm-up before your harder exercises, or once you have fatigued yourself practicing
those more difficult moves.
Over the course of a few years, anyone can build from wall push-ups and partial squats
to one arm push-ups and pistols. All that’s required is patience and dedication.
Exercises                            Approximate # of reps
needed before moving on
Wall Push-up                         
40-50
Knee Push-up                           
30-40
Full Push-up                              
20-30
Close Push-up                        
15-20
Self Assisted One Arm Push-up 
10-15
One Arm Push-up                      
5-10
Assisted Squats/Partial Squat
40-50           
Full Squat                       
30-40
Close Squat                        
20-30
Side to Side Squat                  
15-20
Assisted Pistol                  
10-15
Pistol Squat                         
5-10

179
Though the sequences on the previous page are a great way to approach gradually pro-
gressing your skills, there are other steps one could take along the way, which is why I
have included so many different exercises in this book. Feel free to modify the progres-
sions using whatever variations you need to suit your needs. Strength development is not
always linear and we don’t all follow the same path.
How Often To Train?
This is the other big question about pro-
gram design. As a general guideline, three
days per week is the minimum amount of
training that will allow for continuous
improvement. Though age, genetics and
lifestyle factors can contribute to your
progress as well. Again, there is plenty of
room for personal discretion here.
Raw beginners can train as little as once
or twice per week and still make gains for
the first two or three months of training,
however. In fact, the difference between
doing nothing and doing something is such
a huge chasm, those first few workouts
might leave you very sore, so it’s okay to
take longer rest between sessions when
starting. Once you acclimate to that, you’ll
need to step it up to at least three days a
week to experience continued growth. Of
course, with improved conditioning, the
body will be able to handle more work with
less rest. The soreness you experience once
you are in shape is rarely as severe as when
you begin your training.

180
How To Break It Down?
Split routines are all the rage in bodybuilding, but you don’t have to train different
muscles on different days to get strong with your bodyweight. I recommend beginners do
full body workouts every time they train, which should be three or four days a week. An
every-other-day routine (or every third day in the beginning) can work really nicely as
well, so it need not always be Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Don’t get too hung up on
the calendar.
After you’ve been training for a long time and can handle high amounts of volume, a
split routine may be feasible. A simple two-day split consisting of alternating your upper-
body and lower-body exercises works nicely, or you could try the classic three-day push,
pull, legs trifecta (I like to train inversions at the end of a leg day). Some people like to
train more frequently, and a three-day split allows you to spread your exercises out over
the course of the week, increasing the amount of sets and reps for each movement with-
out adding to the duration of your workouts.
Since daily strength training can be a lot for some people to handle, another option is
to do strength workouts every other day with additional exercises like running, swim-
ming or skipping rope performed on the days in between.
There are a lot of different ways to break up your training and no single method is
right for everyone. In fact, the same individual may even find themselves needing to vary
their approach week-to-week or month-to-month depending on how busy they may be
with other aspects of their life.

181
Progressive Overload 
And Diminishing Returns
No matter what style of training or specific program you follow, the general formula
behind strength training is the same: work your muscles, give them rest and repeat.
The human body has an amazing ability to adapt to stress. Every time you work out,
you are essentially injuring your muscles, then when you rest they recover and come back
with a vengeance. It’s a case of whatever doesn’t kill ‘em makes ‘em stronger.  
Once recovery is achieved—which could take anywhere from a day to a week depend-
ing on your level of conditioning relative to the intensity of your workout—you have a
small window in which you can build on the previous session. Train again too soon and
you won’t be recovered enough to benefit from the next workout, wait too long and
you’ll have regressed back to your previous state. This is why many people fail to make
progress. They simply cannot stay consistent for any significant amount of time.
On the other hand, there are people who do manage to stay consistent for years and
eventually, they will also find that their progress gradually begins to slow down. It can
take several years to get to this point though, and gains will still come but they will come
so slowly you might not even notice if you aren’t watching closely. This is simply a case
of diminishing returns, a concept that applies to everything in life. Whether we’re talking
about working out, learning an instrument, or climbing the corporate ladder, the farther
along you get on any path, the more effort it takes to keep moving forward. 
When I was in school, I found the amount of work needed to simply get by and pass
my classes was typically pretty low. Barring disabilities, anyone who’s even remotely
intelligent can get a high school diploma in America simply by showing up and applying
even the slightest effort. But to get straight A’s takes hours of studying and dedication.
Fitness is no different. If you’re starting off in average shape, you can get in better-
than-average shape in a few months by working out three times a week. (Just don’t for-
get you have to eat less to lose weight!) However, if you’ve been at it a while and are
already in better than average shape, it’s going to take more intensity to keep progressing. 
This is why we add more training days. 
This is why we increase our sets and reps. 
This is why we move to harder exercise variations. 
This is why we keep 


183
hen it comes to bodyweight training, the possibilities are truly
endless. With that in mind, here are some other worthwhile
exercises to help supplement your training. Have fun experi-
menting with these bonus exercises and feel free to modify them as you see fit.
APPENDIX A: 
Bonus 
Exercises

184
The movement of a single leg
deadlift is not unlike that of a
drinking bird toy. As you lean your
upper body forward, reach your
opposite leg out behind you. 
Single Leg Deadlift
Much like a pistol squat is exponentially harder than a regular two legged squat, sin-
gle leg deadlifts are more challenging than you might expect. Doing a deadlift on one
leg takes strength, balance and flexibility. While some may dismiss this exercise as
being too easy, the one-legged bodyweight deadlift is a fantastic way to build strength
and stability in your hamstrings, glutes and lower back. If done slowly and with strict
attention to detail, performing a dozen or two one-legged bodyweight deadlifts can be
a serious workout. 
The movement of a single leg deadlift is not unlike that of a drinking bird toy. As you
lean your upper body forward, reach your opposite leg out behind you. This will not
only help you balance, it will also further engage your lower back as well as the leg
that’s in the air. It can help to touch your hand to your opposite foot at the bottom to
keep from externally rotating at the hip. Watch out that you don’t bend your spine on
the way down, but rather take the stretch in your hamstrings.

185
Lying Knee Tuck
The lying knee tuck is a great beginner exercise that can serve as a gatekeeper to harder
moves like the lying leg raise, L-sit and even the pistol squat.
Lie on your back with your hands by your sides and lift your feet a few inches off the
ground. You may place your hands beneath your lower back for support if you need to,
but do your best to minimize any arch. Think about keeping your heels relatively close to
the ground as you tuck your knees all the way to your chest, allowing your lower back to
come off the ground slightly at the top. Stay in control as you extend your legs back to the
start position. Press your lower back down into the ground to engage your deep abdom-
inal stabilizers.
Think about keeping
your heels relatively
close to the ground
as you tuck your
knees all the way to
your chest.

186
Lying Leg Raise
When knee tucks become easy for you, move onto lying leg raises. Start in the same
position, but instead of bending your knees towards your chest, keep your legs straight
and lift them up until your feet are in the air in front of your hips. Your butt might come
off the floor at the top of the range of motion; this is fine. Lower back down with control
and repeat. Again, try not to let your back arch at the bottom of the range of motion.

187
Headstand Leg Raise
Once you’ve gotten comfortable with both the headstand and the lying leg raise, try
combining them for a new challenge. Begin in a headstand, then slowly lower your legs
away from your trunk and raise them back toward the top. You’ll need to lean your hips
slightly in the opposite direction of your toes to keep from tipping over as you reach your
legs away from your body. 

188
Side Plank
A familiar pose to yoga practitioners, the side plank puts more emphasis on your
obliques than a standard front plank. Just like the classic version, you can perform a side
plank on your palm or your elbow, and with one or two legs. As your have to support
your weight on one hand, it is also more work for your shoulder and arm than a standard
plank.
The side plank puts more
emphasis on your
obliques than a standard
front plank.

189
Side Crow
Another common yoga pose, the side crow is like a frog stand except with both legs
resting on one arm. Place your hands on the ground and rotate your hips a quarter turn
to the side with your legs stacked on top of each other. Leverage both legs on the back of
one of your triceps and slowly tip your weight off your feet. Like all isolateral moves, do
your best to balance your practice by training both sides of your body evenly.
Another common yoga pose,
the side crow is like a frog
stand except with both legs
resting on one arm. 

190
L-Sit
In order to perform an L-sit, you’ll need a strong core, strong arms and better than
average flexibility in your hamstrings. The objective is to sit on the floor with your legs
straight in front you like a letter “L” and lift your body off the ground onto your hands.
This is one of those exercises with a very literal name.
If you can’t get to this position right away, practice with your knees bent to work your
way up to the full L-sit. You can gradually build towards extending your legs away from
your body over time. 
Keep your arms tight against your body with your elbows locked and triceps flexed.
Press down with your shoulders and try to make as much space as possible between your
body and the floor.
It can also be helpful to practice your L-sit between two elevated objects to allow some
room to slowly work toward getting your legs parallel to the ground.

191
Elbow Lever
As the name implies, an elbow lever is performed by leveraging your body against one
or both elbows while balancing on your hand(s) with your body stretched out and hov-
ering over the ground. Though it looks similar to the planche, it is significantly less diffi-
cult due to the fact that your torso rests on the backs of your arms.
Make sure to keep your abs contracted and engage your lower back as you raise your-
self off the floor. It is also important to pitch your upper-body forward in order to coun-
terbalance the weight of your bottom half.
If you are struggling with the elbow lever, I recommend practicing on a bench, step or
any other flat, raised object. This will allow you more room to lift your legs into position,
as opposed to the limited amount of space when starting with your hands on the floor.
It may take some time to get used to the sensation of having your elbows jutting into
your abdomen; beginners tend to find it especially unpleasant. With practice, however,
you can eventually learn to make peace with the feeling.

192
One Arm Elbow Lever
Though skilled hand-balancers have a way of making this move seem effortless, the
one arm elbow lever is a very challenging feat, so be patient if you endeavor to add this
one to your arsenal.
Start out by just trying to get your feet off the floor to get a feel for the balance before
attempting to fully extend your body. While strength is obviously a factor in this move,
the one arm elbow lever is more about balance than anything else. It may be helpful to
spot yourself with your free hand in the beginning by reaching it to the side and resting
one or several fingers on the ground next to you. 
Holding your body in a triangular formation with your legs in a straddle can make it a
bit easier to find the balance with this exercise. With practice, you’ll improve to the point
where you can work on bringing your body into a straight line.
While strength is obviously a factor in this
move, the one arm elbow lever is more
about balance than anything else. 

193
Tuck Planche
A less difficult variation on the gymnastics planche, the tuck planche is similar to the
frog stand, except your elbows are straight and your legs are inside your arms, rather
than resting on top. This subtle difference makes the exercise considerably more chal-
lenging.
Get into a deep squat and press your hands into the ground, slowly tipping your weight
off of your feet while squeezing your legs up toward your chest. Allow your wrists to flex
as much as possible to get your weight centered over your hands. Spread your shoulder
blades apart and try to create as much space as possible between your body and the floor.
This will likely be a very humbling move in the beginning. Keep at it, progressively trying
to build to longer holds.
Spread your shoulder blades apart and try to create as
much space as possible between your body and the floor. 

194
Dragon Flag
A dragon flag is typically performed lying face-up on a bench or on the ground with
your hands grasping a sturdy object behind you for support. From here, the objective is
to lift your entire body up in a straight line, stacking it vertically over your shoulders,
then slowly lower yourself back down until you’re parallel to the ground and repeat.
Focus on using your abs, lower back, and glutes to control the movement. Your hands are
there for support, but don't pull the bench into your neck.
Do your best to avoid bending at the hips
in order to keep your body straight from
your shoulders to your toes. Your abs will
have to provide extreme stabilization to do
so. In fact, you'll need to engage your entire
trunk musculature to maintain your form.
The dragon flag emphasizes the abs, but like
all the exercises in this book, it's really a
full-body move.
1
2
3
Do your best to avoid bending at the
hips in order to keep your body straight
from your shoulders to your toes. 

195
4
5
You'll need to engage your
entire trunk musculature to
maintain your form. 
For an added
challenge,
you can try a
dragon flag
against a 
vertical pole.

Kip-up
A bodyweight skill that involves lying on your back and explosively jumping to a
standing position, the kip-up comes up in many disciplines including calisthenics, martial
arts and parkour. It’s a great way to work on leg power, hip
drive and total body coordination. Plus if you ever fall on your
butt during your training, returning to your feet via kip-up is
the best way to redeem yourself.
On the other hand, you’ll probably look pretty dumb while
trying to learn to kip-up, so if you’re shy about flailing around
in public, better to practice this one at home. I also recommend
using a soft surface for training this exercise.
As the kip-up is a fairly advanced technique, I don’t recom-
mend working on it unless you are already fairly lean and
strong (and have healthy joints). I also suggest getting comfort-
able with back bridges first to make sure your spine is ready.
To perform a kip-up, begin by lying on your back with your
palms flat on the ground on either side of your head. From
there, roll your thighs up toward your shoulders and get ready
to explode from your hips. 
196
1
2
3

197
To land a successful kip-up,
you’ll have to kick your legs up
and out as hard as you can and
push off with your hands a split
second later.
Think about whipping your
legs around in a circle so you
land toward your toes. You
want to try to get your feet
under your center of gravity so
you don’t fall backwards.
Timing is crucial to landing this
move and it takes a lot of trial
and error. As always, be patient
and keep at it. I’m still practic-
ing toward putting more pop in
my kip-up; fitness training is
always a work in progress.
4
5
6

198
Tiger Bend
The tiger bend is the handstand push-up
version of the hinge push-up, which is also
sometimes called a tiger bend push-up (con-
fusing, I know). Needless to say, this is a very
advanced move. If you’ve gotten comfortable
with normal handstand push-ups, however,
you should try it on for size.
A tiger bend begins in a handstand posi-
tion. From there, you slowly lower down
onto your forearms, then shift your weight
back to your palms and press yourself back
up. Just like a standard handstand push-up,
you’re best off practicing against a wall for a
while before you attempt to try this move
freestanding.
Your bottom position should be closer to
that of a scorpion pose than a straight fore-
arm stand. If you don’t allow your back to
arch and your legs to dangle in front a bit,
you’ll continually wind up losing your bal-
ance and falling to your feet when you
attempt to press yourself back to the top.
You’ll need to position your body a bit far-
ther from the wall than you might think in
order to allow your legs to hang forward at
the bottom. Eventually you’ll be ready to try
a freestanding tiger bend.
As this is one of the most difficult moves in
the book, expect to put in a lot of effort if
you want this one in your arsenal. I recom-
mend getting comfortable enough with the
freestanding handstand push-up to do at
least four or five consecutive reps before
beginning to work on a freestanding tiger
bend.

199
Pistol Press
A combination of two of my favorite exercises, this one starts off with you lowering
yourself down on one leg like a pistol squat. When you get to the bottom, place the hand
opposite your squatting leg on the floor and lower your face down just above your hand.
Pause for a half second, press yourself back up, stand and repeat.
As the push-up portion of this exercise is slightly easier than a standard one arm push-
up, it can be a useful progressive skill for someone who’s close to their first one arm
push-up.

200

201
or all my talk about how you have to listen to your body and design your
own program based on intuition, I know it’s helpful to have some guide-
lines. 
You can use the following sample routines exactly as they are, or modify them as you
see fit. Just make sure you’re working hard and being honest with yourself. Remember,
these routines are just examples. They are not intended to be all-inclusive.
Rest as long as you need to between sets. When you can perform all exercises to com-
pletion with 30 seconds or less between sets, move on.
When you get past the first level, do one set of each of the previous levels’ exercises as
a warm-up.
If you cannot complete the suggested number of reps, just do as many as you can
without sacrificing proper form.
APPENDIX B: 
Sample
Routines

202
Novice
Wall Push-up or Kneeling Push-up   
2 sets of 30 reps  
Bench Squat or Partial Squat           
2 sets of 30 reps  
Lying Knee Tuck                              
3 sets of 10 reps  
Beginner Bridge                                
3 holds of 30 seconds  
Tripod                                               
3 holds of 30 seconds  
Frog Stand                                       
3 holds of 30 seconds  
Beginner
Push-up                     
3 sets of 20 reps 
Full Squat                   
3 sets of 20 reps 
Split Squat or Lunge   
3 sets of 10 reps (each leg)
Lying Leg Raise         
3 sets of 10 reps 
Straight Bridge           
3 holds of 30 seconds 
Headstand                 
3 holds of 30 seconds 
Intermediate
Close Push-up                   
3 sets of 20 reps 
Uneven Push-up                
2 sets of 10 reps (each side)
Assisted Pistol                   
3 sets of 10 reps (each leg)
Side-to-Side Squat              
3 sets of 10 reps (each leg)
Full Bridge or Neck Bridge  
3 holds of 30 seconds 
Elbow Lever                        
3 holds of 30 seconds 
Handstand                          
3 holds of 30 seconds 

203
Advanced
One Arm Push-up                
5 sets of 5 reps (each arm)
Plyo Push-up                        
5 sets of 5 reps 
Pistol Squat                          
5 sets of 5 reps (each leg)
Shrimp Squat                       
5 sets of 5 reps (each leg)
Headstand Leg Raise         
3 sets of 10 reps 
Wall Crawl                           
3 sets of 5 reps 
One Leg Bridge                   
3 holds of 10 seconds (each leg)
Freestanding Handstand     
3 holds of 30 seconds 
Expert
One Arm Clap Push-up                      
3 sets of 3 reps (each side)
One Arm/One Leg Push-up                
3 sets of 5 reps (each side)
One Arm/One Leg Bridge                   
3 holds of of 20 seconds (each side)
Pistol Squat (Hands behind back)      
5 sets of 5 reps (each side)
Jumbo Shrimp                                     
5 sets of 5 reps (each side)
Dragon Flag                                         
5 sets of 5 reps 
Tuck Planche                                      
3 holds of 30 seconds 

204
The Two Day 
No Equipment Split
Day 1: Squats and bridge work
Day 2: All kinds of push-ups and non-bridge inversions
One or two days of rest between each day including active recovery (swim, jog, mar-
tial arts, additional skill practice, etc.).
The Three Day 
No Equipment Split
Day 1: Squats
Day 2: Push-ups
Day 3: Bridges/Inversions
Use active recovery and rest days as needed.

205

206
Assessing Your Strength
These assessments are based on reps performed in one continuous set. You may rest at
the top position to take a breath in between reps, but the feet and/or hands may not move
once the set has begun.
Men
Push-up           Squat          One Arm Pushup       Pistol Squat
Novice           
>20     
>20       
>1            
>1
Beginner              20-39    
20-50        
1-3        
1-3
Intermediate      
40-64   
51-100       
4-10      
4-10
Advanced          
65-99    
101-199   
11-19       
11-19
Elite                 
100+     
200+       
20+            
20+
Women
Push-up           Squat          One Arm Pushup       Pistol Squat
Novice            
>1            
>20           
>1                
>1
Beginner           
1-10      
20-50        
>1             
1-3
Intermediate       
11-20    
51-100        
1-3         
4-10
Advanced            21-30    
101-199      
4-9           
11-19
Elite              
30+    
200+        
10+         
20+  

207


209
l Kavadlo is one of New York
City’s most passionate and suc-
cessful personal trainers. A fix-
ture in the ever-changing fitness scene, Al has
worked with all types of clients including ath-
letes, models and even an Olympic medalist. Al
is recognized worldwide for his amazing body-
weight feats of strength and his blog
(www.AlKavadlo.com) has become one of the
most popular online resources for information
about bodyweight strength training and calis-
thenics. Outside of fitness, Al’s interests include
rock music, tattoo collecting and facial hair. 
Also Available by Al Kavadlo:
Raising The Bar: The Definitive Guide to
Pull-up Bar Calisthenics
(Dragon Door Publications, 2012)
We’re Working Out! A Zen Approach to
Everyday Fitness
(Muscle-up Publications, 2010)
ABOUT THE
AUTHOR

210

211
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Thanks to my brother, training partner and best friend, Danny Kavadlo for all the love,
support and encouragement he's given me throughout my life. This book would not have
been possible without Danny's help. In addition to appearing in many of the photos,
Danny took some of the photos himself, proofread my manuscript and gave me some
suggestions that really improved the quality of this book. I am very lucky to have a
brother like Danny.
Thanks to all the talented photographers whose photos really make this book come to
life, especially Colleen Leung and Jordan Perlson, both of whom went above and beyond
to capture some breathtaking images, at times putting their own safety at risk to do so.
Thankfully nobody was hurt in the process.
Thanks to John Du Cane, Derek Brigham, Adrienne Harvey and the rest of the team at
Dragon Door for being so great to work with and for allowing me total creative freedom
(while still offering their expert feedback).
Thanks to Jason Ferruggia for writing the foreword for this book. I've been a fan of
Jason's for a long time and it's an honor to have him involved.
Thanks to "Coach" Paul Wade for his unwavering support and guidance. Though
we've never actually met face-to-face, Coach Wade has become one of my closest friends
and confidants.
Thanks to Daniel Lucas, Keith Paine, Antonio Sini and the rest of the team at Nimble
Fitness in NYC for their continued love, support and encouragement.
Last but not least, a big thank you to all the rest of my family, friends, clients, col-
leagues and fans who have helped foster a positive environment for me. This book would
not have been possible without each and every one of you!
We're Working Out!


For more information on bodyweight strength training
as well as free video tutorials, make sure to check out
www.AlKavadlo.com!

Brilliant Book—
simply brilliant
“This is a fantastic book—
period! Al has provided some basic
cues which have made my chin ups
and leg raises much easier. This is a
great piece of work and EVERY-
ONE can benefit from it—Olympic
lifter, powerlifter, bodybuilder etc.
You don’t have to do all the
moves—you can pick a couple and
run with them. Al shows some
great progressions and tons of dif-
ferent movements. I could go on
and on but the best thing would 
be to buy the book-you wont 
regret it.” 
—Darius Rana, Sydney, Australia
Raise YOUR Bar
“Unlike much of the trash in
the modern fitness industry, Al
takes a structured approach to
coaching and programming.
Raising The Bar starts at a level
that everyone can handle and then
builds on it—it's not a random
selection of exercises but a rea-
soned approach to improving skill
in a number of key movements. 
This, in my opinion, is the key
to progression and Al delivers it in
his own enigmatic style. And if
you're in any doubt as to the effec-
tiveness of the approach then you
need to see what Al can do! You'll
be blown away!”
—Matt Palfrey, Bath, UK
Best book ever 
written!
“As a personal trainer, I've
spent years convincing my clients
that they don't need any fancy,
overpriced, useless junk to get a
great workout. The greatness is
within the simplicity. I've watched
every trainer in the area mess up
the concept of functional fitness
with their ‘ideas’. Balancing on
stacks of bosu balls, using the other
leg to pull on rubber bands, one
arm using a shaky weight, and the
other arm doing curl to presses
with a half pound pink dumbbell,
all while balancing a medicine ball
on your nose sounds good in the-
ory, but at the end of the day, noth-
ing gets accomplished. 
Al, just like everything else
Dragon Door publishes, manages
to take the simplest of tools, and
make it the most important. These
movements are something that
everyone not only CAN do, but we
are all SUPPOSED to do them.
They're in our DNA. Not like all
the machines and circus tricks. 
Al has been a huge inspiration
to me for quite sometime. This goes
far beyond simple pullups and dips.
This is the perfect book to go along
with The Naked Warrior, Convict
Conditioning 1 & 2, and Pavel’s
flexibility work. Thank you Al, for
writing such an awesome book.”
—Rick Chafton HKC, FMS,
Crystal Lake, IL
Worth every dime
I was gun shy about spending
the money. It's not the best of
times. I could not afford to blow
that kind of money on a stinker.
Thankfully this book is anything
but. I have been a life long aerial
guy. I just always had this convic-
tion that being able to push and
pull my own weight around was a
key survival attribute. That said, I
also thought I knew it all and there
was nothing left to learn about the
subject. Wrong. There is, there was,
and this book had it.”
—Steve Shear, Lawrence, NY
A must have for 
any bodyweight
practitioner!
“Al put together an outstanding
book! It reads very easy in a way
anyone could understand. He gives
some awesome and doable progres-
sions along with some of his
favorite routines. If you want to
become a BAR-STAR, then you
need this book!”
—Tim Stovall, Evansville, IN
High Praise for Raising the Bar
Order Raising The Bar online: 
www.dragondoor.com/B63

“With Raising the Bar, Al Kavadlo has put forth the per-
fect primal pull-up program.  Al's progressions and demon-
strations make even the most challenging exercises attain-
able.  Anyone who is serious about pull-ups should read this
book.”—Mark Sisson, author of The Primal Blueprint.
A Kick Ass Encyclopedia of 
Bodyweight Exercises
“Al Kavadlo has put together a kick ass encyclopedia of
the most powerful and most commonly used bodyweight
exercises amongst the various groups of bodyweight masters.
From the most simple form of each exercise progressing to
the most challenging form of each exercise, Al covers it. As a
Coach and bodyweight training addict I loved all the varia-
tions shown.This book is far beyond just pull ups and there
are countless exercises for upper body and abs. Al covers
what is probably EVERY exercise he knows of, uses and
teaches others, breaking down proper techniques, regressions
and progressions. This is HUGE for the trainers out there
who do NOT know how to adapt bodyweight exercises to
each individual's fitness level.
If you're a fan of bodyweight training, between this book
and Convict Conditioning you can turn your body into a
deadly weapon!!!” —Zach Even-Esh, Manasquan, NJ
“Al has put together the companion manual for all the
crazy bar calisthenics videos that you find yourself watching
over and over again—a much needed resource. Within this
book is a huge volume of bar exercises that will keep your
pullup workouts fresh for years, and give you some insane
goals to shoot for.”
—Max Shank, Senior RKC
"The only tool required to fully train bodyweight is a bar
or something to hang on. I believe that this amazing book by
Al Kavadlo, contains everything that is ever possible to do
with a bar, from entry level to ‘mutant’ level. Thanks to the
information contained in this book you will have material to
practice and improve your skills for years"—Fabio Zonin,
Senior RKC, Italian bodybuilding champion, Master
Instructor FIF
Go Beyond Mere “Toughness”—
When You Master The Art of Bar
Athletics and Sculpt the Ultimate      
in Upper Body Physiques
“Raising the Bar is very likely the most important book on strength and 
conditioning to be published in the last fifty years. If you only ever get your 
hands on one training manual in your life, make it this one. Buy it, read it, use it.
This book has the power to transform you into the ultimate bar athlete.” 
—Paul “Coach” Wade, author of Convict Conditioning
aising the Bar breaks down every
type of exercise you can do with a
pull-up bar.  From the basic two
arm hang, to the mighty muscle-up,
all the way to the elusive one arm pull-up, “bar
master” Al Kavadlo takes you step by expert step
through everything you need to do to build the
chiseled frame you’ve always wanted.
Whether you’re a die-hard calisthenics enthusi-
ast or just looking to get in the best shape of your
life, Raising the Bar will meet  all your expecta-
tions—and then some!
The message is clear: you can earn yourself a
stunning upper body with just 3 basic moves and
1 super-simple, yet amazingly versatile tool. 
And what’s even better, this 3 + 1 formula for
upper body magnificence hides enough variety to
keep you challenged and surging to new heights
for a lifetime of cool moves and ever-tougher pro-
gressions!
Cast in the “concrete jungle” of urban scaffold-
ing and graffiti-laden, blasted walls—and sourced
from iconic bar-athlete destinations like
Tompkins Square Park, NYC—Raising the Bar
rears up to grab you by the throat and hurl you
into an inspiring new vision of what the human
body can achieve. Embrace Al Kavadlo’s vision,
pick up the challenge, share the Quest, follow
directions—and the Holy Grail of supreme upper
body fitness is yours for the taking.
R
Raising 
the Bar
The Definitive Guide to Bar Calisthenics
By Al Kavadlo          #B63  $39.95
224 pages, 330 Photos
Order Raising The Bar online: 
www.dragondoor.com/B63

hances are that whatever athletic level you have achieved, there are some
serious gaps in your OVERALL strength program. Gaps that stop you short of
being able to claim status as a truly accomplished strength athlete.
The good news is that—in Convict
Conditioning—Paul Wade has laid out a
brilliant 6-set system of 10 progressions which
allows you to master these elite levels. 
And you could be starting at almost any age
and in almost in any condition…
Paul Wade has given you the keys—ALL the
keys you’ll ever need— that will open door,
after door, after door for you in your quest for
supreme physical excellence. Yes, it will be the
hardest work you’ll ever have to do. And yes,
97% of those who pick up Convict
Conditioning, frankly, won’t have the guts
and the fortitude to make it. But if you make
it even half-way through Paul’s Progressions,
you’ll be stronger than almost anyone you
encounter. Ever.
1.  AT LEAST one set of 5 one-arm pushups each side—
with the ELITE goal of 100 sets each side
2. AT LEAST one set of 5 one-leg squats each side—
with the ELITE goal of 2 sets of 50 each side
3. AT LEAST a single one-arm pullup each side— 
with the ELITE goal of 2 sets of 6 each side
4. AT LEAST one set of 5 hanging straight leg raises—
with the ELITE goal of 2 sets of 30 
5. AT LEAST one stand-to-stand bridge— 
with the ELITE goal of 2 sets of 30
6. AT LEAST a single one-arm handstand pushup on
each side— with the ELITE goal of 1 set of 5






Well, how DO you stack up?
Can you meet these 5
benchmarks of the truly
powerful?... Page 1
The nature and the art of real
strength… Page 2
Why mastery of progressive
calisthenics is the ultimate secret
for building maximum raw
strength… Page 2
A dozen one-arm handstand
pushups without support—
anyone? Anyone?... Page 3
How to rank in a powerlifting
championship—without ever
training with weights… Page 4
____________
Calisthenics as a hardcore
strength training technology…
Page 9
Spartan “300” calisthenics at the
Battle of Thermopolylae… Page
10 
How to cultivate the perfect
body—the Greek and Roman
way… Page 10
____________
The difference between “old
school” and “new school”
calisthenics… Page 15
The role of prisons in preserving
the older systems… Page 16
Strength training as a primary
survival strategy… Page 16
____________
The 6 basic benefits of
bodyweight training… Pages
22—27
Why calisthenics are the ultimate
in functional training… Page 23
The value of cultivating self-
movement—rather than object-
movement… Page 23
The real source of strength—it’s
not your muscles... Page 24 
One crucial reason why a lot of
convicts deliberately avoid
weight-training… Page 24
How to progressively strengthen
your joints over a lifetime—and
even heal old joint injuries…
Page 25 
Why “authentic” exercises like
pullups are so perfect for
strength and power
development… Page 25
Bodyweight training for quick
physique perfection… Page 26
____________
How to normalize and regulate
your body fat levels—with
bodyweight training only… 
Page 27
Why weight-training and the
psychology of overeating go
hand in hand… Page 27
____________
The best approach for rapidly
strengthening your whole body
is this… Page 30
This is the most important and
revolutionary feature of Convict
Conditioning…. Page 33
A jealously-guarded system for
going from puny to powerful—
when your life may depend on
the speed of your results… Page
33 ____________
The 6 “Ultimate” Master
Steps—only a handful of athletes
in the whole world can correctly
perform them all. Can you?…
Page 33
How to Forge Armor-Plated Pecs
and Steel Triceps… Page 41
Why the pushup is the ultimate
upper body exercise—and better
than the bench press… Page 41 
How to effectively bulletproof
the vulnerable rotator cuff
muscles… Page 42 
How Do YOU Stack Up Against These 
6 Signs of a TRUE Physical Specimen?
According to Paul Wade’s Convict Conditioning you earn the right to call
yourself a “true physical specimen” if you can perform the following:
Here’s just a small taste of what
you’ll get with Convict Conditioning:
Order Convict Conditioning online:
www.dragondoor.com/B41
C

Order Convict Conditioning online:
www.dragondoor.com/B41
How basketballs, baseballs and kissing-
the-baby all translate into greater
strength gains… Page 44
How to guarantee steel rod fingers…
Page 45
Do you make this stupid mistake with
your push ups? This is wrong, wrong,
wrong!... Page 45
How to achieve 100 consecutive one-
arm pushups each side… Page 64
Going Beyond the One-Arm Pushup…
Pages 68—74
____________
Going up!— how to build elevator-cable
thighs… Page 75
Where the real strength of an athlete
lies… Page 75 
Most athletic movements rely largely on
this attribute… Page 76
The first thing to go as an athlete begins
to age—and what you MUST protect...
Page 76
THE best way to develop truly
powerful, athletic legs… Page 77
____________
The phenomenon of Lombard’s
Paradox—and it contributes to power-
packed thighs… Page 78
Why bodyweight squats blow barbell
squats away… Page 79
The enormous benefits of mastering the
one-leg squat… Page 80
15 secrets to impeccable squatting—for
greater power and strength… Pages
81—82 ____________
Transform skinny legs into pillars of
power, complete with steel cord quads,
rock-hard glutes and thick, shapely
calves… Page 102
How to achieve one hundred perfect
consecutive one-leg squats on each leg...
Page 102
Going Beyond the One-Leg Squat…
Pages 106—112
How to add conditioning, speed, agility
and endurance to legs that are already
awesome…. Page 107
____________
How to construct a barn door back—
and walk with loaded guns… Page 113
Why our culture has failed to give the
pullup the respect and attention it
deserves… Page 113
Benefits of the pullup—king of back
exercises… Page 114
The dormant superpower for muscle
growth waiting to be released if you
only do this… Page 114
Why pullups are the single best exercise
for building melon-sized biceps… 
Page 115
Why the pullup is THE safest upper
back exercise… Page 115
The single most important factor to
consider for your grip choice… 
Page 118 ____________
How to earn lats that look like wings
and an upper back sprouting muscles
like coiled pythons… Page 138
How to be strong enough to rip a
bodybuilder’s arm off in an arm
wrestling match… Page 138
How to take a trip to hell—and steal a
Satanic six-pack… Page 149
The 5 absolute truths that define a
genuine six-pack from hell... Page 150
This is the REAL way to gain a six-pack
from hell… Page 152
3 big reasons why—in prisons—leg
raises have always been much more
popular than sit-ups… Page 152
Why the hanging leg raise is the greatest
single abdominal exercise known to
man... Page 153
10 waist training secrets to help you
master the hanging leg raise… Pages
154—155
How to correctly perform the greatest
all-round midsection exercise in
existence… Page 174
____________
Going beyond the hanging straight leg
raise… Page 178
Setting your sights on the most powerful
midsection exercise possible—the V
raise…. Page 178
How to develop abdominal muscles
with enormous contractile power—and
iron hip strength… Page 178
____________
How to combat-proof your spine… 
Page 185
Why the bridge is the most important
strength-building exercise in the world…
Page 185
How to train your spine—as if your life
depended on it… Page 185
Why you should sell your barbell set
and buy a cushioned mat instead... Page
188
How to absorb punitive strikes against
your spine—and bounce back smiling…
Page 188
Why lower back pain is the foremost
plague of athletes the world over… 
Page 189____________
Why bridging is the ultimate exercise for
the spinal muscles… Page 189
The 4 signs of the perfect bridge… 
Page 191
How to master the bridge… Page 192
How to own a spine that feels like a
steel whip... Page 193
How the bridging series will grant you
an incredible combination of strength
paired with flexibility… Page 216 
Why bridging stands alone as a total
training method that facilitates
development in practically every area of
fitness and health… Page 216
____________
How to look exceptionally masculine—
with broad, etched, and powerful
shoulders… Page 219
Those vulnerable shoulders—why they
ache and the best way to avoid or fix
the pain… Page 220
How to choose authentic over artificial
shoulder movements… Page 223
Why an understanding of instinctive
human movement can help solve the
shoulder pain problem… Page 224
Remove these two elements of
pressing—and you will remove virtually
all chronic shoulder problems… 
Page 225
The ultimate solution for safe, pain-free,
powerful shoulders… Page 225
____________
The mighty handstand pushup… 
Page 226
Using the handstand pushup to build
incredibly powerful, muscularized
shoulders in a short span of time… Page
225
How to strengthen the vestibular
system—using handstand pushups…
Page 225
8 secrets to help you perfect your all-
important handstand pushup
technique… Pages 228—229
____________
Discover the ultimate shoulder and arm
exercise… Page 248
Going beyond the one-arm handstand
pushup… Page 252
The master of this old technique will
have elbows strong as titanium axles…
Page 255____________
The cast iron principles of Convict
Conditioning success… Page 259
The missing “x factor” of training
success… Page 259 
The best ways to warm up… Page 260
How to create training momentum…
Page 262____________
How to put strength in the bank… Page
263
This is the real way to get genuine,
lasting strength and power gains… Page
265
Intensity—what it is and what it isn’t…
Page 265
Why “cycling” or “periodization” is
unnecessary with bodyweight training…
Page 266
How to make consistent progress…
Page 266____________
5 powerful secrets for busting through
your plateaus… Page 267
The nifty little secret of consolidation
training… Page 268
Living by the buzzer—and the
importance of regime… Page 275
5 major Convict Conditioning training
programs… Page 276
____________
The New Blood training program…
Page 278
The Good Behavior training program…
Page 279
The Veterano training program… 
Page 280
The Solitary Confinement training
program… Page 281
The Supermax training program… 
Page 282
Convict
Conditioning 
How to Bust Free of 
All Weakness—Using the 
Lost Secrets of Supreme Survival
Strength
By Paul “Coach” Wade
#B41  $39.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11   320 pages
191 photos, charts and illustrations

Order Convict Conditioning online:
www.dragondoor.com/B41
A Strength Training Guide That Will Never Be Duplicated! 
“I knew within the first chapter of reading this book that I was in for something special and unique.
The last time I felt this same feeling was when reading Power to the People! To me this is the Body
Weight equivalent to Pavel’s masterpiece. 
Books like this can never be duplicated. Paul Wade went through a unique set of circumstances of
doing time in prison with an ‘old time’ master of calisthenics. Paul took these lessons from this 70 year
old strong man and mastered them over a period of 20 years while ‘doing time’. He then taught these
methods to countless prisoners and honed his teaching to perfection. 
I believe that extreme circumstances like this are what it takes to create a true masterpiece. I know that
‘masterpiece’ is a strong word, but this is as close as it gets. No other body weight book I have read
(and I have a huge fitness library)...comes close to this as far as gaining incredible strength from body
weight exercise. 
Just like Power to the People, I am sure I will read this over and over again...mastering the principles
that Paul Wade took 20 years to master. 
Outstanding Book!”—Rusty Moore - Fitness Black Book - Seattle, WA 
A must for all martial artists  
“As a dedicated martial artist for more than seven years, this book is
exactly what I’ve been looking for. 
For a while now I have trained with machines at my local gym to improve
my muscle strength and power and get to the next level in my training. I
always felt that the modern health club, technology based exercise jarred
with my martial art though, which only required body movement. 
Finally this book has come along. At last I can combine perfect body
movement for martial skill with perfect body exercise for ultimate strength. 
All fighting arts are based on body movement. This book is a complete
textbook on how to max out your musclepower using only body
movement, as different from dumbbells, machines or gadgets. For this
reason it belongs on the bookshelf of every serious martial artist, male and
female, young and old.”—Gino Cartier - Washington DC 
Brutal Elegance.  
“I have been training and reading about training since I first joined the US Navy in
the 1960s. I thought I’d seen everything the fitness world had to offer. Sometimes
twice. But I was wrong. This book is utterly iconoclastic. 
The author breaks down all conceivable body weight exercises into six basic
movements, each designed to stimulate different vectors of the muscular system.
These six are then elegantly and very intelligently broken into ten progressive
techniques. You master one technique, and move on to the next. 
The simplicity of this method belies a very powerful and complex training
paradigm, reduced into an abstraction that obviously took many years of sweat
and toil to develop. 
Trust me. Nobody else worked this out. This approach is completely unique and
fresh. 
I have read virtually every calisthenics book printed in America over the last 40
years, and instruction like this can’t be found anywhere, in any one of them.
Convict Conditioning is head and shoulders above them all. In years to come,
trainers and coaches will all be talking about ‘progressions’ and ‘progressive
calisthenics’ and claim they’ve been doing it all along. But the truth is that Dragon
Door bought it to you first. As with kettlebells, they were the trail blazers. 
Who should purchase this volume? Everyone who craves fitness and strength
should. Even if you don’t plan to follow the routines, the book will make you
think about your physical prowess, and will give even world class experts food for
thought. At the very least if you find yourself on vacation or away on business
without your barbells, this book will turn your hotel into a fully equipped gym. 
I’d advise any athlete to obtain this work as soon as possible.”—Bill Oliver -
Albany, NY, United States 
I’ve packed all of my other training books away! 
“I read CC in one go. I couldn’t put it down. I have purchased a lot of
bodyweight training books in the past, and have always been pretty
disappointed. They all seem to just have pictures of different exercises, and no
plan whatsoever on how to implement them and progress with them. But not
with this one. The information in this book is AWESOME! I like to have a
clear, logical plan of progression to follow, and that is what this book gives. I
have put all of my other training books away. CC is the only system I am going
to follow. This is now my favorite training book ever!”—Lyndan - Australia 
Dragon Door Customer Acclaim for 
Paul Wade’s Convict Conditioning

Order Convict Conditioning online:
www.dragondoor.com/B41
A lifetime of lifting...and continued learning.   
“I have been working out diligently since 1988 and played sports in high
school and college before that. My stint the Army saw me doing
calisthenics, running, conditioning courses, forced marches, etc. There are
many levels of strength and fitness. I have been as big as 240 in my
powerlifting/strongman days and as low as 185-190 while in the Army. I
think I have tried everything under the sun: the high intensity of Arthur
Jones and Dr. Ken, the Super Slow of El Darden, and the brutality of
Dinosaur Training Brooks Kubic made famous. 
This is one of the BEST books I’ve ever read on real strength training
which also covers other just as important aspects of health; like staying
injury free, feeling healthy and becoming flexible. It’s an excellent book.
He tells you the why and the how with his progressive plan. This book is a
GOLD MINE and worth 100 times what I paid for it!” 
—Horst - Woburn, MA 
Best bodyweight training book so far!   
“I’m a martial artist and I’ve been training for years with a combination
of weights and bodyweight training and had good results from both (but
had the usual injuries from weight training). I prefer the bodyweight stuff
though as it trains me to use my whole body as a unit, much more than
weights do, and I notice the difference on the mat and in the ring. Since
reading this book I have given the weights a break and focused purely on
the bodyweight exercise progressions as described by ‘Coach’ Wade and
my strength had increased more than ever before. So far I’ve built up to
12 strict one-leg squats each leg and 5 uneven pull ups each arm.
I’ve never achieved this kind of strength before - and this stuff builds
solid muscle mass as well. It’s very intense training. I am so confident in
and happy with the results I’m getting that I’ve decided to train for a
fitness/bodybuilding comp just using his techniques, no weights, just to
show for real what kind of a physique these exercises can build. In sum, I
cannot recommend ‘Coach’ Wade’s book highly enough - it is by far the
best of its kind ever!”—Mark Robinson - Australia, currently living in
South Korea
This book sets the
standard, ladies 
and gentlemen
“It’s difficult to describe just how
much this book means to me. I’ve
been training hard since I was in
the RAF nearly ten years ago, and
to say this book is a breakthrough
is an understatement. How often
do you really read something so
new, so fresh? This book contains
a complete new system of
calisthenics drawn from American
prison training methods. When I
say ‘system’ I mean it. It’s complete
(rank beginner to expert), it’s
comprehensive (all the exercises
and photos are here), it’s graded
(progressions from exercise to
exercise are smooth and pre-
determined) and it’s totally
original. Whether you love or hate
the author, you have to listen to
him. And you will learn something.
This book just makes SENSE. In
twenty years people will still be
buying it.”—Andy McMann -
Ponty, Wales, GB 
Fascinating Reading and Real Strength  
“Coach Wade’s system is a real eye opener if you’ve been a lifetime iron junkie.
Wanna find out how really strong (or weak) you are? Get this book and begin
working through the 10 levels of the 6 power exercises. I was pleasantly
surprised by my ability on a few of the exercises...but some are downright
humbling. If I were on a desert island with only one book on strength and
conditioning this would be it. (Could I staple Pavel’s "Naked Warrior" to the
back and count them as one???!) Thanks Dragon Door for this innovative new
author.”—Jon Schultheis, RKC (2005) - Keansburg, NJ 
More Dragon Door Customer Acclaim
for Convict Conditioning
Single best strength training book ever!   
“I just turned 50 this year and I have tried a little bit of everything over the
years: martial arts, swimming, soccer, cycling, free weights, weight machines,
even yoga and Pilates. I started using Convict Conditioning right after it
came out. I started from the beginning, like Coach Wade says, doing mostly
step one or two for five out of the six exercises. I work out 3 to 5 times a
week, usually for 30 to 45 minutes. 
Long story short, my weight went up 14 pounds (I was not trying to gain
weight) but my body fat percentage dropped two percent. That translates into
approximately 19 pounds of lean muscle gained in two months! I’ve never
gotten this kind of results with anything else I’ve ever done. Now I have
pretty much stopped lifting weights for strength training. Instead, I lift once a
week as a test to see how much stronger I’m getting without weight training.
There are a lot of great strength training books in the world (most of them
published by Dragon Door), but if I had to choose just one, this is the single
best strength training book ever. BUY THIS BOOK. FOLLOW THE PLAN.
GET AS STRONG AS YOU WANT. “—Wayne - Decatur, GA 
Convict
Conditioning 
How to Bust Free of 
All Weakness—Using the 
Lost Secrets of Supreme
Survival Strength
By Paul “Coach” Wade
#B41  $39.95 
Paperback  8.5 x 11   320 pages
191 photos, charts and illustrations

“I’ve been lifting weights for over 50 years and
have trained in the martial arts since 1965. I’ve read
voraciously on both subjects, and written dozens of
magazine articles and many books on the subjects.
This book and Wade’s first, Convict Conditioning,
are by far the most commonsense, information-
packed, and result producing I’ve read. These books
will truly change your life.
Paul Wade is a new and powerful voice in the
strength and fitness arena, one that is
commonsense, inspiring, and in your face. His
approach to maximizing your body’s potential is
not the same old hackneyed material you find in
every book and magazine piece that pictures
steroid-bloated models screaming as they curl
weights. Wade’s stuff has been proven effective by
hard men who don’t tolerate fluff. It will work
for you, too—guaranteed.
As an ex-cop, I’ve gone mano-y-mano with ex-
cons that had clearly trained as Paul Wade
suggests in his two Convict Conditioning
books. While these guys didn’t look like steroid-
fueled bodybuilders (actually, there were a
couple who did), all were incredibly lean, hard
and powerful. Wade blows many commonly
held beliefs about conditioning, strengthening,
and eating out of the water and replaces them
with result-producing information that won’t
cost you a dime.”  —Loren W. Christensen,
author of Fighting the Pain Resistant
Attacker, and many other titles
“Coach Paul Wade has outdone himself. His first book Convict Conditioning is to my mind THE BEST book
ever written on bodyweight conditioning. Hands down. Now, with the sequel Convict Conditioning 2, Coach
Wade takes us even deeper into the subtle nuances of training with the ultimate resistance tool: our bodies.
In plain English, but with an amazing understanding of anatomy, physiology, kinesiology and, go figure,
psychology, Coach Wade explains very simply how to work the smaller but just as important areas of the body
such as the hands and forearms, neck and calves and obliques in serious functional ways.
His minimalist approach to exercise belies the complexity of his system and the deep insight into exactly how
the body works and the best way to get from A to Z in the shortest time possible.
I got the best advice on how to strengthen the hard-to-reach extensors of the hand right away from this
exercise Master I have ever seen. It’s so simple but so completely functional I can’t believe no one else has
thought of it yet. Just glad he figured it out for me. 
Paul teaches us how to strengthen our bodies with the simplest of movements while at the same time balancing
our structures in the same way: simple exercises that work the whole body.
And just as simply as he did with his first book. His novel approach to stretching and mobility training is
brilliant and fresh as well as his take on recovery and healing from injury. Sprinkled throughout the entire
book are too-many-to-count insights and advice from a man who has come to his knowledge the hard way
and knows exactly of what he speaks.
This book is, as was his first, an amazing journey into the history of physical culture disguised as a book on
calisthenics. But the thing that Coach Wade does better than any before him is his unbelievable progressions
on EVERY EXERCISE and stretch! He breaks things down and tells us
EXACTLY how to proceed to get to whatever level of strength and
development we want. AND gives us the exact metrics we need to know
when to go to the next level.
Adding in completely practical and immediately useful insights into
nutrition and the mindset necessary to deal not only with training but
with life, makes this book a classic that will stand the test of time. 
Bravo Coach Wade, Bravo.” —Mark Reifkind, Master RKC, author of
Mastering the HardStyle Kettlebell Swing
“Convict Conditioning is one of the most
influential books I ever got my hands on.
Convict Conditioning 2 took my training and
outlook on the power of bodyweight training
to the 10th degree—from strengthening the
smallest muscles in a maximal manner, all the
way to using bodyweight training as a means
of healing injuries that pile up from over 22
years of aggressive lifting.
I’ve used both Convict Conditioning and
Convict Conditioning 2 on myself and with
my athletes. Without either of these books I
can easily say that these boys would not be
the BEASTS they are today. Without a doubt
Convict Conditioning 2 will blow you away
and inspire and educate you to take
bodyweight training to a whole NEW level.”
—Zach Even-Esh, Underground Strength
Coach  
The Experts Give High Praise to
Convict Conditioning 2
Convict
Conditioning 2 
Advanced Prison Training
Tactics for Muscle Gain, Fat
Loss and Bulletproof Joints
By Paul “Coach” Wade
#B59    $39.95
Paperback  8.5 x 11   354 pages
261 photos, charts and illustrations
“The overriding principle of Convict Conditioning 2 is ‘little equipment-
big rewards’. For the athlete in the throwing and fighting arts, the section
on Lateral Chain Training, Capturing the Flag, is a unique and perhaps
singular approach to training the obliques and the whole family of side
muscles. This section stood out to me as ground breaking and well worth
the time and energy by anyone to review and attempt to complete.
Literally, this is a new approach to lateral chain training that is well
beyond sidebends and suitcase deadlifts. 
The author’s review of passive stretching reflects the experience of many
of us in the field. But, his solution might be the reason I am going to
recommend this work for everyone: The Trifecta. This section covers
what the author calls The Functional Triad and gives a series of simple
progressions to three holds that promise to oil your joints. It’s yoga for
the strength athlete and supports the material one would find, for
example, in Pavel’s Loaded Stretching.
I didn’t expect to like this book, but I come away from it practically
insisting that everyone read it. It is a strongman book mixed with
yoga mixed with street smarts. I wanted to hate it, but I love it.”
—Dan John, author of Don’t Let Go and co-author of Easy Strength
Order Convict Conditioning 2 online: 
www.dragondoor.com/B59

Foreword 
The Many Roads to
Strength by Brooks
Kubik 
Opening Salvo:
Chewing Bubblegum and
Kicking Ass
1. Introduction: Put
Yourself Behind
Bars 
PART I:
SHOTGUN MUS-
CLE
Hands and Forearms
2: Iron Hands and
Forearms: Ultimate
Strength —with
Just Two
Techniques
3: The Hang
Progressions: A
Vice-Like
Bodyweight Grip
Course 
4: Advanced Grip
Torture: Explosive
Power + Titanium
Fingers 
5: Fingertip Pushups:
Keeping Hand
Strength Balanced 
6: Forearms into
Firearms: Hand
Strength: A
Summary and a
Challenge
Lateral Chain
7: Lateral Chain
Training:
Capturing the Flag 
8: The Clutch Flag:
In Eight Easy
Steps 
9: The Press Flag: In
Eight Not-So-Easy
Steps 
Neck and Calves
10. Bulldog Neck:
Bulletproof Your
Weakest Link 
11. Calf Training:
Ultimate Lower
Legs—No Machines
Necessary
PART II:
BULLETPROOF
JOINTS
12. Tension-
Flexibility: The
Lost Art of Joint
Training 
13: Stretching—the
Prison Take:
Flexibility,
Mobility, Control 
14. The Trifecta:
Your “Secret
Weapon” for
Mobilizing Stiff,
Battle-Scarred
Physiques—for
Life
15: The Bridge Hold
Progressions: The
Ultimate
Prehab/Rehab
Technique
16: The L-Hold
Progressions:
Cure Bad Hips and
Low Back—Inside-
Out
17: Twist
Progressions:
Unleash Your
Functional Triad 
PART III:
WISDOM FROM
CELLBLOCK G
18. Doing Time Right:
Living the Straight
Edge 
19. The Prison Diet:
Nutrition and Fat
Loss Behind Bars 
20. Mendin’ Up: The 8
Laws of Healing 
21. The Mind:
Escaping the True
Prison 
!BONUS CHAP-
TER!
Pumpin’ Iron in
Prison: Myths, Muscle
and Misconceptions
—TABLE OF CONTENTS —
Convict
Conditioning 2 
Advanced Prison Training
Tactics for Muscle Gain,
Fat Loss and Bulletproof
Joints
By Paul “Coach” Wade
#B59    $39.95
Paperback  8.5 x 11   354 pages
261 photos, charts and illustrations
Order Convict Conditioning 2 online: 
www.dragondoor.com/B59

aul Wade’s Convict
Conditioning Ultimate
Bodyweight Squat
Course explodes out of
the cellblock to teach you in
absolute detail how to progress
from the ease of a simple shoul-
derstand squat—to the stunning
“1-in-10,000” achievement of the
prison-style one-leg squat. Ten
progressive steps guide you to
bodyweight squat mastery. Do
it—and become a Bodyweight
Squat Immortal.
This home-study course in ulti-
mate survival strength comes
replete with bonus material not
available in Paul Wade’s original
Convict Conditioning book—
and numerous key training tips
that refine and expand on the
original program.
A heavily and gorgeously-illus-
trated 80-plus-page manual gives
you the entire film script to study
at your leisure, with brilliant, pre-
cise photographs to remind you
of the essential movements you
absorbed in the DVD itself.
Paul Wade adds a bonus Ten
Commandments for Perfect
Bodyweight Squats—which is
worth the price of admission
alone. And there’s the additional
bonus of 5 major Variant drills to
add explosivity, fun and super-
strength to your core practice.
Whatever you are looking for
from your bodyweight squats—
be it supreme functional strength,
monstrous muscle growth or
explosive leg power—it’s yours
for the progressive taking with
Convict Conditioning, Volume 2:
The Ultimate Bodyweight Squat
Course.
WHY EVERY SELF-
RESPECTING MAN WILL
BE RELIGIOUS ABOUT HIS
SQUATS…
Leg training is vital for every ath-
lete. A well-trained, muscular
upper body teetering around on
skinny stick legs is a joke. Don’t
be that joke! The mighty squat is
the answer to your prayers.
Here’s why:
•  Squats train virtually every
muscle in the lower body, from
quads and glutes to hips, lower
back and even hamstrings.
•  Squat deep—as we’ll teach
you—and you will
seriously increase
your flexibility and
ankle strength.
•  All functional power is trans-
mitted through the legs, so
without strong, powerful legs
you are nothing—that goes for
running, jumping and combat
sports as much as it does for
lifting heavy stuff.
ARE YOU FAILING TO
BUILD MONSTROUS LEGS
FROM SQUATS—BECAUSE
OF THESE MISTAKES?
Most trainees learn how to squat
on two legs, and then make the
exercise harder by slapping a bar-
bell across their back. In prison,
this way of adding strength was-
n’t always available, so cell
trainees developed ways of pro-
gressing using only bodyweight
versus gravity. The best way to
do this is to learn how to squat
all the way down to the ground
and back up on just one leg.
Not everybody who explores
prison training will have the
dedication and drive to achieve 
strength feats like the one-arm
pullup, but the legs are much
stronger than the arms. If you put
in the time and work hard, the
one-leg squat will be within the
reach of almost every athlete who
pays their dues.
But the one-leg squat still requires
very powerful muscles and ten-
dons, so you don’t want to jump
into one-leg squatting right away.
You need to build the joint
strength and muscle to safely
attempt this great exercise.
Discover how to do that safely,
using ten steps, ten progressively
harder squat exercises.
IN THE STRENGTH GAME,
FOOLS RUSH IN WHERE
ANGELS FEAR TO TREAD
The wise old Chinese man
shouted to his rickshaw driver:
"Slow down, young man, I’m in
a hurry!" If ever a warning
needed to be shouted to our
nation of compulsive strength-
addicts, this would be it. You see
them everywhere: the halt, the
lame, the jacked-up, the torn, the
pain-ridden—the former glory-
seekers who have been reduced to
sad husks of their former selves
by rushing helter-skelter into
heavy lifting without having first
built a firm foundation.
Paul Wade reveals the ten key
points of perfect squat form. The
aspects of proper form apply to
all your squats, and they’ll not
only unlock the muscle and
power-building potential of each
rep you do, but they’ll also keep
you as safe as you can be. 
Bodyweight training is all about
improving strength and health,
not building up a list of injuries
or aches and pains. They are so
fundamental, we call them the
Ten Commandments of good
squat form.
Obey the Ten Commandments,
follow the brilliantly laid out pro-
gressions religiously and you sim-
ply CANNOT fail to get stronger
and stronger and stronger and
stronger and stronger—surely,
safely and for as long as you
live… 
COMPLEX MADE SIMPLE
Having read both Convict Conditioning and
Convict Conditioning 2, the complementary DVD
series is an excellent translation of the big six
movement progressions into a simple to follow
DVD. The demonstration of movement progression
through the 10 levels is well described and easy to
follow. 
As a Physical Therapist it is a very useful way to
teach safe progressions to patients/clients and other
professionals. I have already used Volume I (the
push up progression) to teach high school strength
coaches how to safely progress athletes with pressing
activity and look forward to using volume 2 with
these same coaches. I think anyone who studies
movement realizes very few athletes can properly
squat with two legs, let alone one.
You will not find an easier way to teach the squat.
Well done again Paul. Look forward to the rest of
the series.”
—Andrew Marchesi PT/MPT, FAFS, 
Scottsdale, AZ
Convict Conditioning
Volume 2: The Ultimate 
Bodyweight Squat Course
By Paul “Coach” Wade featuring 
Brett Jones and Max Shank
#DV084  $69.95 
DVD 56 minutes with full color Companion Manual, 88 pages
NAVY SEAL
ON THE ROAD
“My whole team uses
it. We can work out
effectively anywhere
and I mean
anywhere!”
—Tyler Archer, Navy
P
GET DYNAMIC, CHISELLED, 
POWER-JACK LEGS AND DEVELOP
EXPLOSIVE LOWER-BODY STRENGTH—
WITH PAUL “COACH” WADE’S ULTIMATE
BODYWEIGHT SQUAT COURSE
Order CC Ultimate Squat online: 
www.dragondoor.com/DV084

I RECOMMEND IT
“I fully expected to be disappointed with Paul Wade’s Convict Conditioning,
Volume I: The Prison Pushup Series. John Du Cane will tell you: I am not a fan
of some of the stuff in these books. It’s been said by others that this might be one
of the most striking DVDs ever made. It’s on location in Alcatraz and the
graphics are pretty amazing. So, yes, stunning. This DVD from Wade is stunning
and very cool. 
The manual that supports the DVD is very helpful as much of the material is
done too well in the DVD. Many of us need to take some time looking at the
DVD then flipping the manual back and forth to ‘get it.’ 
Once again, there are parts of this DVD and the series that rub me the wrong
way. Having said that, I am frankly amazed at the insights of the product here.
As a coach, I am better than when I popped the box open. I have a whole set of
tools, and the progressions, that I can use tomorrow with my group. That to me
is the testimony that people should hear from me: I watched it and I applied it
instantly! This one
‘gets it.’ You can
apply what you
learn instantly and
know where you
are going from
there. I highly
recommend it.”
—Dan John,
Master RKC,
Burlingame, CA
aul Wade’s Convict Conditioning
system represents the ultimate
distillation of hardcore prison
bodyweight training’s most powerful
methods. What works was kept. What
didn’t, was slashed away. When your life
is on the line, you’re not going to mess
with less than the absolute best. Many
of these older, very potent solitary train-
ing systems have been on the verge of
dying, as convicts begin to gain access to
weights, and modern “bodybuilding
thinking” floods into the prisons.
Thanks to Paul Wade, these ultimate
strength survival secrets have been saved
for posterity. And for you…
Filmed entirely—and so appropriately—
on “The Rock”, Wade’s Convict
Conditioning Prison Pushup Series
explodes out of the cellblock to teach
you in absolute detail how to progress
from the ease of a simple wall pushup—
to the stunning “1-in-10,000” achieve-
ment of the prison-style one-arm
pushup. Ten progressive steps guide you
to pushup mastery. Do it—and become
a Pushup God.
This home-study course in ultimate sur-
vival strength comes replete with bonus
material not available in Paul Wade’s
original Convict Conditioning book—
and numerous key training tips that
refine and expand on the original pro-
gram.
A heavily and gorgeously-illus-
trated 80-plus-page manual gives
you the entire film script to study
at your leisure, with brilliant,
precise photographs to remind
you of the essential movements
you absorbed in the DVD itself.
Paul Wade adds a bonus Ten
Commandments for Perfect
Pushups—which is worth the
price of admission alone. And
there’s the additional bonus of 5
major Variant drills to add explosivity,
fun and super-strength to your core
practice.
Whatever you are looking for from your
pushups—be it supreme functional
strength, monstrous muscle growth or
explosive upper-body power—it’s yours
for the progressive taking with Convict
Conditioning, Volume 1: The Prison
Pushup Series.
P
Convict Conditioning
Volume 1: The Prison Pushup Series
By Paul “Coach” Wade featuring 
Brett Jones and Max Shank
#DV083  $69.95 
DVD 59 minutes with full color Companion Manual, 88 pages
AWESOME RESOURCE FOR COACHES
& STRENGTH DEVOTEES
“I am using this manual and DVD not just for my own training, but for the
training of my athletes. It shocks and amazes me how varsity high school athletes
can NOT perform a solid push up.... not even 1! Getting them to perform a perfect
push up requires regressions, progressions, dialing in the little cues that teach them
to generate tension and proper body alignment, ALL of which carry over to other
exercises.
This manual is an awesome resource for Coaches. It can & should be used to
educate those you train as well as shared with your staff. For those who have a
love for strength, you will respect all the details given for each and every push up
progression and you will use them and apply them. 
As a Strength devotee for over 2 decades, I've been through the grinder with
free weights and injuries, push ups are something I KNOW I'll be doing for the rest
of my life which is why I RESPECT this course so much!
The lay out of this manual and DVD are also BIG time impressive, the old
school look and feel fires me up and makes me wanna attack these push ups!”
—Zach Even-Esh, Manasquan, NJ
GET A ROCK-HARD, BRUTISHLY
POWERFUL UPPER FRAME AND
ACHIEVE ELITE-LEVEL STRENGTH—
WITH PAUL “COACH” WADE’S
PRISON-STYLE PUSHUP PROGRAM
Order CC Prison Pushup online: 
www.dragondoor.com/DV083

aul Wade’s Convict
Conditioning 3, Leg
Raises: Six Pack
from Hell teaches
you in absolute detail how to
progress from the ease of a
simple Knee Tuck—to the
magnificent, "1-in-1,000"
achievement of the Hanging
Straight Leg Raise. Ten pro-
gressive steps guide you to
inevitable mastery of this
ultimate abs exercise. Do it,
seize the knowledge—but
beware—the Gods will be
jealous!
This home-study course in
ultimate survival strength
comes replete with bonus
material not available in Paul
Wade’s original Convict
Conditioning book—and
numerous key training tips
that refine and expand on
the original program. 
Prowl through the heavily
and gorgeously-illustrated
80-plus-page manual and
devour the entire film script
at your animal leisure. Digest
the brilliant, precise pho-
tographs and reinforce the
raw benefits you absorbed
from the DVD.
Paul Wade adds a bonus Ten
Commandments for Perfect
Bodyweight Squats—which
is worth the price of admis-
sion alone. And there’s the
additional bonus of 4 major
Variant drills to add explo-
sivity, fun and super-strength
to your core practice.
Whatever you are looking
for when murdering your
abs—be it a fist-breaking,
rock-like shield of impene-
trable muscle, an uglier-is-
more-beautiful set of rippling
abdominal ridges, or a mon-
strous injection of lifting
power—it’s yours for the
progressive taking with
Convict Conditioning,
Volume 3, Leg Raises: Six
Pack from Hell
PRISON-STYLE MID-
SECTION TRAINING—
FOR AN ALL SHOW
AND ALL GO
PHYSIQUE
When convicts train their
waists, they want real,
noticeable results—and by
"results" we don’t mean that
they want cute, tight little
defined abs. We mean that
they want thick, strong,
muscular midsections. They
want functionally powerful
abs and hips they can use for
heavy lifting, kicking, and
brawling. They want guts so
strong from their training
that it actually hurts an
attacker to punch them in
the belly. Prison abs aren’t
about all show, no go—a
prison-built physique has to
be all show and all go. Those
guys don’t just want six-
packs—they want six-packs
from Hell.
And, for the first time, we’re
going to show you how these
guys get what they want.
We’re not going to be using
sissy machines or easy isola-
tion exercises—we’re going
straight for the old school
secret weapon for gut train-
ing; progressive leg raises.
If you want a six-pack from
Hell, the first thing you need
to do is focus your efforts. If
a weightlifter wanted a very
thick, powerful chest in a
hurry, he wouldn’t spread his
efforts out over a dozen
exercises and perform them
gently all day long. No—
he’d pick just one exercise,
probably the bench press,
and just focus on getting
stronger and stronger on
that lift until he was mon-
strously strong. When he
reached this level, and his
pecs were thick slabs of
meat, only then would he
maybe begin sculpting them
with minor exercises and
higher reps.
It’s no different if you want a
mind-blowing midsection.
Just pick one exercise that
hits all the muscles in the
midsection—the hip flexors,
the abs, the intercostals, the
obliques—then blast it.
And the one exercise we’re
going to discover is the best
midsection exercise known
to man, and the most popu-
lar amongst soldiers, war-
riors, martial artists and
prison athletes since men
started working out—the leg
raise.
You’ll discover ten different
leg raise movements, each
one a little harder than the
last. You’ll learn how to get
the most out of each of these
techniques, each of these ten
steps, before moving up to
the next step. By the time
you get through all ten steps
and you’re working with the
final Master Step of the leg
raise series, you’ll have a
solid, athletic, stomach made
of steel, as well as powerful
hips and a ribcage armored
with dense muscle. You’ll
have abs that would’ve made
Bruce Lee take notice!
THE TEN
COMMANDMENTS
YOU MUST OBEY TO
EARN A REAL
MONSTER OF AN
ATHLETIC CORE
Paul Wade gives you ten key
points, the “Ten
Commandments” of leg
raises, that will take your
prison-style core training
from just "okay" to
absolutely phenomenal. We
want the results to be so
effective that they’ll literally
shock you. This kind of
accelerated progress can be
achieved, but if you want to
achieve it you better listen
carefully to these ten key
pointers you’ll discover with
the DVD.
Bodyweight mastery is a lot
like high-level martial arts.
It’s more about principles
than individual techniques.
Really study and absorb
these principles, and you’ll
be on your way to a six-pack
from Hell in no time.
The hanging straight leg
raise, performed strictly and
for reps, is the Gold
Standard of abdominal
strength techniques. Once
you’re at the level where you
can throw out sets of twenty
to thirty rock solid reps of
this exercise, your abs will be
thick and strong, but more
importantly, they’ll be func-
tional—not just a pretty six-
P
Order CC Ultimate Squat online: 
www.dragondoor.com/DV085
Convict Conditioning
Volume 3: Leg Raises
Six Pack from Hell
By Paul “Coach” Wade featuring 
Brett Jones and Max Shank
#DV085  $59.95 
DVD 57 minutes with full color Companion Manual, 82 pages
DEMONIC ABS ARE A MAN’S BEST
FRIEND—DISCOVER HOW TO
SEIZE A SIX-PACK FROM HELL
AND OWN THE WORLD…
LEG RAISES
pack, but a real monster of an athletic core, which is
capable of developing high levels of force.
Hanging will work your serratus and intercostals,
making these muscles stand out like fingers, and your
obliques and flank muscles will be tight and strong
from holding your hips in place. Your lumbar spine
will achieve a gymnastic level of flexibility, like fluid
steel, and your chances of back pain will be greatly
reduced.
The bottom line: If you want to be stronger and more
athletic than the next guy, you need the edge that
straight leg raises can give you.

Convict Conditioning
Volume 4: Advanced Bridging: 
Forging an Iron Spine
By Paul “Coach” Wade featuring 
Brett Jones and Max Shank
#DV087  $59.95 
DVD 59 minutes with full color Companion Manual, 88 pages
ERECT TWIN PYTHONS OF COILED BEEF UP
YOUR SPINE AND DEVELOP EXTREME,
EXPLOSIVE RESILIENCE—WITH THE DYNAMIC
POWER AND FLEXIBLE STRENGTH OF
ADVANCED BRIDGING
aul Wade’s Convict Conditioning
system represents the ultimate distil-
lation of hardcore prison body-
weight training’s most powerful
methods. What works was kept. What did-
n’t, was slashed away. When your life is on
the line, you’re not going to mess with less
than the absolute best. Many of these older,
very potent solitary training systems have
been on the verge of dying, as convicts
begin to gain access to weights, and mod-
ern “bodybuilding thinking” floods into
the prisons. Thanks to Paul Wade, these
ultimate strength survival secrets have been
saved for posterity. And for you…
Filmed entirely—and so appropriately— on
“The Rock”, Wade’s Convict
Conditioning Volume 4, Advanced
Bridging: Forging an Iron Spine explodes
out of the cellblock to teach you in
absolute detail how to progress from the
relative ease of a Short Bridge—to the stun-
ning, “1-in-1,000” achievement of the
Stand-to-Stand Bridge. Ten progressive
steps guide you to inevitable mastery of this
ultimate exercise for an unbreakable back.
This home-study course in ultimate sur-
vival strength comes replete with bonus
material not available in Paul Wade’s origi-
nal Convict Conditioning book—and
numerous key training tips that refine and
expand on the original program.
Prowl through the heavily and gorgeously-
illustrated 80-plus-page manual and devour
the entire film script at your animal leisure.
Digest the brilliant, precise photographs
and reinforce the raw benefits you
absorbed from the DVD.
Paul Wade adds a bonus Ten
Commandments for Perfect Bridges—
which is worth the price of admission
alone. And there’s the additional bonus of
4 major Variant drills to add explosivity,
fun and super-strength to your core prac-
tice.
Whatever you are looking for from your
pushups—be it supreme functional
strength, monstrous muscle growth or
explosive upper-body power—it’s yours for
the progressive taking with Convict
Conditioning Volume 4: Advanced
Bridging: Forging an Iron Spine.
P
Order CC Prison Pushup online: 
www.dragondoor.com/DV087

O R D E R I N G  I N F O R M A T I O N
METHOD OF PAYMENT Ë CHECK Ë M.O.  Ë MASTERCARD Ë VISA Ë DISCOVER
Ë AMEX
Account No. (Please indicate all the numbers on your credit card)
EXPIRATION DATE 
Day Phone: (      )
Signature: __________________________________________  Date: _________________
Warning to foreign customers: 
The Customs in your country may or
may not tax or otherwise charge you
an additional fee for goods you
receive. Dragon Door Publications is
charging you only for U.S. handling
and international shipping. Dragon
Door Publications is in no way
responsible for any additional fees
levied by Customs, the carrier or any
other entity.
Customer Service Questions? Please call
us between 9:00am– 11:00pm EST
Monday to Friday at 1-800-899-5111. Local
and foreign customers call 513-346-4160
for orders and customer service
100% One-Year Risk-Free Guarantee. If
you are not completely satisfied with any
product––we’ll be happy to give you a
prompt exchange, credit, or refund, as you
wish. Simply return your purchase to us,
and please let us know why you were
dissatisfied––it will help us to provide better
products and services in the future.
Shipping and handling fees are non-
refundable.
Telephone Orders For faster service you
may place your orders by calling Toll Free
24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days
per year. When you call, please have your
credit card ready.
ITEM #       QTY.                ITEM DESCRIPTION
ITEM PRICE
A OR B        TOTAL
Complete and mail with full payment to: Dragon Door Publications, 5 County Road B East, Suite 3, Little Canada, MN 55117
Sold To: 
A
Name__________________________________
Street __________________________________
City ___________________________________
State ______________________  Zip  ________
Day phone*_____________________________
* Important for clarifying questions on orders
SHIP TO: (Street address for delivery)      B
Name___________________________________
Street __________________________________
City _______________ _____________________
State ______________________  Zip  ________
Email ___________________________________
HANDLING AND SHIPPING CHARGES • NO COD’S
Total Amount of Order Add (Excludes kettlebells and kettlebell kits):
$00.00 to 29.99
Add $6.00
$30.00 to 49.99
Add $7.00
$50.00 to 69.99
Add $8.00
$70.00 to 99.99
Add $11.00
Canada and Mexico add $6.00 to US charges. All other countries, flat rate, double
US Charges. See Kettlebell section for Kettlebell Shipping and handling charges.
Total of Goods
Shipping Charges
Rush Charges
Kettlebell Shipping Charges
OH residents add 6.5% sales tax
MN residents add 6.5% sales tax
TOTAL ENCLOSED
Please print clearly
Please print clearly
NOTE: We ship best method available for your delivery address. Foreign orders are sent by air.  Credit card or
International M.O. only. For RUSH processing of your order, add an additional $10.00 per address. Available on
money order & charge card orders only.
Errors and omissions excepted. Prices subject to change without notice.
$100.00 to 129.99
Add $14.00
$130.00 to 169.99
Add $16.00
$170.00 to 199.99
Add $18.00
$200.00 to 299.99
Add $20.00
$300.00 and up
Add $24.00
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
FAX YOUR ORDER (866) 280-7619

O R D E R I N G  I N F O R M A T I O N
METHOD OF PAYMENT Ë CHECK Ë M.O.  Ë MASTERCARD Ë VISA Ë DISCOVER
Ë AMEX
Account No. (Please indicate all the numbers on your credit card)
EXPIRATION DATE 
Day Phone: (      )
Signature: __________________________________________  Date: _________________
Warning to foreign customers: 
The Customs in your country may or
may not tax or otherwise charge you
an additional fee for goods you
receive. Dragon Door Publications is
charging you only for U.S. handling
and international shipping. Dragon
Door Publications is in no way
responsible for any additional fees
levied by Customs, the carrier or any
other entity.
Customer Service Questions? Please call
us between 9:00am– 11:00pm EST
Monday to Friday at 1-800-899-5111. Local
and foreign customers call 513-346-4160
for orders and customer service
100% One-Year Risk-Free Guarantee. If
you are not completely satisfied with any
product––we’ll be happy to give you a
prompt exchange, credit, or refund, as you
wish. Simply return your purchase to us,
and please let us know why you were
dissatisfied––it will help us to provide better
products and services in the future.
Shipping and handling fees are non-
refundable.
Telephone Orders For faster service you
may place your orders by calling Toll Free
24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days
per year. When you call, please have your
credit card ready.
ITEM #       QTY.                ITEM DESCRIPTION
ITEM PRICE
A OR B        TOTAL
Complete and mail with full payment to: Dragon Door Publications, 5 County Road B East, Suite 3, Little Canada, MN 55117
Sold To: 
A
Name__________________________________
Street __________________________________
City ___________________________________
State ______________________  Zip  ________
Day phone*_____________________________
* Important for clarifying questions on orders
SHIP TO: (Street address for delivery)      B
Name___________________________________
Street __________________________________
City _______________ _____________________
State ______________________  Zip  ________
Email ___________________________________
HANDLING AND SHIPPING CHARGES • NO COD’S
Total Amount of Order Add (Excludes kettlebells and kettlebell kits):
$00.00 to 29.99
Add $6.00
$30.00 to 49.99
Add $7.00
$50.00 to 69.99
Add $8.00
$70.00 to 99.99
Add $11.00
Canada and Mexico add $6.00 to US charges. All other countries, flat rate, double
US Charges. See Kettlebell section for Kettlebell Shipping and handling charges.
Total of Goods
Shipping Charges
Rush Charges
Kettlebell Shipping Charges
OH residents add 6.5% sales tax
MN residents add 6.5% sales tax
TOTAL ENCLOSED
Please print clearly
Please print clearly
NOTE: We ship best method available for your delivery address. Foreign orders are sent by air.  Credit card or
International M.O. only. For RUSH processing of your order, add an additional $10.00 per address. Available on
money order & charge card orders only.
Errors and omissions excepted. Prices subject to change without notice.
$100.00 to 129.99
Add $14.00
$130.00 to 169.99
Add $16.00
$170.00 to 199.99
Add $18.00
$200.00 to 299.99
Add $20.00
$300.00 and up
Add $24.00
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
FAX YOUR ORDER (866) 280-7619

O R D E R I N G  I N F O R M A T I O N
METHOD OF PAYMENT Ë CHECK Ë M.O.  Ë MASTERCARD Ë VISA Ë DISCOVER
Ë AMEX
Account No. (Please indicate all the numbers on your credit card)
EXPIRATION DATE 
Day Phone: (      )
Signature: __________________________________________  Date: _________________
Warning to foreign customers: 
The Customs in your country may or
may not tax or otherwise charge you
an additional fee for goods you
receive. Dragon Door Publications is
charging you only for U.S. handling
and international shipping. Dragon
Door Publications is in no way
responsible for any additional fees
levied by Customs, the carrier or any
other entity.
Customer Service Questions? Please call
us between 9:00am– 11:00pm EST
Monday to Friday at 1-800-899-5111. Local
and foreign customers call 513-346-4160
for orders and customer service
100% One-Year Risk-Free Guarantee. If
you are not completely satisfied with any
product––we’ll be happy to give you a
prompt exchange, credit, or refund, as you
wish. Simply return your purchase to us,
and please let us know why you were
dissatisfied––it will help us to provide better
products and services in the future.
Shipping and handling fees are non-
refundable.
Telephone Orders For faster service you
may place your orders by calling Toll Free
24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days
per year. When you call, please have your
credit card ready.
ITEM #       QTY.                ITEM DESCRIPTION
ITEM PRICE
A OR B        TOTAL
Complete and mail with full payment to: Dragon Door Publications, 5 County Road B East, Suite 3, Little Canada, MN 55117
Sold To: 
A
Name__________________________________
Street __________________________________
City ___________________________________
State ______________________  Zip  ________
Day phone*_____________________________
* Important for clarifying questions on orders
SHIP TO: (Street address for delivery)      B
Name___________________________________
Street __________________________________
City _______________ _____________________
State ______________________  Zip  ________
Email ___________________________________
HANDLING AND SHIPPING CHARGES • NO COD’S
Total Amount of Order Add (Excludes kettlebells and kettlebell kits):
$00.00 to 29.99
Add $6.00
$30.00 to 49.99
Add $7.00
$50.00 to 69.99
Add $8.00
$70.00 to 99.99
Add $11.00
Canada and Mexico add $6.00 to US charges. All other countries, flat rate, double
US Charges. See Kettlebell section for Kettlebell Shipping and handling charges.
Total of Goods
Shipping Charges
Rush Charges
Kettlebell Shipping Charges
OH residents add 6.5% sales tax
MN residents add 6.5% sales tax
TOTAL ENCLOSED
Please print clearly
Please print clearly
NOTE: We ship best method available for your delivery address. Foreign orders are sent by air.  Credit card or
International M.O. only. For RUSH processing of your order, add an additional $10.00 per address. Available on
money order & charge card orders only.
Errors and omissions excepted. Prices subject to change without notice.
$100.00 to 129.99
Add $14.00
$130.00 to 169.99
Add $16.00
$170.00 to 199.99
Add $18.00
$200.00 to 299.99
Add $20.00
$300.00 and up
Add $24.00
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
FAX YOUR ORDER (866) 280-7619

O R D E R I N G  I N F O R M A T I O N
METHOD OF PAYMENT Ë CHECK Ë M.O.  Ë MASTERCARD Ë VISA Ë DISCOVER
Ë AMEX
Account No. (Please indicate all the numbers on your credit card)
EXPIRATION DATE 
Day Phone: (      )
Signature: __________________________________________  Date: _________________
Warning to foreign customers: 
The Customs in your country may or
may not tax or otherwise charge you
an additional fee for goods you
receive. Dragon Door Publications is
charging you only for U.S. handling
and international shipping. Dragon
Door Publications is in no way
responsible for any additional fees
levied by Customs, the carrier or any
other entity.
Customer Service Questions? Please call
us between 9:00am– 11:00pm EST
Monday to Friday at 1-800-899-5111. Local
and foreign customers call 513-346-4160
for orders and customer service
100% One-Year Risk-Free Guarantee. If
you are not completely satisfied with any
product––we’ll be happy to give you a
prompt exchange, credit, or refund, as you
wish. Simply return your purchase to us,
and please let us know why you were
dissatisfied––it will help us to provide better
products and services in the future.
Shipping and handling fees are non-
refundable.
Telephone Orders For faster service you
may place your orders by calling Toll Free
24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days
per year. When you call, please have your
credit card ready.
ITEM #       QTY.                ITEM DESCRIPTION
ITEM PRICE
A OR B        TOTAL
Complete and mail with full payment to: Dragon Door Publications, 5 County Road B East, Suite 3, Little Canada, MN 55117
Sold To: 
A
Name__________________________________
Street __________________________________
City ___________________________________
State ______________________  Zip  ________
Day phone*_____________________________
* Important for clarifying questions on orders
SHIP TO: (Street address for delivery)      B
Name___________________________________
Street __________________________________
City _______________ _____________________
State ______________________  Zip  ________
Email ___________________________________
HANDLING AND SHIPPING CHARGES • NO COD’S
Total Amount of Order Add (Excludes kettlebells and kettlebell kits):
$00.00 to 29.99
Add $6.00
$30.00 to 49.99
Add $7.00
$50.00 to 69.99
Add $8.00
$70.00 to 99.99
Add $11.00
Canada and Mexico add $6.00 to US charges. All other countries, flat rate, double
US Charges. See Kettlebell section for Kettlebell Shipping and handling charges.
Total of Goods
Shipping Charges
Rush Charges
Kettlebell Shipping Charges
OH residents add 6.5% sales tax
MN residents add 6.5% sales tax
TOTAL ENCLOSED
Please print clearly
Please print clearly
NOTE: We ship best method available for your delivery address. Foreign orders are sent by air.  Credit card or
International M.O. only. For RUSH processing of your order, add an additional $10.00 per address. Available on
money order & charge card orders only.
Errors and omissions excepted. Prices subject to change without notice.
$100.00 to 129.99
Add $14.00
$130.00 to 169.99
Add $16.00
$170.00 to 199.99
Add $18.00
$200.00 to 299.99
Add $20.00
$300.00 and up
Add $24.00
1•800•899•5111
24 HOURS A DAY
FAX YOUR ORDER (866) 280-7619

