 
PVC and polycarbonate Roofing  
INSTALLATION INSTRUCTIONS - TYPES - SIZES - COSTS 
 
 
 
PVC / Polycarbonate sheet roofing  
Pvc and polycarbonate sheet roofing come in a variety of profiles, sizes, and 
colours. Quality and prices vary immensely.  
The most common profile is corrugated.  
The most common lengths are 1800mm, 2400mm, 3000mm and 3600mm and less 
common, 4200mm, 4800mm, 5400mm and 6000mm.  
The cover width ranges from 610mm to 760mm and the colours include clear, opal, 
white, solar grey, blue, and green.  
Quality varies enormously from cheaper pvc sheets up to lifetime guaranteed 
polycarbonate sheets and the price varies accordingly. Guarantees range from zero 
to lifetime.  
Prices range from around $10 per sq metre to $36 per sq metre (not including 
screws or flashings).  
Sometimes the cheapest is not the most cost effective. Pamphlets relevant to the 
type of sheeting required are usually available from most stockists, it is advisable to 
read them.  
 
 
Roof pitch  
Most type of PVC or polycarbonate manufacturers recommend a 10 degree pitch 
(approx 1 in 5.7 fall).  

A lesser pitch could require additional weatherproofing such as extra flashings or 
appropriate sealants.  
 
Cutting  
Garden scissors or a fine tooth saw can be used to cut most sheets. The higher the 
quality, the easier the cutting. Sometimes a carborundum blade on a disk grinder 
will do the trick but only one sheet at a time or it could cause fusion and weld the 
sheets together.  
 
Drilling  
Pre-drill the holes in the sheets before fixing. The holes should be 8mm to 10mm 
and at least 2mm larger than the shaft of the screws to allow for expansion and 
contraction. Ensure the holes are in the high part of the corrugation. Sometimes it 
might be easiest to lay the sheets upsidedown on the ground and pre-drill. Another 
tip is to use a stick with a hole in it as a guide for the drill.  
 
Fixing  
Appropriate screws are readily available from any suppliers that stock the PVC or 
polycarbonate roof sheets. If the choice is available, hexagonal heads are the 
easiest to use. Most sheets should be fixed at every fourth corrugation and every 
second corrugation at gutters, ridging and overlaps.  
 
Accessories  
Accessories such as ridge flashings, apron flashings and foam eave fillers are also 
readily available from any suppliers that stock the PVC or polycarbonate roof 
sheets.  
 

