
 
 
BOHM-BIEDERMAN
CORRESPONDENCE
 
 
 
 
 


BOHM-BIEDERMAN
CORRESPONDENCE  
 
DAVID BOHM AND
CHARLES BIEDERMAN
 
 
Volume One:
Creativity and Science
Edited by
Paavo Pylkkänen
London and New York 

First published 1999
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2002.
 
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
 
The letters of David Bohm © 1999 Sarah Bohm
The letters of Charles Biederman © 1999 Charles Biederman
Selection and editorial matter © 1999 Paavo Pylkkänen
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced
or utilized in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means,
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording,
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.
 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Bohm, David.
Bohm-Biederman correspondence/David Bohm and Charles Biederman;
edited by Paavo Pylkkänen.
p.
cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
Contents: v. 1. Creativity and science—
1. Bohm, David—Correspondence. 2. Physicists—England—
Correspondence. 3. Biederman, Charles Joseph, 1906– —Correspondence.
4. Artists—United States—Correspondence. 5. Art and science. 6. Creation
(Literary, artistic, etc.) 7. Creative ability in science. I. Biederman, Charles
Joseph, 1906– . II. Pylkkänen, P. (Paavo) III. Title.
N72.S3B64 1999
001'.092'2–dc21
[B]
98–24759
CIP
 
ISBN 0-415-16225-4 (Print Edition)
ISBN 0-203-00803-0 Master e-book ISBN
ISBN 0-203-20158-2 (Glassbook Format)
 

CONTENTS
 
Acknowledgements
PAAVO PYLKKÄNEN
vii
Foreword
M.H.F.WILKINS
ix
Preface
CHARLES BIEDERMAN
xii
Editor’s Introduction
PAAVO PYLKKÄNEN
xiii
I
A New Vision of Totality
March 6, 1960
3
March 26, 1960
4
April 11, 1960
6
April 24, 1960
8
May 22, 1960
19
June 6, 1960
27
June 28, 1960
35
II
Creative Determination
August 1, 1960
45
October 3, 1960
54
November 17, 1960
61
December 28, 1960
73

vi
Contents
III
Thought and Reality
February 2, 1961
87
March 2, 1961
98
February 24, 1961
103
May 29, 1961
115
IV
Truth and Understanding
December 22, 1961
125
December 26, 1961
140
January 18, 1962
149
December 29, 1961
160
December 30, 1961
165
February 24, 1962
170
V
Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
February 2, 1962
179
February 9, 1962
181
March 17, 1962
182
March 18, 1962
190
April 14, 1962
191
April 23, 1962
194
March 23, 1962
200
April 27, 1962
209
April 15, 1962
215
May 7, 1962
222
April 24, 1962
228
Chapter Summaries
PAAVO PYLKKÄNEN
232
Bibliography
249
Index
253
 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
 
The publication of the Bohm-Biederman correspondence has been a
large project involving the generous help of many people. We are, of
course, extremely lucky that these letters have been preserved. This is
thanks to Charles Biederman, who preserved copies of the
correspondence. A very important role has also been played by David
Bohm’s wife Sarah, who has been energetic in her endeavour to further
Bohm’s work in many areas. She initiated this project by contacting
Biederman and has been responsible for many of the various
arrangements required to manage the vast project, which the publication
of a 4,000-page correspondence inevitably is. It has been a great joy to
work with Sarah.
Very special thanks also go to the English artist Anthony Hill,
who not only provided me with a lot of material on and by
Biederman, but also shared his fascinating views on Biederman’s
approach and its relation to Bohm’s thinking. Arleta Griffor has
done an invaluable job in organizing the material and in keying
Bohm’s hand-written letters onto diskette. Her deep and extensive
knowledge of Bohm’s philosophy has been very helpful throughout
the project. Thanks are also due to Sampo Karjalainen, who scanned
Biederman’s typed letters. Professor Basil Hiley, Lee Nichol and
David Peat have contributed to the project in various ways, not least
by discussing many of the ideas.
This project has been supported financially by the Academy of
Finland, the University of Skövde, Sweden, and by the Swedish Herbal
Institute Ltd, Gothenburg, Sweden. I am especially grateful to the head
of the Department of Humanities at Skövde, Seppo Luoma-Keturi, as

viii
Acknowledgements
well as to the Director of the Swedish Herbal Institute, Georg Wikman,
for their patronage. I should finally warmly thank Adrian Driscoll and
the editorial staff at Routledge who have recognized the special value
of this project and helped us in many ways.
Paavo Pylkkänen
 

FOREWORD
 
I met David Bohm in 1943 when I began, with other physicists, to
work on the horrendous atom bomb Manhattan Project at Berkeley
California. Bohm was very highly regarded as a physicist, but what
specially interested me was his exceptional breadth of interests
which ranged over the whole of human culture. This unusual
breadth linked with the fact that Quantum Theory, which was his
special area of research, involved revolutionary breadth of thinking.
Bohm was specially interested in the philosophical challenge of
the new Theory (which Einstein had failed to deal with). As an
experimental physicist, such philosophical problems did not
concern me directly. On the other hand, the post-war role of the
Atom Bomb much worried me and it was Bohm’s ideas about this
problem which brought me and him together. Some physicists on
the Project were narrowly fascinated by the idea of, after the war,
constructing new nuclear bombs of much greater power. Bohm’s
imaginative concern enabled him to see the dangers of such
developments. Like the great Quantum pioneer Niels Bohr, Bohm
saw the need for holistic approaches with open dialogue between
those with differing views. He saw that political analysis could not
be avoided. However, after the war McCarthyist extremism grew
and Bohm’s recognition of the political aspects of nuclear policy
led to his professional future in the United States being threatened.
Bohm moved to Princeton where Einstein welcomed him. But Bohm
was advised to leave the US because his passport might be taken
away. He decided to leave the country.

x
Foreword
After the war I worked on DNA which led me in 1952 to Brazil
where I met Bohm again and was very glad to find him developing his
ideas as before with creative courage and energy. A few years later he
settled in England. He married an artist (as I did) and, in order to
clarify ideas about a more unified culture, he began discussing with
artists the relationship of art and science. During the 1960s
environmental science began to make clear that science-based technology
was creating serious environmental problems. This, together with the
relentless background of the nuclear arms race, emphasised the need
for a new way of seeing the world. Studying interconnections in our
culture and developing an holistic philosophy was increasingly seen to
be necessary and, in response, new cultural movements appeared. The
British Society for Social Responsibility in Science (BSSRS) was formed
and stressed the need for more sense of community in science and
more integrated thinking about the problems of the world.
Following writing by novelist C.P.Snow on the gap between science
and art, a BSSRS group was formed, including Bohm and myself, to
examine the relation between art and science. We were stimulated by
symmetry in architecture (e.g. by Buckminster Fuller) and in newly
discovered viruses and giant molecules. BSSRS activities peaked in
1970; at a great conference which examined problems foreshadowing
today’s social and ethical concerns about molecular biology. There were
many distinguished speakers, including Bohm on holism and dialogue.
In the US Charles Biederman, well known Structurist artist and author
of considerable writings on the nature of art, became very interested in
Bohm’s ideas. Anthony Hill, a British artist with special interests in
mathematics, had told Biederman of the importance of Bohm’s new book
Causality and Chance in Modern Physics. As a result in 1960 an enthusiastic
correspondence began between Bohm and Biederman. On the other hand,
in Britain, although Bohm’s ideas attracted much attention in the 1970s
and after, the general movement of idealism and libertarianism of the
1960s and 1970s faded. Political conservatism grew and monetarism
increased its domination of the whole of culture. It was only after Bohm
died in 1992 that I became aware of the remarkable Art/Science
correspondence between Bohm and Biederman from 1960 to 1970. The
correspondence illustrated clearly Bohm’s ideas of dialogue and cast light
on how Art/Science ideas could point the way to increased unity in all
aspects of modern culture.
Today, with severe world-wide disunity in culture as a whole, it is
useful to recall the surprising degree of Art/Science unity which has

Foreword
xi
existed in the past. For example, the recent Tate Gallery exhibition
“Turner and the Scientists” reveals how Turner painted breath-taking
landscapes where beauty and spiritual force emerged with the aid of
careful study based on science such as meteorology and geology. This
was possible because the communities of science and art were then
closely linked (as was symbolised by the Royal Society and the Royal
Academy being next door to each other). Turner trained as a builder
and architect, mixed with poets and scientists and admired steamships,
railways and the Industrial Revolution. (See Turner and the Scientists by
James Hamilton 1998.) The Romantic movement had by no means
built a solid barrier between Science and Art. Similarly, seventeenth-
century scientists had viewed science as a way of “Reading the Mind of
God”. And, leaving aside Science/Religion opposition, in the nineteenth
century it was not unusual for astronomers to see the “Glory of God in
the Splendour of the Heavens”.
Today it is specially difficult to see science in a wide perspective.
One reason for this difficulty is that research workers find themselves,
like other professionals, under increasing pressure. But the need to see
science from wider angles is greater than ever. The Bohm-Biederman
correspondence gives unique illumination of Art/Science relations. It
illustrates very well Bohm’s ideas of creative dialogue and can help us
move towards greater unity in the modern world. Such unity is of vital
importance. The Bohm-Biederman correspondence demands most
careful study.
M.H.F.Wilkins
 

PREFACE
 
Charles Biederman
It was sheer chance that I encountered David Bohm’s writing in
1958, having ordered one of his books on speculation from a scientific
catalog. I knew nothing about him. What struck me about his work
and prompted my initial letter was his underlying effort to seek for
some larger sense of reality, which seemed a very humanized search.
This was further evidenced as our correspondence progressed, and
he made the effort to communicate with me beyond the private
language of physicists. I soon discovered that David was as concerned
with the disparities within his own field as I was with those within
mine. As a result, I remain indebted to him for the stimulus and the
urgency he brought to our discussions of the differing reality pursuits
of science and art and the humanities, although we arrived at our
respective conclusions only after our correspondence ended. I am
sure that David would have hoped that our mutual efforts would
stimulate others to confront the larger, neglected problem since
Leonardo da Vinci of our perception of reality as evidenced by
thousands of years of art and then by four centuries of modern
science. Now more than ever, it seems to me, the problem is
inescapable, and its resolution is crucial to the well-being of both
fields. Long ago Whitehead observed that Newton left nature
“without meaning or value”, and that the limitations of science were
“perhaps too narrow for science itself’. This, it seemed to me, was
also David’s view.
 

EDITOR’S INTRODUCTION
 
Paavo Pylkkänen
On March 6, 1960 the American artist Charles Biederman wrote to
the physicist David Bohm in London. Biederman had recently read
Bohm’s book Causality and Chance in Modern Physics (1957) which had
been recommended to him by the English artist Anthony Hill. For
Biederman the book had been a “tremendous experience to read”
and he wanted to let the author know this. What neither of them
realized at the time was that this one-page, spontaneous letter was the
first of over 4,000 pages of correspondence, to be written between
March 1960 and April 1969! In this first volume the early part of this
correspondence is published, namely the letters ranging from March
6, 1960 to April 24, 1962.
David Bohm (1917–92) was one of the foremost physicists of his
generation and the author of many influential books. He is known in
particular for developing an alternative interpretation for the quantum
theory, the theory that deals with atomic phenomena. The first consistent
interpretation of the quantum theory was proposed in the mid-1920s
by Niels Bohr. It made the radical proposal that a deterministic
description of the movement of individual quantum systems (e.g.
electrons) was no longer possible, and even more strikingly, that we
should give up thinking of, say, an electron as just a particle and rather
see it as something that can exhibit both wave-like and particle-like
properties, depending on the experimental situation. In all this a kind
of undivided wholeness of quantum phenomena was emphasized. Bohm
started off as a supporter of Bohr’s point of view and even wrote one of
the best textbooks of its time, The Quantum Theory (1951), along these

xiv
Editor’s Introduction
lines. Gradually, however, Bohm grew dissatisfied with what he saw as
the fragmentary features of the Bohr approach, and here he was
influenced by discussions with Einstein in Princeton. He began to
examine whether a fuller description of quantum processes was possible,
and in 1952 published a consistent alternative hypothesis about the
quantum domain. This hypothesis went strongly against the prevalent
view by suggesting that individual quantum systems like electrons are
accompanied and determined by a new type of field, that they have a
well-defined existence as particles, and move deterministically along
trajectories. Yet it made very explicit some of the most radical features
of quantum theory, such as a holistic property known as non-locality.
The response to Bohm’s work was divided. Given that Bohr’s
interpretation was taught as the only possibility—sometimes
dogmatically—some were satisfied that Bohm had shown that an
alternative exists. Others felt that Bohm’s hypothesis was trying to avoid
the philoso-phically radical implications of Bohr’s view, such as
indeterminism and a kind of ambiguity of quantum phenomena.
Bohm himself saw his 1952 “causal intepretation” as a starting point
or a source of insight rather than as a final theory. But as many of his
fellow physicists were against the theory and as he could not obtain
new empirical evidence in its favour, he began to focus on different
things, to some extent returning to Bohr’s way of looking at the quantum
theory. However, he started to reconsider the causal interpretation more
seriously in the 1970s, partly as a result of the work he did together
with his colleague Basil Hiley and their research students at Birkbeck
College, London University. Bohm’s last ideas on the interpretation
are published in the book The Undivided Universe which he co-authored
with Basil Hiley and which was almost completed before Bohm’s death
in 1992. Although Bohm’s 1952 work was initially resisted, it is today,
in various developed forms, increasingly seen as a source of insight
into the fundamental problems of physics.
Since the early 1960s—which is the period when the correspondence
with Biederman began—Bohm started to develop a general framework
for physics which he later called the implicate order, known to the general
public through Bohm’s Wholeness and the Implicate Order (1980). One of
the values of the correspondence is that it shows the development of
Bohm’s ideas leading towards the implicate order. Bohm also made
significant contributions in many other fields, including philosophy,
psychology and biology. In discussions with the Indian teacher
J.Krishnamurti they explored human consciousness and the possibilities

Editor’s Introduction
xv
of its transformation. And in this correspondence, of course, we see
him engaging in an intense dialogue about the meaning of art and
artistic creativity. A biography that covers the various aspects of his
work has recently been written by F.David Peat (1996), and a useful
introduction to the more technical parts of his work can be found in the
introduction to Bohm’s Festschrift by Hiley and Peat (1987).
Charles Biederman (b. 1906) was the founder, in the late 1930s, of
an art form first known as Constructionism and later, in the early 1950s,
as Structurism. This art form, which is a kind of relief art organized
geometrically, developed from painting but shares its three-dimensional
properties with sculpture. According to the art historian and critic Donald
Kuspit (1985), “the key to Biederman’s works is the use of planar
geometrical elements as irreducible sensory—color—units, and their
integration into structures that seem dynamically evolving.” Thus
Biederman often describes his work as dealing with the “structural
process level of reality”. Biederman also wrote and theorized extensively
on art, the most notable example being his monumental book Art as the
Evolution of Visual Knowledge (1948) (referred to in the correspondence
itself simply as the Evolution book). Although he never became part of
the mainstream, Biederman strongly influenced some important English
artists such as Victor Pasmore and Anthony Hill and also held some
significant exhibitions, including a retrospective at the Hayward Gallery
in London in 1969. Illuminating discussions of Biederman’s works and
ideas can be found in, for example, Kuspit (1977) and Craven (1980a,
1980b), as well as in various exhibition catalogues.
In the foreword to Biederman’s Hayward exhibition catalogue, Robyn
Denny (1969:4) first notes that between 1936 and 1966, “Biederman
carried through one of the most radical and single-minded attempts in
modern art to formulate a new definition for art and its relation to the
organic world” and then goes on to consider the reasons for Biederman’s
neglect. One suggestion is that many people know Biederman only
through his theories which they do not accept, very few having seen
his work. Another reason is that while “art in America focused on the
idea of ‘object’ as an entity separated from the natural world, Biederman
was systemizing the Structurist comprehension of nature as a source of
art”. Biederman’s audience has been very specialized and connected by
an ideology and “a belief in the evolutionary process in art derived
from certain basic premises”. According to Jan van der Marck (quoted
in Denny 1969:5), the approach of this group is programmatic: “They
are concerned with the technical and the conceptual issues in the making

xvi
Editor’s Introduction
of their works. They have a mathematical or natural science orientation.
Finally they have a social ethic that may strike the critic as utopic.”
This explains, of course, why Biederman was interested in books like
Bohm’s Causality and Chance.
Robyn Denny thinks that Biederman’s Art as the Evolution of Visual
Knowledge (1948) played an important role in Victor Pasmore’s conversion
to abstract art which, in turn “has always been regarded as one of the most
glamorous landmarks in British postwar art” (Denny 1969:5). For Pasmore
and some other English artists Biederman’s book was very relevant:
 
Many artists have claimed Courbet and Cézanne, Monet and Mondrian
as prime sources of their creative sensibility…But Biederman in so doing
offered…a coherent, uncompromising and committed proposition for a
radical alternative to painting and sculpture which received an affirmative
response from this small group of English artists.
(Denny 1969:5)
 
Jan van der Marck notes that following Cézanne, Biederman is motivated
by structural processes he observes in nature, especially outdoors:
 
He studies nature’s “building methods” as they present themselves in a
dynamic interaction of form, space and light, and abstracts these insights
into a non-mimetic art of pure, geometric form. By proposing the
“structural process level” of reality as the source of art, Biederman offers
an alternative to two types of art which he opposes equally:
representational art, with its references to mimetic, visible reality, and
non-geometric abstract art, as it favours emotion over reason.
(van der Marck 1969:12)
 
Here is how van der Marck describes a Structurist relief.
 
[It] consists of a flat rectangular plane with an ingeniously organized
array of smaller planes attached to both the background and to one
another. Within the limitations of their geometric shape and parallel or
perpendicular positions, these planes create a unique arrangement of
volume and space.
(van der Marck 1969:12)
 
Robyn Denny notes that those who have not seen Biederman’s reliefs
before are often surprised at the intensity of colour and its optical
complexity: “For Biederman, colour and light are as essential ingredients

Editor’s Introduction
xvii
of each work as the substance and form of the structure itself.” And if
Denny at times has found Biederman’s arguments hard to connect with,
his work appears free from any idiomatic constraints. Biederman’s reliefs
 
contain an extraordinary degree of rigour, discipline and control. A sense
of order, a command of means, and uncluttered clarity of purpose…
There is no doubt in my mind that Charles Biederman has made a
unique contribution to modern art.
(Denny 1969:6)
 
To honour Biederman’s 90th birthday in 1996, the Tate Gallery
exhibited one of his works which it has in its possession.
The above throws some light on the factors that are likely to have
triggered the intense correspondence between Bohm and Biederman.
Perhaps the most important was the interest that the two men shared in
the natural world. The fact that they were approaching nature from
different angles, those of art and science, meant that they complemented
and in this sense needed each other in order to obtain a fuller
understanding of nature. Another factor was their dissatisfaction with
the dominant trends in their fields. This is evidenced by the fact that in
his very first letter to Bohm, Biederman draws a parallel between the
situation in art and in quantum physics. His idea was that in both art
and in physics traditional views of nature had become inadequate in
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and that in both fields
the mainstream had failed to respond adequately to the new situation.
For Biederman a favourite example of such a failed response was
Surrealism and for Bohm it was the “Copenhagen” interpretation of
the quantum theory. A further common factor was that both Bohm
and Biederman were proposing new and what they felt to be more
adequate views of nature in their respective fields. Finally, their
opposition to the mainstream and persistence in developing and holding
alternative views did not help them to gain respect amongst their
colleagues—the label of the maverick was appropriate to both men.
When the correspondence began, both men were already mature
thinkers and practitioners in their fields and consequently the knowledge
they draw upon in their letters is extensive. This is not, however, to say
that the letters are inaccessible to the general reader who may not possess
a detailed knowledge of Bohm’s and Biederman’s work. On the contrary,
the fact that we have here a physicist writing to an artist and vice versa
means that difficult ideas are often explained in a clear and simple

xviii
Editor’s Introduction
fashion. It is this that makes the Bohm-Biederman letters much more
accessible and relevant to the general reader than a correspondence
between theoreticians usually is. It will, of course, be helpful to have
some familiarity with their work prior to the correspondence. Thus,
for example, the reader may find it useful to have Bohm’s Causality and
Chance in Modern Physics to hand when reading the letters—this was, after
all, the text that prompted Biederman to write to Bohm in the first
place. Biederman’s writings are harder to obtain, but the articles
mentioned in the bibliography at the end of the book provide a fuller
introduction to his work which the general reader is likely to find helpful.
CREATIVE DETERMINATION
Bohm and Biederman discuss a wide range of topics in the letters
that follow. The fact that the form of the discussion is that of
correspondence means that there is a great deal of spontaneity in the
way the different topics come up. This makes it more difficult to
summarize the discussion and to find the main topics and themes.
Fortunately, Bohm himself makes a summary of this kind, notably in
his December 22, 1961 letter (L16, DB8), and to a lesser extent in his
April 15, 1962 letter (L30, DB16). The reader will find these summaries
useful, although they are, of course, written to Biederman rather than
to someone with no previous knowledge of the correspondence.
Certainly one central topic in the correspondence is the relationship
between human beings and nature, in particular as this has to do with
artistic creativity and scientific endeavour. I also think one is justified in
making the following simplified contrast between the overall styles of the
two thinkers: as a scientist Bohm is more concerned with understanding
nature as it exists independently of human beings, whereas Biederman
as an artist is more concerned about the meeting of human beings and
nature, and properties that come into being as a result of that meeting.
Through his scientific and philosophical thinking, Bohm aims first to
formulate a vision of nature as a creative process and then to understand
human beings and human creativity in terms of that vision. Biederman’s
Structurist art, in turn, focuses on the special role of human beings: the
Structurist artist discovers and reveals those creations inherent in nature’s
process which only human nature can actualize.
This basic initial difference of approach shows itself in many of the
individual debates. For Biederman, nature considered without human beings

Editor’s Introduction
xix
is determinate and there is no room for properties such as chance,
indeterminism, disorder, randomness. lawlessness, etc. as objective. These
only arise in the meeting of human beings and nature and they are projected
on to nature by us. This explains why Biederman approves of Bohm’s
argument in Causality and Chance in Modern Physics in which he opens up the
possibility that the quantum level, currently the basic level of nature, can
be seen as deterministic, contrary to what the prevailing “Copenhagen”
interpretation of the quantum theory had claimed. It appears that Biederman
prefers the view of nature—when understood independently of human
beings—as relatively simple, determinate and straightforward and sees
complexity as arising only when human beings and nature meet.
Those who view Bohm as a simplistic determinist—and there may still
be quite a few—would expect him to have approved of Biederman’s
attitude. Bohm’s overall response to Biederman—as well as much of Bohm’s
published work since the mid-1950s at least—reveals, however, that his
concept of “human-independent” nature is far more complex and
permeated by features such as indeterminism and contingency than that
of, say, Biederman. This state of affairs is indeed captured by Biederman’s
remark to Bohm: “What you want to attribute to nature, I attribute
exclusively to man” (L11, CB6, December 28, 1960). In a number of
letters we find Bohm trying to convince Biederman how various properties
such as chance, randomness, contingency, possibility, etc. can be seen as
objective properties of human-independent nature. This ought to surprise
those who have seen Bohm as a simplistic determinist, perhaps based on
their reading of Bohm’s 1952 papers on “hidden variables”. For here we
have Bohm, who is internationally known as a defender of a deterministic
interpretation of the quantum theory, and thus for many a defender of
strict determinism in nature, arguing strongly for the objective existence
of properties such as contingency, chance, indeterminism, etc. Of course,
Bohm does this already in Causality and Chance, but here the point is made
more vividly, given that Bohm is defending the role of indeterminism
rather than questioning it, as he most famously did in his 1952 papers.
Regardless of the differences in their approaches, we find the two
thinkers developing many common themes and ideas as well. An
important idea is that of creative determination, which Bohm and Biederman
see as different from and going radically beyond either mechanistic
determinism or pure chance and chaos. A related and very interesting
discussion has to do with the concept of time. Bohm summarizes their
discussion as follows in his December 22, 1961 letter to Biederman
(L16, DB8):  

xx
Editor’s Introduction
Each moment traces its past and projects its future in a unique way. At
each moment there is an infinity of possibilities, which (we both agree)
have, in some sense, a real existence. You argue that man can choose
from these possibilities, and nature by itself cannot.
The past is not by itself fully determinate, but is ambiguous as to
what it is (or was). The future helps to determine what the past really
was. Thus, the past does not fully determine the future. (If only because
in some measure, the future partly determines the past.)
 
It is through arguments such as the above that Bohm and Biederman
try to make room for a new type of “creative determination”. One idea
is that if the past does not fully determine the future, this leaves room
for the present moment to make a creative contribution. This discussion
also relates to the perennial philosophical debate between determinism,
freedom and responsibility. If the laws of physics completely determine
the behaviour of our bodies, how can we be held responsible for our
physical actions? And even if we allow chance and indeterminism in
the laws of physics, what difference would it make? For then the
behaviour of our bodies could be governed by, say, a combination of
deterministic and random laws, and this does not seem to capture what
is meant by responsible action either. In trying to develop a concept
that goes beyond either pure chance or strict determinism, Bohm and
Biederman are thus tackling not only the question of artistic creativity
or creativity in nature, but also the problem of understanding how
responsible action is possible if we are physical beings.
In my view their discussion of creative determination and time brings
up fresh viewpoints that are often neglected by philosophers. For example,
when philosophers discuss issues such as determinism, they often bring
relatively simplistic notions of physics into the discussion. Bohm’s
suggestion that the past is ambiguous is related to the uncertainty principle
of the quantum theory. The idea that the present moment can make a
creative (rather than random or strictly determined) contribution has
thus to be understood within the wider, quantum-theoretical idea of the
“ambiguity of the mode of being of parts” which Bohm explains in his
second letter to Biederman. This is not to claim that Bohm and Biederman
have come up with definite solutions of important problems in their letters.
But they certainly discuss some very difficult issues in novel ways, which
may well benefit contemporary researchers struggling with these topics.
To help the reader deal with the vast amount of information in the
correspondence, at the end of the book I have provided a brief summary

Editor’s Introduction
xxi
of each letter. These summaries are inevitably selective and thus by no
means do full justice to the various letters. They should be taken as a
rough guide for orienting around the material rather than as a precise
summary and evaluation of the contents of the letters.
Personally I think that the Bohm-Biederman letters are an extraordinary
treasure. We live in an age where science and technology increasingly
need to serve the interests of economic growth and immediate practical
applications. The adverse effects of science and technology are well known,
but it seems to be impossible to control and foresee developments such as
those in information technology. For example, how will the current
developments in this technology affect human consciousness? Will
consciousness have to mechanize itself in order for the new information
technology to function efficiently? Similarly, it is hard to see the role of
art in the “postmodern” era. Much of “serious” contemporary art is
inevitably linked with commercial-ization and mass-media culture. The
Bohm-Biederman letters provide a space in which one can critically reflect
these contemporary developments and glimpse alternative directions.
REFERENCES
Craven, D. (1980a) “The Art of Charles Biederman”, unpublished PhD thesis,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Craven, D. (1980b) “Charles Biederman’s Art of Complicity”, Arts Magazine,
March, pp. 130–5.
Denny, R. “Introduction”, in Charles Biederman: A Retrospective Exhibition with
Especial Emphasis on the Structurist Works of 1936–69 (exhibition catalogue for
the Hayward Gallery, London, and the Museum and Art Gallery, Leicester),
Arts Council of Great Britain, London.
Hiley, B.J. and Peat, F.D. (1987) Quantum Implications: Essays in Honour of David
Bohm, Routledge, London.
Kuspit, D.B. (1977) “Charles Biederman’s Abstract Analogues for Nature”,
Art in America, May/June, pp. 80–3.
Peat, F.D. (1996) Infinite Potential: The Life and Times of David Bohm, Addison
Wesley Publishing Co. Inc., Reading, Mass., and Harlow, England.
Van der Marck (1969) “Biederman and the Structurist Direction in Art”, in
Charles Biederman: A Retrospective Exhibition with Especial Emphasis on the Structurist
Works of 1936–69 (exhibition catalogue for the Hayward Gallery, London,
and the Museum and Art Gallery, Leicester), Arts Council of Great Britain,
London.
(Note: For a full listing of works by and on Bohm and Biederman, please
refer to the Bibliography at the end of the book.)


 
I
 
 
 


A NEW VISION OF TOTALITY
 
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
March 6, 1960
Dear Professor Bohm:
I believe that whenever one comes across a book that has become a
tremendous experience to read, one should let the author know it. This
is what your book, Causality and Chance, has been for me. I read it just
recently, and I will have to read it again.
To explain my interest in your book. To put it briefly, the notion of
indeterminism has always seemed contrary to experience, which, even
after reading your very fine book, I cannot accept even as an eventually
limiting case.
It seemed an almost inescapable error that the early mechanistic
outlook should have arrived at an absolute. But I think there is something
else afoot when the complementary-indeterministic orientation also
arrived at an absolute. For the latter takes place in a period when there
is a general awareness of the non-absolute character of our structural
knowledge about nature. When the first mechanistic outlook fell, there
had been no crisis in science but just the opposite; afterwards there was

4
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
the tremendous effort to re-orient. In the present stage of the mechanistic
view, there came a genuine crisis, and it appears to me that
complementary-indeterminism is but a rationalization of that crisis.
This effort impresses me as the Surrealism of science. When the old
view of nature was no longer adequate for the further continuance of art,
the Surrealists, unable to wrest a new order from nature, assumed the
view of nature as “disorder.” I sympathize with your belief that a deeper
penetration will reveal a nature of causality. But there is the possibility
that this will also dispel the basis for the present “lawless” view of nature
and, rather than make it a limited case, will dispense with it entirely.
But I must tell you why I feel so deeply the reading of your book. It
is because in general your view of nature appears to substantiate the
direction in which I have been considering these problems, not from
the view of a physicist, but from that of an artist. I have been concerned
with the hiatus that exists between art and science, the disparity and
separation that exists between these two fields. And, what better place
to get at the problem than to consider their respective orientations to
nature as reality. The view I have gradually been approaching is one
that appears to be enforced by some of your conclusions.
Three years ago I wrote a long essay on “Mondrian and Science.” It
seems very likely that it will finally reach publication sometime this
year. If you will permit me, I would like to send you a copy when it
appears.
May I thank you for making your views possible for me to read. My
feelings for hope for the future are increased by such as you.
Sincerely yours,
Charles Biederman
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
March 26, 1960
Dear Mr B.:
Thank you very much for your letter of March 6, in which you express
a good opinion of my book, Causality and Chance. I am particularly happy
that you, as an artist, found the ideas in the book interesting. I too have
been concerned with the gap between science and other fields of human

A New Vision of Totality
5
endeavour. I regard this gap as bad both for the scientist and for the non-
scientist. On the one hand, the general conceptions of the scientist are
strongly influenced by general ideas that are, so to speak, “in the air”, in
any given period; and on the other hand, science contributes ideas which
strongly influence the thinking of subsequent periods.
There is no doubt that the currents of thought, emotion, and general
reaction to social and world conditions, which led to Positivism and
Existentialism in philosophy, to Surrealism, Expressionism and Action
Painting in art, to similar trends in literature, etc., have contributed heavily
to the ideas behind the Bohr interpretation of the quantum theory.
Nevertheless, the problem is very complicated, because all these reactions
contain aspects of truth, inexplicably mixed up with a great deal of
falsehood. For example, in science, there really has been a breakdown of
older ideas on causality, space-time, etc., and Bohr’s point of view expresses
certain aspects of this breakdown correctly. Similarly, Existentialism
exposes certain weaknesses and hypocrisies that are really in our social
and personal relations; and it raises in a sharp form the problem of what
can be meant by freedom. In art, the older classical forms no longer
express modern reality, and some new development seems to be needed.
Similarly, in literature, the form of the novel does not seem to be adequate
to expressing the complicated and ambiguous character of the individual
today, which results from his new social relations.
The pity is that the kernel of truth in all of these movements has
swept many people along into swallowing a tremendous number of
false aspects at the same time. (One could say that people find it difficult
to keep the baby without also keeping the bath water.)
Thus people are led to adopt inadequate, excessively negative
attitudes to themselves, to their fellow men, to society as a whole, etc.
In this way they contribute to worsening the very breakdown that they
are reflecting.
What is missing is a new overall point of view that is adequate to
our new situation, our new relationships, and our new knowledge. We
cannot ever return to the old ideas, but it is important also not to throw
up our hands in despair and to adopt irrational points of view.
I am looking forward very much to reading your article when it
arrives.
Very sincerely yours,
David Bohm

6
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
April 11, 1960
Dear Professor Bohm:
Thank you very much for yours of March 26.1 read your letter with
considerable interest, and I regret that it is my misfortune that I cannot
talk with you on the problems that are of mutual interest.
You were probably being kind to me, but I had hoped you might
respond directly to some of the statements I made dealing with the
subject of your book. If I am saying what seem to you foolish things
about science, I’d feel you were doing me a service to say so.
Unfortunately I do not know any scientist with whom I can discuss
problems of science and art, let alone one of your competence. On my
own I read what science books I can afford, and hope each time that I
will be able to comprehend something of their contents. This reminds
me to tell you that I thoroughly enjoyed the clear way in which you
wrote your book, the lack of pomposity, and the very genuine devotion
to your work reflected in your words. Except for the mathematics I
think I will be able to comprehend most of what you write, by reading
it until I do.
There is one thing that has always remained a mystery to me about
the use of all such terms in science, as random, lawless, indeterministic,
disorder, etc., etc. How does one distinguish disorder from order in the
structure of nature? It appears to me that when the physicist describes
the variable activities of the individual atoms to all the others observed,
he does no more than produce a description. He then proceeds, as I see it,
to take what remains a descriptive abstraction and offers it in terms of
an inferential abstraction. If this is the case, one is not being given any
empirical evidence, but only the manipulation of words where there is
a confusion of descriptive with inferential abstractions.
I was extremely interested in the subject of your letter, and the wide
view you have of it. Would you be interested in writing an article,
expanding these notions for an art magazine? A friend of mine in Canada
is starting a new magazine, it will be called The Structurist and devoted
to that contemporary art that followed out of the Dutch school of De
Stijl. We are anxious to have articles by scientists such as you who can

A New Vision of Totality
7
write along the lines you take in your letter to me. So I hope you will be
interested. Have you published anything along these lines?
I was particularly struck by your statement that Bohr’s formulations
were greatly influenced by what was going on in other fields of activity
than his own. Could you be more specific? For this seems like something
of extremely vital importance which should be publicly made available.
In my article mentioned in my previous letter, I am mostly concerned
with the adverse effects science has had on art, because of the narrow
concern of scientists and the erroneous use of their theories by artists. I
also state that art has failed to exert its beneficial influence upon the
course of science, the opposite of that aspect you mention in your letter.
You write that “some new development seems to be needed” in art.
Since 1937 I have been working and gradually formulating such a
development. In 1948 I published the results often years of writing, to
indicate by means of evolving history just what sort of new development
was potential to our times. I am sending you a copy of this book. In it
you will discover that I cannot agree with you, as regards Surrealism,
Expressionism and Action Painting, as possessing what you call a “kernel
of truth.” To my view, these and most other art movements of our
century, like political and other social forces, have used certain kernels
of truth as the means for escaping the extremely difficult problems of
our times, and resorting to pathology in art and barbarism in politics,
solutions of violence whether with a brush or guns.
Since my 1948 book appeared, a number of artists have gone in the
general direction I formulated, especially since about 1950. These artists
are English, Dutch, Canadians and Americans. I am enclosing three
issues of their magazine published in Amsterdam. All these artists are
concerned with the relation between art and science, as you will see
they represent differing viewpoints on both subjects. I would welcome
your severest criticism of my essay “Art and Science as Creation”
appearing in one of these issues. I am also sending you a copy of my
most recent book, The New Cézanne, which, in effect, has the purpose of
showing the transition from the old mimetic view of nature to the new
view of nature as a creative process.
My best wishes,
Charles Biederman

8
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
April 24, 1960
Dear Mr Biederman:
Thank you very much for your letter of April 11. I am awaiting the
receipt of your book and articles with great interest. I am afraid however,
that I cannot write the article you suggest for The Structurist, mainly
because I really know very little about art and do not feel qualified to
write on the subject, or even on the relation between physics and art.
Perhaps after I read your book and articles we might discuss this question
further.
As for Bohr’s being influenced by what was going on in other fields,
he admits (privately) that he was strongly affected by Kierkegaard’s
Existentialism. The point of contact is in the question of the dual nature
of subject and object, of action and contemplation, etc. In physics, there
arises the analogous problem that the observing apparatus (which is
the proxy of the observing subject) is linked to the rest of the universe
by indivisible quanta. Indeed, this is only a special case of the universal
linkage of each part of the universe to the whole in the same way. Such
a linkage means that the essential sides of the very being of each system
are in its indivisible quantum relationships with what it is not (i.e. what
is other to it). This holds as much for the observing subject (or for his
proxy, the observing apparatus), as it does for any object that we might
care to distinguish from its background. As a result, there is an inherent
ambiguity in what each partial system is, because what it is is in essential
respects, its relation to its other. In this way, physics has led to the
denial of the mechanistic idea of a universe made up of distinct parts
(or elements), such that each part exists separately and simply comes
into interaction with other parts. This idea of ambiguity of the mode of
being of parts is, in my opinion, a very deep one, and of fundamental
importance for further progress. It is very significant that even in physics,
the science where analysis into parts is developed to the utmost, one
discovers that this is, in fact, not a correct description of reality.
The connection with Existentialism is fairly clear. The Existentialists
are concerned with the question of being vs. existence. They, in my
opinion correctly, feel that there is a wide gap between our concrete
existence and our apprehension of this through ideas which describe

A New Vision of Totality
9
what we are. When we look deeply into ourselves, we find that all our
usual well defined ideas about ourselves become arbitrary, unnecessary,
fade into nothingness (much as happens in the atomic domain when
we try to follow an atomic process in great detail). People who have
reflected long (perhaps too long) on these questions, quite justifiably
begin to feel anxiety, fear, nausea, etc., because the whole foundation
of their being seems to lose its solidity and its value. We discover that
the question of what we are is, in considerable measure, ambiguous.
And it is not surprising when we think of why this should happen. For
in such introspection, one part of the self separates itself and tries to
look at another part. In a rough analysis, it can see certain outlines of
characteristics, more or less. But as a closer inspection proceeds,
ambiguity inevitably appears, because an essential side of the self that
is being watched is in the self that is watching, and of course, vice
versa. Thus, it is just as wrong to split the self into observer and
“objective” self as it is to split the world in two. This is a split that is OK
for some restricted purposes, but it is wrong as an expression of the
universal and necessary laws of being of the universe or any part of it.
Thus far, then, I find myself in agreement with Bohr. Where I disagree
is in his contention that we can merely accept this state of affairs as an
irreducible fact, and that we cannot make any further progress towards
comprehending how everything (including ourselves) exists in this
indivisible relation in which its full being is only in the whole. I think
that it is possible to go further and to develop a mathematical and
physical theory which gives us some conception of this new relation of
part to whole. Perhaps I could say we need a kind of “vision of totality”,
mathematical and perhaps ultimately, artistic, literary, social, etc. as
well. This vision would (like all our partial conceptions) distort and
leave out a great deal. Nevertheless, it might carry us a step further in
our understanding of the problem.
This new point of view depends on understanding the world and
each part as infinite. Here, it is not merely quantitatively infinite, for such
an infinity is still limited to repetition endlessly of a certain quality. Nor is
it merely qualitatively infinite. For this is still limited to the need for
endless change of quality. True infinity cannot be limited by anything
else at all. Either we can say that it has no “other”, or else that the infinite
is its own other. This amounts to saying that true infinity is self-limiting,
or that it is free (in the sense that there is nothing outside it to limit it).
Here, it is important to stress that if the infinite did not limit itself, it
would have no being at all. For whenever we have to do with something,

10
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
there must be a limit (e.g., it is not something else). Hence, it is essential
to define the infinite as self-limiting, and not just as the unlimited, which
would be nothing at all.
This is where the finite comes in. The finite is the limit in the infinite.
(It is important to avoid saying “limit of the infinite” as this would deny
that the infinite is really infinite, i.e., unlimited by anything outside of
it.) The illusion that is common to most thinking is that the finite exists
in itself (i.e., that a particle exists in a certain part of space). Actually the
finite exists only as a side or aspect of the infinite totality. We get into
serious errors by imagining that certain entities (e.g., electrons or men)
are only finite. In reality, everything is basically infinite and only
secondarily, finite.
Here, we have an interesting new feature which first appears in the
mathematics of the infinite. Thus, the number of points in any region
of space is infinite, no matter what size this region may be. It is therefore
possible to map the whole of infinite space into any part of it. In other
words, to each point in the larger space corresponds a point in the
smaller one. Hence, every region of space, however small, can reflect the whole.
Even more, the relation between each part and the whole can also be
reflected in the part. Thus, even the simple quantitative infinity of space
has the new feature that not only is each part in the whole but so also can the
whole be in each part (in the sense of a reflection, at least). This feature is
reminiscent in my opinion, of certain features of some paintings, where
each part reflects other parts and even the whole, with regard to colour,
form, composition and other elements which go to make up the picture.
The above idea of the infinite shows already the breakdown of the
notion that the world can be divided into separately existing parts. For
already, even in this very simple view, an essential aspect of what each
part is is that it reflects the other parts.
The further extension of the idea of infinity to time leads to an even
more radical change. Here, what is suggested is to reverse the usual
idea of first imagining time and then saying that things exist and move
in time. Rather, we begin with existence and process, and say that time
is the order in this process. Thus, we define each time concretely as the
“time when” such and such existed, or changed, and each position as
the “place where” it was, etc. To carry through such a view consistently,
we should begin with the concept of totality, which is infinite and eternal.
This includes all that there is. was and will be. If we knew this. we
would know all reality. We would know every concrete existent, every
law (relationship) and the limits of every law. Of course, we can only

A New Vision of Totality
11
select out certain aspects of this totality. Each science reflects some aspect,
the arts another, the poet another, and so on. Even more fundamental
is the split corresponding to past and future. At any one moment, one
side of eternity is reflected as “past”, i.e., it is gone. Another side is the
future, which is yet to come. On the basis of some limited knowledge
of the past, we try to project our knowledge, with limited success, towards
the future. Actually, what is present now is neither the past nor the
future, but a reflection of these, which if inter-preted properly would
tell us, in principle, all about them (only that this would require an
infinite effort of interpretation). The split that we make at each moment
is to divide all existence, at that moment, into two sides, one reflecting
that which has been, the other implying that which will be. The reflection
of that which has been is what is available to us immediately.
Nevertheless, both sides actually exist together in each moment, they
combine to make a totality. As a result, one side implies the other. I
suggest here an analogy to advertising signs made of flashing coloured
electric lights. In this way pictures are made, let us say with red and
blue lights. Suppose we could only see the red lights (which are analogous
to the reflection of the past). Then the general outline of the blue parts
of the picture would be implied by the red parts, but its details would
be missing. Thus, we would know something of the “shape of things to
come” but not very much in detail.
I suggest that the above is the way in which we apprehend selected
aspects of reality. They are selected by our location in space and time,
by the nature of our senses and interests, by the character of our
instruments, knowledge, skills, techniques, etc. Everything that we know
is a selection out of an infinite totality. But here we must be careful.
Even our knowledge as well as our thoughts, feelings, etc., are parts or sides of this
totality. Remember here the point made by Niels Bohr, that anything
less than the totality is, in some extent, ambiguous in its mode of being.
Thus, even if we consider the whole universe, but leave ourselves out
of it, we will leave essential ambiguities in the picture. For just as much
as the mode of being of each man is completed only in his relationships
to other people and to the rest of the world, so also is the mode of being
of other people and the rest of the world complete only in their
relationships to that man. This shows up, for example, in that nature
without man is very different from nature with man in it (and
transformed by man). Each man may contribute something essential to
the being of others, and even to nature. Of course, usually it does not
seem to happen this way, but this may be because we do not understand

12
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
ourselves. Especially, we do not understand that each man is potentially
infinite, and that if he were able to realize himself as such, he could
have an enormous effect on other people, simply by being what he
is (because it could become clear to other people in this way that
they too are potentially infinite).
The above point of view implies that the notion that there exist
“things” that are only finite is at best, a crude simplification, good enough
for some purposes, but basically wrong in its overall implications. Since
the very idea of a “thing” implies limitation and finiteness, we could
say that in a sense, there is really no “thing” in the world. Even chairs,
tables, etc., which seem at first sight to be limited “things” are not really
so. If we apply a little heat, the molecules go into movement and they
dissolve away into gas. Put them into an atomic pile and even their
atoms would dissolve away into other atoms and energy. At very high
energies all kinds of particles transform into each other. Thus, there are
really no final or eternal limits on what any “thing” actually is, or can
become. Such limits are only of relative validity, i.e. the limitations are
themselves limited in their domains of validity. Thus, even the simplest “things”
are really infinite, and much more so, the same holds for man, who is
infinitely more complex and subtle in his make-up.
Considering the above, it is therefore not surprising that man’s first
impression of infinity is a sense of “nothingness”. Thus, the empty
night skies suggest infinity. What this really means is that all the
apparently solid and everlasting features of nature, society, ourselves,
etc., are realized to be founded on essentially nothing at all (or at least
what is essentially nothing in relation to the totality). Every one of
these things has something in it arbitrary, contingent, and therefore it is
subject to being altered or destroyed by what is outside of it (as well as
perhaps by its own internal laws of development). Even what seemed
to us the most eternal values are seen to partake of this nature. It is
therefore not surprising that this view has much in it that is frightening
to all of us.
The other side of the picture is, however, that infinity denies the self-
existent reality only of the finite. It does not mean a bare and empty
nothingness at all. Rather, it means that no finite form is everlasting or
complete in itself. This can be understood as the certainty that we must
eventually lose everything that we have, or are. But it can also be
understood as infinite freedom. We are not bound permanently by anything
in the past (even though we must take the consequences of the past into
account in all our calculations). There is a real freedom in the universe,

A New Vision of Totality
13
in the sense that every form of necessity has its limits. If we know those
limits, we can take the appropriate actions and remove ourselves from
the dominion of any particular kind of necessity, thus becoming free, at
least in that respect.
Engels has said that “freedom is the recognition of necessity”. On
the basis of the above discussion, I would argue that this is a misleading
simplification, because mere recognition of necessity does not liberate
us. For example, we all recognize the necessity that we must die, but we
go on dying whether we like it or not. To be free of death we would
have to understand the limitations of the laws that make death necessary,
and to take the appropriate steps to remove ourselves from the dominion
of these laws. We are at present able to do this in a small way. Thus,
some of the causes of death are the actions of bacteria. If we take steps
to remove ourselves from subjection to bacteria, we free ourselves from
some of those things that make death necessary. But the more
fundamental origin of the necessity of death is in our own internal
processes that constitute our mode of life. And these are what we must
understand if we are really to prolong life in a fundamental way.
You may now ask what is the positive content of freedom? In other
words, after we have removed ourselves from the dominion of necessity,
what will we do? The answer to this question is I think, closely related
to the nature of art. We are really asking ourselves, “What are we, most
essentially, after we have removed all external factors that now limit
us?” I suggest that each one of us is something infinite, which at least
reflects the infinite totality. This something should itself be a kind of
whole. That is, it should have the kind of completeness, unity, integral
character, etc., that is in a good picture. In such a picture, one cannot
analyse the whole into separately existing parts (e.g. spots of paint etc.).
Rather, to the extent that the picture is a real work of art, the justification
of each part is only in the whole picture. Similarly, with regard to our
own existence in time and space, we do not say that the past completely
determines the future, for this would deny novelty to the future and
wholeness to our existence in time. Rather, we say that the past in some
way limits the future (remember the analogy of the picture made of
flashing lights, in which the past shows “the shape of things to come”
but not its details). Nevertheless, there is room for something new to
exist in its own right. The freedom of each new thing to be what it
really is, is limited by the past. This limitation applies to ourselves as
well as to everything else in the world. But insofar as we understand
these limitations, we can remove ourselves from their dominion and we

14
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
can, in a sense, make room to allow us to be what we are, i.e. a
complete, whole person, not only at one moment, but over a whole
lifetime. In such a mode of existence there is genuine freedom, in the
sense that the future is not fully determined by the past any more
than, for example, the left-hand side of a picture is fully determined
by its right-hand side. Rather, both sides simply make up the whole
picture, in the sense that, while they limit each other in certain ways,
this limitation is incomplete when the whole picture is not taken into
account.
Of course, in doing all this, we cannot ignore causality, any more
than the painter can ignore the requirements of technique, the
properties of paint, etc. It is just by understanding causality very
deeply that we can find its limitations, which leave room for us to
be free, as the painter by mastering his materials and techniques
finds room to express freely something that is an essential side of
himself. By the word “express” one does not mean that this something
is already there in him, fully formed and just waiting to come out.
Rather, one means that it comes into this form fully only in the
process of expression. Thus, the process has in it an aspect that is
free, not determined by anything other than itself, i.e. it has the
character of the infinite to be self-limiting (or perhaps, to be
“creative”, it could be said).
All of this raises another interesting point. A good picture is not
only an integral whole, but even more, it achieves this wholeness by
expressing something having universal significance. In other words,
while it is something specific, particular, limited in its existence, etc.,
its relationships to its parts are rich enough and of the right character
to suggest the universe and its relationships to its parts. Thus, it is
“universal” in the sense that somehow its structure reflects that of the
universe. In other words, it makes a kind of “world in itself”. But
besides this, it must make clear the other side of the truth, viz. that
the picture is also not a world in itself, but obtains its full significance
by its relationship to what is outside of it. In this way, it obtains another
kind of universality. And I think that each truly existent thing does
the same (a human life that could be lived freely, for example). In its
structure, there is a wholeness that suggests a world in itself, yet this
wholeness is not self-existent, but rather exists only in its relationship
to the complete whole.

A New Vision of Totality
15
I am afraid that I have been getting a bit out of my field in the above
speculations. Nevertheless, I would appreciate hearing how they strike
you as an artist.
I have gone a lot further toward developing these ideas in
mathematical form, but they are still only in a preliminary stage of
formulation. Perhaps we could discuss them further after I hear from
you about what I have written so far.
Perhaps it would be helpful if I summarized the main idea I have
been developing so far. It is based on the notion that anything less than
the infinite and eternal totality of all that there is, was or will be, is
inherently ambiguous as to what it is, because essential aspects of its
being reside in its relationship to this totality. This ambiguity applies in
all divisions that we make (subject-object, universal-particular, one
science vs. another, science vs. art, etc., etc.). The most fundamental
division is time itself, which divides this totality (at each moment) into
two parts, that which has (at that moment) passed away and that which
is (at that moment) yet to come. Each new moment constitutes a new
division of this totality, containing a reflection of all previous divisions.
At first sight, we tend to conclude that the past and the future are
each well defined in their being, with no ambiguity as to what they are.
But a more careful analysis shows that essential aspects of the being of
each are in their relation to the other. Thus, there is some ambiguity in
past and future. We experience this ambiguity in certain ways directly.
For when we try to say “now”, we find that by the time we have said it,
the time that we meant is already past, and no longer “now”. And if we
try to do it with clocks, so as to be more precise, quantum theory
implies that a similar ambiguity would arise because of the quantal
structure of matter. In fact, there is no known way to make an
unambiguous distinction between past and future.
If we follow through the consequences of this ambiguity, we see that
there is room for genuine freedom. For it becomes impossible that the
past shall completely determine the future, if only because there is no
way to say unambiguously what the past really was until we know its
future. In other words, as in a work of art, each part acquires its full
meaning only in its relation to the whole. To a certain extent, we are led
to a conception of being, which cannot be specified unambiguously at
one moment of time.
My disagreement with Bohr is that he stops with just giving the
limitations on the older mechanistic and deterministic points of view,
and discourages the development of new categories of thought

16
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
concerning space, time, existence, etc., in which one will see the reasons
for these limitations. Thus, if determinism is limited, this need not be a
complete mystery. It may only mean that we must have a different idea
of what things are, which shows quite naturally why determinism is
limited. If we get a different idea of time and of what is to be meant by
existence in time, then we see a natural reason why the past would not
determine the future (e.g., as has been suggested, the law is not that the
past shall determine the future completely, but rather, that the whole
shall form a unity, as in a picture or a musical composition).
As you may perhaps have noticed, my ideas on determinism and
indeterminism have developed since I wrote Causality and Chance, although
what I now think about these questions was to a considerable extent,
implicit in the point of view expressed in the book. To relate this to
what you said in your first letter (March 6), I would say that neither
determinism nor indeterminism (causality or chance) is absolute. Rather,
each is just the opposite side of the whole picture. Wherever there is
one of these categories, there must also be the other. Our method should
be to begin with something that goes beyond both of these categories,
viz., the infinite and eternal totality. We want to get to know what the
totality is and how indeterministic it is. The role of indeterminism is
merely to describe the fact that causal relation in time does not exhaust
the whole of being. It does not mean absolute lawlessness, but only that
any particular chain of lawful relationship is limited, i.e. not completely
universal in its domain of validity. These limits leave room for new
relations and new kinds of totalities to come into existence. In terms of
a sufficiently broad context, all laws and all limits to these laws are seen
to follow from the fact that the whole (which includes time as well as
space) is indeed a kind of unity.
With regard to your letter of April 11, you ask about the use of
terms in science such as “random”, “lawless”, “indeterministic”,
“disorder” etc., “How does one distinguish order from disorder?” You
are quite right in supposing that there is a great deal of arbitrariness
and confusion here. Nevertheless, I believe that underneath it all, there
is a real problem that remains to be solved, and that it is not just a
question of “descriptive abstraction”. For example, in the question of
determinism vs. indeterminism, there is as I have said, a necessary
complementary relation of the two ideas. Each event can always be
studied (a) as unique and singular, at least in some aspects, and (b) as
part of a causal chain. To be unique and singular, there must be
something in it which is not just a reflection of other elements in the

A New Vision of Totality
17
chain, e.g. its past, although it may, in part, be such a reflection. Similarly,
every chain of determination has a beginning and an end. From the
point of view in which we consider this chain, we must say that here
this particular form of determinism becomes irrelevant, and we have a
lack of such determinism. Likewise we may consider elements which
are, in a narrow context, unique, singular and not essentially related to
each other. In a broader context (e.g. space and time) one will see them
coming into relation, as necessary parts of the broader whole. Thus,
each form of indeterminism is also limited. Similar ideas can be
developed with regard to order vs. disorder, randomness vs. law, etc.
With regard to your view concerning Surrealism, Expressionism and
Action Painting, I agree in considerable measure with you about them.
I personally do not like them, nor do I regard them as really healthy
trends in art. However, where I differ from you is in my evaluation of
their significance. I think that many of their proponents have honestly
been trying to solve real problems. Of course, they have attracted many
charlatans, but then so has every other form of art, including what has
been called “classical”. One must avoid the tendency to attribute
malicious intentions to these people (e.g. that they “have used certain
kernels of truth as the means of escaping the extremely difficult problems
of our times, restoring to pathology in art and barbarism in politics,
solutions of violence whether with a brush or guns”).
What I think is closer to the truth is that these movements focus on
isolated facets of reality, mistaking them for a whole or a universal
essence of the whole. In this connection, I think that from the times of
the Impressionists and perhaps before, there has existed a dissatisfaction
with the older representational forms of art. It has been felt that they
somehow give too superficial a view of reality. There have been many
movements, whose main content has been based on the feeling that all
the apparently solid aspects of life, as it is seen in common experience,
are really not very substantial, and that something else very different
lies beneath this. Naturally, in doing this, they have tended to stress
what is chaotic, meaningless, deceptive, etc. There is even a grain of
truth in such a vision. Consider, for example, the Surrealists, who tend
to suggest that behind all the common and reassuring features of
everyday life, is something absurd. They do this either by an abnormal
increase of irrelevant detail in too uniform and clear a light, or else by
taking a picture which is very realistic and everyday in each of its parts,
and yet which adds up to something frightening or absurd. In doing
this, they suggest something that is true about the world that we live in

18
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
(e.g. something like the Nazi concentration camps, some of which were
covered with slogans like “work enriches life”).
Where all these movements go wrong is that their proponents get so
attached to the particular facet of truth that they have discovered that
they cannot go on to something new, something more positive and
creative. But I doubt that there is any plan in their minds to be violent
or to do any dirty work. In this respect, they are no different from some
of their opposing counterparts, such as the school of Socialist Realism
in the Soviet Union. The latter are reflecting an idea common in that
country that what they are building has eternal value. As a result, they
are disturbed when any work of art suggests the impermanence and
doubtful significance of a great deal of what they are doing. They too
cannot look at the whole truth, and engage in violence to suppress the
other side, and to force a certain style on artists (also with, in all
probability, very good intentions).
I should perhaps add here that my first reactions to modern art were
almost entirely negative. However, in some respects, I have changed
my mind. For example, with regard to Rouault, I first felt that his pictures
were very discouraging and depressing. Gradually, I began to see them
in a new light. In particular, last year in London, I saw a picture of his,
The Old Clown, part of the E.G.Robinson collection, I believe. At first, it
seemed to be rather a mixed up set of patches of colour. But gradually,
it began to take shape. In particular two patches struck my eye, one in
the face of the clown and another outside him, which seemed to
complement the first. My eye began to move back and forth from one
patch to the other, a pulsation was established, and suddenly it ceased,
to give way to a remarkable new steady vision which I can best describe
as seen in a new dimension. It was not so much that the clown became
visible in three dimensions, this was true but only a minor point. The
major point is that there seemed to be a flow or a current in which the
whole being of the clown poured outward to reveal itself, all his feelings,
thoughts and emotions etc., and a counter-flow in which the outside
(including the viewer) was drawn into him, to emerge again in the
outward flow. It was a very striking experience for me, one that I shall
always remember. Whether the artist intended the picture to be seen in
this way, I don’t know of course, I would be interested in knowing
whether it struck anyone else in this way.
The main point that I want to make in the above discussion is that it
illustrates how wrong it is to make snap judgements on something new.
No doubt there is a great deal of rubbish in any new movement, but

A New Vision of Totality
19
there also may be a great deal of value, which has to be understood in
a new light. It is also rather dangerous to make very detailed blue-
prints as to what the new should be. If we do this, how can what is
really new come into being? Of course, we do need theoretical analysis
of all existing trends, but we also need a continual alertness, a readiness
to recognize the new and the unexpected when it occurs, even if it
means altering or abandoning our most cherished views at times. This
is perhaps a concomitant of not being “violent” in the sense that you
describe in your letter. In other words, it is essential that there be real
freedom and no effort to impose preconceived ideas on others, or on
oneself.
This letter has grown much longer than I had intended and also due
to pressure of work, taken much longer in the writing than I had hoped.
Perhaps it could be the basis of an article to be published eventually (in
a year or so). I should be grateful for your comments.
Awaiting your reply with great interest,
My kindest regards,
David Bohm
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
May 22, 1960
Dear Mr Bohm:
Thank you very much for your good letter of April 24. Be assured
that it was appreciated and reread with considerable interest. I wish I
could give you a reply that you would think merits receiving yours.
Once more I have the experience, in your letter as in your book, and
which I have not mentioned before, how similar many things you say
are to what Alfred Korzybski puts down in Science and Sanity, which first
appeared in 1933. Do you know of him? Have you read him?
Throughout your letter you are expressing your notions of nature
as process, but not until page 3 do you directly use the term “process.”
You show how everything is related to everything else, including the
mechanical instrument, with all of which I agree.
But about those instruments which serve as the perceiving
intermediary between the man and nature, about that I should like to

20
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
know more. Perhaps someone has dealt with this, but not in anything I
have come across. What are these instruments doing to the men who
use them? Constantly there is the effort to sharpen the perception of
the instrument for man, but where is the man in all this, what is
happening to him? Too often I feel, while reading science, that the
author forgets that he is the final super-instrument, that he forgets
mankind altogether along with himself, so submerged is he in the
instrumental world. Nature is not a machine. Does man rely too much
on the instrument, so much that today he permits it to deceive him
because he assumes it no longer supplies a chain of causality? I mean,
could it be that the instrument, even though it probes more deeply into
nature than ever before, can no longer function so thoroughly for man
as it did in the older mechanics? In the sense, that what the instrument
now reveals demands more of him, of himself. Is this why men are now
erecting absolutes from a state of desperation; a dualism in nature—
comple-mentaries—a dualism between man and nature—indeterminism?
When I read accounts of the behavior of the single atoms in relations
to all the others, I have the impression of something akin to the creative
human being. This is an impression I do not get from the kind of
nature picture given by the older mechanics, from the little I know
about it. It seems as though the very creative depths of nature are now
being approached in physics. This could be the sort of event that
mistakenly leads to the view of indeterminism by those too much
submerged in over-dependence upon instrumental finality. Now that
the instrument finds more, could it be that it “tells” less?
Your use of the term “ambiguity” to express your views on what are
all aspects of the totality of nature, is completely new to me. I would
have to think more on the use of that term. To me everything in nature
is one vast process; “Everything is everything else,” as I believe Leonardo
put it. Thinking and experiencing in that way, it becomes untenable to
accept dualisms of any sort such as complementarianism and
indeterminism, and as your use of “ambiguity” seems to suggest too.
I must admit ignorance about Existentialism. I once read a small
book by Sartre, but it did not interest me to pursue the subject further,
even though there certainly were those “kernels” of truth in it. That
there exists a “gap” between our existence and what we think about it
is certainly not something that we are the first humans to think about.
Perhaps we are so taken with this disparity in our century, because we
have lost the means by which we could look with some hope of doing
what other times did, namely, to narrow the “gap.” Perhaps because, in

A New Vision of Totality
21
our times, both the artist and the scientist have literally been ejected from
nature’s womb, so to speak. This has brought on the crisis in both art
and science. That is to say, nature no longer responds neatly to the
instruments as it did in the old days of localization, and Heisenberg thinks
to take his revenge, while Bohr would tell the disparities of the lasting,
the absolute brotherhood of complementaries. As for the artists, they
have lost the convenience of nature offering ready-made forms for art,
forms which always remained there in nature for the artist to return to
when things went wrong. It is not by chance that science and art speak of
the “laws of chance,” that artists and composers make what they call
indeterministic and molecular art. Not that many of these ever bother to
read science, but it does appear to offer a solution for artists wandering in
a land of drought. It frees them from all restraint from everything, even
from themselves, becoming a mere vehicle for the arbitrary.
In your “vision of totality,” you just about include all other fields. I
think we have to make more modest demands. Why not work to bring
into a totality view what is already reaching for it? I mean certain arts
and sciences. What a force if the truly creative individuals of science
and art were to stop inhabiting different planets and join forces, as they
sometimes did in the past, first through a comprehension of each other.
These two fields seem to contain the solution for a future sanity, because
the solutions needed for each are the ones that mankind seems to be
searching for. Alone they continue helpless and largely destructive. We
have arrived at the end of “living like maggots in a cheese,” as Cassius
Keyser warned so long ago (p. 655 my Evolution book). Man is now on
his own; he is in charge of his own evolution, it will no longer come
about in the old “natural” way, he must consciously direct it. Survival
now depends, it seems to me, upon being creatively oriented whether
one is a scientist, artist or whatever.
Then the relation of our existence to what we think about it, and
our relation to nature, will cease to be but a mere problem, becoming
more centered in the effort of creation. It is in this respect that I believe
art holds the deepest significance to the future (see my “Art and Science
as Creation,” in Structure [1958]). Art has had a very special role in
man’s relation to nature, which is hardly suspected. It is difficult to
imagine how various times could have realized their various views of
totality, without art. I also have the impression that what the sensitive
individual experiences before art, but largely unconsciously, is a totality
relation with the rest of nature. Art makes him feel adequate at being
one with the universe of nature.

22
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
The artist is without anything but himself before nature, without
instruments, without mathematics to order, to suggest, to predict, and
without a philosophy. He must forever hurl himself anew and whole
into the totality of nature. He cannot dare to think beyond where he is
in this totality, except in the most extremely tentative way, otherwise he
would frustrate the effort to create art.
What you say about the finite and infinite, about that I have to think
more. Even though the finite infiniteness of the infinite throws me, I
seem to agree with the conclusions you draw from it. Your notion that
“there is really no-‘thing’ in the world,” is a wonderful expression of
process. But, in agreeing with you, I have to take what seems like the
opposite position. You speak of chairs, tables, etc., how heat applied
dissolves all into gas, that even then the atoms can be dissolved into
other structures, etc. You thus drive the object down the road that science
has traveled where indeed objects vanish into everything. You draw
only a picture of nature that science sees, a nature put in reverse. This
reminds me of Eddington’s famous two tables, the one we are all familiar
with, and the one of science. As you will recall, Eddington was perturbed
by this situation. What happened, he asked, to art, poetry, to that world
of perception and experience which vanished at the behest of the scientific
table? Dualisms again, the dualism of art and science.
It is not alone the world of the elementary particle that is admirable
in nature, but also the fabulous richness of that world which those
particles manifest to natural, human-scale perception. This is to speak
in terms of your “totality,” is it not? It is not that my kind of artist sees
nature only as the limitation of the perceived objects, for us too limited
things are only “relatively limited,” as you put it. It is rather, that we
extensionalize this level of nature into a deeper perception of its use to
art.
Let me try again. You write about the problem of the historical past
and the future. It seems to me that the physicist is one who, in respect
to nature, the further he gets into the “future” of nature, the less he
cares about the “past” experience of nature. It seems that what he once
saw as the reality of nature, which continues to remain a reality of
nature in spite of his denial, should be retained in any totality picture of
nature which the physicist makes. I have the impression that the physicist
is perpetually seeking an a or the reality, when all we experience on all
levels of nature comprises the totality of nature’s reality. On such grounds
art and science could meet in a mutual concern with nature, and acting
as correctives to the picture each makes of nature.

A New Vision of Totality
23
Accordingly, I emphasize the reverse direction of your illustration,
in which we regard the atoms and their energies transformed into other
relations until we have chairs, tables and human beings. The direction
of nature. I am suggesting that this direction of the totality process of
nature can continue further, through the agency of man as artist. While
the physicist pursues the creative process of nature, even to how nature
began, the artist is working at the other end of this process, extending
this creative process. The physicist wants to get at the beginning of
nature, to the very birth of the atom. While the artist wants to continue
with what that atomic world already manifests in its evolution. Think
of the evolution of nature evolving new forms, that is, the new art is
continuing the evolution of nature as art.
About your discussion of “necessity,” I am not sure I understand
you. I cannot see how we manage to “remove ourselves from the domain
of necessity.” If we recognize ourselves as potentially possessed of that
quality you speak of as infinite, is not that going from one notion of
necessity to that of another, that is, we go to the necessity of the infinite
attitude? Aside from that question, I agree completely with your notion
that human life is a mode of the infinite, a “reflection” of it, as you say,
a wholeness in ourselves that is at one with the wholeness of nature. It
is not a question of being that, the human being is such, it is only that
we frustrate its free operation.
You write that we do not ignore causality, that comprehending it
deeply enough “we find its limitation, which leaves room for us to be
free.” I wonder, however, if the situation of causality is more similar to
what happened to the old mechanics of time and space localization. I
mean, is it so certain that the attitude of causality has reached a limit
any more than considerations of time and space? The latter were not
eliminated simply because the simultaneous thing no longer worked.
This is to ask, is it possible that the notion of causality could be exten-
sionalized? That what is necessary is a less mechanistic attitude toward
determinism, the inheritance from the old mechanics, that it can be
replaced by a creative notion of determinism?
I am very, very far from recognizing any process in an artist which is
“free, not determined by anything other than itself.” I can only imagine
it as a delusion induced by opium, the artist managing to forget the
determining role of the opium. Artists of our century, by the car load,
presume to possess such a freedom but, as you will note in my writing,
I find it to be a fictional freedom at the sacrifice of the unlimited freedom
which nature opens to the artist, as it always has. I believe I have shown,

24
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
at least no one has disputed it as yet, that even an artist like Piet
Mondrian, who claimed independence from the sensory world of nature,
remained as bound to it as any artist in the past. His suppression had
only the effect of making him unconscious of the role of nature in his
art. No artist has ever escaped a deterministic relation with nature,
whatever the course his art takes, whatever he thinks he is doing.
The paragraph in which you consider a good work of art as an
integral whole, which results from expressing the structure of the
universe, and say that its significance lies in its relationship to the totality,
with that I am completely one with you. You have put in different
words, and very good ones, what I have written many times as being
the future goal of art. It is possible, however, that when you have read
my writings, you will find that we have arrived at similar conclusions
about art from different experiences with nature, since you are a physicist.
In the second section of your letter you give a résumé of what you
have been saying. You again speak of the problem of past and future. I
think I understand you, and agree. But there is one point I would suggest
for your consideration, I will use your excellent illustration of the red
and blue lights, the red past leaving the implied blue future. It seems to
me there is is one other subtle event that takes place. Looking back at
the past we see another set of red and blue lights. Only now the blue
light represents any section of the past which was once a future. It
leaves an area implied for the red which covers the past of this once
future area. We now notice that the implied red area has been altered
by the future which followed it. I am suggesting, that if the past is
always implying, in some way and degree, the newness of the future,
the future is always in the process of implying, in some way and degree,
a newness to the past. This is to say, that the past is in a constant state
of change which increasingly offers the means whereby we can most
successfully discern the potentialities for freedom in the future. This
seems to fit in with your statement, that “there is no way to say
unambiguously what the past really was until we know its future,” and
“that the whole shall form a unity, as in a picture.”
The two paragraphs in which you take up determinism and
indeterminism, order and disorder, etc. I can follow you verbally,
everything you say is reasonable, but I cannot reach the non-verbal
level from which I must suppose your notions to be derived. Even what
we usually call disorder, is really a connotation of negation concerning
some kind of order. How in the world does one ascertain with any
semblance of confidence, that a “particular form of determinism becomes

A New Vision of Totality
25
irrelevant”? How does one decide whether it’s the particular form of
the notion of determinism, or whether it is the general notion of
determinism, that is irrelevant? I have asked, “How does one distinguish
order from disorder?” You repeat the question, but I could not see that
you answered it. Why is there always so much obscurity on this issue?
I have the impression that faith is posing as fact.
Here is a sentence that I quote from your book, a kind of sentence
that I frequently encounter in science literature: “Because of the random
distribution of the particles an almost continuous pressure is produced on
the walls” (italics mine; p. 48). The atoms seems to be doing two
paradoxical acts. That is, they are acting in a haphazard and also in an
“almost” uninterrupted time sequence. This is a kind of plain disorder
and, at the same time, an “almost” order. Isn’t there something more
here than the argument of statistics by which you resolve such a
discrepancy?
You state that in art there has “existed a dissatisfaction with the
older representational forms of art,” “that they give a superficial view
of reality.” Here the physicist in you has taken art in the nature direction
taken by your field. But art is not science-nature. Those who are the
foremost of the post-mimetic innovators, for me Monet and still more
Cézanne, remained all their lives as the most fervent admirers of the
great ones in their past. They did not need to denounce their
predecessors in order to feel status, unlike the Dadaists who had to
paint a mustache on Mona Lisa. Monet and Cézanne continued from
where their predecessors left off, as did Einstein from those before him,
thanking them for what they left behind, which enabled them to go
further. Dissatisfaction with the whole past is an art disease that made
its appearance precisely with the breakdown of mimetics. Artists, that
is most of them, having lost the thread of continuity from the past,
blamed the past. Then, not knowing where their art was taking them,
they supplanted a definitive effort with a new but strange virtue, not-
knowing. It is these not-knowers who shed crocodile tears over art’s
nature reality which science presumably dismembered beyond further
use, but who are in fact pleased that this has happened, pleased that
science denounces causality and upholds chance, disorder,
indeterminism, etc. When the physicist looks back at Newton, and I
am reminded of Einstein, or back at any of the great innovators, does
he speak of “their superficial reality”? Far from it, as you know. There
is an altogether different attitude. Well, there are some artists too who
look at their predecessors with affection, not dissatisfaction.

26
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
What you express as the relevance of Surrealism as a reflection of
the truth of our times, such as the concentration camps with their cruel,
absurd slogans of “work enriches life,” is, to be sure, one way to look at
it, if somewhat strained. I say this as not being a Jew. It seems to me the
perversity of Surrealism to say so. Are not such artists perpetrating the
very condition of human life that nurtures such bestiality as the
barbarism of the Nazi? Is not Surrealism but art’s participation in the
insanity of our times? Anyway, with equal reason, I do believe, one
could say that the Nazis “suggest something that is true about this world,”
by pointing to the cruel absurdities that Surrealists conjure in art. This
reminds me of the Nazi officers, not small fry, who paid that clown
Picasso visits of admiration. Why did they leave this communist stooge
alone and murder other artists? Surrealism, yes indeed!
Do you think it impossible for artists and art to sink as low as human
behavior sinks in other fields? Are artists some rarefied breed of life,
that no matter how absurd, their behavior can never be compared to
that among the more ordinary mortals? I am not surprised that such as
the Surrealists “cannot go on to something more positive and creative,”
to use your words. They only know destruction; if the Nazis are the
truth, indeed the Surrealists are the truth. You must forgive me, I do
not feel these things with the sterility of objectivity.
It seems to me that your reaction to the Rouault picture was the
result of your experience as a physicist. As I read this paragraph I almost
expected you to say something about a break-through about the quantum
barricade. Am I being absurd?
You write that you do not feel qualified to deal with the relations
between physicist and art. Do you know of a single soul who is? I do not,
whether physicist or artist. Until some individuals in both fields do their
best to deal with this problem, even if they must stumble and appear
ridiculous, there will not appear a qualified person in either field.
In late summer the editor of The Structurist, Eli Bornstein, who lives
in Canada, will visit me. With your permission I should like to show
him your letter on the basis, as you suggest, that you might make this
into an article for a future issue.
I should appreciate your comments, particularly where I try to relate
our two fields.
With my best wishes,
Charles Biederman

A New Vision of Totality
27
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
June 6, 1960
Dear Mr Biederman:
Thank you very much for your letter, and for your two books plus
the three articles in Structure which I received. I have read your book on
Cézanne, and the three articles in Structure, and I have begun to read
Art as the Evolution of Visual Knowledge. I should prefer to delay a detailed
comment on your ideas until I have finished the latter book. For the
moment, I shall only say that I find your ideas very interesting and
stimulating. In particular, Cézanne’s ideas on space as a unity of
interpenetrating planes come close to ideas that I am trying to develop
on geometry. I am sympathetic to your efforts to develop an art that is
not a mimesis of nature, but rather, something that exists and is beautiful
in its own right, having the same general laws of process and relationship
as are found in nature. However, I wonder if you may not be in danger
of dogmatism, when you assert that this is surely the main line in the
evolution of art, at least for the present. How can you be so sure that
the older forms have been completely exhausted, that art has no more
role to play, either as a mimesis, or as the expression of new truths
concerning nature? After all, you yourself have stressed that the future
throws new light on the past, reveals new meanings in it, etc. In other
words, I would be ready to consider your proposals as a possible line of
development that may well turn out to be fruitful. But how can you be
so sure that it must be the only or the main line of development?
Now to get back to your recent letter (of May 22). I am afraid that I
did not express my point of view very clearly in my previous letter. I
did not intend to dissolve the familiar large-scale world into atoms,
electrons, etc. The opposite process is, of course, equally valid, i.e., of
going on from atoms to large-scale realities. Indeed, I would stress that
there is no way to reduce the large scale to nothing but atoms. From the
point of view of infinity, it would make no sense to say that the large-
scale world is constituted of atoms, the atoms of electrons, protons,
etc., the electrons and protons of something still smaller, and so on ad
infinitum. In this way, everything would disappear in an infinite
regression. Rather, I would say that each thing, each level, makes its
own unique contribution to the totality, a contribution that is not just a

28
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
reflection of something else (even though it may in part be such a
reflection). Therefore, the large-scale reality with which the artist works
is a part of the whole truth, a part having certain qualities, meanings,
etc., that cannot be found in their entirety or even in their essential features, by
going down to atoms, electrons, etc. Atoms, electrons, etc., are neither
more nor less real than the large-scale level of our immediate experience.
It is only all these levels working together, each making its own
irreplaceable contribution, that constitute the totality.
In connection with this problem, I would argue, for example, that
the laws of living, thinking matter (e.g. human beings) contain certain
features which are very probably not fully deducible from the laws of
the constituent atoms. For example, we have studied atoms, electrons,
etc., largely in isolation, or in interaction, only a few at a time. Using
laws suggested by these studies, we have then made the gratuitous and
unproved assumption that if we could only solve the equations for the
myriads of atoms constituting the living animal or the human body, we
could, in principle, deduce every property, quality, etc., of the latter.
But it is much more likely that something is left out of our laws of
individual atoms, something that is of not appreciable importance when
only a few atoms at a time are involved, but that may be of crucial
importance in large masses of highly organized matter, such as is found
in living beings. In other words, living things may have new qualities
not found in isolated atoms or in small groups of atoms, such that there
are new laws which can be expressed only in relation to these new
qualities. Similarly, for large-scale nature in general.
It is here that the idea comes in of the “finite in the infinite”. Every
thing that is in any sense determinate in its existence at all, must be
limited. For determination (which has the same root as “termination”)
means limitation, and therefore, finiteness. On the other hand, we have
seen that because the full being of each thing is only in its relationship
to the totality, every notion of something as finite is in some way,
erroneous. Not only does this follow when we dissolve chairs into atoms,
electrons, etc., (i.e., chairs are not just simply chairs, but are potentially
and actually infinitely more). It also follows when we build atoms, etc.,
into large-scale objects (i.e., atoms are not only atoms, they are also
potentially and actually constituents of large-scale objects, having further
qualities and laws that they could not possess as simple atoms). We see
then that determination (or equally well, the termination) of each thing
within its pre-assigned limits holds only as simplification valid for some
purposes, but not for others. It is in this sense that I say there is no

A New Vision of Totality
29
“thing” in the world. Nevertheless, if there were no relative
determination, there would only be a characterless chaos. Thus, there
is no pure infinite either. There is only the finite in the infinite and the
infinite in each finite. These are two opposing categories which
complement each other, in the sense that either one immediately
demands the other. For example, to say that something is determined
or limited is to imply immediately that there exists (at least potentially)
something beyond these limits. Thus the idea of limitation immediately
implies the unlimited, while the idea of unlimited cannot even be
expressed, except in relation to its opposite; viz., that which is limited.
And when we have two such opposing universal categories, the truth is
that both must be asserted of everything, i.e., everything is both finite
and infinite, both limited and unlimited.
I found your comments on the image of past and future in terms of
red and blue lights very interesting. It is certainly true that the future is
always implying some newness about the past, which “increasingly offers
the means whereby we can most successfully discern the potentialities
for freedom in the future”. However, it is here that the notion of
ambiguity shows its importance and relevance. In other words, if the
past were already something absolutely definite and determined, how
could it in any way be changed at all by the future? If we assert that the
past is inherently ambiguous as to what it is, at least to begin with, then
we leave room, logically speaking, to assert further that the future
changes the past, in the sense that future developments remove some of the
ambiguity in what the past was. This means that on the basis of what may
have revealed itself up to a certain point in time, the precise and detailed
character of any given thing or event is ambiguous. It is this ambiguity
which leaves room for some freedom. For only future developments
will show fully what this past really was. On the other hand, guided by
the erroneous idea that the past was in itself unambiguous in its nature,
we may come to the wrong conclusion that there is an iron-bound
determinism, leaving no room at all for freedom in the future.
It is this idea of ambiguity that I wish to apply to measurements in
the quantum mechanical domain. When one tries to find the exact
location of an electron by means of an instrument, one discovers that
the instrument participates so intimately in the mode of existence of the
electron that the velocity of the latter must be ambiguous. Of course, in
the future, this ambiguity may be reduced, when we see what the electron
has actually done, but new ambiguities appear, with regard to the still
later behaviour of the electron. We therefore never get rid of all ambiguities.

30
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
As we get rid of some, new ones come into their place. In other words,
every description of the electron (or of anything else) must contain
some ambiguity with regard to what it is, an ambiguity which means
that its future is not fully determined by its past alone.
It is here that we come to the problem of freedom again. I never
meant to say that there are creative acts which are not determined by
anything else at all. I only meant to say that they are not determined fully
by anything else. To explain this, recall that the large scale is not determined
fully by the atoms, but makes some irreplaceable contribution to the totality
of law. Similarly a future event is not fully determined by its past, and also
makes some irreplaceable contribution to the totality of law. Of course,
this does not mean that the large scale is completely independent of the small
scale, or that the future is completely independent of its past. Rather, there is
mutual interdependence and inter-relationship of everything. But the law
of the interdependence is such that any given thing is only partially
determined (limited) by what it is not. The full law of its determination can be
expressed only when the thing in question is included. Thus, it is more like the law
of a picture than a mechanical determination purely by externals. In other
words, it is only in the whole that the full reasons for each part can be
found; and the whole must include all the parts, including even those
whose determination is being discussed. It is in this sense that there is
freedom, especially with regard to creative acts. No doubt these acts are
conditioned, limited and shaped by society, history, the natural
environment and everything else. But these external features by themselves
do not fully determine just what will emerge in this act. It is only when we
have the whole act completed before us that we can trace all the reasons
why it is just as it is, and in doing this, we shall see that it is only in the
context of the whole, including the act itself, that reasons can be
intelligently ascribed. Thus, to a certain extent, a creative act contributes
to its own reasons for being just what it is. It cannot be reduced fully to a
mere consequence of external factors. Indeed, external factors frequently
interfere with the possibility of a creative act. And to the extent that this
is true, freedom is possible only when we have understood these limitations
and removed ourselves from their domain.
I think that in your struggle against modern painters who falsely
deny that their painting has any degree of external determinism
whatsoever, you must be careful not to go to the opposite extreme, and
to deny any degree of autonomy whatsoever to the act of creation.
This brings us to the problem of freedom and necessity. First of all
let us ask ourselves “What is necessity?” What is necessary is that

A New Vision of Totality
31
which cannot be otherwise. But whenever we consider some part or
aspect of the universe, we discover that, considered by itself alone it could
be otherwise. In other words, we cannot see in a chair the full reasons
why it is just as it is. In the materials of which the chair was made there
were many possibilities. That possibility which is now actual was
determined by something external to the chair (in this case, the man
who made it). From the point of view of the chair alone, it is only a
contingency that it is just as it is. (Contingency is the opposite of necessity,
viz., that which could be otherwise.) We discover in each part of the
universe certain relations that are necessary (laws) and certain properties
that are contingent. By broadening the part of the universe under
consideration, we may show that some things that were contingent in
the narrower context are necessary in the broader context. But then we
will have introduced new contingent properties in the broader context,
which will be necessary in a still broader context and so on without
limit.
This above means that in no finite context can we ever get rid of
contingencies. In other words, necessity and contingency are two
opposite categories, which apply to everything (every finite thing). No
matter what we consider, some aspects will be necessary and some
contingent.
Of course, we could consider the infinite totality of all that there is,
was and will be (the cosmos). If we consider this total cosmic process,
then there is nothing outside on which it could depend. Its necessity
therefore, is obvious. For whatever the cosmos is, it by definition cannot
be otherwise. Thus, its necessity and being are identical. The category
of contingency has here disappeared. Moreover, necessity and freedom
have also merged. For nothing outside can exist which could constrain
the cosmos to be as it is. We therefore cannot first imagine a cosmos
that could be otherwise and then lay down a law which requires it to be
what it is (as we could first imagine a man who could drive on either
side of the road and then lay down a law from the outside, such as
“keep to the right”). When we have stated what the cosmos is, we will
have given everything that exists, every relationship, every law, every
limit to law, etc.
When we come to any part of the cosmos, we of course know by
experience that each thing has, in itself, many possibilities, and that
further laws may be needed to explain why it has to be just what it is.
Here, we have an interesting application of the concept of ambiguity.
Remember that each part of the cosmos has inherent ambiguities in its

32
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
mode of being, because what it is is fully determined only in its relation
to the whole (which includes its infinite past and future, as well as
itself). But then we come to the question as to whether that part is
necessary. This too will be in some degree ambiguous, because we will
actually always try to express this necessity in terms of laws relating to
something less than the whole cosmos. To the extent that it is ambiguous
as to whether a given thing is necessary, it can be regarded as contingent
(and of course, vice versa). We therefore come to a deeper point of
view than before on this question. We no longer regard something as
contingent in one context and necessary in another. Rather, we say that
it is both necessary and contingent in the same context. We avoid an outright
contradiction here by noting that to the extent that its necessity is
ambiguous, there is room for its contingency, and vice versa. This is
similar to what we do with regard to the wave—particle nature of the
electron. To the extent that its particle nature is ambiguous (so that its
precise location is not defined) there is room for its wave-like character
to exist (in the domain of ambiguity of position).
When you mention in your article in Structure that Cézanne saw the
universe as a pulsation of colour, you remind me of some of my ideas on
the wave-particle character of matter. We must explain why the same
thing, e.g. an electron, can in some conditions act like a wave and in
others like a particle. Now, I propose to do it by giving up the notion that
the electron is a permanent existing particle (like a microscopic copy of a
billiard ball). Instead, let us consider a pulsating model of the electron.
We shall begin with a continuous background field extending over the
whole cosmos. Imagine a wave coming inward in this field towards a
certain point in space. At a certain time, it builds up to an intense pulsation,
and then begins to disperse. Think now of a series of such pulsations,
very close together, arranged to succeed each other in time along a track
or an orbit. If the pulses are very close together, the whole series will
reproduce all the properties of a particle on the large-scale level (where
the spacing between pulses is too small to show up). Yet on the small
scale, the electron is very different. The ingoing and outgoing pulses
which make up the electron will explain the simultaneous wave-particle
properties of the electron. We do this by giving up the notion that the
electron is a permanently existing particle. Instead we suppose that it dissolves
away and re-forms out of the background continually.
In this model, we see the indivisible unity of each thing with the
cosmos, since its pulses come in from the whole, and fall back into the
whole. The pulses of each particle interpenetrate those of every other.

A New Vision of Totality
33
Hence no particles are really separated in their existence. Even the
observing apparatus is made of particles with this pulsating structure.
Thus, every measurement contributes to the structure of the observed
system. The old idea of an observation which just gives us information
about something without participating in the existence of that thing
(and without that thing’s participating in the existence of the apparatus)
has broken down.
Different kinds of particles (electrons, protons, etc.) correspond to
different spacing in time between the pulses, and to different forms of
the track (various kinds of spirals, etc.). The “creation” of a particle
corresponds to starting a new series of pulses, its “destruction” to ending
the series. Transformations from one kind of particle to another
correspond to a change in the pattern of pulsations.
Here we have an important idea. If we just have one pulse, we cannot
tell whether it is an electron, proton or any other kind of particle. It is
only the pattern of a long series of pulses that tells us what kind of
particle we have. It therefore has no meaning to talk of an electron
existing at a given time. An electron is not the kind of thing that can be
what it is at a fixed moment in time (nor is anything else for that matter).
Now comes the question of regularity and irregularity, law and
lawlessness, that has been causing so much trouble. From the
cosmological point of view, every law is merely a contribution to
describing what the cosmos is. For example, we may have the law that
the electron follows a certain orbit. In term of pulses, this is translated
as the statement that when there is an electron, there is a certain kind of
pattern of pulses. This pattern may be more or less regular, in the sense
that certain features are repeated, with the result that if we know the
pulse pattern up to a certain moment of time, we can predict the further
pattern. To the extent that the pattern is this way, we have determinism
in time, i.e., the conclusion that the future is only a reflection of the past,
and has nothing basically new in it. On the other hand, we can assume
a more general kind of law; viz., that while there is some tendency for
the future to repeat the past (with modifications) there is room for
something new to come in, something that is not reflected in the past.
We can find the reason for this new thing only when we consider the
whole pattern in space and time, including the new thing itself. If we
consider less than the whole pattern, we may not find the reason. Thus,
in a limited context the appearance of such a new thing will have no law.
For example, every regular pattern of pulses may have in it sudden
breaks, alternations, appearances of new elements, etc. In a context less

34
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
than that of the whole, we can only say of them that they exist in the
cosmos, and must be taken into account. But every context of law is
actually finite. Therefore in every theory and in every description, there
must appear elements which do not fit into any regular pattern of law,
but which are just there. Within the context of the laws in question,
these elements are contingencies, breaks in a regular pattern, disruptions
of the pattern, etc., or just simply irregularities, having no reason that
can be found within the framework of law in question. Of course, they
may find their reason in a broader framework, but then further new
unexplained elements will appear in the broader framework. We never
get rid of such elements altogether. Indeed, from the point of view of
the ambiguity in the mode of existence of each thing and in each
relationship which it must satisfy, it follows that in no context of law
can any regular pattern be shown to be absolutely necessary. Therefore,
we will never get to a point where there is no room for something new
to come in, something that doesn’t fit into any given pattern of law.
Every time we have a regularity, we must have some limit to this
regularity. Of course, this may later be described as a new and more
complicated regularity, applying in a broader context. But then the
broader context will have its own irregularities. Wherever there are
regularities, there must be irregularities. Wherever there is law, there
must be lawlessness. These are opposite and universal categories, which
we assert together about everything (like necessity and contingency).
I hope that this letter answers some of your main questions. In my
next letter (which I shall write in a few weeks after I return from Holland)
I hope to comment on your very interesting ideas on art and its
development. I didn’t do it at this time, mainly because I need more
time to think about your ideas, and to discuss them with several people
who are working in art here (including my wife).
As for showing my letters to Eli Bornstein, I shall be very glad if you
do so, and I should welcome his comments. However, I cannot guarantee
writing an article. At present, it is only a possibility, indeed a contingency.
Meanwhile, I am very eagerly awaiting your reply to this letter.
Very sincerely yours,
David Bohm
P.S. A physicist does not discard an older law when a newer and better
one is found. He shows that the older law is contained in the newer one
as an approximation or a limiting case (as Newton’s laws of motion are

A New Vision of Totality
35
contained in Einstein’s laws as an approximation holding for velocities
small compared with those of light). Therefore the attitude is not so
different from that which you advocate with regard to art.
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
June 28, 1960
Dear Mr Bohm:
Thank you for your good letter which I found very stimulating.
I think this last letter has improved my understanding, I hope, of
what you have been trying to convey. I find many coincidences with
what I believe in.
You wonder if dogmatism is leading me to assert that such an art as
Structurism comprises the main line of future development. You ask,
has the mimetic direction been exhausted completely? The answer is
certainly not. I do not claim that it was, but only that the structural
capabilities of the two older mediums were exhausted as regards further
useful development of the past image of art. Hence the reason for the
creation of such media as photography, film, television, all of which are
structurally more extensive and so able to give the mimetic direction a
continued evolution. An evolution, by the way, that appears to have an
unlimited future, even beyond art proper.
In regard to Structurism as the future for non-camera art. Such
decisions, you are well aware, are based on some kind of assumptions.
These make the difference between attitudes that adopt a definitive
position about the future course of art as new in a new future, in contrast
to those who prefer to delve further on the established theme of what
has been done in the past, including heretofore untried variants on that
theme. The latter characterizes the conservative effort. But man cannot
stand still, or circle a point, in art any more than in science. He must
either push forward or he will stagnate into regression. Broadly speaking,
the new to the new future is achieved through constantly increasing
experience and knowledge of the reality of human life within the reality
of this universe of nature. This is true for everything, for art as for
science. Failing in this the very living quality, the impetus to and the
sustenance of a significant art disappears, either as viewed against the
background of past accomplishments, or in the view of the needs which

36
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
the future will require. Everything is then replaced by the placid or
violent efforts which have no place to go worth going yesterday, today
or tomorrow.
Only in the achievement of this living quality, the quality of adequate
existence, does the unique youth of each generation find before them
the unique life that is really their own. It is this too which permits an
old artist, or scientist, to retain the vigour of youth in his work and life.
In our times, however, this pursuit of the inescapable new is confronted
with a very drastic situation. It is not a relatively simple change to the
new as, for instance, from the romantic realism of Delacroix to the
more direct realism of Courbet. Rather, there is a change from one
kind of art that all the past has centered on, to one that appears extremely
different. This change from minieticism to an art that is an invention of
man, is comparable to and appears to be as drastic a change as that
from the old localization of time-space to that of the quantum view of
nature, from what little I comprehend of the latter. But it has been my
experience, and I would not be surprised if it has been yours in physics,
that the more one becomes familiar with the details of the change, the
drastic element is replaced by experiencing a logical growth from the
past to the present.
Why is it, however, that the quantum outlook upon nature, and for
something drastic we have no equal, is so readily accepted while the
structural view of nature as a creative process for art, is not readily
accepted? The physicist has some marked advantages. These lead
everyone to accept his innovations even though few care to comprehend
them. Nature herself produces certain manifestations on the physicist’s
observational instruments that are above dispute, as such, aside from
interpretations of them. So that to this day, even though no one has
seen an atom, all accept the notion. Then there is the obvious, the
fantastic and even fearful “practicality” application of science. All this
is connected with what I tried to say in a previous letter about man’s
naive belief in the machine. To the extent that he over-evaluates the
machine he does so at the expense of under-evaluating his super-
machine, his own organic perception. In this respect it is of interest that
the observing machine has lost its old aura of “objectivity” on the particle
level of nature and, like the human being, is found to influence the
observed with its “subjective” behavior.
When we come to the creative structural view of nature presented
by art, in contrast to the atomic structural view presented by science, it
cannot be shown with any instruments whatever, not even as the camera

A New Vision of Totality
37
instrument can show the old structural view of nature as objects. The
new vision of nature can only take place in the human unaided eye. To
make things more difficult, an entirely new mode of visual abstraction
is required, and I use abstraction in the sense you use it in your book.
When one is bereft of this new vision, or is unwilling to submit his
vision to its manifestations in art, how is he going to experience the
deeper penetration that has been made into nature’s significance to
human efforts at art? How can one then comprehend that this vision is
a continuance of the past’s vision, of both nature and art? How is one
to experience that the new art does exactly what all the past has done in
the evolution of art? How then is one to see that any “new” variation
on the past then pales beside the deeper penetration into nature and
art, that is open to our times? It is the latter which the past offers us, not
variations on itself. Art lives as does everything in the cosmos, growth
or death.
In relation to my views on art, you brought in my emphasis upon
the future throwing new light on the past, and which appears to you to
contradict my notions of past art. So I must say further just what I
meant by that. This “new light” does reveal much that might have been
done, and was never done in the past. But it is not our privilege to
return to these things, when these things are such as would be
comparable to an adult wishing to return to his childhood. What this
“light” reveals of the greatest importance is increased knowledge of
human behavior in general, enabling us the better to exploit the
possibilities of the future. In our times this problem is severely
compounded in that we cannot let nature take its course, as the saying
goes, but man must now directly make decisions about the future of his
evolution. If the future lights up the past, then it does so also in terms of
what has never and would never be in the past, but only in the future.
Variant possibilities left behind by the past serve our greater
understanding of it, but offer no direct course of action for the future.
To achieve the last we have to do as the past, create or die.
You correct my mistaken impression that you were reducing
everything to atomics and, in so doing, you have also given me a more
adequate perspective on the view we both take. We cannot reduce
everything to atoms, as you say, since that would lead everything
vanishing into an “infinite regression.” You not only regard all levels of
nature as a unity, but also art and science as part of that unity. This is
precisely the understanding that I have sought. I am very glad to see
you include the artist’s level of nature perception as part of the whole

38
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
truth, especially after what I have read by other scientists who obscure
this problem. When you write that atoms, etc., “are neither more nor
less real than the large-scale level,” this reminds me of a sentence in my
“Mondrian and Science” essay, which I mentioned is to be published
this year. It reads: “Perhaps the atom is as much a reality, or as much an
illusion, as the visible world.” This was written in connection with a
problem of reality or illusion. It is a great pity I did not have my
correspondence with you before I wrote the above mentioned essay.
Yet, when you read it, in spite of some of the ignorance I am bound to
display about science, I hope you will find something worthwhile in it.
Your next paragraph is wonderful. Where you say that what is
revealed to us by the study of relations between a few atoms in isolation,
probably leaves out qualities which are present in large-scale nature.
This has always seemed incontestable to me, and it is a welcome relief
to hear you, a physicist, say it, after all the scientists I have read who
speak of the atom as the reality. You flatly state that all is not atoms.
This should ultimately make it possible to coherently distinguish between
science and art on their creative levels, and just as important to discern
the relations between them. It seems to me that art and science, like all
other human activities, form related levels as do the various levels of
nature, such as those sought between physics and biology, which latter
I do not pretend to comprehend.
I appreciate your effort to further clarify your notion of the finite
and infinite, and their mutual qualities. I think you make good sense
with what you say there, but I would like to make a comment in reference
to it. You write of the terminate as limited, as terminate. In my previous
letter I wrote of creative determinism. What I meant by that is that
whatever we consider, an atom, particle, tree or human being, everything
is potentially of such a character along with its field or environment,
that any aspect of its structure has a plurality of possibilities. In this
view the determinate, in the sense you speak of it as limited or terminate,
occurs only after the event has spilled this way or that, or only after the
human has made his creative decision from out of the multiple choices
open before him. After that the plurality of choices is manifest again. In
this situation what has become determinate serves as a guide for future
decisions that have to be made before the new set of plurality choices.
The finite or determinate, then, becomes a means for demarking, in
the form of abstractions, the character of our pursuit of the infinite,
unlimited nature of human existence. Accordingly, as you put it, “we
have seen that because the full being of each thing is in its relationships

A New Vision of Totality
39
to the totality, every notion of something [Biederman’s italics] as finite is in
some way [Biederman’s italics], erroneous.” Are we then faced with “two
opposing categories,” as you say? On the one hand you show such an
acute sensitivity to the mutual relationships in this problem, while on
the other hand you feel the need to set up oppositions. I am wondering
whether the oppositions are purely verbal or actual.
Could not such a notion as creative determinism supply an
explanation, prior to the one of statistics, for the behavior of atoms as
explained in the following? “Because we all know atoms to perform all
the time a completely disorderly heat motion, which, so to speak, opposes
itself to their orderly behavior and does not allow the events that happen
between a small number of atoms to enrol themselves according to any
recognizable law” (Schrodinger). Otherwise, who is being irrational,
atoms or physicists?
There appears to be complete agreement with your further clarifi-
cations about the image of past and future. Earlier in this letter I gave
some further explanations of my view. Is this in agreement with your
position, or do you make a different inference about the future and its
effect upon the past?
In your notion of the ever present ambiguity of our experience of
nature and, I would add, of ourselves too, as I understand it you are
saying, in effect, that we never know everything about anything we
experience. This problem not only involves an assumed infinite universe
of nature, in which it remains to extensionalize experience and
knowledge of it, but is complicated by the fact that the human being
fundamentally reacts creatively to each approach to the future. He can
react so because each aspect of the future reveals itself as ambiguous, as
susceptible to a plurality of possibilities. It seems to me that the ever
renewed meeting between the creative being and creative nature is
constantly introducing new qualities, to the point that the being himself
is constantly becoming new as the universe of nature is constantly
appearing new. Once any of the possibilities are acted upon, these
possibilities at once impose their unique determinations by virtue of
their unique structure. This is not to contend that the creative act is fully
determined by any one thing or things, but rather, by everything, by
what you call the totality. The view of the nature within and without us
as a structure of creative determinism, indicates the kind of “freedom”
open to human life, fundamentally the freedom to be creative. This
seems in agreement with your important statement that only when the
whole, complete context, which includes the creative act itself, is before

40
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
us can we ascertain its reasons or, what I would say, tentatively ascertain
its determinations. And, to the extent that each creative act makes both
the human and his vision of the universe constantly new, this relates
with your notion that the creative act itself contributes something special
to the nature of the whole context being considered. A striking example,
I cannot think of a more vivid illustration, is the purely creative work
of art, visual or auditory.
The above paragraph is also meant as an answer to your warning
that I not go to the opposite extreme of those artists who reject all
determination, by denying any degree of autonomy to the act of
creation. I am extensionalizing, humanizing mechanistic determinism
to a view of determinism as creative, regarding the creative act as the
epitome of freedom open to human nature within environmental
nature. What is freedom? Is there freedom? Is not this a problem
man’s stupidity has gotten himself into? Is there not something better—
to be creative?
What you write regarding necessity and freedom, that is, that any
aspect of the universe considered alone could be otherwise, seems at
one with the attitude of creative determinism. But again you bring in
dualisms, this time between necessity and contingency as oppositions.
Yet you then draw a picture of the universe totality, in which both
contingency and freedom merge with necessity, which is agreed to. I
do not see, however, the necessity for considering them as oppositions. It
seems to me you begin with some things you call oppositions, then
whittle these characteristics away until they are non-existent, then you
merge them in a happy embrace. In every abstraction we make we
inevitably leave out a multitude of structural aspects, whether we want
to or not, so that all abstractions are accompanied by contingencies.
The latter, sooner or later, submit to the form of necessity. We have
good reason to believe future contingencies will respond in the same
way. Ultimately, it is necessity which appears fundamental to all our
experience of structure, not contingency. Contingency exists only in
our abstractions, not in what we abstract from. If, as you write, necessity
and contingency must occupy every context, then this is because we
never know what the totality consists of.
When I first read your notion of a pulsating model of the electron,
I thought of Einstein who, on arriving at a solution for a problem,
remarked that it was so “beautiful” he hoped it were “true.” That was
my feeling towards your solution. It is worthy of being true to nature.
You seem to have eliminated the stop-gap necessity of complementaries

A New Vision of Totality
41
along with dualisms, as concerns the wave-particle problem,
supplanting it with what you call an “indivisible unity.” I wish I were
capable of responding further to your solution, but all I am capable of
is to admire it. I wish your model all possible success. Let me know
how it develops.
Whenever I read that the observing instrument participates in the
structural determination of the observed, as in your letter, I have the
feeling that something extremely important is taking place in this
situation, as though there is some immense and simple secret contained
in it. The striking thing is that man created observing instruments to
avoid the subjectivism of his own being, but now finds that his
instruments exert a subjective influence on nature too!
You write that the electron, or anything else, is more than what it is
at any fixed time. This says something incomparably more meaningful
to me than all the talk about indeterminism. In a way, it says what the
indeterminists think they are saying, but fail to say. I feel the same way
about your method of distinguishing particles according to the kind of
rhythm and pattern of the pulse, the significance of transformations in
the pulse, etc. All this seems to have the character of our experience of
nature—structure as creation.
Your explanation of regularity and irregularity, law and
lawlessness, is clear and of a piece with everything else you say. One
question to this, the same old one I have been making. Since all
contingencies eventually resolve into law, even though this evokes
newer contingencies, then why must one ever apply the connotation
of lawlessness to any contingency? Why is it necessary to preface
this situation with a schizophrenic structure of law and lawlessness?
In my next article in Structure, “Symmetry in nature and Art,” I
consider the problem of the kind of regularity that symmetry evokes
in nature and art. I hope to get you a copy. There you will see what
you call irregularity is considered a characteristic of the regularity
manifest by nature on all levels.
When you give me your criticism of my art and theories, and
which you say will be the result of consulting others and your wife,
will you do this? Let me know what specific artists your group
admires, especially after Courbet. With that I could better
comprehend whatever criticisms you make, and better answer them.
Does your wife have snapshots of her work or that of the other
artists, which I could see? In any case, I look forward to what you
will have to say, with the greatest interest.

42
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
Meanwhile may I thank you for your patience with my efforts to
understand your work.
My best wishes,
Charles Biederman
 

 
 
 
II


CREATIVE DETERMINATION
 
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
August 1, 1960
Dear Mr Biederman:
I am sorry that my answer to your letter has been delayed so long. I
have been away, and since returning, I have been busy. However, I
hope now to make a few comments on your very interesting letter. First
of all, before discussing questions of art, I would like to continue on
certain general questions of principle, because I think that these questions
are very deeply involved in what I would like to say about your ideas
on art.
In your latest letter, you expressed views on creation which come
very close to my own. Your idea of creative determinism (which I would
call “creative termination”, or as a compromise, “creative determination”)
is more or less the transcription into the artistic sphere of my idea of the
cosmic process forming itself and thus creating space, time, matter,
movement, etc.
The nature of each theory can only be understood in terms of the
law of the pattern or structure, which represents its part in the whole
process. Ordinary things represent situations in which the pattern repeats
itself with modifications, but the creative aspects of the process are

46
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
emphasized at certain critical points, where the non-repetitive character
is of crucial importance.
I would like to add that the notion of creative determination should
apply not only in science and art, but even more, in human relations
generally. For above everything else, the human being is so complex
and dynamic in his structure that his very character is determined in
the interplay of relationships with the whole universe and especially
with other human beings. The ideal of human behaviour should be
that every moment of relationship be creative. Naturally, this ideal is
difficult to achieve, since in a great many spheres (industry, government,
politics, education, etc.) the relationships necessarily must have some
degree of repetitiveness and fixed character. But at least some moments
ought to be creative. Our mode of life today is however such as to
make this almost impossible. People are not really related to each other
freely enough to allow something new and creative to emerge between
them. This lack of freedom is often referred to as experienced as a
“difficulty of communication”. But the notion of lack of creativeness is,
I think, a more accurate way of describing the trouble. The idea of
communication presupposes that each man has something in him, an
idea, an emotion, etc., which he wishes to communicate (share in
common) with other people. If this were all, then we would really have
little in common, because the content of each man’s mind would be his
own only, and there would be no basis for communicating it. But in a
genuinely creative relation, the new theory that comes into existence
comes about through the relationship, and therefore, it must be
something “between”, something shared. There is now no mystery in
communication, since what is to be common was in the first place
produced “between” the two people.
In art or science, man may have a creative relationship to other
people by way of his material or ideas. However, in current society, it is
hard to have a direct creative relation to other people. The indirect
relation by science, art, literature, etc., is the most that can generally be
expected for the present period at least. It is here that science and art
may play an essential role in the evolution of a new mode of existence
for humanity. For it is in these fields that man may first obtain a clear
idea of what creativity really is; and from these fields, this idea may
spread to human relations in general. When human relations generally
tend to be based on creative determination, we may have hope for a
happier, more stable, and yet dynamic and ever changing society, in

Creative Determination
47
which each individual may find room for his own peculiar capacities in
his contribution to a harmonious and many-sided whole.
I would say that the work of art or science is not only a creation of
the man who does it, but that its function in the viewer or the student
is to get in movement a similar creative process. It is in this way that
something is “communicated”. But what is communicated is not
something belonging only to the man who did the job. Rather, it is also
a potentiality of the man who views it, so that a creative person helps to
reveal to others their own potential for creativity. (This is a quotation
from John Berger, who frequently writes in The New Statesman. Have
you ever read him?) In the same way a non-creative person (i.e., one
who tends to repeat or imitate) reveals to others their potential for non-
creativeness, and thus serves to dampen and depress them. Here is a
case of how the character of human beings is formed in their
relationships. But I believe that in the long run, this kind of formation
of character goes much further, because, as I said before, what counts is
not only the creativity of a man by the intermediary of inanimate
material, but even more, the direct mutual creativity of two or more
people who have the right relationships. And here, something new can
come into being in the character of each person, something which must
originate in such a relation between people, but which can creatively
determine new characteristics that never existed before. As you stated
in your letter, these new characteristics will then be the basis for still
further development.
I believe that the above ideas on creativity are very close to yours. Is
this so?
As I see the problem now, our main source of disagreement is on the
question of law and lawlessness, regularity and irregularity, necessity
and contingency, etc. We agree that in every finite view of the world,
which must be partial, incomplete, an abstraction, there will appear
limits to law, regularity and necessity. However, it seems to me that you
regard these limits as nothing more than a result of our necessarily
“incomplete knowledge, at any particular stage in our development”.
In other words, you would maintain that objectively speaking, there
cannot exist such characteristics as lawlessness, irregularity and
contingency, these being merely subjective characteristics, which we
erroneously ascribe to reality as a whole.
The difficulty in the above point of view is that in effect it also
denies reality to time, process and creativity itself, while it admits the
reality only of the infinite and the eternal. To see why this is so, recall

48
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
that in the point of view that we both agree with, the past is regarded as
being, in a certain sense, incomplete. At any given moment, the past is
“what has been”. It is terminated, hence determinate. It is also of course
the basis of the future, but considered in itself, it defines only possibilities,
which are actually determined “creatively” by the future when it comes.
After this future becomes the “has been” of a still later future, we can
then see the laws which made just this creative choice necessary. At this
stage, you would perhaps argue that the necessity was there all the time
and that our lack of knowledge was what hid it from us in the beginning.
But here it is important to notice that what was originally hidden from
us was just the future itself; viz., the creative choice which did not
follow from anything that “had been” up to the moment in question. If
you assert that this creative choice was actually necessary from the
beginning, you deny that it really made an essential and irreducible
contribution to what the totality is; and you fall back into ordinary
mechanical determinism, in which the future is nothing but a reflection
of the past. On the other hand, if you assert that it is necessary from the
point of view of eternity and infinity, and if you state that its lack of
necessity from the point of view of the development up to a given
moment in time is nothing more than a subjective error due to our lack
of knowledge, you also deny that the act of creation makes an essential
and irreducible contribution to the totality. This time, however, you
jump to the opposite extreme of teleological determinism, in which the eternal
and infinite end is the only reality while the temporal and finite
intermediate means has no degree of autonomy in its role whatsoever.
This latter position is essentially that which has been held by many
mystics, especially in the East, where the reality of time is often denied.
The former position (mechanical determinism), which has been more
common in the West, also in effect denied the reality of time, because it
leaves no room for creative determination in the future,
It seems to me that if you want to say that the creative act is a real
determination, and not just a reflection of some past beginning or future
end, you have to admit that the incompleteness in what “has been” up
to any given moment is just as real and objective as is the completeness
in eternity. It is true that at a given moment, we do not know what is to
come. What is fundamental, however, is not our lack of knowledge,
but rather, that in what “has been” up to this moment, there simply do
not exist all the factors that determine what is to come completely. This
fact is objective and not just the result of our lack of complete knowledge.
Rather it is the other way round. Our lack of knowledge results at least

Creative Determination
49
in part from the incompleteness in the being of what has been. Since our
knowledge is based on what has been, it too must be incomplete for
this reason alone, as well as for other reasons (viz., that we do not even
know the whole of the past).
From the point of view described above, the creative process is real.
For at each moment, certain aspects of the world are incompletely
determined (ambiguous, and having a range of possibilities). It is this
indetermination which leaves room for the creative process to make an
irreducible contribution; viz., to terminate a range of possibilities and
to determine one of them as actually existent. But the creative process
has another equally necessary side; it opens up a new set of possibilities.
Hence, it is not just determination. It is determination on its past side
only, but it is the opposite of determination on its future side. These
possibilities are at the moment of their being opened up, not fully
determined by anything that “has been” up to that moment; their full
determination requires a later creative act. To say that everything is
fully determined in the eternal totality is correct; but it leaves out the
essential fact that there always exists a range of possibilities that are not
fully determined in the totality of what has been up to a given moment
of time.
This brings us to the question of necessity and contingency, which is
very intimately related to the question of actuality and possibility. As I
said in my previous letter, it is of course true that whatever the cosmos
in its aspect of eternal totality is, it cannot be otherwise, for the simple
reason that there is and can be only one such eternal totality. Thus, the
fundamental starting point is that the cosmos is necessarily as it is. But
this statement is, taken by itself alone quite empty. For in order to go
further, and to give some content to our ideas about the cosmos, we
must introduce the notion of parts of the cosmic process existing in
space and time. In any part, it is necessary that there be contingency. For
the basic defining quality of a part is that it is not the totality and yet
inherently related to this totality. As a result, it must be dependent on
what it is not. This is just the definition of a contingency; viz., that its
necessity does not follow fully from what it is. Note that the contingency
of such a part is not just a result of our lack of knowledge of the factors
that make this part necessarily what it is. For in order to be a part,
something must be such that the full reason for it is not itself. As a
result, even if we knew everything, the above quality of contingency of each part
would necessarily remain the same. A correct knowledge of the factors which
made this part necessary would show at the same time that this part,

50
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
considered in itself, is necessarily contingent. And we could not eliminate
the concept of contingency except by denying the reality of space, time,
partial aspects of a process, etc., in favour of that of the infinite and
eternal totality alone.
In your previous letter, you objected to my setting up the opposition
of two categories, such as necessity and contingency, and then allowing
the opposition to vanish in a happy union. But this is just the essential
point. The truth about the cosmos is to be asserted by first asserting its
unity, by then asserting its duality in terms of opposing categories, and
then showing the interwoven unity of two duals. If we did not assert
duality, then all that we could say about unity would be trivial and
empty, the mere repetition of the words “The infinite and eternal cosmic
process is one.” By then saying that this process is also dual, we set
ourselves the problem of showing in a non-trivial way how the two
opposing categories interweave in a pattern of structure to make one,
and thus we obtain a description that is potentially capable of being
rich and full of content.
With regard to necessity and contingency, we see that to make a
non-trivial statement about necessity, we must assert the contingency
of partial moments of the cosmic process. Here, I must emphasize again
that it is not just our lack of knowledge of the totality that is involved.
Rather, what is at stake is the question of the mode of being of a partial
moment. In other words, in order that partial moments shall really
exist, it is necessary that they shall contain partial chains of necessary
relationship, which come to an end. It is in this way, that one can give
a definite meaning to the concept of a partial moment. If no such partial
chains of necessary relationship existed, there would be no justification
at all in our procedure of distinguishing between different moments.
Thus, we assert the essential and necessary contingency which makes a
distinction between different moments meaningful and correct.
But now we must come to the “happy union” of contingency and
necessity. For the limits on each particular chain of necessary relationship
are seen to follow necessarily from the relation of this partial chain to
the totality (including itself). Of course, it may be that the limit on a
given chain of necessity will follow from a law. More generally, however,
we must take into account the fact that each existent thing and action
contributes to the totality of law in its own special way, that is not fully
reducible to that of anything else, or of any general category of things.
As a result, a given form of necessity can be limited not only by more
and more nearly universal forms of necessity but also by necessity arising

Creative Determination
51
from the existence of the particular and the singular. (It is here that the human
creative act can play a key role.)
We see then that necessity and contingency interweave and that each
calls for the other. The mere statement of necessity is empty; there
must be contingency of partial moments in order that the concept of a
necessary relationship can be formulated in a non-trivial way. That is
just the way science, art, and every other form of human endeavour go.
After we recognize the general principle of necessity, we distinguish the
partial elements in our problems by recognizing their contingency and
then we obtain meaningful laws by recognizing the necessary relationship
that must be expressed in terms of these contingencies. If there were no
meaning to contingency, it would be no achievement to find a law
showing a necessary relationship in the contingencies. It is rather like
the relationship between a picture and parts of it (e.g., spots of paint).
Each part in itself is a contingency, yet if it is a good picture, each part
is seen to be necessary in view of the whole. If however each part did
not in itself have some contingent aspects (i.e., that were not necessary
on the basis of anything in itself alone) then there would be no room
for the picture to achieve something by removing this contingency and
relating each part to the whole. In other words, the necessary condition
for an overall necessity and unity is that each part shall have a genuine
contingency that can be removed by the picture as a whole. But this
creation and removal of contingency is not just a game. Rather, it is the
essence of the process by which the picture can really be a picture.
More generally, then, necessity and contingency must be interwoven
in the correct description of anything from any standpoint whatsoever.
It is true that what is necessary in one context may be contingent in
another and vice versa, in the way I discussed in previous letters. But
this does not mean that only the context of the infinite and eternal
totality, with its absolute necessity of everything, is correct. Rather, it
means that the interchange of the roles of necessity and contingency in
our thought processes reflects the interchange of roles that takes place
in reality. For example, what is a contingency in terms of all that exists
up to a given moment of time may be a necessity in terms of the later
moment (otherwise, as I have pointed out, we must deny the reality of
time). Therefore, when we adopt two contexts (i.e., that of one moment
of time and that of a later one) this is not just the result of ignorance or
arbitrary choice, but rather, it reflects that each process has in itself many
equally valid contexts. One of the jobs in correct thinking is to try to
reflect this by adopting a set of contexts existing in the process itself. Of

52
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
course, it may often happen that our choice of contexts is artificial, and
not a true reflection of the real contexts in the process. But then this is
only a mistake in our thinking. (Just as we may mistake one object for
another, or use inadequate categories, etc., etc.)
We come then to the idea that nature has its own contexts, and that
it is our job to find what these really are. We can clarify this problem a
bit further by returning to the problem of possibility and actuality.
Now from the point of view of the infinite and eternal totality, the category
of possibility is meaningless. For whatever this totality actually is, it has no
possibility for being otherwise. The category of possibility applies only to
partial moments. But here, I think we both agree, that possibility is not just
a subjective judgement on our own part, which we ascribe to things because
we do not know their full and concrete actuality. Rather, there is some
sense in which possibility really belongs to a partial moment, so that when
we think of its possibilities, we are reflecting some aspect of reality. But
here, one must stress that even the possibilities that are not actually realized are in
some sense real. In other words, if we wait until we have some approximation
to the eternal totality, we will see that only certain possibilities have actualized
themselves. Nevertheless, for a full understanding of the process, we cannot
ignore the possibilities that never become actual, and that in general can no
longer even be actualized at all.
The above would lead us to consider the notion of real possibilities
or actual possibilities. Even if none of a thing’s possibilities are ever actually
realized, we can ask if they are really a possibility (i.e., it is really a
possibility for an acorn to become an oak tree, but not to become a
lizard. This, we can say with meaning, even if the acorn is never planted).
I shall now try to give a more precise account of the relationship of
possibility and actuality from a general point of view. In doing this I shall
first stress the notion of possibility as a relationship. In other words, one will
not talk about pure and abstract possibility, but rather about possibility
in view of such and such a fact. Let us consider a given moment in time
and all its possibilities. Each relationship to the totality (including itself)
may narrow down its possibilities. The totality of all relationships would
narrow them down to actuality. Thus, each moment is in effect framed
by a series of penumbras (or haloes) of possibilities, one within the other,
and gradually converging down to the actual character of the moment in
question. Each set of possibilities is a reflection of a certain partial
relationship of that moment to the totality (viz., it tells us how the moment
is limited by the partial relationship in question). The limitation is not
just the result of our lack of complete knowledge concerning actuality.

Creative Determination
53
Even if we knew the totality of what is, was, and will be actual, the full
statement of what each moment really is would lead us through all its
relationships, and therefore through an implicit definition of its series of
penumbras of possibility. In this way, all the possibilities of each moment,
even those never actually realized, are seen to be essential aspects of what
that moment actually is, because they reflect its relationships to the totality.
The above implies a union of the opposing categories of actuality
and possibility. At a naive level, one might be tempted to say that only
the actual is real (at least only what is actual in the infinite and eternal
totality). But then to give the category of actuality a meaning, we must
introduce the category of the possible. Again at the same naive level,
one might argue that possibilities are unreal, and are ascribed to
something only because we do not know what will emerge actually in
the infinite and eternal totality. This is similar to the view that
contingency represents our lack of knowledge, and that only necessity
in the totality is real. Both views are inadequate, because they do not
take into account the reality of the partial moments.
What we have done here is to first introduce the category of the
actual. We then oppose this to the category of the possible. Finally we
are led to a new description, by uniting the two categories in a concrete
way; viz., by coming back to the actual as a limit of the series of
penumbras of possibility, and by representing possibilities as relationships
in the actual cosmic process (i.e., each range of possibilities is determined
by a relationship that actually exists in the process). Once again this
procedure of introducing duality and then bringing the duals together
in a “happy union” is seen to be necessary to describe the world as it is.
We may usefully compare the above conclusions with those
concerning necessity and contingency. After introducing contingency
as the opposite of necessity, we showed that just as there are “actual
possibilities”, there are “necessary contingencies”. This is an example
of the interweaving that is characteristic of opposing categories.
September 23, 1960
Since starting this letter, I have become very busy and could not
finish it. Now I must go away to Israel for about six weeks, but after I
return, I expect to continue. Meanwhile I shall be very interested in
your comments on what I have sent to you.
We have been having many discussions on your books and articles
(which have now been lent to some artists). When I get back I can let

54
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
you know about this discussion. Also while we were in Holland, my
wife and I had an interesting discussion with Carl Visser, whose work
was then on exhibition at the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam. I shall let
you know about this later too.
Incidentally, it appears that Pasmore is an exponent of the Structurist
school. We have seen some of his work recently. Would you agree with this?
As for my wife, she is still studying painting. Unfortunately we
have no photographs of her work. She has done some sculpture
which is what I may call an effort to express the meaning of certain
mathematical ideas that I explained to her. Right now she is intrigued
with what can be done with a pattern of interweaving opposite spirals
in painting. She also does what you would call “mimetic painting”.
I would appreciate hearing from you soon.
Very sincerely yours,
David Bohm
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
October 3, 1960
Dear Mr Bohm:
I am glad to receive another provocative letter from you, and I
appreciate the effort you have put into it. I am also glad that in a great
many ways we pursue a mutually related path in respect to understanding
this very difficult problem of creation, whether in nature or human nature.
Your revision of my expression “creative determinism” to that of
“creative termination” or “creative determination,” I find is so excellent
that I intend to adopt them. I am also going to insert these changes in
an essay I wrote some three years ago called “Art and Freedom,” in
which I take up the problem of “determinism” in art.
Certainly you are very right indeed to insist that creative
determination applies to human relations generally, as in science and
art. It was to that thought that I devoted my closing paragraphs in “Art
and Science as Creation.” I have the horrible premonition that if there
is not to be a more general awareness of creative determination, the
consequence will be to destroy such a pursuit even in science and art,
leaving us with a “Brave New World.”

Creative Determination
55
At present, as you point out, there is lacking the freedom so essential
for a creative amalgamation to occur between people. I can feel this only
too well, since I have lived in a state of complete isolation here for the
past ten years. Even the scientific and institutional popularization of the
term “communicate,” in place of such terms as “converse” that were
once used, indicates the current problem. For the former means only to
“give,” the latter to “do with,” all of which coincides exactly with the
criticisms you make of current communications, criticisms which I was
not aware of as you present them. You say, however, that it is not a lack of
freedom, but a lack of creativeness that makes for difficulty of creatively
conversing with one another. I would not say it was a lack of creativeness,
but a fear of being so especially in our times, because of the very high
price one must pay to be creative. Conformity is the great goal imposed
on both sides of the Iron Curtain. Hence it follows that the general effort
everywhere is one of “communication,” of giving directives or inducing
people to accept them. To “do with” or to achieve what you call “between,”
in which both are creative participants, is indeed rare. This cleavage
between people is reflected in the cleavage between man and nature. The
latter cleavage, I feel, is playing a major role in coloring the kind of nature
theories that are dominant today in both art and science. Man and nature
disappear, and in their place is something floating called science, art, etc.
Your hope that science and art could serve as the means for achieving
the new mode of creatively oriented existence for humankind, is just
what I tried to say in a previous letter to you. So we are agreed on a
place for hope! But so far the facts are that throughout this century
certain kinds of science and scientific attitudes, have been determining
human relations, wielded by the hands of politicians and other
institutional mentalities. The science of psychiatry largely resolves the
hot war of the individual into a cold war and solves nothing. It is to
what is left of such lives that most art addresses itself, a form of
distraction. Until art, as it did in the past, again becomes a sane
participant in determining the orientation of human life, we will remain
in trouble. I do not think that science alone, as it seems to me the last
50 years have indicated, can solve our difficulties. Nor do I believe that
art can do so alone. Art and science have in them qualities that could
neutralize the destructive ones inherent in each field, since both have
the potentiality for both good and evil.
Yes, I am familiar with John Berger, since I have been reading The
New Statesman these past two years. Although his views on art are very
far from my own, he has occasionally written things I agree with, such

56
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
as his remarks on that monstrosity Gabo erected in front of some depart-
ment store in Amsterdam, and which you probably saw on your visit
there. The quotation you give from him is to be agreed with; where I
would disagree is what he would like to see “communicated” as art.
His political views give a nineteenth-century hangover to his notions of
art. However, the way in which you go on to discuss the sustenance of
creative relations, is more to the point.
Apparently I have not made myself understood as regards creative
abstraction before a future as it unrolls into present experience, and
then into the past. But I am glad you did misunderstand me, for thus
you brought out certain criticisms of the general view I hold with you
and, in dispensing with them, brought out some factors of which I was
not aware. Certainly, if I thought as you assume, I would indeed be but
perpetuating the same old mechanical determinism.
When creative abstractions are made before a future as it comes into
experience, the necessity that I take to be involved is not the particular
abstractions made since, as I tried to make clear, the possibilities are
multiple not singular. (Although I think if we could know all the
possibilities of abstraction open to us before each piece of future, and
the consequences from each, we would find one abstraction that was
superior to all other possible abstractions, with which you will not agree.)
However, once we make a creative decision among the possible
abstractions we discern, necessity lies in the fact that whatever the
abstraction made they will be like past ones, in the sense that they are
made by the particular determinant structure of human life out of the particular
determinant structure of nature. Therefore, it is not a case of particular
determination but of a general process of determinant structure that
remains in force whatever the creative abstraction we may make. In
this sense abstraction is indeed creative; it does bring in a new
contribution even, although we may not always see it, even of the very
notion of determination as such. The temporal to the contrary, is not denied,
for every creative act, every passing moment is potentially open to new
creation, creation itself is constantly undergoing change along with
everything related with it. This is based on an attitude of non-identity
where anything is not the same as it was or will be or will ever be after
that. Here there is not the possibility of mere reflection of “some past
beginning or future end,” to use your excellent expressions. In fact,
such events are impossible. When I wrote that the “creative act is fully
determined… by everything, by…the totality,” I meant to express the
view that all was a determinate process, that the character of the totality

Creative Determination
57
was determinate. I was not assuming a “future end” that would impose
itself upon each future that we would experience. I also meant that not
just any creative act was possible, or that all were of equal value, among
the manifest possibilities open to abstraction at any one time.
While I’m on the subject, I’d like to say something about what you
have labelled totality, to which I invite your criticism. In your previous
letter you said that whatever we deal with, it must be finite. This is
invariably the case unless we are inflicted with a case of mystics. You
then carry your thought further, stating that it is also necessary to regard
the totality itself as “self-limiting” since to regard it as unlimited “would
be nothing at all.” A little further along in your letter you say that the
totality “includes all that there is, was and will be.” From this I infer the
totality to be some closed system, an absolute system that can be no
more nor less than what it is all the time. Here it seems to me that the
creative quality, and the temporal one upon which it depends for its
reality, are both flatly denied. The totality being what it always was, is
unaffected by the passage of time, where one cannot distinguish a past
from a future and, as you well show in your letter, to ignore these
factors is to deny the possibility of creation. The whole becomes the
opposite of its parts, a dualism. There is another possibility from what
I called, in an earlier letter, the “finite, infiniteness of the infinite” (a
contradiction in terms), but which seems to give substance to the notion
of the totality as actually unlimited.
If we extrapolate from the views we have been discussing, and to
which we mutually hold, it seems another view of nature is possible.
One in which the “incompleteness” we experience before the “has been”
and the “will be,” is also true of the cosmic totality itself. That is, the
cosmos itself is undergoing a constant state of growth, and is not any
more “self-limited” than any of the finite experiences we have. In this
view, if one could at this very moment possess the total experience and
knowledge of the totality, one would only experience that moment of
it, but not the totality. For, the very next moment the totality would
evolve to another totality, just as do our finite experiences. There is a
structural correspondence here between our creative abstractions and
experiences, and the cosmos as creation. In this view, it is not the totality
of the universe at any one time that is infinite, it is only the creative process
which permeates the structure of the cosmos which is infinite. It is for this reason,
as I hope you will soon see in my Mondrian and science essay (the title
was changed at the last minute to “The Real and the Mystic in Art and
Science,” supposed to appear this month), that I wished to make the

58
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
notion of creation fundamental to further comprehension of nature’s
structure. This is certainly as true of science and so far you alone, to my
knowledge, have con-firmed this. Are there others in your field who do
so? This reminds me, I would appreciate any suggestions about books,
ones that are possible for me to understand. I have no access to a library
except the local one in R.W. [Red Wing], which is hopeless for my interests.
Your remarks on necessity and contingency. Here too you begin by
positing a totality as closed and absolute. Nevertheless I agree with
your further remarks about positing a cosmic process as made up of
parts, and which parts are not the totality yet related to it, and that each
part “must be dependent on what it is not.” You then go on to show
that this situation indicates the contingent character of any part, because
“the full reason for it is not in itself.” I am in full agreement, but there
is a difficulty. Is it a semantic one? I do not know for sure. I don’t see
contingency as an attribute of anything outside ourselves, to me it
appears as a state of our consciousness between the “has been” and the
“will be.” That is, we are conscious that all abstractions about the partial
are themselves partial abstractions, and all statements about anything
should be followed by an etcetera, to indicate that which has inescapably
been left out, and which further experience will make a little more
evident to us (we hope). Contingency exists by virtue of the kind of
structural abstracting relationship of the human being with nature, except
that human life is nature. Contingency consciousness on the part of the
human, of his experiences of nature, not nature as contingent, is of the
very essence that makes for a creative consciousness of nature’s multi-
ordinal facets of determination. Contingency is a fact of experience,
not of the actuality experienced. There would not be any contingencies
if there were not humans to experience them. My objection is to
projecting onto nature, what belongs only to human nature. Otherwise,
it seems to me, contingency is applied anthropomorphically.
Duality. It seems to me you assume necessity and contingency as
oppositions a priori, you do not assure me of its actuality. To say that
one needs dualisms to do this or that with the analysis of nature, is no
assurance that there are dualisms in actuality by which one can do this
or that with analysis of nature. What does the notion of contingency
do for that of necessity? How does one operate with the other?
Contingency awareness extensionalizes our awareness of the finite in
its multi-relations to every other part of the whole cosmos. There is not
necessity to my left opposing contingency to my right, which I then
bring into a happy harmony. They are together all the time in experience,

Creative Determination
59
so that one removes the “and” and writes contingency-experience for
the same reason that space-time was hyphenated. This attitude does
not prevent you from “showing in a non-trivial way how the two factors
interweave in a pattern of structure to make one,” etc. They not only
interweave, they are interwoven to begin with.
Your example of the painting in relation to the above interests me
very much. I believe I understand you, but I’m not sure it’s your
understanding. So, could you illustrate it using geometric forms? For
instance, suppose we make a painting with two lines so and we assume
that all this is properly organized, the parts to the
whole. Even this limitation of factors has a
multitude of contingencies and so possibilities. I
can change the shape of the canvas quantitatively,
the width of the two lines, the right angle relation
of the two lines, etc., etc. Now would you call a
contingency that has to be removed, in order to
preserve the proper structure of the whole, so? It
so happens that the most difficult problem in
Structurist art is to discern just those particular
possibilities that will achieve the development, that
will sustain the evolution of an art of pure creation,
as against indulgence in arbitrary possibilities.
Your discussion of the possible and actual interests
me a great deal. Yes, we can agree that “possibility is
not just a subjective judgement.” But I would do so in
a context you would disagree with. That is, possibility
is only inherent in the interaction between a human
being and nature, and not in extra-human nature as
such. I mean this in the same way that the act of
abstraction is not inherent in nature, but only due to the presence of humans
who are able to relate themselves to nature with abstractions. Hence, the
objectivity of the notion of possibility has its base in human action, nature
only providing the field for such action. One can make a very interesting
distinction between the mimetic and purely creative artist’s relations to
nature, where we find the term “possibilities” has two greatly different
contexts, and so meanings. The mimetic artist’s possibilities are predominately
determined by his capacity to discern the already present actualities
perceivable in optical nature. Whereas, the purely creative artist’s possibilities
rest not only on the capacity to discern what the mimetic artist perceives in
nature. He takes optical perception further to center his focus on the process

60
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
character of nature’s structure. Thus he is able to discern possibilities that are
potential to nature but are not actual in nature, and which would never become
actualities without the human artist. The mimetic artist discovers and largely
records what nature has already actualized; the non-mimetic artist is a
discoverer of hitherto non-actualized possibilities, which only human nature
can actualize.
From the above you can see the importance I attach to the point you
bring out of non-actualized possibilities being “in some sense real.” This
is also important because it applies to the consideration of what “has
been” as well as what “can be” or “will be.” This attitude has played a
very important role in my study of art history, as well as in the evaluation
of my personal art history. By this means I have been able to comprehend,
on the one hand, the development from Monet to Mondrian, to
understand how these particular possibilities were actualized. On the other,
I was able to take this goal secured by these artists, and discover possibilities
they could not discern, to then formulate a more direct, more clear path
to the goal in question. This becomes important for the learning process
of each new generation of young artists. For this reason I never encourage
the young artists who contact me to simply follow the particulars of my
own development. Learning to become a creative artist is itself creative.
Contrast this with the learning process of mimetic artists, I mean the
truly mimetic artist who no longer exists. He not only imitates nature,
but has to learn to imitate past painters and sculptors as well.
Of a given moment of time and all its possibilities. You say that if we
knew all its relations to the totality, this would narrow that moment to
what I gather you mean, its total actualized character. In the view of
totality as a constant process of creative growth, such knowledge could
only be of a moment that “has been.” To know all the relations of the
moment to totality, we would have to know more than you indicate.
We would know not only all the possibilities whose relations have been
actualized, but also all those that have not and will not be actualized
except in a cosmos not yet existent. Such a view of the cosmos
corresponds strongly to all previous experience, whereas an absolute,
closed totality, does not do so at all. No one has been able to give a
convincing picture of a beginning or an end or limit in all directions, to
the cosmos. Even the beginning that some astrophysicists formulate,
may be but another evolutionary cycle of the cosmos.
The dualisms, the oppositions of the lawless and lawful, etc., remain a
mystery to me. Every time you begin to substantiate the dualistic attitude
I have the experience, although this may be but my own failing, that you

Creative Determination
61
slip away from it into another problem. There are some silent, that is
unexamined, or perhaps not presented assumptions respecting this attitude.
I know Carl Visser, but not personally. I do correspond with his
friend Joost Baljeu, the editor of Structure whom I have known for the
past four years or so. But due to some strange behavior on his part for
the past several months, I have the impression our association is about
to terminate. Pasmore has helped himself to my art and writing. But he
is not an exponent of Structurist art, only of Pasmore. I look forward to
another good letter from you when you have the leisure. Meanwhile I
wish you a good trip and stay in Israel.
My best regards
Charles Biederman
P.S. What did Einstein mean when he expressed “surprised
thankfulness” that four equal rods can make a square, since, in most
universes that he could imagine, there would be no such thing? This
was quoted by Russell in The New Leader, at the time of Einstein’s death.
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
November 17, 1960
Dear Mr Biederman:
I was very glad to receive your letter of Oct. 3, which contained a
great many interesting and important points. I will send you a brief
(i.e., relatively brief) letter now commenting on these points, and then
in a later letter, I will comment on your views on art. My reason for
further delaying a discussion on art are twofold: 1) I know very little
about it and require some time for my opinions to jell; 2) I have the
impression that my reactions to Structurist art are closely bound up
with the questions that we are discussing, so that I could clarify these
reactions by clarifying these questions. In addition, I have my own
reasons for discussing these questions, as they are important in the
work I am now doing; and I feel that to discuss them with someone,
such as yourself, in the different but related field of art, may bring out
something new. (It is like the idea of “conversation” rather than
“communication” — something new may arise between us.)

62
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
Perhaps the main difficulty in the question of opposition of various
categories such as necessity, contingency, etc., comes from the tendency to
regard both opposites as separately existing entities, which struggle with
each other and eventually unite in a happy union. Let us instead consider
opposition from the point of view of process. Every process has one or more
pairs of directions. These pairs of directions can be understood as movement
between two contrary states; i.e., states which mutually exclude each other
(so that the existence of one implies the non-existence of the other).
The contrary states are not themselves generally existent, but they are
simply the limits of the process, which would be approached if the process
continued indefinitely in one direction. Now every process moves simultaneously
in both directions. The opposition is not between the limits of the process,
but rather in the two directions themselves (i.e., oppositions in movement).
Let us look into this question more deeply. Two basic concepts in
the conceptual understanding of the world are universal and particular.
Something universal refers to the whole, the totality (including itself if
it is truly universal). Something particular refers to some part of the
totality, i.e., to less than the totality. Now, every finite thing that we
consider is particular. Hence, particularity applies to the totality, so that
particularity is universal. Similarly, universality is a particular, since
universality is not particularity, and therefore universality does not
include the totality of all possible concepts (which must include
particularity).
We see then that these two opposing concepts are very closely bound
together by the process of logical reasoning. In order to understand the
relation better, let me draw the diagram below. I consider, for the sake
of argument, two times, tA, and tB, and a series of points, A1, A2,…An,
B1, B2,…Bn, which are present at times tA and tB respectively.  
 

Creative Determination
63
Now I consider a process from tB to tA. I say that each point B1,… Bn
splits up and goes to make up the points A1,…An, as indicated by the
lines from tB to tA. I show a typical case below, where I show how B3
splits up (you can imagine rays going out from B3 to A1…An).  
Now let us consider that all the other points, B1,…Bn split up in the
same way. The total effect appears in the diagram below.
From every point B there is a set of lines connecting it with every point A.
But now there are two ways to consider these connections.
1
A point, say, Bn, splits up and enters into all the points An. Let us
regard the totality of points An as the universe at the time tB. Then
if we start from a given point, Bn, we obtain a process of universalization,
i.e., some particular point, Bn, becomes universal.
2
We can consider the process from the opposite side. Each point An is
made up of contributions from the totality of points Bn. This is a process
by which the universal (the universe at the time tB) divides itself and
forms particular points A1…An at the time tA. It is therefore a process
of particularization, a process in which the universe becomes particular.

64
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
The two processes of universalization and particularization are by
definition opposed to each other in direction. Nevertheless, in the totality,
they are identical. For the totality of the process of universalization
(represented by the totality of all the lines from tB to tA) is exactly the
same as the totality of the process of particularization. Thus, we have in
the totality an identity of opposite processes. However, in any part, we
have a diversity of these opposite processes. For, considering any point,
say Bn, we have a process of universalization away from it, and
considering any point, say An, we have a process of particularization
toward it.
Here, it is important to stress that it would be a distortion to discuss
the totality alone. For the totality is a totality of parts. Thus the parts are as
real as the totality. Hence the identity of opposites is neither more nor
less real than is their difference. The truth is that the same process opposes
itself, and that the opposites are identical in the totality, different in the
parts. Now, we come to a further essential point. In accordance to what I
said before, the reality is the process itself, viz., universalization and
particularization. The universal and the particular are only abstractions;
viz., the hypothetical limits of this process in opposing directions.
Therefore, in my diagrams, you should think of the points as abstractions
in comparison to the process itself, as represented by the lines.
I would try to express other oppositions in a similar way. For example,
consider potential and actual. These are two opposing processes: (a)
the potential becomes actual; (b) the actual becomes potential
(actualization and potentialization). In the totality, the two processes
are identical. But in each part, one or the other will dominate. Likewise,
neither the potential nor the actual exists as such in a literal sense but
they are just the abstract limits of the process extrapolated indefinitely
in a given direction.
Let us now try to look at necessity and contingency in a similar
light. Likewise we say that necessity and contingency are only abstract
limits of the process. It is a bit clumsy to find appropriate words for the
two opposite sides of the process, but let us call them “necessitation”
and “contingentation”. In other words, there exists nothing in the
universe that is absolutely necessary or absolutely contingent. Rather,
there exists a process in which the contingent becomes necessary and
the necessary contingent. In the totality, the two directions are identical,
but in any part, one side is emphasized.
Let me try to explain this farther. When one says that something is
contingent, one says that it is a part, dependent on the totality, so that

Creative Determination
65
the reason for itself is not in itself alone. But as we have seen, each such
a contingent part is the limit of a process of particularization. This part
does not and cannot exist by itself as such. Rather, its very being a part is only
an abstraction, a limit of the process of particularization by which this
part exists. But the part is also always in a process of universalization, a
movement by which it falls back to the totality. Each part is only a
moment in the above process, in which the property of being a part
(i.e., “partiality”) is emphasized in relation to universality.
Insofar as we consider the total process of particularization, we find
in it a movement towards necessitation and towards its opposite. The
movement towards necessitation can be simulated by considering more
and more of the lines in the process (see my diagram). For example, if
we see several lines moving towards a certain point, we conclude that
there must be still more lines aiming towards intersection at that point,
and that it cannot be otherwise because of the point character of the
pattern. You might object here that the movement of necessitation occurs
only in our own minds. However, I wish to assert that the movement in
our own minds is a reflection of a movement that occurs in reality; viz.,
that with the passage of time, more and more lines come into existence.
Thus, there is a process of necessitation in reality, reflected by a
corresponding logical process in our thinking.
What is the opposite of necessitation? This would correspond to a
falling away of lines (not only in our thinking but in reality as well). In
other words, some entity (e.g., a point) becomes necessitated as it
establishes more and more links with the totality, which makes its change
more and more difficult. (Necessitation may be equated with causation,
provided that we think of causation as an active process by which something
is maintained in existence and not just a correlation of past and future.)
But then an existent entity may lose its links with the totality, thus
becoming less necessary; and eventually, it may then change or even
pass out of existence. Thus, something which is, at a given stage of the
process, mainly a contingency will become more necessary later, and
eventually it may fall back into being more of a contingency.
My view is then that necessitation is a process; viz., the establishment
of links with the totality, which tends to fix something in the state in
which it is, while contingentation is the opposite process.
To sum up my view on duality and process. I say that every process
is in itself dual, since it has opposite directions. In the totality the duals
are one, and in the partiality, they are different. Both the unity and the
duality of the dual sides of the process are equally real and equally

66
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
essential. What are usually called opposites are abstractions, the limits
of each direction of the process. We may therefore call this point of
view the unity in duality and duality in unity, this being the meaning of
a process. That is to say, the very idea of a process contains this
conception, since a process cannot occur unless there is a change and
change cannot occur without a duality of directions.
I think there is a close relation between the above and some things
you said in your last letter. You agree (p. 2) that “when creative
abstractions are made before a future as it comes into experience, the
necessity…is not the particular abstractions made”. Rather, as you say,
necessity lies in the fact that the abstractions will be like the last ones, in
the general way in which they are related to the determinant structure
of nature and of human life. Therefore, it seems to me that in effect,
you admit that to begin with, the particular has an aspect of contingency.
In other words, the past structure of nature and human nature does not
determine each individual creative abstraction in all of its detail. This
aspect of contingency is objective, and not just the result of our way of
looking at things. For as we both admit, each moment really has its past
(i.e., the existence of a past is not just due to our inability to know the
future, it represents a genuine completeness in the structure of the
moment itself). And in relation to this past, the next creative abstraction
is in certain ways contingent.
Where then does necessity come in? The answer is that if a particular
creative abstraction is fruitful, viable, correct, or whatever else you wish
to call it, it will be able to establish more links with the totality of
natural and human reality. In this way, it is necessitated. Abstractions
that are arbitrary will not do this, so that they will quickly change or
die. Nothing makes their existence necessary. It seems to me that this is the
problem of all artists, and especially the Structurists as it is explained in
your book, articles, and letters. For example, as you say on the last
page of your letter (p. 6), you study the development of artists from
Monet to Mondrian, to understand how certain possibilities were
actualized, and from this to see further possibilities that they did not
discern. As I see it, this means that each of these artists was able to
propose something that was for some period of its development
necessitated. Then as the development proceeded, it began to lose its
necessity, and to peter out. You are trying to see how to continue the
development, so that it establishes further links to the totality of reality,
in order that the process of necessitation shall go on.

Creative Determination
67
The above shows that each new creative act, while initially contingent,
must prove its necessity by fitting into the totality of human and natural
reality. Those things which are not necessitated again and again in this
way will die. Thus, as Ibsen once said, “Truths can grow old” (unless
they develop in response to the new total situation in which they exist,
a situation to which they themselves contribute an essential aspect).
Now to come to another point, namely, your notion that the concept
of possibility applies only to the relation between human beings and
nature. (For example, you say there would not be contingency if there
were no human beings to experience it. Also on p. 5, you say that
possibility is inherent only in the interaction between a human being
and nature.) I want to give some arguments in favour of the point of
view that possibility is a universal category, existing both in nature, in
human beings, and in their relation. In order to do this, I want first to
explain in more detail my ideas on totality, as it seems I didn’t make
them clear enough until now. I want to say that I agree with you in that
there is no absolute fixed and final totality. Rather, I would say that
each moment, each “here and now” is an infinite, inexhaustible totality.
It is infinite and inexhaustible because this moment must be related to
the whole of its past, and to the whole universe through this. I gave an
image of this relation in a previous letter, in terms of waves converging
from infinity to each point in space and time and then falling back into
infinity. Each point is therefore the product of a process, to which the
whole universe and the whole of its past contributes. For this reason,
each point will be a kind of reflection of this past.
Let me now give a more general argument. When we measure space,
we usually imagine taking a ruler or a tape from one point to another,
and counting the number of divisions in the line that joins the two
points. In the measurement of time, however, the situation is very
different. We cannot take a clock and go back to yesterday, in order to
measure the time between today and yesterday. Rather, we must have
present now (today) a trace of yesterday. A trace may be a memory, a
photograph, a record made by a man, but it may also be a natural trace
(e.g., tracks of a dinosaur or layers of folded rocks). A trace is something
that is not the past, but which is a function of the past, a structure in
which the past is, as it were, folded and tangled up, but in principle
capable of being unfolded and untangled, at least in our minds. Even
more, it may be said that one side of what exists at each moment is just
this tangled and folded trace of the past. This applies not only to each
time, but to each place. Each moment, as it exists, is a “here and now”,

68
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
containing its past as trace. But if, in principle at least, we are to be
capable, at each moment, of knowing the whole past, it follows that this
must be continued as a trace in each “here and now”. For if there were
a “here and now” that did not have the whole past (and indeed the
whole universe) folded into itself in the form of a trace, then there
would be a place and time for which some of the past (and some part of
the universe) would in effect not exist. Since there is no such place and
time, it follows that each part of space and time has the totality of its
past and the whole universe folded into it. This applies not so much to
nature as to man. What I am trying to say is that the world is as if every
moment were potentially conscious of the universe, in the sense, that in
its inner structure, the whole history of the latter would in principle be
read. In this regard, the moments experienced in man’s consciousness
could be on the same footing as the moments of existence in nature.
Man is part of the totality, which includes himself and nature; and in
the general character of space and time, he shares these properties,
which are universal.
Let us now proceed further. Given any moment, A, it contains a
folded trace of previous moments (or is such a folded trace). Now
consider a later moment, B. This contains a folded trace of A, as well as
of all moments which are contained in A. In this way, we see that B is
inwardly and in itself later than A. For whereas A is folded in the part of B
representing the past, B does not similarly appear in A. (It is as if B
remembers A while A does not remember B—but memory in the sense
that I use it is universal.)
It is clear then that a given moment (say B) not only contains (and
is) a totality of the traces of previous moments, but that it is also a totality
of totalities. On the other hand, B itself enters into still later moments
(such as C) as part of their folded structure. And so on. It follows then
that no totality is complete. For each moment has a future which will be
determinate only in the past of still later moments.
In this regard, we must see this process dually. The folding of the
past into A is the process of particularization, which I indicated diagram-
matically earlier in this letter. It is through this process that the past of
A is present—i.e., “presented” to A. Thus, presence is a relationship
(but an inner relationship). There is no such a thing as the universal
present, but rather there is the present of each here and now. We must
remember, however, that each here and now is also thus present to all
the moments in the future. This is the process of universalization, whereby
A breaks up; as it were, and re-appears, folded up with other events, in

Creative Determination
69
the past side of all later moments. As I explained before, in relation to
the totality, the two processes are the same, while in relation to each
“here and now” they are different.
Naturally, in any moment, there cannot exist a complete and fixed
totality. To discuss the totality of a given moment, we must go to the
limit of the infinite future of that moment. Then its totality will appear
on the past side of this infinitely later moment. It is evident then that
totality is (like partiality) an abstraction, which does not exist by itself.
What is immediate is the partial moment, the individual “here and
now”. But what this moment is in its totality is only revealed in the
totality of later moments. Since the part and the totality are equally
necessary for the process to be what it is, it follows that the unity of
opposites in the totality and their diversity in the parts are on an equally
valid footing.
It is interesting to point out that the two sides of the process also
represent passivity and activity. Thus, as the past of a given moment appears
folded up as trace, the moment plays a passive role, being formed by its
past. But then, as that moment breaks up and re-appears folded up in
its future moments, it is playing an active role, entering into and helping
to form its future.
Now let us return to possibility and actuality. As it exists, each “here
and now” is actual, and in its future is a range of possibilities as
determined by its past. In the next moment, some of these possibilities
have been actualized, and new possibilities are created. The question of
what will be actualized depends on the interaction of this moment with
all the others. Notice that I am giving to the “here and now moments”
existing in nature a role similar to that which you give to those existing
in man. I say that nature is in itself creative. Man is creative too. While
his mode of creativity is peculiar to himself, his being creative is a special
case of a universal process of creativity. As a result, possibility has
meaning in the relation of any “here and now” to the totality; viz., that
given what exists in the past of such “here and now”, there is a range of
possibilities open to developments in the future of this here and now.
This range will be narrowed down when “more and more here and
now’s” are taken into account, as when what is in this moment comes
to interact with more and more similar moments,
Finally, it is clear that in this point of view, contingency has an
objective meaning. For each “here and now” is as essential and real as
any totality. Given the past of any “here and now”, say A, the next
moment, B, has aspects that are not necessitated by anything in the past

70
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
of A. Of course, in the total process, which includes B, A, and everything
else, it will become clear how any feature will cease to be necessary in a
later moment, C, so that this feature will not continue to exist. Thus,
there is objective contingency in relation to certain moments, and objective
necessity in relation to other moments, as well as a process of necessitation
in the passage from one moment to another (and also of course the dual
process of contingentation). In a sense, we can say that judged from the
standpoint of a certain moment, something can be contingent. One of
the moments under discussion may be the moments of consciousness of
some human beings. Events may therefore be contingent in relation to
him, too, but this is only a special case of the general relation of
contingency,
With regard to possibility, it is the same. Which possibility will
become actual depends on the totality, including the human being. A
human being may look at nature and see possibilities, which can be
determined only by the totality, including himself. But if we consider
any moment in nature, we can say that the rest of the world has certain
possibilities, which are fully determined only in its relation to that moment.
Therefore, when the human being creatively determines certain
possibilities to be actualized, he is participating in a universal process.
I have been using the words, unity and diversity of opposites in
certain relationships. To be more consistent, I should perhaps have
referred to the process of unification and diversification. Complete unity
and diversity are only the abstract limits of this process. Thus, as we
consider more and more moments, towards the future, of a given
moment A, we approach the totality for A. We never reach it. Totality
is therefore the limit of a process. Similarly, absolute partiality,
particularity (the mathematical point) is the limit of this process in the
opposite direction. But I claim that this process occurs not only in our
own minds, but also in nature. In other words, each “point” breaks up
and spreads out, tending to universalize and “totalize” itself, while the
dual process takes place, by which the contributions of many points
move towards unity as “one-ness”.
As usual this letter has gotten longer than I expected. However, I think
that after these questions are clarified, we can get down to discuss artistic
problems in a fruitful way (at least I hope so). I hope that I have already
indicated the relevance of some of these questions to Structurist art.
Now to answer some of the specific questions that you asked me.
On p. 5, you give an example of a geometrical form with two lines, and
discussed the multitude of contingencies that have to be removed.  

Creative Determination
71
The example is perhaps too simple for me to give
an adequate answer. In terms of mimetic art, I can
more easily express what I wanted to say. Thus, if
we have the picture of a man, then the spots of
paint representing his eyes are in themselves
contingent in that they could be located anywhere
in the picture. This contingency of location is
removed when we consider the whole picture,
which is supposed to represent a man.
Now a picture is static, so that in its structure, it cannot express
contingency and necessity as a process. The process must be in the mind
of the man who views it. When he first sees a given item, it is “just
there”, i.e., it is contingent, then he sees more, and gradually, the picture
as a whole is registered. Then he begins to understand (perhaps by a
creative act of his own) the “law of a picture” which is its essential content,
and which begins to necessitate each detail if it is a good picture. If it is not
a good picture, he may discover that the contingency of some parts is
only reinforced by his overall view of the picture. Or he may experience
necessitation of a given part in a cursory viewing, but see its contingency
on a more careful viewing. So you see, the viewer passes through the
process of necessitation and contingentation. Presumably the artist does
too. The creative step is the realization of the concept of the picture as a
whole, but then he must execute it in paint and see if it remains necessary.
The further development of his own and other people’s painting may
also either necessitate or de-necessitate the line that he has been following,
as well as the development of techniques, society, etc.
With regard to Structurist art, I imagine that the problem is similar,
except that the overall law in the picture is not determined by the mimesis
of an object, but rather by the mimesis of the general laws of structure in
nature. Thus, the contingency of each part would be removed by the fact
that it was necessary in view of the overall pattern and purpose of the
work. The Structurist might even, as you say, discover possibilities that are
potential to nature, but are actualized only with the aid of man (e.g., by the
artist himself). But again, the removal of contingency of any part means
that it is this overall content of the work which necessitates that part.
Here, I would like to stress again that all art has as its object not so
much the embodiment of the processes of nature as the initiation of
these processes in the viewer. As we both agree, art does not
communicate, but rather, it helps to guide a creative process in the viewer.
Structurist art should, according to this notion, set up in the viewer a

72
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
process which reveals, not a particular object, but rather, the general laws
and possibilities of nature, the essential structure of reality. If it does this,
then it will itself be a reality, and not just a copy of something else. For the
essential character of reality is that it is constituted by such processes.
Would you say this is a correct interpretation of your point of view?
Finally, with regard to your post-script question about Einstein’s
statement expressing “surprised thankfulness that four equal rods can
make a square, since in most universes that he could imagine, there
would be no such thing”. Here Einstein was referring to certain aspects
of non-Euclidean geometry. In particular, he supposed that he started
with four equal rods, their equality being demonstrated by the fact that
when they are placed side by side, their end points coincide. Now, to
make up a square out of these rods, it is necessary to displace three of
them in relation to a fourth. Let us do this in steps. Let the fixed rod be
A. Then let us displace another rod, B, parallel to itself through a distance
equal to one of the rods, as shown in the first diagram.
Next we take rods C and D and rotate them 90°, forming the second
diagram. Finally, we displace D parallel to itself to form the square.
Now, in non-Euclidean geometry, one goes more deeply into the question
of what is meant by parallelism and by a right angle. In a more general
geometry, it is possible that initially equal rods displaced parallel to themselves,
in the way described above, will in effect cease to have equal length. Thus,
the square would not close, as I indicated in the diagram below.  
We cannot imagine this behaviour in terms of the
space of ordinary experience. Yet logically, when
we study the postulates underlying geometry, we
can see no inherent reason why this latter
behaviour (the non-closing) should not be possible.
The fact that they do close is then empirical, rather
than logically necessary. This means of course that
the empirically observed closing may only be an
approximation, and that eventually a very accurate

Creative Determination
73
measurement would show otherwise. Similarly, perhaps the closing is
characteristic of our ordinary scale of distances, and might not apply
either on the sub-atomic scale of smallness or the super-galactic scale of
largeness.
I hope that this gives you some idea of what is involved here. It is
very hard to give a more precise idea without mathematics.
With regard to your request for books about this view on creativity
in nature, it is hard to suggest anything, as few people hold these views
at present. I would suggest your reading Whitehead as the nearest
approximation that I know of. For example, try his book, Process and
Reality, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1929.
With best regards, and looking forward to another letter from you,
David Bohm
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
December 28, 1960
Dear Mr Bohm:
Your letter of November 17 was read with interest in what you have
to say. However, my reply is handicapped by the fact that I could not
understand several of your key points.
You must forgive me but I had to smile at your explanation for
delaying discussion of art. For everything you say applies as much to
me as an artist trying to discuss your work. Nevertheless, since I have
taken the plunge first, and I assure you it is a plunge, it is just as well
you delay your remarks on art until our conversations give you
something to go on. I am hoping that we will also unearth those
psychological differences and relations between physics and art.
For instance, I have been struck for a long time by the necessity for
the physicist to minutely ponder whatever he encounters before that
aspect of nature which concerns him. As an artist I never feel the
need to pursue my thoughts to the nth degree, although I do so more
than most artists, as do those few who are concerned with the new
direction. If I were to pursue art as the physicist pursues his, much as
I would find it pleasur-able, I would be making inroads into my main
work, to be constantly experiencing and seeking understanding of

74
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
vision for art purposes. This reminds me, several times in the past I
have read that scientists are generally more interested in music (sound);
do you find it so?
It is interesting to note, that the field of philosophy called aesthetics
has tried to formulate a minute penetration of art experience. But it
invariably turns out to be quite useless, ignored by artists, because so
far removed from the actualities of art. As has been noted by others, it
could go on existing even if there were no art.
You start off by saying that every process has one or more pairs of
directions. How do you adjust this view with the often stated notion
that the general cosmic process is a one-way, irreversible affair? I think
I understand what you are talking about as “contrary states,” these
“oppositions in movement.” You say that these states are not “generally
existent,” but it seems to me they are never existent. There are only the
interweavings of different components of a process, in which none can
achieve complete supremacy to its own limits.
I don’t see how these states, really aspects of a single process, are
seen to possess directions “contrary” to, and in “opposition” to, each
other. Incidentally, are you familiar with Piet Mondrian’s Neoplastic
theory of art? In it he has his “oppositions,” dualisms and universals.
Let’s take the problem of symmetry which I take to be characteristic
of all processes in nature and human life. In your language, if one
extended the two aspects of the process to their limits there would be
absolute, frigid symmetry in one direction, asymmetric chaos in the
other. In actuality we never face either extreme. What we commonly
call symmetry is never without its asymmetric aspects, the latter never
without symmetric aspects. Thus the cosmos does not freeze into rigor
mortis, nor disintegrate into utter chaos. To make contraries out of that
is to have the choice between hanging and shooting. What I do find is
a spectrum of variables disclosing the rich order that is extant in the
creative structure of nature’s unity. Both aspects are always present
together in varying degree. This corresponds to what you call their
“identical” characteristic in the totality. But I question the term identical,
preferring your reference to the degree of dominance of one aspect or
another. So I don’t find any opposites which are even opposite to
themselves (because they are said to achieve identity too), where
processes themselves are opposite to themselves. You start with contraries
and end up with contradictions.
What you say about universals escapes me. The following sentence
completely baffled me: “Similarly, universality is particular, since

Creative Determination
75
universality is not particularity, and therefore universality does not
include the totality of all possible concepts (which must include
particularity).”
Does necessitation occur only in our own minds (either-or)?
Necessitation or determination of some kind will probably continue to
be regarded as an attribute of nature in the future. But in that future
aspects of our present view of necessitation will be found to lack existence
outside our minds. In this qualified manner I would admit that our
mind reflects what occurs in reality. If it did not, we would not have a
reliable means for discerning error, and if the reflection were perfect,
however, we would never make errors only experiencing perfect
reflections of each new moment. It appears, then, what we experience
outside us is derived from what is neither words, thoughts nor
perceptions. These latter are attributes peculiar to the human aspect of
nature and remain as such, no matter how well the structure implied by
our words, thoughts and perceptions appears to correspond to, even to
reflect nature. The reflections are limited reflections because the capacity
of our mind for reflection is, at any one time, always limited. Thus our
mode of perception and/or abstraction when projected upon nature seems
to achieve a correspondence of structure within the nature context being
experienced. Our projections seek structural consciousness that
corresponds to a nature that appears to be reflected. The history of art
offers vivid examples. Until recent times when some have become more
acutely aware of the non-allness of our perceptive and abstractional
abilities, verbal statements were made along with contemporaneous
art, especially from Giotto to Courbet, exclaiming that nature’s realism
had been captured to the nth degree. The reflections of nature appeared
to correspond to the art, and appeared so because nature was not
perceived, not consciously reflected, to a degree greater than that reflected
in the art. Therefore the verbal statements of realism only indicated the
conscious condition of human vision (reflection) of nature at the time.
The notion of duality, you say, is essential if we are to be able to
show the interweavings of the different aspects of a process, otherwise
we could only make the trivial statement that the cosmic process was
One. It is not my intention to deny the different aspects of any process;
only the inference that these aspects are in “opposition.” To return to
our discussion of past and future, I suppose you would say there were
two directions, a going into the past of each moment, and each moment
going away from the past into the future. Are these oppositions, or
opposite directions? Simultaneously, each moment becomes past and

76
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
future at the threshold of the present. What you have so well explained
as the folding of each moment into the past, is also a folding into the
future. There is, however, only one direction to the process, the future.
Strictly speaking, there is no past, “What has gone has gone forever,”
as Whitehead put it. As you say, we cannot go back to yesterday with a
clock and measure the time to today. There are only various “traces” of
the past “folded” up in the present “here and now.” The traces themselves
are constantly moving, in motion, from what they were towards an
inevitable series of will be. Traces of traces are left behind. Truly,
everything that was has indeed vanished forever. What remains of the
past is what it was not. With these qualifications I can agree the past
continues to exist, the term “continues” implying the qualifications
anyway. Only our ingenuity to abstract permits us to unfold past times,
places and things and even thoughts and perceptions of the past. I do
not find the passive role you refer to, only a past that is actively
responding to the alterations of the future, as the future is constantly
responding to the residue of the whole past which, as you say, is
contained in each whole moment.
In your remarks on arbitrary abstractions, you couple them with
mine on the development from Monet to Mondrian, as an example of
what was once necessity then “petered out.” On that quoted remark we
may not be in agreement. True, I study the development from M. to M.
in order to comprehend the specific structure of the transition from
mimeticism to creation. This leads to discovering certain possibilities
that were actualized by these artists which made possible and sustained
this transition, as distinct from other actualizations which were in direct
conflict with their goal. It is these latter qualities, some extant some
suggestively potential, in the art of Monet, for instance, which led to
the arbitrary abstractions of all Monet’s contemporaries, except Cézanne.
It is just these arbitrary efforts that have been leading the majority
efforts at art steadily to a death that is now close at hand in today’s art.
There we see that art has become a mere therapy for the artist himself,
but a reverse sort, in that they only release the urge to destroy. This led
me to divide all post-Courbet art into Structurism and Expressionism,
in my Cézanne book. Here indeed I certainly see oppositions, dualisms,
contraries. What you want to attribute to nature, I attribute exclusively to man.
The non-arbitrary actualizations remain sustained because they
remain necessitations. As we increase our understanding of these
necessitations, they continue to play a part in clarifying the particular
necessitations of future art. Thus, anything that once attains true

Creative Determination
77
necessitation in art, remains so, for we have yet to exhaust our
understanding of the very first art attempts of cave artists when they
began picturing the world in their eyes. As you said with Ibsen, the
truth can grow old, but it can also respond to the new as it comes.
Such problems, however, are not fully recognized in art. The belief
is that the artist is free to do as he pleases. The concern is with whatever
the artist does, not whether it is desirable. In this way a Picasso can be
quite sincere in announcing the demise of Cubism, without knowing
that it was his false understanding of Cubism that led to its demise. He
cannot know that Cubism is open to a different view, that it can be
actualized otherwise, and in a way in which its necessitation is sustained.
Contingency is peculiar to human life. You disagree. Perhaps my
position is between the one you take and the one you think I take.
Nothing in experience gives me reason to regard the objective reality as
a process containing contingentation, to believe that anything could be
other than it is at a particular moment. I do believe, however, that the
unique structure of human life allows it a multiple of potentiality choices
before each future, that things could certainly be other than they are.
The history of the human race is full of examples of this multiplicity.
And today, in both the fields of science and art, we see similar material
acted upon as having different potentialities. This leads me to believe
that in some respects nature’s objective reality could be otherwise where
the intercession of man is possible. This is to exclude a belief in chance.
If I stubbornly reject chance as an inherent aspect of nature’s structure,
it is not that I count on the hope that were we given knowledge of the
infinite future, causality, as we know it today, would hold firm. Looking
at all man’s past searchings into nature structure, we see his vision of it
change too often to have any hope (or desire) that current views will
last any longer than so long, and then be replaced by others. What I
feel, I don’t mind admitting that it’s instinctual, is a notion of causality
remarkably altered by a nature seen as a purely creative process —not
the atomic particles, but what is at the bottom of that structure, not the
objects we perceive with our eyes, but what is at the bottom of that
perception. A creative causality that rejects any form of mechanistic
thinking equally with any notions of chance. A process where what
now appears as chance is but the subtle intricacies of creation, causality
as a process of diverse orders of creative determination.
Chance theories of nature, and here too I don’t mind admitting I
have only my feelings to speak from, to the degree held seem to me as
signs of man’s defeat before nature. Men claim that a stone wall exists

78
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
at a certain point in his penetration of nature, which he proclaims both
absolute and impenetrable, thus assuring himself that there is no need
to keep on looking, on the chance that he, not nature, erected that wall.
Had physicists taken art more seriously than they generally do, they
might have detected a warning to themselves at the sight of many in
both art and music turning, without stopping for a decent amount of
thought, to the views of chance and indeterminism as the very essence
of nature and human life.
A nature with chance is just as repugnant as one of mechanistic
determinism. The latter eliminates the essential quality of creation, the
former reduces it to the absurd, to that creative irrationality seemingly
implied by Bohr’s “irrationality trait,” p. 91 your book.
All my feelings, thoughts experienced with nature, as well as my
attempts to follow various physicists as they recount the motions in the
intimate structure of nature, all come to a nature of creative motions,
growth. I feel the elements of wonder, discovery, the constant creative
renewal of nature pouring into the veins of human life, to make man a
unique creator within nature’s process. I think early men were on the
right track. Their instinctual yearnings as creatures of nature led them
to form their greatest gods as beings of creation; creators ordering the
creation of the universe.
In speaking this way, I am not under the impression that I prove
anything, that I am talking in a way that seems to utter trivialities,
lacking what is needed for their serious consideration. So why talk like
this at all? Because I believe that human feelings are the place where an
ever greater degree of objectivity can be born. I think this has been true
of all the great art and great scientific discoveries. Our feelings are our
life-link with nature, as they are with other human beings. In this way
I have found the direction that I believe leads to a genuine art of our
times; in the same manner, I find the way to the development of that
art. We live, but to fully live we must feel. And whatever we say about
the structure of nature and human life must lead us to feel it, and to
always seek to feel it deeper. Otherwise, it is like making love to an
apparition.
I have the impression that twentieth-century urbanism coupled with
the immense power that man now wields thanks to science, the age of
man-power instead of horse-power, that all this has dulled our confidence
to feel. We have Geiger counters for the atoms, but we have them for
humans too. These days one is supposed only to “communicate.” We
want to rise above feelings, because we fear to feel. It has left a vacuum

Creative Determination
79
in life which we leave the totalitarians to fill, they do make people
“feel.” From this viewpoint, indeterminacy appears to me to have its
major appeal to the intellect, to the Ego of man frustrated before a new
and illusive reality appearance of nature, both in art and science.
Since we agree there cannot be an absolute fixed totality, how can
any moment, any “here and now,” be “an infinite, inexhaustible totality”?
This is not achieved, as you propose, by relating the moment to its
whole past, and the whole universe. That would be to relate it only to
a limited totality, a particular of the infinite creative process of nature.
Only by its relation to a future that extends to infinity, is any past moment
infinite. You yourself, further on in your letter, show how no totality is
complete, when you discuss moment A folded as a trace in moment B,
etc. Still further on you say that totality is found in the limit of the
infinite future of the particular moment.
I thought your exposition of how each moment was a kind of
reflection of the past excellent, as were the verbal expressions such as
traces, folded and unfolded. What you say explains very well my reasons
for being necessarily concerned with the historical process of art as
being applicable to present decisions about art. When you publish the
views you are discussing with me, I will ask my more serious readers to
study your work.
Regarding contingency as you demonstrate it in a painting. First I
want you to know that I readily agree to contingency in works of art.
Still a very interesting thing happened when I read your views on this.
In the way you tried to explain contingency, it seems to gain in
significance when applied to non-mimetic art. In the painting of a man
your contingency remarks only apply to whether or not the parts, the
eyes, etc., were properly related according to the determination imposed by
created models in nature. This deals only with the facility of the artist to
imitate, not with his creative ability. So let’s expand the context. Again
a man, a painting by Rembrandt, depicted in head gear and ornate
dress, looking at a bust on which one of his hands rests. There is the
table, etc. Here your contingency remarks really get to work. For we
are now concerned with this artist’s remarkable ability to creatively
compose the picture toward an expressive goal.
But it is precisely this latter effort that takes on an even fuller existence
where art is wholly created by man, that is, he is not limited by the
finite creative area left open by the demands of mimeticism of already
created objects by nature, carpenters, etc. I chose the Mondrian-like
painting, limited to the context of two lines in right-angle relations, in

80
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
order to avoid unnecessary visual complications
requiring much explanation. In such a painting,
and I do not need to depart from the words you
used for your man painting, the right-angle lines
are “contingent in that they could be located
anywhere in the picture.” For example, the area
of the canvas could be an equal sided square, the
two lines dividing it into four equal parts. “This
contingency is removed when we consider the
whole picture,” for we find it to be a more creative
expression of the lines and colors within the area.
There is then the difference between a dull
monotony and the creative expression of diversity,
as in the case of sounds produced by an
instrumental composer of music.
But there is more to contingency in purely creative art. No genuine
artist would ever claim that any of his works were perfect, i.e., that all
contingency had been removed, that necessitation reigned perfectly
supreme. (The nearest anyone comes to claiming this perfection, inter-
estingly enough, are idealists who claim knowledge of some absolute,
as did Mondrian.) Cézanne is a vivid example who has been
misunderstood on just this problem, because of his repeated expressions
of wishing to “realize.” The artist strives with the hope that certain
contingentations in past work will find their resolution in necessitations
achieved in future work, but never with the expectation (or the desire)
that this process between the two aspects will ever cease. In regard to
this problem, artists like Mozart and Monet were highly sensitized
vehicles for their art, but men like Cézanne, Beethoven, Poussin were
also seeking to be masters of the process of their art. Both kinds of
artists have their necessary and irreplaceable place in the evolution of art.
Going further still, let us see how this non-absolute, non-perfection,
this non-idealistic attitude, brings up another aspect of contingency. If a
work of art is such that it “begins to necessitate each detail,” it is then
static, frozen instead of living. Examples of this art are most completely
achieved by artists who use mathematics as the determinant for the
structure of the parts of their art. At the other extreme we find
contingency floundering across the work hopelessly searching for
necessitation. Examples of this art cover the galleries of the world today,
called Action Painting here, Tachiste Painting over there. It is this type

Creative Determination
81
of artist who are highly pleased to hear the theory of indeterminism
murmured in their ears backed up by the high source of “science.”
Contingency in great works of art serves the role of securing the
living quality which, in the two examples above, is either chaotic or
frigid. Where this living quality is present, the work seems inexhaustible
to experience, we can come back to it again and again. New contingencies
keep on appearing which lead us to its broader base of necessitation.
Thus the totality of the work is constantly changing and expanding,
until we begin to experience a fuller sense of correspondence with the
art. In this way the great work of art approaches the living quality
experienced by the creations of nature, where nothing remains a fixed
totality. It is then not enough to merely attain structural integration in
the “overall pattern,” to use your phrase, for that can be achieved easily
enough by submitting to the dictates of mathematics. It is necessary
that the work’s structural pattern be imbued with the dynamic expression
of the living quality most exemplified in the creations of nature. This
cannot be achieved at the price of “disorder” or indeterminacy, as the
drip and splash artists think.
The structure of a picture is static, you say, so process experiences,
contingency-necessity, occur only in the human being. Would you reason
in the same way about a sea-shell? You seem to assume that unless a
work possesses actual motion it remains for the viewer to set the static
parts in motion, at least in himself. This is to neglect the structure of
the eye with its focal area, to forget that the artist arranged the parts
that the eye might experience the motion of the focal points coming
together in certain ways. If process experience could only be manifested
in visible motion of what the eye sees, the reality would be a rock-and-
roll one. Nothing is truly static anyway.
Every new work of art has some contingency relations, and so
necessity relations, with all past great art, and the reverse is also true.
You are looking at a Rembrandt painting, the Rembrandt you see has
never been seen before, not only because you have never been before,
but also your vision is colored by all the art since Rembrandt, as well as
before. This accounts for the rise and fall of certain works or artists
with each new generation. What happens to the “static” work of art is
not unlike what we have discussed in regard to past and future. It is
possible to project oneself into a view that approximately sustains the
contemporary experience of some past work of art. This is rarely done,
it is difficult to do, yet essential for the adequate understanding of art as
an evolutionary process.

82
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
“The Structurist,” you write, “might even, as you say, discover
possibilities that are potential to nature, but are actualized only with the
aid of man,” the artist. I could not have used the word “might,” more
likely the word “must.” The Structurist takes the one alternative to
mimesis— pure creation of art. He must realize creations inherent in nature’s
creative process, which can only be actualized by man. But even this is
not too difficult to do, and that is not very well understood. What is
truly difficult is to realize the living quality I referred to earlier, else the
art is still-born. To the degree the particularity of the artist’s form relations
fail to be other than the particular relations created by nature, to that
degree the Structurist fails.
I assume you mean that all art has the purpose of “helping to guide
a creative process in the viewer.” Mimetic art has two general roles—as
a vehicle of literature, or performing the task which became the province
of camera artists in the nineteenth century. The first involves the viewer
in the creative activity peculiar to literature when it takes the form of
visual art. The other reveals and stimulates human vision to experience
the creations of nature. One is thankful that this last form of art
continues. It is from this last that the Structurist takes the next step,
revealing those creations inherent in nature’s process which man alone
actualizes. His art reveals to human life the deeper creative relation he
can possess with nature and so with himself in all aspects of human
existence. It is through this art that I came to understand science as
essentially dealing with nature as creation.
In this connection I cannot agree that Structurist art has the intention
of “not revealing a particular object,” but of offering the “general laws
and possibilities of nature, the essential structure of reality.” I do not
mean to say it will not, but that this can only be done with words and
theory. Art is a perceptive experience, one does not merely manifest
laws and their possibilities, but rather uses them as the means to manifest
the creative experience of art. These manifestations possess the same
qualities as nature—form, space, color. Their purpose is not so much to
“guide a creative process in the viewer,” as much as to imbue him,
immerse him, in the quality of human existence as creation. To convey
that creation is fundamental as the supreme expression of the human
quality. Art and music, however, realize in the purest form what is essential for the
adequate experience and realization of human life in general.
I appreciate your effort to explain the Einstein remark which I see,
after a point, takes me in the area of my ignorance.

Creative Determination
83
I read Whitehead’s Process and Reality some 20 years ago, I quote
from it in my Evolution. But looking into it again, at your suggestion, I
find the verbiage in it still poses hurdles for me to follow consistently
what he is saying.
I hope you haven’t forgotten that you were going to tell me of your
meeting with Carl Visser. Are he and I the only artists in the new
direction that you have come in contact with? Also, I meant to ask you
in my previous letter, if you are an acquaintance of J.Berger? His
replacement on The New Statesman needs being replaced!
Again I look forward to your reply. Meanwhile, my best regards
and may I wish you and your wife
a good New Year,
Charles Biederman
 


 
 
 
III


THOUGHT AND REALITY
 
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
February 2, 1961
Dear Mr Biederman:
Thank you very much for your latest letter, and the two journals,
which I have read with great interest. I find that we are very close to
agreement on many points, and that the respects in which we disagree
are now more clearly defined. I think it best that we go further into
these philosophical questions. Meanwhile, I am considering my ideas
about Structurist art, which will probably be ready for discussion by
the time I get your next letter. I have seen an exhibition in London of
Structurist art and have had an interesting talk with Anthony Hill. When
I get around to making my comments on Structurism, I shall also discuss
my talks with Carl Visser and Anthony Hill. In addition, your books
and articles have been lent to students at the Slade School in London,
and I hope that we shall be able to have some discussion on them soon.
Your discussion of contingentation and necessitation in art is very
illuminating; it expresses just what I would have liked to say. I am very
surprised indeed that you do not see that the same process goes on in
nature. Incidentally, may I ask you to think about a certain question
related to this subject: “If man has error and contingency in the make-

88
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
up of his mental processes, and if he evolved solely out of nature (and
is sustained solely by his inter-connection with nature), then where did
these features of his process originate, if they were not, in some sense,
in nature from the very start?” In other words, do you think that man’s
claim to distinction is his “creation” of error and contingency out of
nothing?
About the difference in emphasis in physics and art, this arises because
the physicist seeks laws having some kind of universal truth. By this,
one means that these laws operate in every context in which the terms
mentioned in the laws exist. For this reason, a discrepancy between
theory and fact, even in the smallest detail, becomes extraordinarily
important. As a result, everything has eventually to be worked out in
full detail. Sometimes the smallest discrepancy between theory and fact
reveals the need for a revolutionary change in the whole set of concepts.
As I see it, artists do not generally work in this way (except for a few
like Leonardo da Vinci who was very much oriented towards science).
It is true that physicists are generally more closely attached to music
than to art. Music is of course, as you say, more removed from mimesis
than art, and in this sense more universal. It also has a more clearly
defined relation to mathematics. What do you think?
I think that it is important to me to state my ideas on process once
again, because they have evolved since the last letter was written. The
main change is that I now admit (in agreement with you) that process
exists even in so-called “static” objects, such as a picture. Of course, we
realize that no object is really static, but that rather, its persistence in a
certain form is a consequence of inner movements that balance each
other (e.g., atomic movements, pulsation, etc.). But what must be added
is that for this reason, the persistent aspects of the form of the thing
can, and indeed must, reflect process. Your example of a sea-shell is
extremely cogent. I like to give the example of the geological strata on
the rocks, which reveal their process of formation, deposition, etc. These
examples are only special cases of a very general principle; viz., all
structure is the trace (and the trace of the trace, etc.) of process. But secondly,
structure also conditions subsequent process, both in the object having
the structure, and in everything else in which this object can act
(including of course the human viewer). In other words, existing structure
determines potentialities for subsequent process. Thus, in effect, process congeals
as a set of persistent structures, while the real inner and outer movement
of these structures implies their further unfolding and revelation of self
in subsequent process.

Thought and Reality
89
Let us now return to the problem of time. Consider any particular
moment in any particular place. This is for itself a “here and now”. For
every other moment, it is a “then and there”. Each such moment is in
contact with other moments in two ways:
1
Its past acts in it, to form a trace, trace of a trace, etc.
2
It acts in its future, in a similar way.
The action of such moments (parts of the cosmic process) in each
other is conditioned by the fact that there is a maximum possible
velocity of connection between different moments, the velocity of light.
To illustrate this, we can draw a graph of space against time. For
simplicity we consider only one dimension of space, which we denote
by x. The maximum velocity (in two opposite directions) is represented
by a pair of straight lines, as shown in the diagram, which pass through
the point, P, representing the event under discussion.  
In relation to the point, P, the light rays passing through it separate space-
time into three parts: (A) absolute past, (B) absolute future, (C) absolute
elsewhere. The absolute past of P is constituted of all those events that
can act in P. The absolute future of P is constituted of all those events in
which P can act. The absolute elsewhere of P is constituted of all those
events, such as P’, which have no direct contact with P. (Such a direct
contact would imply a movement faster than light, which is impossible
according to the theory of relativity.) Of course, indirect contact between
P and points such as P’ in the absolute elsewhere of P is possible, because
there can be other events, such as P”, which are in the common past of P
and P’, and which can be connected with both P and P’ by light rays.
The essential idea here is that any process whatsoever which can be
localized at the point P can be acted upon only by what is in its absolute

90
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
past. This is true whether the process in question is a part of inanimate
matter or a sentient human being. Such a process does not fully determine
its absolute elsewhere, but it does yield a projection of its past, which determines
potentialities for its absolute elsewhere. Nevertheless, there is always room,
logically speaking, for this absolute elsewhere to differ from any of the
potentialities that are projected forward from the past of the given event, P.
In other words, from the trace of the past of any given event, there cannot
be a complete determination of the potentialities of the events that are
simultaneous with it, much less of those that are in its future.
There is an instructive way of looking at this problem. Each event
(including a moment of our own existence) is presented with that which
acts in it. This is in reality what is present to it. The present of an event
is really in its past. For example, what a person sees is the light now
reaching him. With distant stars, this may have set out millions of years
ago. There is no way at all to know what this star is doing “now”. One
may guess by projecting his own past forward to the star’s position, but
this will be only a guess, since it is always possible that something new
will come into being between the events that we can now see on the
star and those which come later. This discrepancy exists even for close
objects, but it is usually unimportant for practical purposes, because
these objects do not change appreciably while the light passes from
them to our eyes. However, for very fast processes (which can be studied
by instruments), this change can be of crucial importance.
We can see immediately that there is room here for objective and
universal contingency. For once we admit that there is a part of the
general cosmic process at some point, P, then it follows that the
development of this part depends objectively on what is outside of it,
since its future potentialities are contingent on what it is not.
Our own mental events are a special case of the kind of contingency
described above. Thus, the inner structure of these events at a given
moment determines completely neither the potentialities of what exists
elsewhere at the same time, nor those of our own future. What I wish
to stress here is that every event in nature has a similar inner structure
(which is the trace, trace of the trace, etc. of its past), and that the
further development of this structure is likewise not completely self-
determined, but in some ways dependent on what is elsewhere to it.
This is what I mean by objective contingency. This kind of contingency
is essentially the same in physical events as it is in mental events.
Contingency must of course later turn into necessity, as the process
at a given point, P, develops and further responds to the influences of

Thought and Reality
91
the processes in its absolute elsewhere. This is the process of necessitation
that we have been talking about. But there is also the process of
contingentation. For certain developments, which would be necessary if
only the projection of the absolute past of P were operative, cease to be
necessary, because new factors have entered into the process from its
absolute elsewhere. There is a continual process of necessitation and
contingentation, exactly as you described in relation to viewing a picture.
As a new experience comes in, that which was necessitated in a projection
of past experiences ceases to be actually necessary. Room is created for
something new, and as a result of the response to the very same
experience, the new comes into being, its potentialities being necessitated
by the experience in question. But as I have said before, this is also the
way in which developments take place in nature generally.
It is clear that the above point of view emphasizes heavily the basically
inward character of all processes, whether natural or human. As I have
already indicated, in each “here and now”, there is a moving trace of
the rest of the world. This happens, of course, also in our own mental
processes. Everything that we know is what enters into our inner process
of consciousness at a given moment. The space that we perceive is a
result of this process. Even what is outside is therefore really also inside.
It is important to stress again that this is characteristic not only of human
reality, but also of all nature.
The above represents a concept of existence as action. Each process exists
in itself in the form of inner action, in a way that what is outside acts in it,
and therefore also is in it. All relation is by way of such mutual action. Any
part of the process, A, is for B, only in the way in which it acts in B. Thus,
in effect, each part of the process “shows” itself by the way it acts in every
part of the universe. It may act differently in different parts, and therefore
show itself in different aspects. (This is really very similar to Whitehead’s
idea in Process and Reality that every event “prehends” events in its own
past.) The basic concept is therefore action. Appearance is a form of action;
viz., how something acts in the observer (e.g., in his eyes to form an image).
Reality is in this way to be understood as actuality; i.e., a totality of action.
To sum up, nothing ever exists except some “here and now”. Within
each “here and now” are the moving traces which are the results of the
action of all the “then and there’s” which are in its past. Each “here and
now” passes out of existence, to be replaced by others, but its trace is
left in the inner movement and structure of subsequent events.
The commonly accepted idea of a single general picture of the whole
cosmic process is wrong. Each moment gives, as it were, a broad

92
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
“panoramic” view of its distant past. Processes near each other in space
and time have a great deal of their distant past in common. From this,
there arises the illusion of a single common “public” space-time. The
only reality is, however, the set of “private” space-times belonging to
the various events, and their relationship to each other. (Note that we
do not fall into subjectivism, because the private space-time of the mind
is just a special case of similar space-time is existing universally in nature.)
We have here what may be called “concrete universality” of each event,
since it is related to the whole universe, in a way that is peculiar to itself
alone. For this reason, it is just as correct to say that the place and time
of a given event (in relation to that of others) is in it, as it is to say that
it is in its place and time.
It is important to notice that although each “here and now” has the
trace of its past in it (and indeed is a trace of its past), it is not in general
fully conscious of its past. For consciousness requires memory. Memory is
more than a trace; it is the re-creation or re-collection of the past, as a kind
of image of how it was. As you said in your letter, the trace is the past as
it was not. Memory aims to produce again the past as it originally acted
and to confront it to the action in the present. Memory involves a process
of reflection, by which the inner trace is transformed into an image.
An interesting question is that of whether memory-like reflection
does not occur to some extent in inanimate matter. The answer is that
it does, at least in a rudimentary way. Consider for example the reflection
of waves from a shore line, or even more obviously an echo of a
previously produced sound from a rock face. In calculating machines,
a similar process of reflection is frequently used to fulfil the function of
storing up data for some time and then bringing it back at an appropriate
stage into the process of calculation. In man’s brain, such a reflection
process is of course enormously highly developed. Yet it is clear that
man’s mental processes are not absolutely alien in this respect to those
of nature. And as I indicated in the question that I asked you earlier, it
would be surprising if they were. For then, how could man have evolved
from non-living matter?
It is important to apply the ideas described above to ourselves as
well as to nature. For, as is quite evident from the preceding discussion,
we can learn about nature only through our relation with it; i.e., only
through the way nature acts in us and we act in it. For example, a very
young child may suppose that far away objects are small because they
produce small images in his eyes. Later, he learns to correct this idea,
by noting that apparent size depends in part on a certain relation of the

Thought and Reality
93
object to himself; viz., the distance. But we have a natural tendency
similar to that described above to weight heavily those factors that seem
important to us, because of our desires, interests, fears, etc. We must
understand ourselves and our relationship to the whole process in order
to interpret correctly our experiences with nature.
One of the particular problems that must be understood especially
well is the role of our own past experience, in determining our response
to the world. It is clear that in this response, we are guided by a large
number of ideas, conclusions, habits, etc., which have been accumulated.
Accumulation is not a static affair, but a dynamic process. For that
which has been accumulated has to be maintained. It tends to fall into
a trace, so that a counter-process of reflection is needed to bring it back
more or less to its original form. Thus, any set of well-defined ideas
that we may have should be thought of as a system of inner movements.
Let us call them “moving conclusions”.
When we have a new experience, then in principle, we could respond
in an integrated way to what may be called the “challenge” of this
experience, by means of some action. Generally speaking, however, we
tend to respond mainly with the aid of these “moving conclusions”
consisting of old ideas, habits, prejudices, etc., in such a way as to produce
another conclusion of this kind. Since these conclusions are only an
infinitesimal fraction of our whole being, this response is not likely to
be an integrated one. Rather one part of it will tend to come into conflict
with other parts thus setting up a process of disintegration, which in
general becomes apparent only later, when it begins to act in nature, in
other people, and in ourselves.
Whenever there is such a lack of inner integration of response, true
creativity is impossible. Such creativity can come into existence only
when the set of “moving conclusions” described above is de-necessitated,
or in other words, when the process of continuation of these aspects of
the past by means of a corresponding movement of reflection comes to
an end. This cannot be brought about by trying to oppose, destroy, or
annihilate these aspects of the past. For as you point out in your articles
in The Structurist, this only perpetuates their dynamic power in another
form. Rather, it must be done by trying to understand the past. If this
understanding is deep enough, we are liberated from the domination of
the past; we stop repeating it mechanically or with mechanical
modifications, and we are free to respond creatively to the challenge of
the new moment.

94
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
In this connection, I regard work such as yours, which analyses
developments in the field of art, as being of crucial significance. By
seeing into the process of art as it has actually been, we come to
understand it. In this way, we cease to be under the necessity of repeating
previous trends within the older general framework, or else of simply
trying to destroy the old framework altogether, thus still being
conditioned by the past.
Nevertheless, just because I think that your work is so important, I
feel the need to express certain misgivings, which arise in me when I
think about some of the things that have been written about Structurist
art. In other words, I have the feeling that along with a great deal of
truth, the theory of Structurism may have some inconsistent elements.
These could impede you in carrying out what I feel to be your real
goal, which is to help us to an understanding of the role of creativity,
first through art, and perhaps ultimately in a more general way.
As far as your analysis of the limitations in past trends in art is
concerned, I am in general agreement. When you suggest Structurism
as a possible way out of the impasse, I can only say “More power to
you”. The difficulty is that your theory has in it certain potentially
dogmatic elements. For you feel that in addition to studying the facts of
art as it did evolve, you can pick out the real main trend, which Cézanne
and Mondrian carried along without developing it to the full extent of
its possibilities.
Now you may well be right in your assessment of this trend, but you
may also be wrong, or only party right. The precise truth about this
question is however, much less important than is the fact that while you
project this trend towards the future, it is actually only the past, as seen
from your own special vantage point. Other people also look at trends
in the past and pick out a certain one that appeals to them, which they
too think is the proper thing to be developed.
The question that I want to ask you is this: “Is not the pre-judging of
the issue of what is the main trend in art incompatible with full creativity,
which must be free from moment to moment?” I realize of course that
you are allowing yourself a great deal of freedom, but only within the
framework of the Structurist theory. Suppose that in a truly creative
moment, you were led to something that conflicted with the whole set
of basic tenets of Structurism? Are you allowing yourself to be free to
do this, if the challenge of the future moment should lead to such a
response? Or are you perhaps unconsciously restricting your responses
so as to avoid such a possibility?

Thought and Reality
95
I feel that I must clarify a few points here. As I said before, I agree
with you that true creativity is not a simple destruction of the past. Nor
is it a simple repetition or continuation with modification of the past. It
must be free to reject any feature of the past, to continue it, to modify it,
or to initiate some new line of development which is not limited by the
past. This freedom applies not only to what other artists have done, not
only to the work of that particular artist himself, but also to all the
theories that this artist may have made. For these theories are themselves
based on the past, and are the past of this particular artist, even if they
are his assessments as to what he imagines that the future will be. Such
assessments are generally incomplete in two respects. First, because of
his own particular character and background, he will be attracted to
certain aspects “of the whole process of development, repelled by
others. These attractions and repulsions are arbitrary. Therefore, he
is in danger of picking out the tendencies that attract him, and calling
them the true continuation of the process. Secondly, there is (as happens
in nature too) always something new coming in from outside, the
unexpected. A dogmatic adherence to theory may prevent him from
being sensitive to this.
As I see it, the purpose of theoretical analysis is to free us from being
controlled by the past that is in us (i.e., the “moving conclusions” that I
mentioned previously). Such freedom cannot be obtained by ignoring
the past, because the past is always operating in the present, whether
we are aware of this operation or not. The artist (and of course the
scientist too) must therefore try to understand this past, not only in the
way that other people are influenced by it, but also in the way that he
himself is thus influenced. (For example, he must see that his own theories
may be conditioning him in the same way that other people’s theories
are conditioning them.) Until one understands the true role of the past,
as it works in one’s own mind, one tends to over-emphasize its
importance. As a result, one is incapable of an integrated response to
what is new in the present.
In this connection, some of the things that have been written about
Structurist art resemble what the Marxists have said. For they felt that
by studying the evolutionary process of the past, they could pick out
the main direction in which history was moving. They became so
attached to their theories that they were unable to review their own
role objectively, or to admit new and unexpected developments not
fitting into these theories. It is interesting that they too presented the
argument that a partisan viewpoint is inevitable. One must be conscious

96
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
that one is a partisan and take it into account, they said. But they were
never really able to do so. Perhaps this was not entirely an accident, but
partially a consequence of a theory that extolled partisanship. In other
words, they not only admitted that they were influenced by what
attracted and repelled them, but said that this was only right and proper,
and indeed a wonderful thing. For without it, they would be unable to
be active enough and ruthless enough to carry out the revolution which
their theory demanded. To recognize partisanship as something that is
there inevitably is one thing; to say that it is desirable is something else.
For example, one may recognize that disease is probably inevitable, but
if one extols it by regarding it as a mechanism for killing off weaklings
and thus improving the race, one is introducing a basically false idea.
In this regard, I feel that Bornstein’s article in the Structurist that you
sent me sets forth with particular clarity the aspect of the theory that I
am referring to above. He says several things that could equally well
have been said by Marxists. For example, “Without the idea of progress
—meaning a conscious moving on towards something worthy of faith
and endeavour—there is no history.” Elsewhere he states, “Faith is
commitment.” He then refers to the fact that your work has revealed
an order or process through which man’s art has evolved, an order
which presents a positive direction of advance along a new course. The
Marxists have said something very similar about their own point of
view. Suppose now that a person is confronted with two conflicting
faiths. Each of these faiths is equally honest in recognizing its own
partisan character, and in trying to take its own subjective limitations
into account. Since it finally comes down to a question of faith and to
commitment to what is in the nature of the case unknown, i.e., to what
will develop in the future, each person can finally say only that the faith
of A is what appeals to him while that of B repels him or vice versa.
Does everything really finally boil down to such accidental and arbitrary
personal preferences? I do not believe so, nor it seems, do you. For if it
does, then your whole position, which is against Tachism, Action
Painting, Expressionism, etc., becomes untenable. Indeed, all these finally
put the essence of art in the accidental personal idiosyncrasies of each
individual.
It seems to me that what you are most basically concerned with is
the role of creativity in art. Analyses such as yours may well suggest
new lines that are worthy of being explored. But unless this exploration
is carried out in an undogmatic way, without “faith” or “commitment”,
then it seems to me that you are in danger of interfering with the freedom

Thought and Reality
97
of the creative process. For you are not allowing yourself to carry out
such a process, if it has aspects that are not compatible with the articles
and commitments of your faith.
It seems to me that true creativity requires that theories be regarded
as dispensable hypotheses, generally useful up to a certain point, but
not to be taken so seriously that they should channel the creative process.
As I indicated previously, this does not mean that the past is to be
ignored, or that one is to fall back into mere subjectivism. Instead, it
means that the total situation in each new moment can lead to a challenge
requiring an integrated response. This total situation is produced by
nature (and of course other human beings) as they impinge on a given
person, and also by the further inner development of that person himself,
by which he understands his past and frees himself from its domination.
It should be clear that I do not regard Expressionism, Tachism, etc., as
true creativity, since they stress too much the immediate and accidental,
because not fully understood, subjective drives of the individual artist.
I think that the above few pages express the essence of my present
views about Structurism. It is important, I think, that we discuss these,
as they ought to be cleared up before I discuss your position in more
detail. I am therefore awaiting your comments on these points (as well
as on the rest of the letter of course) with great interest. Meanwhile,
before receiving your answer, I shall probably send you another letter
discussing some of the additional interesting and important points that
you raised in your last letter; viz., the role of contradiction, order and
disorder, process as a unity of opposites, the role of emotion in thinking,
and finally, the limitations on expressing reality in terms of words and
their associated thoughts.
Very sincerely yours,
David Bohm
P.S. Enclosed are some clippings about the exhibition of Structurist art
that I attended in London.

98
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
March 2, 1961
Dear Mr Bohm:
Thank you for your very good letter, I appreciated hearing what
you had to say.
You ask me: If error and contingency are peculiar to human life?
But if this life evolved out of general nature on which it remains
dependent, how then did humans attain the above qualities if not from
the nature out of which they evolved?
The answer is in those qualities which uniquely distinguish human
life from all other aspects of nature, both physically and mentally.
Physically, man has attained the upright position which has the important
consequence of freeing the two front limbs from the earth as well as the
digits on those limbs, into incomparable areas of achievement. Mentally,
there is the immense expanse of human consciousness, both qualitatively
and quantitatively, with the possibility of indefinite future expansion,
for only a small part of the brain has been used so far.
How then to relate these distinctions to their origin in extra-man nature
from which man evolved? We speak of distinctions within the area of
human life, such as primitive in contrast to so-called civilized man.
Such distinction-relations are also extended to inanimate nature, as in
your example regarding memory. In man memory is a part of
consciousness, but when “memory” is traced to its lowest order in
inanimate nature, there is no consciousness. If a stress is exerted on a
piece of plastic and afterwards it returns to its former state, it does so
because the applied stress did not destroy the persistence of the original
order. What a world of difference between man and the inanimate. If I
see a shell, I react to its image. The shell, however, neither sees me nor
can it react to me. The shell remains in my memory, I never enter the
shell’s “memory.” If this sharp distinction is not true for non-human
organic life, the presence of these qualities are strictly limited beyond
which development ceases.
The ability to abstract is the most potent center around which the
conscious life of man is focused. Other organic life evidences this ability.
But in every instance there is a limit. Only man has unabatedly continued
to extensionalize his abstracting ability, that is, develop his consciousness

Thought and Reality
99
of nature and self. For this reason he alone produces science, art, in
short, culture.
You can see the line of my thought without further elaboration, that
is, to distinguish human life while, at the same time, relating the
distinctions to nature. There remains to consider why humans, being
supreme in the realm of consciousness, that they alone must resolve
problems of contingency?
Human life evolves in the interior of a female, from the most
elementary cell structures through all kinds of suggestive primitive forms
of sea and land organic life. At the last moment this life sheds its
completely hairy body, and is born. Biologically and historically, there
is an evolution of human life out of the original state of nature.
We think of the evolution of the universe. We can also think of the
evolution of nature centering around a conscious form of life. Nature,
of course, would continue if man were to disappear tomorrow, now a
possibility. Nevertheless, indefinitely expanding conscious life introduces
a unique factor. It must seek comprehension not only of the endless
ramifications of nature structure, but also to comprehend the ever-
expanding ramifications of its own desires within the structural
potentialities permitted by nature.
Extra-human nature continues without consciousness; human nature
must ceaselessly improve its consciousness of abstracting from unconscious
nature processes for the survival purposes of a consciously directed
existence. Nature is like the plastic structure mentioned earlier, while
man has the double task of comprehending unconscious and conscious
aspects of nature. Now consciousness implies choice. Therefore, what
lacks consciousness cannot evoke the act of contingentation. What
possesses consciousness, especially human life, is literally surrounded by
choice and, therefore, contingency exists on all sides.
If the above holds, attributing contingentation to non-human nature
would appear as anthropomorphic projection, as also in the instance of
inanimate “memory.” The latter is a purely physical manifestation of
structural action. If we take the physical uniqueness of the human, its
unique expanding consciousness, in short, its unique capacity to
physically-mentally abstract, and follow its “traces,” the quality of
contingency disappears in organic life at a point, while the last remnants
of consciousness and abstracting end with the ameba. The further back
we go, the more necessitation assumes the dominant role until it
overcomes contingency actions altogether. For example, inanimate
“memory” is seen to be purely necessitative. The moment you leave

100
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
man you have left all forms of life that are necessitated to comprehend
nature in terms of itself. Beyond organic life there disappears even the
necessity for anything to know anything, in contrast to man who strives
to know everything. This situation makes contingency unique to human
life, forming the bridge or the abyss, to make possible the survival or
the extinction of human life in nature.
Man is not like a rock, tree, bird, animal, etc. Such things fit into
patterns before which they have no choice but to submit. None of these
things can invoke change, all are prisoners of the general process of nature.
Only man has become a free citizen of nature and can become more free.
(At present man is largely a prisoner of human nature.) For this reason
man alone is able to introduce change in nature, including his own nature,
either by carelessly tampering or creatively seeking harmonious relations
with nature. In the latter he puts into action aspects of nature structure,
which are latent in but so far untouched by nature itself.
Human life thus introduces the factor of contingency into nature on
two related levels. By seeking comprehension of a nature that gets
increasingly complicated, and seeking to work out his own volitional
existence within nature, a goal that has also become immensely
complicated.
I understand you to say, that nature consists of a number of processes,
each distinct from but related to the other, with each process possessing
its own essential character which it retains regardless of what happens
in the course of time. If this were not so, we could not recognize what
you call traces, and traces within traces, etc. Nor would nature
consistently produce specific structures, on all levels from particles to
the macro-level. Each “event,” as you say, has a unique character. Strict
individuality reigns everywhere in nature, is what I take it you are
saying. There are only “private space-times,” you write, each of which
is but a special case of the general space-time of nature. Therefore, each
event is a manifestation of what you call “concrete universality,” each
individually related to the general process of nature. Does not this imply
that each atom, particle, possesses individuality, contrary to certain
physicists, the question I wrote about in TS? Can we not say that man
confronts an ambiguous experience of nature, his task being to ascertain
the unique individualities of events which are obscured by the ambiguity?
What you say about the role of past experience is well put,
indisputable, and of first importance. We easily become conditioned to
our past in place of the conditionality that is necessary. We are in
complete agreement that canalized orientation to our past frustrates

Thought and Reality
101
creative action. You then come to express your misgivings about my art
attitude, expressions of which have appeared in other of your letters.
You wonder whether I have sewed myself in my past, plunging ahead
with dogmatism. I would not claim that I am innocent of dogmatism,
error, stupidity, etc. The question is, how serious they are. In this respect
you would have been more helpful to me if you had applied your theories
more directly to my actions, art or art theory. I invite you to do so.
You ask, whether “prejudging” the art future is compatible with the
effort to be creative? Is it possible to avoid doing so? We are not so
constituted that we can hold ourselves in abeyance until each moment
of the future appears. We have to prepare for it. We can no more ignore
decisions about the future than of the past. It is rather a question not of
whether, but of how. Our entire correspondence, as I understand it,
deals with the solution. It is not that we do so and so with the past or
future in order to preserve creative action, rather we begin with creative
action to determine how we will deal with the past or future. Even if the
general aspect of my prediction of the art future holds, I know it to be
a foregone conclusion that the actuality will be greatly different. If this
were not so, the future would contain no surprise, no discoveries to be
made, and no revitalization of the general art effort. If the artist strives
to avoid such predictability, he will be unprepared to use the future
events. Thus the spectacle of artists applauding the virtues of figuration
today, of non-figuration tomorrow, and then once more around. Since
the event of artists claiming the prerogative of creator, whether falsely
as Picasso or not, he has automatically taken on a number of new
responsibilities. Nature no longer protects the artist.
There is a more fundamental reason why we must prepare for the
future. Past man could live in a state of evolution in which natural
events more or less maintained human survival. Art and science had
their models of study supplied them by nature’s creations, and with
them secured an evolution. The past was largely natural or unaided
evolution, it was not too necessary for man to be conscious of his
historical process. Around the close of the nineteenth century all this
was altered radically. It was evident only much later when science was
found to have gone so far in its manipulation of nature creation, as to
make human annihila-tion possible. Artists confusedly sought to be
creators, and not just follow the creations of nature.
Man’s evolution had reached a point where he sought a dominant
place under the sun. What is not widely recognized is that this point in
his evolution and ambition automatically brought with it entirely new

102
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
responsibilities for future evolution, if he was not to perish by his own
hand. That is to say, man no longer possesses the natural protection for
his evolution, he is now involved in the direct manipulations of basic
nature, he must decide where he wants to go. If man’s present
manipulations of nature are left to the mercy of natural events,
destruction will result.
The past is largely unconscious evolution, first physically and for a
while mentally; now the problem is to achieve conscious evolution.
Even if there were not the threat of physical destruction, there would
still be the threat of mental destruction. How then can we possibly
avoid making decisions about the future? The danger is in absolute
decisions as the dictators are in the habit of doing.
In the face of the dictators it is disastrous to avoid at least tentative
decisions about the future. It is now necessary to be as active in our
preparation for the future, as we once were only with the past. The
alarming thing to me is that only the dictators are exploiting the new
possibilities of the future. Their success, however, is due to their use of
the most primitive means, brutal force, and the most developed
corruption of civilized man, brute falsehood.
Am I in a position, you ask, free to recognize anything that might
challenge the basic tenets of Structurism? Am I unconsciously shielding
myself from seeing such possibilities? This, it seems to me, you will
have to decide yourself. Otherwise, I can only say what I do. Two
things. The first has to do with myself. All my theories are put aside, I
am alone with my art, my experience of it. I cannot give these
experiences, others must get them. If I could give them the art would
be expendable, there would only be a form of art literature.
The other thing has to do with other artists. You cannot know life
and ignore death, health and ignore disease, truth and ignore falsehood.
I try to comprehend all the major art attitudes prevailing, to literally
project myself into the artist who made the art. I thus concern myself
with what is opposed to my view. If the artist fails to do this, it will avail
him nothing to be well versed on the dangers of self.
Regarding the similarities between Marxist and Structurist history
theory. The Structurist theory, as I offer it, is taken to be the most
fruitful course open to the future of art. If the Communists win
tomorrow, this art would disappear. This art is not inevitable, nor would
it succeed in its own goals if forced on any artist. To the contrary, it is
both the old and the new status quo who would suppress it. Communism
is the old cloaked over with the new. To make a comparable case with

Thought and Reality
103
Structurism, it would have to advocate some such art as Picasso, whose
attraction to Communism is one with his art. Structurism does not
bring in the old disguised with the new. I cannot answer for Bernstein’s
quotes, not being responsible for them. Nevertheless, I concur completely
with your criticism of them. Structurist art was evolved precisely because
of an unwillingness to accept or reject art on the basis of one’s urgency
for commitment or one’s capacity for faith, the prevailing practice since
the demise of mimetic art. For this very reason I reject Mondrian’s
Neoplasticism which, as the artist himself says, replaces religion.
You close your remarks on this subject with warnings of the dangers
of theory. In The New Cézanne I had occasion to discuss this subject
several times. I ask you to read in one of these places—the last two
paragraphs on page 14.
Music: closer to mathematics, hence the physicist’s preference for it
over art. What do I think? No great composer has used mathematics.
Why is this so if it “has a more clearly defined relation to mathematics?”
I suppose you know Brikhoff’s work on math and music.
Since the disruptions of both art and music in the nineteenth century,
many individuals have attempted to compose with math. Nothing
remotely convincing has yet resulted. A clue to math’s appeal I think
appears in the more recent tendency to raise the banner of indeterminism
in the arts, with or without the alleged appeal to mathematics.
Thank you very much for sending me the reviews of the English
Constructionists. I would not have seen them if you hadn’t taken the trouble.
I welcome your criticisms of my Structurist art or theory. Whether I
agree or not, I will profit from what you have to say.
With my best regards,
Charles Biederman
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
February 24, 1961
Dear Mr Biederman:
I am now continuing the letter that I have already sent to you, in
order to try to get some of the many questions that you raised in your
last letter into better order.

104
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
Perhaps we ought to begin on the problem of contradiction. In your
letter, you raised questions which go very deep indeed. Of course, you
are right when you say that in terms of the framework of a given set of
concepts, we can describe reality only within certain corresponding
limits. Or as you said: “The verbal statements of realism only indicated
the conscious condition of human vision (reflection) of nature at the
time.” All of my discussions are, however, aimed at the attempt to
describe reality with the aid of definite terms, which may include words,
symbols, pictures, etc., and the thoughts that they stand for. I wish to
assert:
1
As long as we use such terms, there will have to be conflict, contra-
riety, and contradiction in our description of reality and in our thinking
about it. (With this you apparently agree.)
2
The use of such terms is not just our own invention. Rather, in
some sense, something analogous exists in nature. (This, you do
not seem to agree with; so that I will have to try to justify it.)
3
It is because of the analogy between terms in our thought process
and something in nature that is at least similar that our procedures
of thought are able to have enough correspondence with nature to
be useful.
4
The problem of going beyond the use of terms is a very fundamental
one. Indeed, as I shall try to explain later, if we could do this, we
could live in a continual creative relation with nature and with other
human beings.
Let me begin by defining the word “term”. This has the same root,
of course, as does “terminate” and “determine”. What we mean by a
“term” is a conclusion of a certain thought process. Of course, the thought
process is, like all process, without limit or measure, at least in its general
features. However, when we reach a suitable conclusion, we terminate it.
This does not mean that we bring it to an end and then forget about it
altogether. Rather, it means that we stop its natural development of
falling into a trace of a trace, etc., and try instead to make it reflect
back, so as to return continually more or less to its original form. In
doing this, we set up a “moving conclusion” of the kind that I referred
to in my previous letter. Such a “moving conclusion” is then added to
the whole set already acting in our memories, habits, presuppositions,
etc. It is at this stage a part of the bag of tricks with which we tend to
confront the world. In particular we use such “terms” in our thinking

Thought and Reality
105
process. It is not an accident that our language refers to “thinking in
terms of such and such”. Indeed, without any terms at all, how would
we ever think?
Now, as we both agree, process cannot be fixed in any definite form.
I like to give the analogy of the lights of Paris reflecting from the Seine
River. When one stands on a bridge, one sees flashes here, there, and
everywhere in the water. These flashes are like our “terms” of thought
and discourse. They evidently introduce conflicts and contradictions
that are not in the city that they are reflecting. Any attempt to think in
definite “terms” is evidently capable of introducing conflict and
contradiction in a similar way, not only because nothing can be fixed in
a moment of time, but also because the structure of each moment is (as
we both agree) the result of the whole process by which it becomes
what it is. Since the effort to describe the process with the aid of terms
leads to contradiction and conflict, so also must the effort to describe
the structure that is present in each moment. In other words, as long as
we try to use “terms” to think about the world, to communicate with
each other, and to record the results and conclusions of our thoughts,
we must expect contradiction and conflict to appear quite necessarily,
since we are not thinking about the world as it is, but rather, as it is not.
The really interesting point, however, is that, to some extent at least, process
can be reflected adequately with the aid of terms, provided that we admit
contradiction and conflict.
All of this is, in a certain way, just common sense. Thus, it is evident
that the act of speaking words and thinking thoughts constitutes a
process, which is taking place in the real world. Nevertheless, while
words and thoughts are real processes, the actual process of the world
is not constituted solely of words and thoughts. It is therefore hardly
surprising that the effort to express reality by words and thoughts must
involve contradiction. The most important question is, however: “In
what ways and to what degree do such words and thoughts constitute
an adequate reflection of the overall real process?”
As a first step towards understanding this problem, let us ask what is
meant by the term, “contradiction”. As its root implies, this word means
to “speak contraries” or speech that goes against itself. Is reality
contradictory? My own view is that reality is neither contradictory nor
non-contradictory, but rather, if I may coin another word, that it is
simply “non-dictory”. Or as I stated earlier, it is not to be understood
solely with words, or with terms of any kind whatsoever. However,
since we have no choice but to use words and terms in our thought

106
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
processes, let us try to see how far we can get toward the implicit character
of-the reality that is at the basis of the terms that we use, the reality that
we really mean when we are talking about it or thinking about it.
The first question to be considered is whether there is anything in
the actual process of the world which is analogous to the terms that
appear in our thought and speech. If a given process is analogous to
another, it means that one of the processes contains some parts, A, B,
C, etc., which stand in the same relation to each other as do certain
corresponding parts, A’, B’, C’, etc., of the other process, of which it is
an analogy. Of course, no analogy is perfect in every respect. Nevertheless,
some analogies have such a wide range of correspondence that they
afford considerable insight into the problem involved.
Now, the first application of the process of terming is in our experience
of objects. When we recognize an object, we give it a name. Eventually
we recognize that it is one of a class or set, and give it a more general
name. Thus we proceed by progressive abstraction, to include objects
in broader and broader sets, each of which has a name or a term.
What justification is there for giving names to objects and classes of
objects? First of all, we do not assign such a name to a process seen to
take place in the world unless it has certain characteristics; viz., regularity,
repetition, stability, and similarity to other processes that are by its side
or that are stored in our memories or in other records as traces. It
evidently must have a recognizable form and a fairly well-defined place
(in relation to other objects). It must also have other persistent qualities
and properties (colour, hardness, inertia, etc.). Thus, in this context, a
“term” implies a related set of persistent and stable attributes of the
object that is “termed”. Therefore, the stability of the term in our thought
process is not something that we have completely arbitrarily introduced out of nothing.
Rather, this stability provides an analogy to a corresponding stability of
the attributes of the object. In other words, we have introduced into
our thought process a feature that is analogous to one that is already
present in the process of the object.
It is important to point out here that as a rule we do not notice the
remarkable similarity between the way the thought process treats this
problem and the way it happens in the process of the object. This is because
we do not usually think of thought as a process. Rather, we tend to
identify thought with the result of this process; e.g., as written in books.
But if all men were destroyed and their books survived, there would be
no thought. Thought is an activity. The books are both a result of this
activity and a structure helping to determine potentialities for further

Thought and Reality
107
activities of a similar kind. If we look at the whole process of thought and
not just at its end result, we see that there is a continual movement and
counter-movement, even in the most elementary mode of thinking.
When we assign a “term”, we initiate a process of reflection and
repetition, so as to bring the movement back to its original form again
and again. But this is just what is going on in the object too. For example,
at the physical level, its molecules are moving back and forth, its waves
pulsating to and fro, etc. Thus, the relative permanence and stability of
the object in the overall process of reality is of the same general nature
as is the relative permanence and stability of the corresponding “term”
in the overall process of thought. (Note the analogy: “Object is to overall
cosmic process as term is to overall thought process.”)
It is evident that an object is named or termed with the aid of its
characteristic qualities, properties, and other attributes. (We include
place, time, and form, among these attributes.) A quality or a property
is evidently not a concrete object as such, but rather, an activity or
function, which the object is able to carry out under appropriate
conditions. We generally begin with functions that the object stimulates
in ourselves, through our sense organs. Thus, an object exposed to
light will stimulate in us (through our eyes) certain functions by which
we recognize place, form, colour, etc. If we feel it with our hands, the
functions will correspond to its texture, hardness, etc. A particular name
for an object is always associated in our minds with a certain combination
of such functions that generally appear together, whenever we sense
the object in question. Vice versa, this combination (or some significant
part of it) can elicit the process of naming it.
But once we get this far, we see that very much more is implied than
the mere factual description that has been given above. For there is a
whole range of possible objects that can stimulate the same function
within our minds (e.g., the function of seeing the colour “red”). The
function therefore selects objects in accordance with those that stimulate
it and those that do not. This selection first of all separates objects
according to their different functions, but secondarily, it unites those
objects which have a given function in common.
The above separation and union of objects into sets and classes is
the starting point for our ideas concerning the particular and the general.
Each particular object is defined as that one which stimulates in us
every one of a certain set of characteristic functions. (This definition is
evidently implicit.) As we abstract from some of these functions, we are
left with a smaller set, which can be fulfilled by more objects. Thus, by

108
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
abstraction we proceed from the particular to the general. By associating
names to sets of function, we have built a certain structure into our thought
process; viz., the structure which is at the basis of the use of sets of
particular objects and sets of sets etc., with ever greater generality.
Let us now see how these sets enter into our thought process. Every
time we see an object, we must see a certain set of qualities (functions
within us), which finally elicit the naming process. The name then elicits
more of the set of associated functions. But each such function is
associated with many objects. Thus, if the process is allowed to go
forward, it will lead to another object, another name, still another
function of the object, etc. In this way, we get the string of associations,
the “stream of consciousness” that is characteristic of uncontrolled
thinking. But then, if we wish, we can pay attention to what we are doing.
We no longer allow thought to develop idly in a random stream as
described above. Rather, by a conscious effort, we can reflect the thought
of the function back to the same object, then allow it to fall back to
another function of that object, then back to the object, etc. Such attention
is not just a passive exclusion of other associated objects. Rather, it is
an active (and frequently arduous) process by which the thought is
made to reflect back on itself. This is what I meant previously when I
said that even to think of the most elementary “term” is an active
process of reflection (from name to function and back), which
resembles in its general features certain of the processes by which the
objects themselves exist.
Let us now go more systematically into the organization of ideas
by association. Now, just as an object can elicit various functions in
our minds (e.g., attributes, qualities, approval and disapproval, pleasure
and pain, etc.) the functions themselves can be treated as objects. For
example, qualities, such as redness, greenness, blueness, etc., can be
given names, and one can attribute qualities to these functions (e.g.,
warmth, depth, etc.). These second order qualities are also functions
in the mind. In this way, the mind begins to reflect on itself. This will
produce a further kind of ordering of thought. Thus, just as each of
the first order functions united certain sets of objects, and separated
others, so each of the second order functions will unite and separate
the first order functions. But now notice that an object is represented
by the union of all the first order functions which it elicits. As a result,
the second order functions will be able to represent objects, since each one can
unite the first order functions, qualities, with a group, corresponding
to a certain object.

Thought and Reality
109
This means that the mental object is a second order function. The
mental object is what arises when we remember something by
association. It is constituted by tying together a whole set of quality
functions, by means of a single second order function. (It is possible
that memories can be recorded more directly, as a kind of “photograph”
or “tape” of the past, but memories in such a form will be difficult to
recall, as they will not be tied in with the web of associations, which is
at the basis of our “everyday” thinking.)
The essential point in the above is that an object is treated in the
thought process as a function of a function (i.e., a second order function).
Of course, one can go on to third order functions, which were elicited
by mental objects (e.g., memories go on to produce changing responses).
The main point I wish to make here is, however, that everyday thinking
is mainly the response of memories. Thus, when we see something,
certain qualities are elicited functions, elicited in us, and these set up
some object function. We then compare our immediate perception with
the mental object functions. Either we see that it seems to be the same
as the mental object, or that it differs. If it differs, we say it differs in
certain respects, in certain ways, or in certain directions. (For example, it
has more of one quality, less of another, etc.) In order for such a comparison
to be carried out, we must have a further mental function, i.e., the function
of comparison. This function makes it possible to assert difference and identity.
Without such a function, our memories would evidently be quite useless
and indeed practically meaningless.
Now it seems to me that the function of recognizing difference is
more elementary than that of recognizing sameness or identity. Thus,
both man and animals can frequently tell that something has changed
without knowing precisely what is there in the first place. There seems
to be an elementary sense of change or difference. “Sameness” is then
taken to mean “non-difference”. That is, let us suppose there is a certain
process of registering difference or change (e.g., this moment differs
from a previous one). The non-functioning of this process would be
called the registering of identity.
No other sensible understanding of identity seems to be possible. If
you think otherwise, why not try to give another interpretation of
sameness?
The above interpretation of identity helps throw some light on our
use of language. Thus, we frequently assert that two different objects or
qualities are the same (for example, that two apples have the same
quality of redness). If the two were precisely the same, then it would be

110
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
impossible to assert their difference. What we mean is that if A and B
are identical, they differ by nothing. But the word “nothing” has here a
relative meaning. It means only that the differentiating function in our
minds does not work.
The notion of a relative nothing, or “nullity” is quite a common one.
Thus, we may say “This is nothing to me”, meaning by this, not that it
does not exist, but rather, that it has no function within the sphere of
my interest. In mathematics, the notion of a “relative zero” or nullity is
well known. A certain symbol may function as nullity in a given field,
but not in a broader field. Thus, every equation should be written not
as A=B, but rather, as A–B=10?, where 10? represents the relative nullity
of a given field. Indeed, it is fruitless to use two different symbols A and
B, if both sides of the equation represent absolutely the same thing. But
if A and B are different, then the equation makes a real contribution to
our knowledge, for it asserts that their difference, whatever it may be,
has no effect in a certain field.
In physics, there is a similar relative nullity. Thus, in the field of
measurements of a certain sensitivity, effects below the “threshold” of
sensitivity of the apparatus register as “nothing”. And in the whole of
nature and human life, the world is full of such “thresholds”, such that
what is below or beyond them simply does not function in the field
under discussion, so that it is represented in that field as “nothing”.
In the field of the thought and experience of a given person at a
particular moment, “nothing” refers to all that has no functions in this
field. Of course, what was “nothing” at an earlier moment may function
later, either because of the changing relation of the object to the person,
or because the person has meanwhile become more sensitive and
perceptive. Thus, the word “nothing” is always changing its meaning.
At each moment, it means the infinite and unfathomable sea of reality
that lies outside the field of my thought, my consciousness, my
experience, my memory. But from moment to moment, different aspects
of this sea will enter my field (as will be true of course for every human
being). In other words, the total field is the field of all my thought, all
my experience, etc., plus the nothing of this field. I must recognize that
my thought, experience, etc., while a part of this reality, is not the whole,
and that the object of my thought can be represented in the field of this
thought only by the thought of nothingness. That is to say, the object is
not a thought at all, but it is what is projected into the field of thought.
Now we can come to the problem of contradiction. Every word,
every thought, aims at some generality in its meaning. For example, if

Thought and Reality
111
I see an object today, I notice its roundness, redness, size, etc., etc. To
“place” the object, I compare its qualities to other qualities in my memory.
Thus, I say that its “redness” is the same as my memory of redness. But
evidently this is not really true. Every experience of redness is different.
Today’s redness cannot be yesterday’s. Therefore, if I assert that two
objects are identical in being red, I am involved in contradiction, since
there cannot be the same redness in different objects. At most, I can
assert that their redness has a null difference in my own field of thought
and memory. That is to say, when the immediate perception of the
object is compared with memory, the “difference function” in my mind
does not operate with regard to the quality of colour.
A similar problem exists in physics. Thus, if I assert that this stick
has the same length today as it had yesterday, I cannot go back to
yesterday, to see how long it was then. But I can only compare its
length to the length of some other object present today, which is a trace
or memory of the stick of yesterday. And in this comparison, having the
same length means only that in a certain field of measurements, no
difference is recorded.
Now the whole utility in language depends on the fact that words
have a general meaning. In other words, we can use the terms redness,
roundness, weight, size, etc., in an unlimited set of contexts, and mean
the “same” thing by such terms. If we had to use a different word for
every different experience of “red”, then really we should not bother to
use words at all. As we have seen, however, it is wrong to fix the meaning
of words, for in reality, they never have the same meaning. Therefore,
every time we make a definite assertion, there is a contradiction. We
assert that the word has a general meaning, and yet we must also assert
that it does not; i.e., that it is different in each particular case.
We could get out of the contradiction by asserting that identity means
“differing by the nothing of a certain field” (e.g., the field of all my
experiences up to a given moment). But then we have only pushed
the problem into the word “nothing”. For it no longer has any well-
defined meaning. Because the word “nothing” is now so flexible, we
have no assurance that the redness of one moment is the same as that
of another at all.
What I propose is that the way out of the trouble is to recognize that
contradiction is inevitable in the movement of thought and language.
Each thought really has contrary meanings (hidden in the infinite and
unfathomable sea of “nothingness” of thought). And it is essential to
allow such contrary meanings. At one moment, one meaning is

112
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
emphasized as dominant; at another moment, a different meaning. But
the communication of the overall meaning (i.e., the really that we really
mean) is through the ebb and flow from meaning to counter-meaning.
I may take a comparison here to counterpoint in music, where the
theme is carried in reflected and opposing ways in different parts (treble
and bass). So perhaps it should be called “counter-diction” and not
“contradiction”. Then I would like to propose a little dictum: viz., “no
diction without counter-diction”.
I would reserve “contradiction” for another process; viz., an unrecog-
nized counter-diction, whose outcome is conflict. Thus, if one does not
recognize the ways of thought, one will not know that the secondary
and suppressed meaning will continue to operate in the secondary
process, to have an important effect, which can eventually come into
conflict with that of the primary meaning. For example, even in the
field of measurements of a given accuracy in physics, the effects of
errors below the “threshold” of sensitivity can accumulate, to produce
visible effect above this threshold. (For example, if the minimum
threshold in a single measurement is 1 unit, then after many
measurements, a series of errors of 1/10 unit, each of which registers as
“something”, so that a series of “nothings” become a “something”.)
Similarly, in life, the contradictions, each of which is outside the field of
what we have experienced or thought of, can accumulate, to produce a
result in the field of our experience, a result that generally conflicts
with the effects that we aim for with the part of the process that is
known to us. We must therefore be continually alert to the existence of
counter-diction in our thought process, which can give rise to contra-
diction or conflict, when the conclusions of our thought lead to action.
You may ask, “Can the mind not be free from counter-diction?”
Evidently, this is not possible as long as it functions in the field of thoughts,
which are associated with words or “terms” that attempt to fix the thought
process in certain ways. Can the mind be outside this field? I think that
the answer is “Probably—yes”. Perhaps in creativity it is this way—it may
have a total understanding of its whole field, including even itself—without
a division into subject and object, “I and not-I”, past and future, etc.
All of these divisions are in the field of counter-diction, since they
are established by functions, such as those of difference and non-
difference (identity). Perhaps when the mind is outside the field of
counter-diction, it can see the real meaning of these divisions, and, as it
were, “project” certain conclusions into the field of the divided mind.
This latter field is necessary to translate the creative process into action,

Thought and Reality
113
but the creative process may perhaps transcend the field of time, in the
sense that it understands the order of things in a deeper way, which
shows why actions taken in the field of time are subject to the law of
counter-diction. If it were possible to see the world and oneself as a
totality, undivided (which is perhaps what happens in true creativity)
then the need for counter-diction in the field of everyday life and the
process of transcending it would perhaps be immediately perceived.
I would appreciate your ideas on this subject. Incidentally, about the
relation of mathematics to music, which we discussed earlier, it has
long been recognized that these are closely connected. Thus, in ancient
Greece, the Pythagoreans got some of the inspiration for applying the
concept of number to the whole of reality by noticing the simple ratios
of the lengths of strings that are in harmony. Much of the structure of
music is similar to certain features of mathematics. The scale is based
on number. Then there is rhythm, which is also a highly numerical
concept. There is the problem of various kinds of time in music. Then
the repetition of a certain pattern of notes at another pitch, in another
key, etc., is strongly reminiscent of group theory. Also, the theory of
reflected patterns, opposing patterns, etc.
P.S. I forgot to mention that the practical utility of the concept of the
general meaning of a word depends on the fact that in nature, there are
fields in which certain kinds of difference do not function (i.e., make no
difference). To the extent that such fields exist, we can utilize the mode
of thinking, in which different individuals are treated by the “same” set
of qualities and attributes. In other words, if A and B differ by nullity in
their effects in a certain field, they can be called “identical” in that field.
The contradiction arises because when the field is studied more closely,
or if one allows a process to develop in time, “null” differences can lead
to something that is “non-null” in the field, while non-null things can
lead to nullity. Thus, “nothing” can become “something” while
“something” can become “nothing”—which is clearly a contradiction.
In each case, one can avoid a particular contradiction by broadening
the field, but only at the expense of introducing new contradictions. As
long as one uses words, or “terms”, with their associated thoughts, one
is in the field of contradiction. For practical purposes, we can ignore
these contradictions as long as they are below the “threshold” of our
field of interest, but there is never any assurance as to how far it is safe
to go on doing this. We need continual alertness and awareness to the
whole process, if we are to avoid coming into conflict with the results of
our own actions.

114
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
An important problem is then, “Why is it that in nature, there are
isolable fields in which contradictions make no difference (i.e., they are
below the threshold)?” This is a very deep question, but if we understood
this, we could see what makes knowledge possible. For the general
applicability of knowledge (which is always a conclusion drawn from
past experience) to new situations, depends on the fact that the errors
we make by thinking in fixed “terms” will, up to a point, make no
difference. This will happen generally, if in the natural process, something
is going on which is similar to what is going on in the human thought
process. In other words, the existence of certain processes will elicit
further functions, which in turn elicit functions of these functions, etc.
All of this happening in such a way that in the field of these functions there
is a certain stability and repetition. Thus, the “terming” process in our
mind in some way reflects something analogous that (to a certain extent
at least) also takes place in nature. Of course, the “terming” process is
probably inadequate for a deep understanding of the subtler aspects of
natural and human processes, and there creativity is necessary.
Finally, I would like to sharpen up the contradiction inherent in the
generality of our concepts (see p. 7 of this letter). As I said, we perceive
difference, and then we perceive identity as non-difference. But non-difference
is perceived as different from any other kind of difference. Therefore
non-difference must be perceived as the operation of the difference function,
to register a difference from all other kinds of differences. Thus identity,
which was first defined as no kind of difference at all, i.e., absolutely different
from every kind of difference, is now seen to be a special kind of
difference, viz., the difference from any other kind of difference. This is
clearly a “counter-diction” and one which can in no way be avoided.
Likewise, the very use of the “difference” is a “counter-diction”. Now
any two things are by definition different. And such an example of difference
is different from every other such example. Yet, we use the same word,
thus implying that various examples of difference are not different.
Clearly, in one and the same thought, viz., difference, we mean that
each different is different, and yet, not different (i.e., the same) because
after all, they are both examples of the same quality; viz., difference.
Thus, we assert the identity (non-difference) of all kinds of differences,
while we also assert their difference. At any one moment, both these
meanings are present, although one may be uppermost in the mind.
Logical thinking requires that both meanings shall always operate. And
as I explained before, the same is true about the general and particular
meanings of every word and thought.

Thought and Reality
115
Now, you might try to get out of this difficulty by saying that two
separate examples of difference are different only in certain respects,
while being the same in other respects. For example, the difference
between an apple and an orange is different from the difference between
a man and a monkey, because one is a difference in species of fruits and
the other in species of animals. But they are both the same, in that each
of them constitutes a relationship of difference. This will not however stand
up, because you cannot be sure that the respects are identical with
themselves. What do you mean by saying that yesterday’s character of
being a human being is the same as today’s? Only that in the field of
your mind at present you do not register a difference. On the other
hand, it is clear that humanity (like anything else) has unlimited aspects
and potentialities, so that literally speaking, it is a terrible and foolish
mistake to ignore the possible difference between today’s humanity and
yesterday’s. Neither the character of being a man, a monkey, an apple
or an orange can be exhausted in the field of anyone’s thought up to a
given moment. Thus, we know that it is arbitrary to assert the self-
identity of any quality. That is to say, it is a contradiction to assert that
such a quality does not differ from itself. Hence, there is no way to
compare two kinds of difference with regard to the qualities of the
difference (except of course in some limited field in which nullity of
difference can be defined). The whole way of thinking through
comparison is nothing but “counter-diction”. And perhaps it is not an
accident that genuinely creative acts cannot be compared—they must
be understood in their own frames of reference.
Very sincerely yours,
David Bohm
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
May 29, 1961
Dear Mr Bohm:
I’d like to begin with some questions. If terms function in the manner
you describe, i.e., engender certain structural difficulties in the function
of language that are serious frustrations, is it unavoidable that these
terms must function as you describe them? If the procedure of beginning

116
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
with “definite terms” leads to the linguistic conflicts you call
contradictions and counter-dictions, are we doomed to begin in such a
manner? What would happen, for instance, if we reversed your
procedure? That is, instead of beginning with definite terms, begin
with indefinite ones? Undefined instead of defined terms? In that case, all the
key terms of our language—reality, democracy, science, art, socialism,
atom, nature, quantum, etc.—would be, to begin with, undefined. Such
terms would take on a defined structure only when a particular individual
used them in a particular context. Such terms are not only capable of
taking on an indefinite number of meanings but more specifically, as
one writer put it, are multi-ordinal. This last makes it possible for
language to take on an abstracting structure corresponding to the
structure of present experience with the world. This attitude takes into
consideration that the fundamental problems of language do not begin
with language, but with pre-verbal abstractions.
Such a function of language is found not only in everyday usage,
but even more so in such specific usages as that of physics. Difficulties
arise, nevertheless, because the “verbal process,” as it has been called,
not only functions with its multi-ordinal terms, but this is largely
unconscious (or inadequately understood). The consequence is the
introduction (or retaining) of certain structures into language which
are structurally destructive. Such is the notion of identity. Take the use
of definite terms (in which the factor of identity invariably operates).
What would happen if someone, say Pryce, was able to legislate that
the term “science” constituted a certain definite term, and no other? I
know you would agree that it would have a disastrous consequence for
the further development of science. For science, like everything in the
universe, is in a state of constant change. So our use of that term is
likewise undergoing constant change. This is in line with your emphasis
upon “thought process” as “constant movement.” For this reason it is
both futile and harmful to search for an answer to that perennially
repeated question “What is science?” For it asks a reply in the singular
(identity) about something that is many things, to many persons, e.g.,
your discussion with Pryce.
In dictatorial nations certain key terms are given apparent or disguised
precise definitions by government fiat, which it behoves everyone to
understand and live by, no matter what. These definitions contain taboos
which dominate all fields, concerning such matters as relativity,
psychoanalysis, art, etc. —anything that encourages the freedom to think
as an individual. Even so, the demands of reality compel such forms of

Thought and Reality
117
government to periodically alter the definitions (not to go into the kind
of opportunist reality usage involved). In any case, there is always one
official answer to such questions as, “What is art?” “What is science?”,
etc. To a lesser, but still pernicious degree, such verbal controls are
practiced in democracies.
The “actual process of the world,” you write, does not consist “solely”
of words and thoughts. Could we make this sharper and so more
accurate? Namely, the world is not words or thoughts. This has led one
writer to remark, whatever we say anything is, it is not, for which condition
you coined the expression “non-dictory” to distinguish the world from
words.
In presenting the problem of the relationship between the function
of the world and words, you end the first part by introducing problems
of identity and differences. From certain things you say, I think you
will agree if I put it this way: The fundamental relation between words
and things is one of structure, with all the implications for abstracting
which order in structure demands. This makes it possible for a structural
correspondence to function between the non-verbal process within
ourselves, and the verbal process, and the non-verbal process of the
world. If this continuity of process is granted, which I know you do,
then it seems that any notions of identity foster false-to-fact assumptions
about process of any kind. The assumption here, one again you agree
with, is that everything in every aspect of itself, is not only unique at
every moment, but also in every one of its moments that have been and
will be. Notions of identity state the contrary and involve one in
contraries, what seem like kinds of “complementaries,” as you argue
the problem. The result is to frustrate efforts to bring the structure of
the verbal process into correspondence with the actualities of the
structural process within and without us. Differentiation, not identity,
is the constant of experience. Identity engenders harmful either-or verbal
fictions, introducing structures non-existent in process actualities
anywhere. To deny this, it seems to me, is a denial of process.
In your theories, however, there is for me the curious situation of
notions of identity along with equal emphasis upon the differential aspect
of process. Curious, because old and new views are thus seeking resolution
to problems arising from their meeting, by putting them into opposition
to each other. It is as though the philosopher in you were carrying forward
the identity notions of Aristotelianism, while the physicist and
mathematician in you were trying to maintain the non-Aristotelian views
that pervade the latter two fields, by setting the two contrary metaphysics

118
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
in opposition. This leads to your general orientation of resolving problems
in terms of either-or counter- and contra-diction. Now I fully agree with
your remarks on how we become unconscious of contradiction. But the
question is, are the counter-dictions also unconscious contradictions?
Two objects have the “same” (identity) qualities, you say. Immediately,
however, you qualify this by noting, that if these qualities were “precisely”
the same (identity), “it would be impossible to assert their differences.”
You resolve this to me contra, not counter, diction by stating “they
differ from nothing” under such conditions as you describe. While this
is understandable, I would dispute this method of expressing the problem.
Again, I would be inclined to reverse your statement— Everything differs
by Everything. Nothing non-verbal can be said to “differ by nothing,”
since we know that everything differs by something from everything. It
is better psycho-logics to state: I include so and so, everything else in
the infinite process of the world I am conscious has been left out. In
place of putting artificial stops to the process of our language function
with “relative nothing,” would it not be more process useful to say, at
this moment I assert that between these two objects I tentatively assume
certain similarities, not identity, of qualities, functions, or whatever? That
would be my answer to your question, can I give another interpretation
of “sameness”? We thus assume actuality resemblances (similarities),
and avoid non-actual absolute sameness (identity). The door is then
left ajar for the inevitable structural revisions. One is then sustaining a
process orientation in one’s general attitude. As you remarked, we must
be constantly attentive to the fact that our reality experience is not the
whole, i.e., we never know all about anything.
You both affirm and deny notions of identity. It would be “fruitless,”
you write, to use two different symbols on two sides of an equation, if
both represented “absolutely the same thing.” What then? Relative
sameness? As with relative nothing? Again you say, we can use a term
like “redness” in an “unlimited set of contexts,” and yet mean the “same”
(identity) thing. We cannot, you point out, use a different term for
every different redness. Granted. But do such terms function as you
describe? Do we not use some single symbol to represent, not the “same”
thing, but an unlimited number of different things? We do not need a
different term for every redness when the single term can symbolize to
the infinity of redness differentiation, it being amenable to an unlimited
number of contexts, as you would agree.
The aim, as I see it, is not to identify any experience of redness-
yesterday with one today, or the latter from one moment to the next. I

Thought and Reality
119
experience this very vividly in my work. When I first see one of my
finished works, it is an incomparably sharper experience than takes
place in either painting or sculpture. That is, each part is made in isolation
and then, when all parts are finished, it is assembled all at once.
Consequently, I see the finished work all at once! Now, what I see during
that first moment, I will literally never see again in the actuality but only in
my memory, where a residue of it will remain. For, from the first moment
my seeing moves in a constant process, which movement is as relentless in
its course as that from birth to death. Everything Is Changing All The
Time, as even I am. Or rather, I try to facilitate this vision so that I will
be changing in a non-frustrating way. One can say, the moment one
sees the same (identity) work of art twice, one has ceased to see the
second (identity) time. One is, so to speak, seeing largely with one’s
memory, projecting and so imposing the past upon the present. I might
add, recalling some past vision of some particular work, that this activity
plays an important role in my judgements concerning the progress of
my vision, as well as the errors I have made along the way.
Now, you yourself state that it is erroneous “to fix the meaning of
words” because they “never” possess the “same” meaning. Due, however,
to your previous considerations, you are led to contend that each
“definite assertion” inevitably produces contradiction. Such contradictions
vanish if we discard notions of identity and regard terms as multi-ordinal,
which is in accordance with actuality demands. Contradiction stems
from the identification of the marks r-e-d-n-e-s-s as implying inescapable
sameness, i.e., identifying words with the world. To confuse the world
with the use of words, or, to make words correspond to the way we can
use the world, that is the issue.
When we say, “I see,” we mean, I understand. We don’t say, “I
hear.” Vision, incomparably more than the auditory, is fundamental to
comprehension of the world. If both sensory paths provide for our
experiencing the world, vision is sharply unique. For it is a direct part
of the brain. Accordingly, the most basic abstractions, in any field, are
visual ones. We translate visual abstractions into the verbal process in a
way that will achieve structural correspondence. This necessitates a
natural order of abstracting, from the objective to the verbal process, not
the reverse. (I realize this gets us up against some old arguments about
the alleged autonomous state some attribute to mathematics, and which
attitude I see as doing much harm in the new direction of art.) It follows
that it is necessary to avoid confusing, specifically identifying, different
orders of abstraction—words with things, the object with the “event”

120
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
level, description with object, and so on with the ever higher orders of
inferential abstraction.
In my Evolution (pp. 519–24) I consider the relation of mimetic art to
the formation of the evolution of language. I conclude by considering
the possibility that the new direction of art, a more purely visual form
of art, will have a part to play in the future formation of language. That
is, reintegrating the necessary and critical role of visualization in
language, to correct the present over-verbalized interpretation of actuality.
The emphasis you give to the need for recognizing that, under certain
circumstances, differences appear not to effect the particular observations
of structure ‘we are producing is, I agree, important. But I would not
employ the expression “nothing” or “null difference,” that being just
what is done by those who, unlike yourself, are not aware of what they
say, “This means nothing to me.” I would prefer a term that makes a
positive emphasis upon remembering the area beyond the threshold, which
I think would more effectively accomplish what you emphasize, the
need to be constantly aware of all the thresholds that constantly surround
us on every side in everything we do. This term-psychology would
more effectively neutralize the general tendency toward conservatism,
i.e., to close off things, to imprison cogitation in conscious or unconscious
absolutes. This tendency rests its destructive work precisely on the border
of actual or imagined thresholds. Pryce offers a good example. He
thought to build a concrete threshold around what constituted the
practice of physics and philosophy. Your rejoinder made him, at least
for that moment, a little more sensitive to the use of those two terms.
If nature is neither contradictory nor non-contradictory, but dictory
as you say, are you not still faced with the question whether you
experience nature as contradictory or not? I would say that nature is
non-contradictory as I believe it is non-contingential, that such
experiences only arise in human experience. What I have been trying
to say does not deny contradiction, but rather rejects the inevitability of
a verbal process which necessitates conflict and contradiction in its inherent
structure.
You suggest that the truly creative act can produce an experience of
totality, “transcending time.” Is it perhaps that one is simply unconscious
of time? The “deeper way” by which the creative act comprehends the
world, to me seems to rest in its grounding in pre-verbal experience,
and the capacity to return the results of the verbal process or thought,
back to pre-verbal experience.

Thought and Reality
121
I am not clear why “genuine creative acts cannot be compared.” Are
there not diverse forms of human creation, all related but each distinct
from the other, with informative similarities and differences?
In the creative act, as regards experiencing the totality, you might be
interested in my own experience in observing nature, which I experience
in art too. Initially, I try to experience nature on a non-verbal level of
perception, maintaining verbal silence within myself. This achieves the
following results. I put aside all I know, i.e., my consciousness of vision at
the time, so that I will not function, at least with the intruding deliber-
ateness of consciousness, with a prejudiced vision. This then permits me to
submit myself as much as possible to the experience of nature, each time
anew. At such times I have the experience of totality, not as knowing that
totality of nature, but because I have removed the barriers to being in it.
You appear to have misunderstood me. I did not mean to imply the
denial of mathematics to music. What I wish you to comment on is,
why all the great composers, since the centuries after the research of
the Pythagoreans, have not chosen to submit their composing to
mathematics? This question seems particularly pertinent in the case of
music, since it seems more amenable to the conditions of mathematics
than the other arts. Just as important, why are those who do not compose
music interested in applying mathematics to music? I am not aware
that this question has been asked.
In our present discussions you have initiated issues basic to all our
other discussions. Until now we have been talking about the structure
of our interpretations of reality, now we are talking about the structural
functions of our talking. This is the key to our understanding each
other. Therefore, it would be a help to me toward that understanding if
this time you directly answered my responses to your views.
Thank you very much for sending me the script of “Quanta and
Reality.” Although there were places I could not follow, I got enough of
it to make very good reading.
 
Pryce: (1) Physics is not philosophy.
Bohm: (2) You have a specific philosophy.
Pryce: I have a philosophy to avoid philosophy. (A devious attempt to
salvage point 1.)
Bohn: You always have some philosophy. (Sustaining point 2.)
 
Pryce gives a good example of using a definite closed symbol which
in this case got him “in a trap” as he himself correctly put it. Your

122
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
remarks on how to teach science theory to students is a breath of fresh
air which has application to all forms of education. Your students are
fortunate!
I look forward to your reply.
Best regards,
Charles Biederman
 

IV

 
 
 

TRUTH AND UNDERSTANDING
 
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
December 22, 1961
Dear Mr Biederman:
After a long delay, the time has come to continue our correspondence.
I hope that you received my brief letter of a few weeks ago explaining
the cause of the delay. Perhaps now things will settle down again, and I
will have more time to answer your letters.
Let me begin by summarizing what seem to be the main recurrent
themes of our correspondence.
1
The question of creative “termination” or “determination”, as
distinguished from either mechanistic determinism or pure chance
and chaos. In this were certain subsidiary questions:
(a) “Contingentation” and “necessitation”. You admitted the category
of contingency only for human beings, with their abstractions,
but supposed that, in some sense, necessity applies to all of nature.
I argued in favour of contingency as applying to all of nature too.
(b) What is “order” and what is “disorder”. Somehow you object
to the notion of disorder, and have a similar objection to the
notion of chance.

126
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
2
The problem of oppositions. You insist (quite rightly in my opinion)
that opposites are never separated, always interwoven from the very
beginning, and that they are only introduced to help us to analyse
nature (not actually existing as such in nature). However, I
maintained that there is something in nature that these opposites
are reflecting, and you seemed to be denying this.
3
The problem of time. Each moment traces its past and projects its
future in a unique way. At each moment there is an infinity of
possibilities, which (we both agree) have, in some sense, a real
existence. You argue that man can choose from these possibilities,
and nature by itself cannot.
The past is not by itself fully determinate, but is ambiguous as to
what it is (or was). The future helps to determine what the past
really was. Thus, the past does not fully determine the future. (If
only because in some measure, the future party determines the past.)
4
The problem of totality. Originally, I defined totality as all that
there is, was, and will be. You objected that this is too static. Rather,
the totality is the process itself, acting creatively in every moment.
Only the totality fully determines each part, and this totality is not
accessible at any moment, to our knowledge. For the latter, by its
very nature, refers only to the past, and not to the actual, living
process, in its concrete existence from moment to moment.
This raises the question “What is a ‘part’?” Are the parts
introduced only by us for our own convenience, or do they in some
sense actually exist? You agreed that the parts are contingent. In
other words, the full reason for their being what they are is not
contained in themselves, but only in the totality. If contingency is
something referring only to our own perceptions and conceptions,
then is the notion of “being a part” also only our own invention?
Or is there some sense in which parts really exist?
5
The question of our relationship to the world. Observation without
participation is impossible. We participate in what we observe and
what we observe participates in us. Quantum theory shows that
this must happen in physics, while common experience shows that
the same holds in all our activities.
The separation of the observer from what he observes is then at
best an abstraction of limited validity. It is impossible to avoid the
conclusion that we are what we observe, and that what we observe
is also ourselves. The distinction of “I” and “not-I” is only relatively
true. But this distinction is at the basis of every distinction “A and

Truth and Understanding
127
not-A”. That is to say, the relation between “A and not-A” is known
to me, provided that I assume it is the same as that of “I and not-I”.
If this distinction of “I and not-I” is false, so must be that of “A and
not-A”. But as you state, process means (in the words of Leonardo)
“Everything is everything else.”
How do we understand the problem? It is related to totality. As
I and not-I are in some sense, aspects of a totality, so must A and
not-A be aspects of a total process. This requires a deeper
understanding.
6
For the scientist and the artist, the question arises of how, as you
say, he can “creatively deal with its past”. He cannot ignore it or
annihilate it. He must take it into account. Yet, he must not be
dogmatically limited by past creative “decisions”.
7
Questions connected with language, thought, and semantics (naming
problems such as those considered by Korzybski). “The world is not
words or thoughts.” There is no such thing as identity. Fundamental
terms (like “truth”, “understanding”, “totality”, etc.) cannot be given
a unique definition. Rather, as you say (with Korzybski), they are
“multi-ordinal”, or I would say, that they are implicit, behind all that
we say and think, and yet not definable in an explicit way.
There is your suggestion that contradiction can be avoided, if
we recognize that a term such as “redness” always has different
meanings, never the same (i.e., it is multi-ordinal). Yet to me, this
raises the problem of what we mean by “similarity”. Our use of the
same term “redness” surely symbolizes that in some sense, something
is the same. If this were not so, why wouldn’t we substitute another
word for our later experiences of a given quality (i.e., roundness,
blueness, etc., instead of redness)? I would say that this question
needs a better understanding.
Your assertion that “seeing” and “understanding” are the same,
seems worthy of more development. I agree with this wholeheartedly.
We must go into the way in which we use words and thought, as
you say.
8
We agree that, in art as well as in science, the key notion is process,
with structure as the basic characteristic by which process can be
described in abstractions. But what is structure? We know intuitively,
but I think that a bit more reflection on this point would be useful.
I would say tentatively that it is a kind of relationship in process,
involving many characteristics (e.g., serial order of before and after,
transitive order of inside and outside, questions of symmetry and

128
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
asymmetry, repetition with transformation and fundamental
qualitative change, and many others). Have you further ideas on
the subject?
9
There is the interesting notion which you gave that man is an
abstracting animal (or as Korzybski would put it, a “time-binder”).
This is no doubt at least an important part of the truth. But you
yourself argue that man is undergoing further evolution, which must
now be consciously understood, if the result is not to be disastrous.
May we not say that animals work mainly on the level of immediate
perception of concrete situations, while man works on the level of
abstractions and time-binding? But perhaps the next stage of evolution
is to go beyond abstractions and back to a new kind of concreteness,
which is perception of totality. In this regard, science has something
to contribute, and art a lot more, but what is most important is man’s
understanding of his own total process of existence.
Let me say a little about understanding. For example, one might
begin by studying circles empirically, measuring the ratio of the diameters
to the circumference, etc., tabulating the results in a log book. Then
one might develop a geometry, defining a circle as a curve traced by a
point moving equidistant from a fixed point, etc. The properties of
circles would now follow from this geometry. Then, when the geometry
was explained, you would at first follow the parts of the argument, but
suddenly you would say “I see”. By this you would mean that you now
understand. In other words, you would no longer perceive the
relationships in the circle by starting from the parts and trying to put
them together, but rather you would start from a total process of thought,
in which the circle, diameter, etc., would all be generated as aspects or
sides, automatically in their correct relationships. Understanding comes
in a “flash”, or is felt by some people as a “click”, in which everything
falls into its proper place. Of course, when you perceive this totality,
you do not see everything in detail as all at once. This comes out later
only as you unfold and develop the full implications of such an
understanding. But what is basic to understanding is that you suddenly
cease to see certain things as parts that have to be put together, and
instead see them as sides or aspects generated in a total process, so that
you now understand why they are related as they actually are.
Of course, if you asked me for a more detailed definition of the
word “understanding”, I could go into a long story, but then, at the
end, I would ask “Have you understood?”, thus giving the game away.

Truth and Understanding
129
In other words, if a man did not at the very outset understand what is
meant by understanding (even if he wouldn’t put it into words), he
would be worse than an absolute idiot, and no conversation with him
would be possible. Similarly, every man understands what truth is,
even when he is lying (consciously or unconsciously). Thus, it is no use
trying to define such terms. But one can explain or explicate them (i.e.,
bring out explicitly a few of the relevant implications of these terms).
I think that everything important is really implicit in our thoughts
and true communication (or conversation) consists in having two people
create in each other trains of thought and feeling having essentially the
same implicit content (i.e., each in effect, opens certain doors in the
mind of the other, while he is doing the same for himself). (Here, we
have the problem of what we mean by the word “same”, but for the
moment, let us leave this in the domain of the implicit.) Just as each
note in a musical composition has no meaning, but the meaning is only
in the composition as a totality, so the meaning is not in the separate
words, but only in the totality of what is being said.
In this regard, I agree with you on another important question, that
of whether thought and feeling can be separated. Of course, thought,
feeling and action, are just three aspects of one total process. In anything
fundamental, all three are inevitably involved. For example, can you
say that truth is purely intellectual? Does one not feel that something is
true, and is not this feeling just as necessary as the intellectual content
that is thus felt to be true? Could there be truth without the feeling of
truth? Could there be understanding without the feeling of
understanding? Evidently, in everything deep and fundamental
(involving totality), thought and feeling are just sides of a single process.
Moreover, thought-feeling of this kind leads directly to an appropriate
action. For example, suppose that you were reaching for a bottle that
you thought contained sugar for your coffee, and suddenly you read
on the label “Potassium Cyanide”. Now, the label is of course a purely
intellectual symbol for a certain substance. Nevertheless, the perception
of this label would work in your feelings and actions. You would not
need to debate with yourself, to think, to choose, etc., asking how this
would affect your career, your bank account, what people would say,
etc., etc. Immediately, you would perceive that all these questions are
secondary, because the totality of your life is involved, and that if you
took this substance, the other questions would not matter. Appropriate
action (withdrawal from the bottle) would start as soon as the truth was
perceived.

130
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
I think that in some sense, creativity is instantaneous thought-feeling-
action. However, every time we perceive something, we generally call up a
cloud of abstractions, and the consequent indecision in action. Of course,
I don’t want to argue against abstraction as such. For, as we agree, abstraction
is one of the things that makes man what he is. Abstract conceptions may
be compared to mirrors that distort reality, giving us a set of views that are
magnified, demagnified, filtered, coloured, etc., etc. These abstractions are
useful just because they distort. For by holding fixed that which is really
changing, they enable us to examine certain relationships at our leisure. By
leaving out certain things, they enable us to see others better, etc., etc. But
our weakness is that we tend to get lost in these mirrors, mistaking what
they reflect for the whole world. We must also perceive that our conceptions
are only abstract reflections, and we must perceive the relationships by
which they do reflect reality. I would say that we need perception of totality
or understanding, which I symbolize by the letter P in the diagram below.
The perception of totality starts from a partial perception of the outer
world, which I symbolize by A. Then, there is the perception of the
inner world, containing our concepts, symbolized by B. (A and B
considered separately are as far as most people ever get.) Then there is
the perception of the relationship between A and B, symbolized by C in
the diagram. Finally, there is the perception, P, of totality, in which A
and B are seen as sides or aspects of a total process, automatically in
their correct relationships, C. This total perception requires that there
be no separation of “I” and “not-I”. Each is only a side of a totality.
It seems to me that in all moments of creation (scientific, artistic or
otherwise), there is no consciousness of an “I”. There is only a process
of creation. Later, when one reflects on the process, then one begins to
think “It is I who did this thing. Isn’t it marvellous what I can do, etc.,
etc.” In other words, the “I” is like a chattering monkey that likes to

Truth and Understanding
131
take credit for everything, but actually only gets in the way by making
a terrific lot of noise. When it is silent for a moment, then creativity can
come into being.
So to come back to the new evolution of humanity, I would say that
we have to go beyond our abstract conceptual way of thinking and
come back to perception of the concrete as basic. But the concrete now
contains the abstract, i.e., as a reflection, which helps throw light on the
totality.
Truth is in an adequate understanding of each moment. In this sense,
it is concrete. If I understand one moment, I may not understand the
next, unless I remain alert and attentive to the total content of what is
happening, because something basically new may enter meanwhile.
There is no fixed, absolute, everlasting truth. Rather, it is a process that
can come into being from moment to moment. It is neither subjective
nor objective, but something that transcends the distinction between
subject and object—and which therefore has to do with totality. Falsity
is also a process, and we must understand the false as false, the truth as
true, along with the true in the false. Generally speaking, falsity comes
from mistaking a part for a totality. The truth in the false is to see this
part as a side or aspect only.
It seems clear that falsity comes from using inadequate abstractions.
Very often this comes about by our holding on too long to past
abstractions, which were once at the very focus of the creative process
but which no longer fit the new situation. In a highly technical society,
such as ours, there is also an enormous number and variety of
abstractions. We use them so often and so unthinkingly that we get lost
in them, ceasing to live in a real world, and living in an imaginary
abstract world instead. In other words, we forget that abstractions are
abstract, and mistake them for the concrete living totality. Or it may be
put in other terms that we allow conception to limit perception (i.e., we
only see what fits into the past and known patterns of things). In reality,
conception should serve perception (as a kind of mirror). Then there
are those people who wish to insist on external perception only. This
too is wrong, as we cannot perceive much without our conceptual
mirrors. What we must perceive is totality, including the outside and
the inside as sides or aspects, automatically in their proper relationships.
Now, I think the new phase of evolution of man is this immediate
perception of concrete truth as a totality to be understood wholly and
fully from moment to moment. This perception is neither intellectual
nor emotional. Rather, it is thought-feeling, and gives rise to a total

132
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
action, which is appropriate to the situation of the moment. It may
properly be called creativity, but need not be restricted to art or science.
Rather, it may occur in any moment of human relationships, as in
relationships between a man and nature, or between a man and ideas.
It contains abstraction. Indeed, each new moment calls for a new kind
of abstraction. But it is, in a sense, a “non-abstract” kind of abstraction.
For this abstraction does not stand by itself. Rather, it is perceived as
being just what it actually is, i.e., an abstraction, and its relationship to
the concrete totality from which it comes is also perceived. Thus,
fundamentally it is a perception of a new kind. But in a sense, we have
always known it, without recognizing it by name. For is not truth
basically a perception too? And is not understanding also a perception?
We use the word “see” for “understand” mainly because in vision we
have the concrete perception of a totality, whereas in hearing, this
perception is strung out in time, so that the totality is perceived only in
the trace left by the whole process of hearing what is said. But
understanding and truth go utterly beyond vision, hearing, feeling, or
any of the particular senses. Even a blind man can “see”, although he
may never have had any vision from the time of his birth. In fact, I
would go further and say basically that it is our understanding that is
behind the impression that the world that we see is a totality. And
when we understand the world as a totality, then for that moment at
least, we are a totality, without the false division of I and not-I. Therefore,
understanding is also a process, a total process, which is a possible
mode of being for man. In this state of creative understanding, a man is
an integrated whole, and not a set of varying fragmentary motives,
desires, urges, conditionings, inner confusions, etc.
If you are going to ask what state of feeling goes with understanding,
I am afraid that it will have to be described by the word “love”. This
word has unfortunately been used in so many false ways that it hardly
means anything nowadays. Yet, I think that by implication, the meaning
will come across. For example, some parents claim that they “love”
their children, but do not understand them. Is this really possible? If
they do not understand what their children actually are, then the beings
for whom they feel love must be imaginary, just projections of the
parents’ own minds. Thus, what the parents actually “love” is not their
actual children, but rather, some projections of themselves. Such a love
is evidently false. Evidently, there can be no real love without
understanding. Vice versa, can there be understanding without love? If
we hate something, we reject it and do not understand it. (This is perhaps

Truth and Understanding
133
what disturbs me about your attitude to Picasso, Action Painters,
Surrealists, etc. Not that I think that they are right, but one must
somehow penetrate into why they say what they do, without being lost
in their point of view.) If we are indifferent to something, we will never
undertake the ardous task of understanding it. If something pleases us,
we will be afraid to look at its dark side, and again we won’t understand
it, i.e., see it wholly and totally. So it seems that the only feeling that
will lead to the action of understanding is love. Sometimes one sees
parents, for example, who know both the good and bad sides of their
children, and simply love them. Or sometimes, the artist or the scientist
loves his work in a similar way. When this sort of thing happens, there
is a total process, which is comprehension on the intellectual side and
love on the side of feeling, so that, in a sense, the person is that which
he understands (there being no separation of I and not-I). Such a state
cannot be static. For under the motive power of these feelings, the person
takes continual action, and also makes an effort to keep his
understanding adequate to the situation as it develops. He is not doing
what he does just for gratification of desires, nor out of anger, hate,
jealousy, envy, or the need to feel secure (which are the usual motives
for almost everything that we do). And out of these latter motives, true
understanding cannot come.
I have gone into the question of understanding rather thoroughly
because I think it is at the root of all the other questions. If I tried to go
into all the questions indicated earlier in this letter, I would write a
book. Eventually, I hope to be able to get to them. But my views have
evolved a great deal since I last wrote to you, and it would be necessary
for me to go into a lot of scientific material to say what I want to say
about these questions. Probably I shall do this in another letter.
Meanwhile, I shall make a few remarks on certain semantical questions,
which are closely related to what I have just said.
In your letter of May 29, 1961, you objected to a suggestion of mine
that identity means “differing by nothing”. I admitted that it was not
happily put, but now, I have what I regard as a better way of doing it.
I begin with a concept of a field. Roughly speaking, this is what it
means in common experience—that is—a domain which remains within
itself as it moves in the context of certain processes. In mathematics,
the field has a very simple definition. For example, the numbers form a
field. For if you consider the operations of addition, subtraction,
multiplication, or division of any pair of numbers, you get another
number. Symbolically, if a and b are numbers, then

134
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
a+b 
a–b 
a*b 
a/b
are all numbers. Thus, the field is closed under certain operations. Its
second important characteristic is that it has a zero as null element, (0),
such that
a+(0)=a 
a*(0)=(0)
a–(0)=a 
a/(0) does not exist (that is, it is infinity)
I want to generalize this notion of a field. For example, we may call art
a field, science another one, the field of vision, the field of our
consciousness at a particular moment are still other ones, etc., etc. A
field is something that moves into itself, reflecting and projecting the
movements in some more general domain as it does so. Every field has
a null element. The null element does not represent absolute nothingness,
but merely those movements which cannot be reflected in the field in
question. Every field is, in effect, defined implicitly by its null element.
It is clear then that two processes, A and B, are identical in a certain
field, if they differ by the nullity of that field, i.e., by something which
produces no effects in the field in question.
The idea of a field can be extended mathematically, especially with
the aid of the concept of a group, but I needn’t go into this here.
Now, let us come to the question of qualities, such as redness. It is
clear that we know redness through a tremendous number of memory
traces, tied together by a name (as some other symbol), in such a way
that the symbol elicits certain sensations that we had when we actually
experienced redness on earlier occasions, when the sensations elicit the
corresponding symbol. Of course, actual redness that is immediately
present before us is not the same as the memory traces by which we
know redness and recognize it (any more than an actual dinner is the
same as our memory of a dinner). However, in a limited field of certain
sensations, the actual red differs in its effect from that of the memory
traces by the nullity of the field. This means that in the totality, no two
things can be identical. Yet, in certain limited fields, they can be identical
(i.e., differ by the nullity of that field).
I think it is necessary to save the content of the concept of identity in
this way, or else we could never justify the common usage of words.
The notion of a field enables us to see what is the real content of this
conception, without committing ourselves to the notion that there is
actual identity of things that are different. In this way, moreover, I think

Truth and Understanding
135
that we can avoid the need for contradiction. For now. our words are
recognized to refer, not to the process as it actually is, but rather to the
trace of the process in a certain field. Our concepts are then only
reflections, traces or shadows of reality, so that we are not surprised
that we come to contradictions, if we say that they are reality. Reality is,
however, actually only implicit. For it is that total process which leaves
these traces, and does an infinity of unknown things besides. So perhaps
we will be able to agree that contradiction is not necessary, if one
understands the relationships between words, thoughts and actuality.
Now, all of this raises an interesting question indicated in your last
letter. For since process is continuous, there must be a structural
correspondence between its verbal and non-verbal aspects, such that in
the verbal field, there can be a projection of the total process (i.e., a kind
of shadow). But in order that this may be possible, there is a still more
fundamental requirement: viz., the total process must be projectable. Now,
in the mathematical theory of groups, one finds a natural “language” for
raising such questions. For there are groups which operating on themselves
just turn into themselves, and these groups contain sub-groups, which
also move into themselves. The interesting point is that certain kinds of
sub-groups stand in such a relation to the full group that the movements
within the latter can be projected into the former. This is just the kind of
relationship we are looking for. That is, we want the non-verbal domain
to be projectable into the verbal field. Of course, I do not want to say that
the world is really just a bunch of these groups. Rather, I suggest that
these groups provide a good way of mentally and symbolically tracing
the total process (better than the arbitrary everyday language) because
these groups are in themselves totalities, and because they have in them
sub-totalities, which trace the full totalities. Thus, the language of groups
stands in better correspondence to the total process than does our everyday
use of language.
I think that this point of view is more clear than the notion you
propose of “similarity”. For when you try to say just what similarity is,
you are finally forced either to reduce it to an undefinable something,
or else you say that two things that are similar are the same in some
respect. For example, two triangles are similar in that they both have
three sides (i.e., they have the same number of sides); they differ in the
lengths of their corresponding sides. I think that similarity is too vague
a concept to assume as an undefinable. Moreover, it seems to me, that
two things with the same quality are in some respects the same, e.g.,
they elicit in me certain sensations which differ by the nullity of the

136
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
field of sensations—which is to say—their difference is below the threshold
of what is perceptible in this field.
There is a further insight here into the quantitative and the qualitative.
The quantitative always requires a common measure, e.g., inches, apples,
degrees, etc. Behind the statement that 1 metre= 100 centimetres, there is
the implicit assumption that all centimetres are the same. But each
centimetre (like each apple) is different from the others. It is in a different
place, built out of different piece of matter, etc. It would not, however, be
adequate to adopt your suggestion of saying that all centimetres (like all
apples) are similar. Rather, in a certain respect, they must be the same (or
else counting makes no sense). In my point of view, this is simple. For all
centimetres are the same in a certain field (for example, if they are placed
side by side or on top of each other, or if they are projected on to the
same line with the aid of light rays, telescopes, mirrors, etc.). From this
point of view, it is clear that the quantitative comes from adopting a field
in which qualitative differences are projected on to nullity. Therefore, the
qualitative is logically prior to the quantitative, and the immeasurable to
what is measured. The fact that quantitative change leads to qualitative
change is then not mysterious. For the quantitative is an abstraction from
the qualitative in the first place (a projection into a certain field). Therefore,
we merely discover that this abstraction has a limited validity, so that
when we push it too far, we are driven back into the qualitative again. For
example, when we heat water (adding heat energy and increasing the
temperature) at first there is only a quantitative change, but at 100°C,
there is a change of quality—the liquid becomes a vapour. But in reality, it
was always undergoing a series of qualitative changes, which were
projected on to the nullity of a certain field (i.e., as to whether the substance
behaves as a solid, liquid, or gas).
You can see also that the concept of nullity in a field is closely bound
up with abstraction in general. Thus, it is not enough that we abstract
from the concrete totality; for this abstraction would be of no use unless
the totality were abstractable. For example, if we take a sheet of glass,
we could shatter it into fragments, and discuss the fragments in
abstraction, but we would no longer have a sheet of glass. The proper
kind of abstraction is different, however, in that it does not imply
fragmentation, but rather, a correct reflection or projection of the totality.
This is possible because the totality contains sub-totalities into which
its movements can actually be projected. Abstraction consists in
considering one of these proper sub-totalities. But if we mistake
something else for a proper sub-totality, then our abstractions will be

Truth and Understanding
137
erroneous, and will lead to contradiction and fragmentation. This seems
to be what has been happening in a great deal of modern art. The old
framework of abstraction has been burst, but many people are now
abstracting according to an arbitrary principle of selection, thus
producing a fragmentation, rather than seeking the natural principle
that is implicit in the problem that they are presented with.
This leads us to a further point that you raised in your last letter;
i.e., the need for a natural order of abstracting from the objective to the
verbal (or artistic) process, not the reverse. You can see that we agree
on the need for this natural order. However, I think that the concept of
the nullity in a field helps give a clearer idea of what can be meant by
such a natural order. I think also that it accomplishes what you suggest;
i.e., we must always remember that there is an area “beyond the
threshold”. With group theory, for example, if one looks at the problem
in this way, one obtains, for the first time, a mathematical language
which, as it were, is always saying, in each breath “This is an abstraction,
and everything in the nullity of the field is projected into nothing.”
The basic question is, as you say, whether we must experience the
world as contradictory. Probably you are right in claiming that this is
not necessary, and that a purely visual (non-mimetic) art will help in
the evolution of a better way of using language. (For example, since
vision suggests a totality, this may help us to think and speak with a
totality always in the background, present by implication, so to speak.)
Mathematics, physics, etc., may also help, along the lines indicated in
this letter. However, what is most essential is obviously understanding,
and this is where the chief problem lies for all of us. Here, we must be
careful to pay attention to our own ideas, tracing their roots, and seeing
where they lead. In this connection, our feelings play a key role. Are we
approaching the subject with love, or with hatred, anger, resentment,
envy, irritation, annoyance, etc.? The latter are a basic source of
contradiction in our thought process. Of course, all of us feel that we
have plenty of justification for some of these feelings (and the fact is
that we probably do have it), but we will have to ask ourselves what is
more important, to justify ourselves, or to understand truth as it actually
is? I know that I often feel such irritations against most physicists, and
I can see that at times, you have such reactions against Picasso, et al.
But for both of us, the question is “Is it worth it?”
With best regards,
David Bohm

138
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
P.S. I think you can see why certain feelings tend to lead to contradiction.
For example, suppose your main interest is to gratify certain desires
(for power, money, fame, sexual satisfaction, or what have you). Then
you are not interested in nature or other people as they actually are.
You are interested in them mainly in their possible role of gratifying
your desires. You do not bother to understand the total process, but are
satisfied to find techniques that give you the gratifications that you
seek. You don’t worry about side effects of these techniques, which
create new problems, but hope that further techniques can be found to
deal with these.
Evidently your mind is in a state of contradiction at the very outset.
For you do not want to accept what actually is—if you did—there would
be no desire to be gratified. Nor do you want to understand what actually
is. All that you want is to have a picture of the world which gives you
the pleasant assurance that your desires will be gratified now and for
ever, if possible. This means that the mind must reject what actually is,
and set up an imaginary state that seems more pleasant, towards which
it tries to move, with the aid of various techniques, etc. Immediately,
you are in a state of contradiction, because one part of you knows (at
least vaguely) what actually is, and the other part of you is struggling
against it. But you cannot carry out a struggle externally unless you
carry out a corresponding internal struggle—and this is the contradiction.
For example, you cannot be angry at someone without being angry at
the image of this person within yourself. This anger is directed within,
as people discover when they get ulcers, high blood pressure, and heart
failure from persistent anger, and aggressiveness in their ways of life.
The energy of aggressiveness is directed against the image within, but
the image cannot “take it”. The energy goes on to work destruction in
the body. But it also wreaks havoc in the mind, creating tension,
fragmentation, confusion, and a general state of internal contradiction,
which is the inevitable concomitant of having one part of the mind (i.e.,
“I”) fighting another part (i.e., the image of the other man), when in
reality, both parts are basically one and inseparable.
In other words, any emotion that leads a person to reject and struggle
against something external will lead him to do the same against a part
of himself. He will therefore be in a state of internal contradiction, in
which understanding (perception of totality) is impossible, since by
definition, he is limiting his perception to some part of the total internal
field, with which part he identifies himself. Thus, there is initiated a
process of disintegration and confusion, which tends to spread, causing

Truth and Understanding
139
further and further fragmentation of the individual. On the other hand,
if he understands the totality of his field, he cannot be rejecting anything.
This doesn’t mean he is accepting it either. He is simply perceiving the
totality as a totality, i.e., such that each part, including himself and
what is not himself, are sides, generated in their proper relationships in
the total process. The corresponding state of feeling is what is usually
described by the word “love”. He is then actually an integrated person,
without fragmentation, whole, etc. In such a state, he may understand
the whole situation deeply enough to take the appropriate action, without
introducing a self-contradictory state of internal resistance of one part
against another within himself.
So you see I think that there is a very fundamental connection between
thought and feeling.
One more point. In your last letter, you said that you didn’t
understand why I maintained that creative acts were not really
comparable. You felt that they could be compared. Perhaps I did not
make myself clear enough. I meant that in the essential features which
are what make a given act creative, there can be no comparison. Of
course, they can always be compared in many respects, but I claim that
in this way, one will miss what is most fundamental to creativity.
If you keep in mind the fact that each creative abstraction is in some
way new, and appropriate to the unique and peculiar total situation to
which it is a response, then you will see that in that regard, it cannot be
compared to another creative act. For to compare two things, you must
put them into the same general framework of conceptual abstraction
(i.e., the same field). For example, you can say that A is larger than B,
but the field of size is present before you have A or B, so that the
general notion of being larger in size can hardly be regarded as a creative
abstraction (i.e., if B is already greater than something else, C, then A
does not introduce something new and creative just by being greater
than B, since the relation of being greater than is already an old and
known relation). I think you will see that all comparisons are of this
nature; they must work in some field that is common to the two or
more things being compared. Therefore, they must leave out something
else, and what they leave out is just the feature of unique creativity,
which can be understood only in the special field of the totality of that
act of creation. In other words, I claim that a truly creative act, to some
extent at least, creates its own abstractive frame, and for this reason, it
cannot be compared fully to anything else.

140
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
3 Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
December 26, 1961
Dear Mr Biederman:
This letter is a supplement to one that I just wrote to you. It is
intended to say a bit about my reactions to Structurist art. (You are
probably saying “At last, and about time, too!”)
First of all, I haven’t managed to see a great deal of it yet. I have been
busy with other things. Of that which I have seen, Carl Visser impresses
me as the best. I haven’t seen any of your work, except in photographs,
but some of the photographs suggest a very good use of colour. The
spatial distribution of surfaces is hard to judge from a photograph, but
some of them look as if they would be very interesting to see.
Secondly, exhibitions are, as you have remarked, a bad place to show
Structurist works. Logically speaking, each Structurist work should stand
in proper surroundings, with which it tends to integrate itself. A flat
wall of a museum, surrounded by other works, is not the place where
this kind of integration is easily accomplished.
Thirdly, a great deal of the work that I have seen strikes me as cold,
calculated, lacking in the kind of freedom that is the essence of true creativity.
Perhaps it is too mathematical, and not irregular enough. In this regard,
Anthony Hill once made a revealing remark to me that he feels himself to
be a kind of frustrated mathematician. There is perhaps a tendency for this
work to attract the mathematically minded. In this regard, however, some
of the photographs of your work suggest warm glowing colours and an
inner life, which goes beyond mere mathematical calculations.
May I ask you a question here? Is it necessary for Structurist art to
restrict itself to simple planes? Doesn’t nature structure have curves in
it too? And aren’t there rich and complex gradations of colour in nature?
This would suggest that there may be a place for something like painting
after all. Do you have to restrict yourself to sheets of plastic, metal and
glass, with their extremely simplified and antiseptic appearance? Perhaps
this is part of the reason why the net result tends to come out very
mathematical and calculated, at least when many people try to put
these principles into operation.
I think that I understand in part your reasons for working with these
very simplified structures. Perhaps you are trying to start with something

Truth and Understanding
141
easy and then to develop your understanding further, before you go on
to curved structures and complex colours which, as yet, you do not
know how to integrate into Structurist art. In other words, perhaps you
are still in a very experimental phase, and in a preliminary part of the
experiment at that.
There is another reason for favouring planes and lines, which is that
there is some evidence for the underlying discreteness and discontinuity
of natural process. Physics suggests this in the quantum theory, which
shows that all process is discrete and indivisible, involving “quantum
jumps” at the micro-level. In the macroscopic domain, a typical process
has so many of these jumps that it appears continuous (like a rain of
grains of sand), but underneath, it is discrete and atomic. In a similar
way, the Impressionist breaks up complex colours into a large number
of pure colours, each discrete and sharply defined. The Cubists wanted
to represent nature by discrete planes. And you are going on from
Cubism in a similar way to a three-dimensional non-mimetic art; but
continuing these particular basic principles of Cubism? Do I understand
you correctly in this regard.
So perhaps you are developing a new kind of “creative abstraction”
in the form of planes in three dimensions, with special emphasis on
relief structures. If so, then several questions arise. First, are these
abstractions “natural”, or are they being arbitrarily imposed by your
own personal peculiar background of thinking, conditioning, habits,
preferences, urges, etc., etc.? We both agree that Picasso, the
Expressionists, the Action Painters, etc., tend to fall into the latter
category. But what about Structurism? I realize that with something
new like this, you need a lot of experience before you understand it
well enough before you understand its truth or falsity. You have to
“listen”, as it were, and to pay attention without judgement, but just
with the desire to understand. Intellectually, I find what you say
convincing and attractive, especially because it ties up with so much in
physics and mathematics. But it still does not move me in my feelings.
This doesn’t mean too much from your point of view, but you might
be interested in the way the whole thing has struck me.
In this connection, your analysis from “M. to M.” is very good.
However, there is always a danger that you may be carried away by the
brilliance of your own analysis. Certain trends in art appeal to you in
the first place. Perhaps this is a sign of something deep, and true about
them, and perhaps it is a sign that your own conditioning leads you to
favour certain things. Then you engage in a very good analysis, which

142
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
reinforces the trends that appealed to you in the first place. Do you see
the danger in this? Not that I am suggesting that you are wrong. At
present, I am hardly competent to do this. I only wonder if at times you
don’t throw up the whole business temporarily and try to see it from
another point of view? Do you ever get very sick of everything that
you have done, feeling that it may be false, superficial, inadequate? I
sometimes feel that we must do this from time to time, to avoid getting
stuck in a groove. (At least, I do this in my work from time to time.)
Discontent is necessary, or else one will go to sleep.
Another question that arises is whether the Structurist type of
abstraction isn’t just part of what is necessary. As I tried to explain in
my previous letter, I think each new moment calls for its own unique
type of abstraction. Is the arrangement of coloured planes in a relief a
rich enough form to accomplish what is required? Evidently you feel
that it is, or else you wouldn’t work in this way. Perhaps you could go
in more detail into why you chose this form?
Thirdly, there is a problem of getting theoretical ideas across, which
is common to all fields. Evidently, you have had a vision of truth, seeing
nature in a new light. Then you analysed the field of art in the light of
this vision, and published the results. But then comes the problem.
Young people come and read what you wrote, without being able to
have the same vision of truth. In reality, nobody can see by anybody
else’s light. He must find his own light in himself. I know that you
understand this and agree with it. What you write may be helpful to
someone else, but only if he is engaged in creative work himself. The
difficulty is that people tend to read what you write, and follow it without
a deep understanding. No doubt, under present circumstances, this is
inevitable, and there isn’t much that can be done about it. It is just a
fact. But it may be helpful to be aware of this fact, that many people are
just looking for a lead, because there is an emptiness within them that
they don’t know how to fill. It is no use getting angry at them. They
don’t understand their own problem, and no doubt do the best they
can within the framework that they do understand. What is needed
when you write your analysis is also an awareness of the problem of
trying to kindle the creative flame in other people (or helping them to
see what is in the way). The way things are now, one is liable just to
start another school, and the essential point of your own vision may be
lost or confused. Perhaps this is why you have withdrawn to such an
isolated place as Red Wing.

Truth and Understanding
143
I hope that you are not offended by some of these remarks. The
same thing happens in physics too. Once a new idea is hit upon by
somebody, if it is successful, it is soon worked to death by a horde of
people anxious to get their reputations, get good jobs, get ahead, etc.
Now, I would like to discuss my experience with the work of Carl
Visser. We first saw this in a museum in Amsterdam, and recognized it
as inspired by Structurist ideas. Later, we talked to Visser and had a
very interesting discussion.
Among his works were several which appealed to me very much,
particularly an earlier partly representational one of a bird in rushes. It
was made of thin strips of black metal on a wooden base. There is no
doubt that Visser was already coming to Structurism in this work, but
he hadn’t made the full change yet.
The fascinating thing about this piece of work is the development of
inexhaustible new aspects with every change of point of view. Each time
you moved, you saw something unexpected. Yet, later, you saw that this
unexpected combined with what you already knew to make a single
pattern, with room in it, however, for still more unexpected things when
you moved again to still another viewpoint. There was a character of
infinite, unbounded life, in this piece of work, and yet it was entirely in a
certain very limited form, involving nothing but black strips of metal.
I can now see that Visser had captured this quality of contingentation
and necessitation that we discussed in earlier letters. Each pattern was
just incomplete enough to leave room for contingency, and yet this
very contingency became the seed of a new pattern of necessity that
encompassed the earlier pattern, while still leaving room for something
fundamentally new.
While the element of mimesis was very weak, it was still there, and
seemed to play a big part, for one got emotional associations of a lonely
marsh under the autumn sky, with the solitary bird, all alone in this world.
Somehow, I got the impression that these feelings played a big part in
helping the work come alive, and that without this small trace of mimesis,
it might have seemed “dead” and mathematical. This raises the interesting
point of whether it is really possible to do without mimesis altogether.
Slavish imitation of nature as we see it is not enough. We must play our
creative role, bringing out possibilities that only we could have brought
out. Yet, can we ever liberate ourselves 100 per cent from mimesis? And if
we could, would it be right for us to do so? Perhaps the effort to be 100 per
cent free of mimesis conditions us, and determines us as anti-mimetics. Just
as the anti-Communist is determined by the very Communism that he

144
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
opposes, so the anti-mimetic may be limited and restricted artificially by
too energetically striving to avoid mimesis. Is it not better to say that the
question of mimesis or non-mimesis is not the central and essential one
(just as Communism versus anti-Communism is a false question—a red
herring that prevents us from seeing what our problems really are)? In art,
the essential and relevant question is, as you say, creativity. In being creative,
we must free ourselves from the traditional duty of mimesis, but we do not
need to define ourselves as anti-mimetics. At least, that is the way it seems
to me. I would certainly appreciate your views on this question.
In some of Visser’s first fully Structurist works, I felt that he lost this
kind of free spontaneous character of life. He seemed to be struggling
with something, probably the problem of order and disorder (which he
said in our conversation was very important to him). As his work
progressed, one saw a change from heavy symmetrical patterns to lighter
patterns, in which an element of asymmetry was consciously and
deliberately introduced. But one still felt that it was all too “planned”
and not really as alive as this remarkable piece of earlier work,
A few months ago, we received some photographs of later works by
Visser, in which (without mimesis) he seems to be coming closer to the
style of the bird in the rushes. Perhaps he will finally work this problem
out for himself.
This brings me to the problem of order and disorder, causality and
randomness, law and chaos, on which we have touched many times in
earlier letters. We have had some disagreement as to what these are, as
to whether randomness and contingency really exist in nature (and not
just in our own minds).
I have had some further ideas on this question since I last wrote you
about them. Let me begin with the problem of throwing coins. In each
throw, two results are possible, heads and tails (to be symbolized by H
and T respectively). In a series of throws, we may get, for example, a
very regular result, such as
H H H H H H H H H H H H H H
or
H T H T H T H T H T H T H T H T
But we can also get a result which we call irregular, such as
H T H H T H H H T H T T T H T

Truth and Understanding
145
Now, it turns out that in almost all such series of throws the results are
what we would call irregular, and only very rarely are they regular.
Now, what do we mean by an irregular or random series of throws?
If we tried to say that something is disordered, irregular or random in
itself, we should come to a self-contradiction. For no matter how
complicated it looks, every order of results is some order, and cannot
be called a “dis-order”. But randomness or disorder can exist in a
relationship between two or more orders. Thus, in relationship to the
time order of throwing, most of the results are random (also in relation
to the space-order of the places where the coins fall). By this, we mean
that if we pick any time sequence (or space arrangement) containing a
large number of throws, we will find:
1
that there are almost as many heads as tails in it (i.e., no tendency
to prefer heads over tails);
2
in any sub-sequence, heads are followed by tails almost as often as
by heads;
3
in any sub-sequence, there is statistically speaking, no correlation
between the results of a given throw and those that are one, two,
three, four, etc., throws later. (For example, if you look at all the
cases that are heads, you will find that five throws later, there are
tails just about as often as there are heads.)
If you reflect a while, you will see that relative randomness has a
clear and well-defined meaning, with real consequences. For example,
in a really random game, it is no use looking for a special “system” to
beat the game, as this would imply a relationship between one order
(e.g., time) and another (e.g., the results of throws) that does not actually
exist.
In a really random relationship, you find what may be called an
independence of two orders. In such a case, what is found in one order
has statistically no correlation to what will be found in the other order.
In the case of coin throws, the reason for this independence is clear. For
in each throw, the result depends on a multitude of factors (e.g., just
how the coin is held, with what impetus it is thrown, etc.) which vary
from instance to instance in a manner having, on the average, no
particular relationship to the time order of throwing.
The notion of independence of orders is very important. For such
an independence leaves room for contingency. For example, as you
follow one order (e.g., time), there is interwoven in it an unrelated order

146
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
(i.e., the results of throws). By just giving the time, you do not determine
the results of the throws, and by just giving the results of throws, you
do not determine time.
More generally, contingency is possible, in part at least, because there
do exist unrelated orders. In this sense, contingency has its roots in
nature structure, and not just in our own minds. In other words, just as
abstractions made by us are justified because nature is abstractable (see
my previous letter), so our ideas on contingency are justified because
nature is contingentizable. In other words, as we give one order, we can
still leave room for the possibility of an independent order, not
determined by the first one. This doesn’t mean that nothing determines
the second order. It only means that the second order is not determined
by the first (and vice versa).
There is also of course the idea of related orders. For example, in the
movement of the planets, the order of time is very closely related to the
order of the series of positions occupied by a planet, so closely that this
motion is precisely predictable, in the sense that if one reads the time
on a clock, one can say where the planet is, and if one sees where the
planet is, one can say what the time is.
Of course, there is every possible case between a perfectly defined
relationship of two orders and perfect independence (or relative
randomness) of these two orders.
Now, another important question that arises in the relationship of
orders is the question of their compatibility. For example, consider a
crystal, which is a perfectly periodic, repetitious, regular array of
molecules. All real crystals have dislocations, which are breaks in the
regular crystalline orders. Now, these dislocations are not absolute
disorders. Rather, they are just another kind of order, which is not
compatible with the crystalline order. The more dislocation in a particular
specimen, the less will be the aspect of crystalline orders, and eventually
if there are enough dislocations, the crystal order disappears. Here, we
see how the development of one kind of order (dislocations) must be at
the expense of another kind (the crystal).
Another such case arises with the molecular theory of gases. An
ordinary gas consists of a mass of molecules in random movement. By
this, one means that in relation to time, space, and large-scale order,
there is, statistically speaking, no particular or distinguished direction
or magnitude of molecular velocities, no distinguished position, etc. In
other words, the two orders (micro and macro) are nearly independent,
and this independence (with its relative randomness) is necessary for

Truth and Understanding
147
the regular behaviour of the gas on the large-scale level. For example,
only if the micro-movements are random will the pressure of the gas be
uniform and regular (as a random rain of grains of sand produces a
nearly uniform pressure). If all the molecules were moving regularly
and nearly in the same direction, however, they would start to collide,
and as a result, there would appear violent turbulence and irregularity
on the large scale, which would die out only after relative randomness
between the levels had been achieved.
Here, we have another case when two orders are incompatible.
Macroscopic order requires microscopic disorder.
When two kinds of order are incompatible, we can analyse the
problem with the aid of certain abstractions. For example, in the case of
a crystal, we can think of an ideal crystal without dislocations. We
compare the actual crystal with the ideal crystal. If there are a very
large number of dislocations, the actual specimen will become random
in relationship to the ideal.
Here, we see how order is treated abstractly. An actual thing, with a
mixture of two or more incompatible orders, is mapped into our ideal
order. One will see that the actual order does not fit the ideal order. Every
possible case can occur, from one approaching perfect fitting (implying a
close relationship of the actual and the ideal orders) to no fitting at all
(implying independence or a random relationship between these orders).
The problem of symmetry is closely related to that of order. Thus,
could we not regard asymmetry as a kind of “tension” between two
incompatible kinds of order? For example, an equilateral triangle has a
certain kind of symmetrical order. But then there could be an
asymmetrical order (e.g., one side is twice the second, which is in turn
twice the third). This second kind of order is evidently not compatible
with the first. However, one could try to make a pattern of triangles,
which somehow interweave these two patterns of order. I haven’t thought
clearly how to do it yet, but a moving and developing pattern should, it
seems to me, have this tension between incompatible orders. However,
the tension should not be so great as to disrupt all relationship between
them, and lead to relative independence or randomness. Yet, it must be
great enough to break the rigid frame of each particular order, and to
create room for something which is new and unexpected, not determined
by the previous pattern, and yet compatible with it, and even more,
capable of including it or comprehending it. In other words, there can
be a tension which determined contingentation of the old, and
subsequent necessitation of something new, necessitated in this way.

148
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
It is my opinion that in a moment of creativity, there is a “flash” or a
“click”, very swift, in which a new totality is determined (as in the case of
understanding that I discussed in my previous letter). This new totality
forms all its parts as sides or aspects, automatically in their right relationship.
When such a totality is formed, it will be “alive”, containing the kind of
“tension” that allows new developments, which do not burst its framework.
The thing cannot be planed or calculated by a mathematical formula, any
more than one can plan or calculate the process by which one understands
mathematical demonstration. (Recall the case I discussed in my previous
letter of the sudden “flash” in which one “sees” the relationships of circle to
diameter, etc., when a mathematical theorem is explained.) As we look at a
work of art, we must come to understand it as a totality. (This doesn’t
mean all at once, of course.) In a complex and subtle work of art (also in
mathematics) there will be many levels of understanding. The first step
will lead us on to the first case of contingency, then we will stop and
understand the next stage, showing the necessity of this contingency, in the
framework of a new concept of the totality, and so on. A real work of art
resembles life itself in being inexhaustible, so that one must understand it
from moment to moment, from one occasion to another, bringing in all
previous experience on each new occasion, so that everything is once again
new. But this will happen only if, objectively, the work of art has
contingentation, due to tensions between orders, leading to breaks in orders,
that are understood in terms of newer and larger patterns, etc.
I think these are my main ideas on Structurist art thus far. Of the
English members of this school, I feel that Mary Martin is one of the
best. However, I feel that on the whole, the chief stumbling block is the
question of contingentation and necessitation, and the “inner tension”,
needed to make the works “come alive” and not be an illustration of
mathematical relationships.
I should very much appreciate hearing your reactions to these
comments.
With best wishes,
Very sincerely yours,
David Bohm
P.S. With regard to the relationship of mathematics to music, which we
discussed in earlier letters, the essential point is, perhaps, that the effort
to present a mathematically calculated music would be an absurdity.
The pure creative act, even in mathematics itself, cannot be calculated.

Truth and Understanding
149
What mathematician would undertake to calculate the process by which a
new creative insight and understanding develops in him? There are a great
many mathematical relationships in music. And indeed, there are in art
too. For there is symmetry, group theory, and topology (the latter not having
been exploited very much as yet, from the point of view of pure mathematical
theory). Indeed, there is mathematics in everything. But from this, it doesn’t
follow that everything is just mathematics. Least of all can the creative act
itself be reduced to mathematics. To create a new musical theme, a new
work of art, or a new form of mathematics, one has to be in a living
process. In this process, there must be feeling—passion —as well as intellectual
thinking and analysis. For this feeling not only provides the motive power
for understanding (as I indicated in my previous letter). It is also an integral
part of this understanding. There is no understanding without the feeling
of understanding, of truth, of totality, and this feeling is essential to the
expression of the content of what is understood. What comes out of
calculation is only the result of a technique. It is like pushing a button in
one of these modern machines and getting coffee, doughnuts, chocolate,
chewing gum, and all sorts of things. But when you understand something,
then inwardly, you are it, and feel yourself to be it. Rather, you no longer
perceive or feel a separation between yourself and that which you
understand. On the other hand, the technician, the calculator, is always
aware of a separation, a gap, between himself and the subject of his technical
procedures and calculations. He engages in operations on a world conceived
to be purely external to himself, in order to gratify his desire to exploit this
world, to obtain results from it which satisfy him, give him a sense of
power, money, recognition, or what have you.
Of course, there is nothing intrinsically wrong with technique and
calculations. What is wrong is that they have become the essence, the
totality, whereas they are meant to be secondary, and to serve the creative
process and the understanding of totality.
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
January 18, 1962
Dear Bohm:
(May we drop the Mr stuff?) I am able to write to you much sooner
than I had expected, due to a bad cold that does not permit me to work

150
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
in my shop. I ignored the cold and now I’m paying for it. Last Monday
your airmail, Jan. 13, and seamail, Dec. 26, both arrived. Here I will
only reply to the Dec. 22 letter.
Does the term “similar” really take us back to the very “sameness”
notions we wish to avoid? If “everything is everything else,” it can also
be noted, from another position, that nothing is ever anything else,
either as anything outside itself or anything it is itself from one moment
to the next. We “see” what we call similarities because, as AK [Alfred
Korzybski] says, we leave out the differences due to the coarseness of
our perception and/or knowledge. The further back we go in the
evolution of man, the greater the tendency to “leave out” the differences,
and so the greater the reliance on identity logic. In the reverse direction
there is an increasing sensitivity to differences, and eventually the notion
of structure as process. Characteristic of this evolution is the greater
relevance of experience to nature, with the lessening of dependence
upon verbalisms. Absolute sameness, absolute differences, neither exists,
for the first would produce a frozen world of “symmetry” structure, the
latter a chaos of “asymmetric” structure. But such symmetry and
asymmetry do not exist in nature.
When we speak with AK of language as similar in structure to nature,
we do not identify the two structures. We remember that words are
never the things we speak about.
“What is structure?” you ask. Is there such a thing as structure?
There are only structured things, and no thing that is structure. What
do you say about that?
I could not have used the phrase “abstracting animal,” as you have
me say, nor does AK. Man is only an “animal” when he acts something
like one and then he becomes less than an animal. Man has the capacity
animals do not, apparently no limit to his capacity to abstract. By time-
binding AK means that each generation can pick up where the last
generation left off, and not simply repeat the last generation as animals
must. This is not simply the quantitative distinction you make—
perception-animals, abstraction-man. Rather, the distinction is
quantitative-qualitative for both perception and abstraction, for both
man and animal. How can a new stage of evolution go “beyond
abstraction” by going “back” to a “new kind of concreteness” of totality
perception? Perception itself is a form of abstraction, as are all our senses.
It is these abstractions that are continued in the more familiar abstractions
of the verbal process. Impossible to go “beyond abstraction,” only
beyond present forms of abstraction. And, any advance in abstraction

Truth and Understanding
151
entails a “new kind of concreteness,” else change is merely verbalism.
Going “back” to a “new concreteness,” a contradiction leading to
pathology however “new.” To be “new” is inescapable, choice is only
pathology or sanity.
There is a good deal more than “some sense” in your view of creation
as “instantaneous thought-feeling—action.” It is a culminating joy for
the one doing the creating. Before (and after) the act of creation, one
has done much preparation. And, is it not true that if this preparation is
done with security demands sitting on one’s back, the moment of
creation will be nullified? At this point it is tempting to compliment
oneself by saying it is necessary to be daring, but not foolish. But I
think it more exact to say it is more a question of being natural in
preparing for and then grasping the moment of creation. I concur
completely with your notion that all forms of creation are characterized
by the conscious absence of the “I.”
True conversation, you say, is two people creating similar, I would
not say “same,” trains of thought to and with each other and in
themselves. But this is nullified by our culture of too competitive “I”s.
In its deepest sense conversation is a form of creation which withers
before the conscious “I.” “Same” conversation is like producing a leaf
of absolute bilateral symmetry—identification—frozen symmetry. We
meet not to repeat, but to create.
Yes, true understanding is a feeling-experience. But, why not look
both ways? As I tried to show in my “Instinct…” article, there is a
thinking-feeling and feeling-thinking spectrum. This implies the even
wider spectrum of consciousness-unconsciousness. General tendency
is to isolate the poles, leaving us without the spectrum between. Hence
the obsession to decry the unconscious as solely the abode of Satan.
Your attitude towards abstraction impresses me as pessimistic, even
though I agree with what you say. Abstractions are not as ephemeral as
you make out. Certain abstractions, from the very earliest times to the
present, remain as truths within their context. Even the genetic notion
of the earth’s structure as a flat surface remains a “truth” of actual
experience, which you and I abide by daily in order to secure certain
types of necessary experiences or actions. Not only do certain of the
most early abstractions remain valid as such, but also because they are
the departure for more sophisticated abstractions about nature structure.
This works in the same way that the past remains a base for action with
the future. These different kinds of orders of truth. originating in different
historical orders, are possible because nature itself is a structure of

152
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
differing orders of truths. Nature is so rich in its diversity that even in
the case of any one order of these truths, there erupts again a plurality
of truths. Abstractions “distort,” you say. But isn’t this only one type of
abstraction? We can also distort abstractions! That is, stretch the truth
of an abstraction beyond its reality context. “By leaving out certain
things,” you write, “they enable us to see others better, etc., etc.” Just
the point, only so do we see certain things better. If we had to include
everything in order to see anything better, human life would be a floating
dream devoid of emotional-intellectual depth.
When you refer to totality as various sided, this seems to fit in with the
above notion of nature as various sided truth. If so it does not seem correct
to say that understanding of the totality-truth goes beyond “any of the
particular senses,” that basically it is understanding that allows for the
realization of totality-nature. Here I suspect that the physicist has indeed
taken over who, after all, spends so much of his experience within the
silent, invisible labyrinths of nature’s atomic underground, where
understanding gains a transcendental status over the senses. I suggest that
the physicist is in a kind of sensory dilemma, as a human being. He must
picture himself in a world devoid of human habitation, and where he is
forced to rely too much upon understanding in terms of language. This is
an inhuman situation and can only be relieved by relating this aspect of
nature back to the human aspect of nature. Can this human dilemma
explain the effort of earlier physicists to wave macro-nature into oblivion,
and then the later effort to deny all picturization of nature as reality?
Anyway, if the totality is many-sided, perhaps many avenues of
approach to it also exist, as the body has a number of sensory avenues
leading to external nature. This is to suggest that understanding is a
part of each of the many approaches to truth. A blind man can say “I
see” to mean he understands. But, have you any hopes that there will
ever be a blind Poincaré, Rembrandt, Beethoven?
I agree unreservedly that anger, hate, jealousy, envy, need for security
are gratifications that prevent us from seeing the truth. Love can also,
however, serve similar gratifications. As in your example, parents who
“love” their children yet do not understand them because they love only
a self-projection. Love like hate falls prey to ignorance of truth. But
those parents who know the good and bad about their children, you say,
can “simply love them.” In each example you had to include more than
“simply love”—love of the experience and knowledge of actuality or
disregard for it. This last brings me closer to my view. Earlier in your
letter you spoke of transcending the subjective and objective to reach

Truth and Understanding
153
totality. I disagree, I would rather seek to merge these two aspects to
the point where the “I” is no longer conscious. Thus, one attains a true
state of objectivity like a child, eyes wide open, curious, receptive, no
thought of I will look for this, ignore this. To be, in short, non-prejudiced
toward experience. This objectivity is a state of love such as referred to
in my article on “Science and Art as Creation,” and as expressed by
Russell, Einstein, and Einstein about Planck. It is this experience of
love that I believe can lead the way to a sense of true love between
humans. In the case of a parent this requires a period of non-parent
consciousness, that is, absence of the conscious “I.”
Because we do not see alike on the above problem probably explains
your rejection of the attitude you assume I have toward Picasso and the
rest. Analysis of these forms of art has been based on the effort to
remove the conscious “I,” but love is circumscribed to the analysis, not
to these artists. To accomplish this I have even projected myself into
painters like Picasso and others, by means of having their art before
me. I also do this with past artists whom I admire, where love this time
for the artists has, too often, blinded me to their defects.
To what extent does the wide difference between your field and
mine influence each in his conclusions about the above? You physicists
in your personal riffs have only each other to deal with, and the words
each of you utters about nature. Nature, your aspect of nature, however,
remains imperturbably out-there, where each of you knows none of
you can change it. I mean, none of you can start ignoring atoms and
peopling nature with xerdons, whatever that is. In art our nature is not
held so steady out of the reach of monkey business, we don’t have
instruments to check crackpot antics with nature. This situation makes
greater demands upon the artist in pursuit of objectivity of nature, than
in the case of scientists, believe it or not.
After repeated readings of your revised remarks on identity, nullity,
group theory, etc., I fail to reach your thinking. It is due to my failure to
think in terms of identity and nullity which, therefore, form blockages
to my understanding you.
January 18, 1962
(Reply to yours of December 26, 1961)
When you say you have not seen much Structurist art, then I must
correct you. I originated that name in 1952 to designate not a school
but a historical evolutionary direction of a creative art. I recognize no

154
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
living artist as a Structurist outside of myself, with two exceptions: artists
who have yet to come to a place where one can say they are Structurists
in the sense I comprehend it. So, unless you refer to my work, you are
not referring to SA, but to Synthesist, Constructionist, Constructivist,
Neoplastic, and the like. I suggest we speak of “new art,” to indicate the
general effort.
When you refer to such as Hill’s art, as cold and calculated (there is
also Ernest, Dill and many others), I most certainly agree. Hill is indeed
correct to regard himself as a frustrated mathematician as he informed
you, and which situation he could easily remedy by ceasing to be a
frustrated artist. When an artist makes an arbitrary entrance into the
new art, meaning a too self-centered interest, the act of creation churns
in the arbitrary waters of the amorphous. Such an artist often chooses
to escape to mathematics to give a raison d’être to his act of creation. You
are right then, to note that the new art attracts not necessarily the math-
minded, but certainly the use of math as a crutch. Some of these artists
have expressed the view that I have no right to print my criticisms of
their use of math, especially since I have frankly admitted to some of
them that I am an ignoramus about math. But this should make it all
the more easy for them to dispose of me, and I wait patiently.
Why restrict the new to the straight plane, why not the rich curvature
which nature expresses? You have not read much of my writing. Here
I can only remark on one aspect of this. The assumption is taken that,
like mimetic art, purely creative art will sustain its living quality only
by an evolutionary development. To do so, one must secure a genesis
such as will sustain the pursuit of an evolution. This seems to require
reducing the problem of form to its simplest possible terms, the idea
being that the simpler, the more potentiality for coherency in a beginning.
This is gone about by reducing the sphere, representing nature as
basically curvature, to its simplest geometric terms—the cube. (This
form later evolves into the spatial plane.) Since the Structurist seeks the
example of nature for the structural possibilities of his development,
the cube puts him in a position to begin on the simplest structural
terms possible. Once again this makes for a coherent beginning, this
time as regards the use of nature for the development of a creative art.
Does the artist need to restrict himself to the “antiseptic” plastics,
metals, glass, etc.? I must speak for myself, since I reject all these
materials, as such. If you were to see my work, you would eventually
have to ask me, “What materials are these made of?” For all you would
see are colored spatial planes! I look to my predecessors the painters,

Truth and Understanding
155
not to the manufacturers of industrial materials. Antiseptic use of
materials, antiseptic use of math, do not they go together?
In some future development the new art will have reached a more
direct relation to nature as curvature.
Your theory of discreteness and discontinuity in science—nature and
art (see my “Nature and Art” article in S. [Structure—Ed.]). The parallel
between the nature discoveries of science and the new efforts of art
seem all too evident. Much of this is a deception, as it now stands, all
the more easily accepted because of the confusion of new artists before
the problem of art, a confusion now of long standing. If we wish to
restrict the discussion to discrete structure, I could then say the new
artist continues on the macro-level where the “jumps” appear continuous.
The great change in art has not been one of, can I say, form beyond
form (discrete), but only from a mimetic to a different kind of form—
from mimetic (nature) to creative (man) forms. I do not wish to deny
parallels between the developments in science and art, rather I expect
they will be really interesting ones, not merely reflective but creative.
The latter will throw unique light on art and science.
All through the development of a new direction for art, science has
periodically been sought as the Salvation Army for the artist. For
instances, right with the beginning, Impressionism, artists looked to
the scientific view of color. Monet, the greatest Impressionist, never
did, and Pissarro had to eventually abandon the science color. The
problem of color in art was unique, obviously it was not that of science.
Cubists and de Stijl artists both used science theory to rationalize their
art, along with math, as is still being done today. Cézanne, the first and
greatest Cubist, solved that problem with art before nature. (See my
“Art and Philosophy” article coming in S.)
Are my abstractions in art “natural” or “personal?” There are two
levels or orders to the answer. In one we have the art which determines
its own course of the particular forms that take place in its development.
In the other we have nature which offers the field of structural
possibilities, the only possibilities, for the realization of art and its
evolution. Art is thus the creation of man according to the infinitely
rich creative potentialities made possible by man. (See TS [The Structurist]
no. 2, which I will send you.)
In questioning the situation in which my efforts at analyzing art may
exist you mean, to put it more bluntly, that it is easy to see what we
want to see. OK. So, do I ever throw up everything and begin all over,
in order to avoid the danger of conditioning? This is unavoidable in

156
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
our changing-over times. From 1926 to 1937 I went through a constant
series of such experiences, as a painter. From 1937, when I became
what I now call Structurist, to 1949, the period of my Evolution book, I
went through a number of serious changes which revolved around the
two schools of de Stijl and Russian Constructivism, and which period
displaced these schools with a new view I formulated of Cézanne. Thus,
I was almost in my mid-40s when I found what I was seeking for. The
last 12 years have not contained further upheavals, nor do I expect any.
Am I choosing forms “rich enough” to accomplish my desired end?
You will grant me that I could easily make my forms “rich enough,” all
you want, as do the followers of the Constructivist Russians. But I
have answered this in preceding comments. Here I could ask this. Why
didn’t Bach use such a “rich” composition of sounds as Beethoven? To
create is to learn to create. To learn to create is to establish a sustained
process of creative evolution for art. This is sensible, but better,
experience confirms it. Why didn’t nature start out with its rich forms?
Why did it perhaps begin with an amorphous gas in which the particles
were created, from which the galaxies were created, etc., etc.? I am not
one of the artist-heroes of our century who thinks to do better than
nature. To create is to grow, not to pick something ready-made off a
store-shelf. The artist who supposes he is a nature unto himself, wanders
in the delusions and hallucinations of his own puny self.
What you say about the consequences of my published writings is
more correct than you can possibly know. I became well aware of what
happens to published writings, especially theory, within a few months
of my first book. I paid for it for not being prepared for it. What you
say is “liable” to happen, my vision being confused and lost at the
hands of readers, has indeed happened. The now so-called British
Constructivist school is the prime example of it, which school you may
not know began as the result of my published Evolution. I am opposed
to forming any school for the new art, and a nationalist one is beyond
forbearance. No, none of these experiences made me withdraw to Red
Wing, but it does make me content to stay here or some other such
place out in the clean vision of nature.
You are very correct to state that the central question is not
mimeticism or non-mimeticism, as oppositions. Along your similar
lines of reason, one cannot achieve democracy on the basis of anti-
Communism as certain elements in the US are proving all too clearly.
In the same way, one cannot achieve an art of creation on an anti-
mimetic basis. I know because that was the kind of first attempt I

Truth and Understanding
157
made as a painter. For this reason I have often stressed, and I do this
particularly in the “Art and Philosophy” article mentioned above, that
mimeticism legitimately continues, but in another medium. It is also
the reason why I gave so much importance to photography in my
Evolution, that book being the first art history to give a legitimate place
to the camera in art history. As for mimeticism in painting or sculpture,
that practice has achieved chaos in trying to go forward, and there is
no return to the past. This is only to emphasize that mimetic art must
go forward like anything else.
Can we liberate ourselves 100 per cent from mimesis? That is not at
all difficult to do, anyone can do it. The pertinent question is, “Have
we liberated ourselves to something or nothing?” But liberation implies
anti-mimeticism again. So is there the possibility of a purely creative
art? Visual creation is not entirely a new thing. Architecture and all the
applied arts have exercised this effort from the beginning of human
culture. But, in the applied arts creation could never be more than a
limited expression of creation. So, the question really is, “Can there be
a pure form of art creation?” But here it is of no use to use words if you
cannot see it, and you cannot see it without a new vision. It being
obvious that a mimetic vision will not suffice. The same arguments and
problems came up with the divorce of music from literary functions,
some almost 300 years ago. As we cannot listen for the story in music
where only the creation of sounds stands alone, so we cannot look for
the story and see the art where there is no longer a story.
Your exposition of independent orders is logical and impressive.
Yet I am not convinced. The greatest power of man also contains his
greatest danger, namely, that it is possible for him to set up situations,
such as experiments, which do not and cannot occur in unmolested
nature. Nature does not toss coins. I go along with Einstein, that
nature is not running a gambling casino, no dice-throwing. Anyway,
does man with his coin-throwing set up a circumstance of structural
happenings that are not sufficiently understood, and therefore give
a false report about the structure of nature? In any case, is it possible
to show beyond the point where justifiable dispute is possible, where
fact is offered rather than faith asked, as I think seems to be done in
the disorder-order notions about nature? If the latter could be shown
the arguments would end, and there would be no necessity to appeal
to the coin-throwing, about which we would then perhaps know
more too.

158
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
I find it difficult to accept notions of randomness, disorder, dislocation,
distortion, and the like. That seems to me, to put impressive lingo at
places of our ignorance. I believe it to be of first significance that in
science and art (both the mimetic manipulators and those who deny
nature), that both speak of nature in terms of its having certain defects,
and this precisely in a period where members of both fields speak of a
“crisis” between man and nature. Terms like random, etc., appear to
me like notices posted over certain areas of nature reading, “Here
anything can happen, feel free to speculate whatever you think.” These
terms are mean-nothings which everyone is free to make into mean-
somethings, an arbitrariness, a surreal indeterminism. It reminds me of
Hans Arp. He would make an ink drawing and then tear it to pieces.
He then drops the pieces on a sheet of paper. And, wherever they happen
to land he pastes them down. Thus, a finished drawing. Perhaps if I
were not so very ignorant about science, I would know better than to
say what I have, or else I would be able to better say what I stumble
around to say.
Your illustration of the molecular theory of gases interests me
particularly, but I could not visualize, therefore I could not comprehend,
the crux of your exposition. Could you make me a drawing showing
molecules “moving regularly and nearly in the same direction,” so I
could see how they would collide and make a turbulence of irregularity
on the macro-level, and a drawing of the random movement on the
sub-macro? I am enclosing something I wrote almost eight years ago,
that is related to our discussion. I sent it to the mathematician E.T.Bell,
with whom I have corresponded, and also to W.H.George at the Chelsea
Polytechnic. I would like your frank opinion of it.
Your remarks on symmetry make me very curious but unable to
cope with them. Perhaps you will say more about it, something that my
novice mind can grasp. This reminds me, in the early 1950s I had
some correspondence with Kathleen Londsdale on symmetry,
randomness, ideal models, etc.
Were you able to see my actual art and arrive at your own actualized
experience of it, you would then realize how very correct the remarks
in your last paragraph are. I mean where you say that, in regard to the
new art you have experienced, the big problem is the question of
contingency and necessitation from which arises that “inner tension”
by which the art comes alive. Finally, you say, art cannot be illustrative
of math relations. Discerning this, which most new artists are very
ignorant of, should facilitate your discerning the necessity for some

Truth and Understanding
159
proper beginning for a creative art such as can sustain an evolution. If
the living quality of the art is that which is poised in the tension
established between the forces of necessitation and contingency, the
necessity for the growth of all these factors can only be realized by
some coherent direction of evolution. This can only be accomplished if
the creative activity in the art is consciously related to the study of
nature’s creative aspect, for there exists the supreme manifestation of
living structure. It is astounding, I have often referred to the living
quality which is necessary in the new art. Yet, not one artist has ever
mentioned it to me.
Is it any wonder that when the artist is unconscious of what is indeed
his inescapable relation to nature, that he unconsciously experiences a
lack of the living quality in his art, that he then tries to remedy this
situation by turning to such a time-honored discipline as mathematics?
To the degree an artist can be a mathematician in his art, to that degree
he deludes himself as artist. Because he will mistake his feeling of
mathematical accomplishment with the feeling of a living quality for art.
Your remarks on mathematics as creation are the first profound things,
to me as an artist, that I have heard about mathematics. Here we have
the opportunity to establish a sensible relation between art, music and
math. But, if there is math in art and music, is there art and music in
math? Perhaps it is no mere accident that some mathematicians and
physicists have felt they are artists. What is an accident and serious is
that some scientists, well-known ones, have encouraged artists into
calculation, “the result of technique,” as you put it. What you say about
the technician and calculator applies to such artists. There is a void
between themselves and art, the latter being like a foreign body outside
himself. There is lacking a living relation between the artist and his art.
He does not, he cannot, feel himself to “be it,” as you say. He is not one
with art. Thus art serves the artist in much the way the calculator’s
work serves him, to gratify desires for fame, wealth, etc. We should
note, however, that to the opposite of lifeless art there is another that is
indeed alive. It literally seethes with the living quality, but it is the
seething life one can experience before a psychotic person—the art of
pathology, the mimetic destructions of nature.
Yes, I am married and we have an 18-year-old daughter. We send
you and your wife our warmest regards.
Charles Biederman

160
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
December 29, 1961
Dear Mr Biederman:
This is a very brief letter to summarize and add to a few points that
were made in my previous two letters (Dec. 22 and Dec. 26).
You are quite right in saying that we have now reached the problem
of defining our terms, of getting to the basis of a real understanding, by
going into the question of how we use words.
As I see it, the basic problem is of what is meant by “same-ness” or
“identity”. Following Korzybski, you say that no two things are ever
really the same. And here, I agree with you, up to a point at least. Then
you go on to bring in the idea of multi-ordinal terms (for example, with
redness, symbolized by R, you consider R1, R2, R3…etc.). But here I
raise the question, “Why use the same symbol R?” Why not replace R2
by B for blueness, S, for sweetness, etc.? In spite of the fact that R1 is
not R2, they must be the same in some respect, or else there would be
no justification for using the same word, and language would turn into
utter chaos.
I proposed to solve the problem (at least in part) by bringing in the
idea of a field, and the concept of the nullity of a field. Two things (that
are different, of course) may be the same inside a certain field, differing
by the nullity of that field.
This raises the problem, of course, as to whether or not the projection
of the world into certain fields is not arbitrary. But you yourself have in
effect provided the answer to this question. In general, such a projection
is, of course, arbitrary. And the arbitrariness shows up in fragmentation,
disintegration and confusion, which result when you project into the
wrong field. But then you considered the idea of a “natural” abstraction,
which does not produce fragmentation, disintegration and confusion.
On the contrary, “natural” abstraction brings out the essential
relationships in a given totality, by stripping away all that is not relevant
to the totality, all that is accidental, and contingent in relation to this
totality. But the important point is that it leaves the essential without
breaking it, distorting it, or destroying it.
In order that such process of abstraction shall be possible, it is
necessary that the process of the world has a certain general kind of

Truth and Understanding
161
structural relationship, which I can call by the name “abstractability”
or “projectability”. That is to say, there must exist in the process of the
world as a whole certain sub-groups or fields, which move into
themselves, in a certain kind of correspondence with the overall process.
In other words, the relations in the sub-groups reflect certain relationships
in the whole world process. But what they must reflect is what is essential
to the totality of the world process. Otherwise, the abstraction will be a
trivial one. This means that they reflect the very process in which the
elements of the world totality are generated, in their actual relationships.
In this regard, even the abstracted group or field itself is an element or
aspect of the totality that it is abstracting. And here is where your stress
on Structurist art as an integral part of nature structure comes into
relevance. In other words, a piece of art need not be just a mimesis or
reflection of nature, it is a part of nature, an aspect that could not have
existed without man’s creative activity. The weakness of mimetic art is
that it is only the content of what is reflected that is relevant, and not
the process of reflection itself. A Structurist art should then be an
abstraction which is plainly part of nature in its own right, and yet also
an abstraction or a projection of what is essential in nature’s totality. It
should also have in it the whole story of its relationship to nature; i.e.,
that it is actually an abstraction of this particular kind. Am I right in
ascribing these views to you?
This brings me to the idea of the concrete. Now, is the concrete just the
opposite of the abstract? Evidently not. For if it were, it would be that
which is not abstract, and therefore only an abstraction from the abstract.
This would make it doubly abstract. Rather, the concrete is the existent
actual totality from which all abstractions come. As such, it contains the
abstract as a part or aspect of itself. In other words, the concrete is (among
other things) also the abstract. But this abstraction is in reality a concrete
abstraction in the same sense as Structurist art. For the piece of Structurist
art is an aspect of concrete reality in its own right, and is not just a mimesis.
And yet, it is an aspect in which there is a field, containing essential
relationships in the concrete totality. As I said in my earlier letter, it is an
abstraction which is always plainly saying that it is just what it is, a part of
reality that is abstracting something essential from the totality.
If you look in a mirror, you see a reflected world. The content of the
reflection is the world, but then there is the process of reflection itself.
Usually, one is not aware of this process, which is a complex movement
by which the mirror reflects the incident light in a certain order and
relationship to the sources of the light. In other words, you hardly pay

162
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
any attention to the mirror itself, but you are interested mainly in the
reflected image. But now the time has come, in science as well as in art,
to pay more attention to the mirror, and to the process by which it
reflects the world. We must notice that the mirror is itself an integral
part of the world; and we must find mirrors which are able to reflect
essential features of the world process, including the fact that they are
mirrors related to totality in a certain way.
The problem is much more general than that of science or art. As I
indicated in my earlier letters, it has to do with understanding and
truth. For understanding is perception of totality. And I think that what
is perceived is just the essential field, which is appropriate for abstraction
this particular moment. Thus understanding goes from moment to
moment. Truth or falsity are also in this process. Truth is, I think, non-
contradiction in the total field of experience, including perception,
thought, feeling and action. Falsity is a process of contradiction of one
part against another, either one thought against another, thought against
feeling, feeling against feeling, thought-feeling against action, or action
against action; or any of these against perception. There is therefore no
final truth or abstract truth, but rather, a concrete truth, which develops
from moment to moment along with understanding, as the total situation
changes. Truth is not just something wholly outside ourselves, which
we approach step by step; nor is it wholly internal and subjective. Rather,
it is something that comes into being within us, by which we are related
to totality. This totality is neither purely internal nor purely external,
but contains both. As you say, we are in it. And through truth it is in us.
In a moment of creative understanding, we are truth, and when we are
confused, we are false, and even more, we are falsity itself, insofar as
we accept and identify ourselves with a process that is false.
We then come to the problem of contingency. This arises because
there are many fields of abstraction, different subjects, different moments,
etc. These fields have, as I explained in my previous letter, a certain
independence, such that one does not completely determine the other.
Thus, given what is in one field, developments in another field are
contingent. But because fields are not in general absolutely unrelated
(except in the case of random relationships), the lack of determination
of field B by field A will reflect back as a lack of determination of A by
itself. For in some ways, A depends on B, and B is in some ways
independent of A. We therefore must have contingency in each field.
Notice that I am not saying that any given event is pure chance. I am
saying first of all, that the existence of fields of abstraction is characteristic

Truth and Understanding
163
of nature’s structure and order. The partial and relative dependence and
independence of these fields is also characteristic of nature. Therefore, in
each field, there must be contingency and chance. What is chance in one
field may be necessary in a broader field and vice versa. But all thought
functions in fields. Therefore, we will never get rid of chance and
contingency in our thought. But this is not purely the result of our own
way of thinking. For this way of thinking is based on the existence of
fields of abstraction in nature (what you call “natural” abstractions). There
is genuine contingency, insofar as functioning in fields is valid.
Moreover, I further claim that necessity is neither more nor less real
than contingency. For necessity also operates in some field. Thus, you
can say that in a certain field, a given development is necessary. But in
general, you find that each field is related to a whole set of broader
fields, having a certain independence and dependence. In physics, this
is very clear. Thus, if you have a gas, consisting of many molecules in
random motions (in relation to the large-scale level), then it is quite
necessary that if you open a valve, the gas will flow out (if it is under
pressure, of course). If you analyse this process in a broader field
including the micro-level as well as the macro-level, you will see that
this necessary regular behaviour is the result of what are, in this broader
field, a host of accidents (e.g., collisions, movements of particular
molecules to and fro, etc.). Similarly, the regular functioning of a city
with regard to traffic, food supply, etc., depends on the co-operation of
myriads of plans, aims and desires of individual people, none of which
is very directly related to the overall traffic pattern.
The fact that necessity dissolves into accident and chance in a broader
field is crucial to the possibility of freedom. For every chain of necessity,
however iron-bound it may seem, is seen in a suitably broad field, to be
full of holes, dependent on accidents, etc. Therefore, if we understand
necessity deeply enough, we can always escape it or modify it. This is
an important idea, a sort of extension of what you are driving at in
Structurist art. For nature as understood by man is different from nature
not thus understood. Causality operates in an iron-bound way only to
those who do not understand it. In this regard, human nature being
part of the totality must understand itself as well as external nature.
Thus, again the relationship is reminiscent of what you say about
Structurist art. Human nature is not just a reflection or a mimesis of
external nature, it has a concrete existence in its own right. But it must
also abstract the totality, including itself, if it is not to be petty, trivial,
fragmented, disintegrated and confused.

164
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
Of course, you might say that each event is determined necessarily
in a complete totality. But this would be trivial. For to give the complete
totality, you would have to give each event, so that the determination
of that event wouldn’t add very much to it. Rather, necessity and
determination have real content, only insofar as they operate within
fields of abstraction. And it is an essential aspect of nature structure
that this type of necessity-contingency actually does operate in every
such field of abstraction, even in those that are “natural”.
So it seems to me that the process of contingentation-necessitation
that we see in art corresponds, in its own way, to relationships that exist
in nature structure. We do not introduce contingency into nature. If we
consider nature without us, this is an abstract field, which therefore
necessarily has contingency in it. For this field depends on what is left
out, which is in this case, just ourselves. But such an abstractability into
“natural” fields, each having contingency, characterizes nature in every
aspect. Contingency is an essential part of the true relationships in nature
structure (being in this regard neither more nor less essential than
necessity).
Now, the meaning of contradiction is this: each partial field will
have contradiction, if it is taken to stand by itself. Reality is the implicit.
It is that which produces these abstractions, these partial fields, these
projections. It is a totality that cannot be put into separate words or
fields. But the meaning in its totality can come into being in each person,
just as the meaning of a musical composition does, even though the
separate notes do not mean much. Here, Korzybski’s idea of multi-
ordinal terms is relevant. For each word has many possible meanings
(even an infinity of them) and the actual contribution that it makes is
determined only in the light of the total idea. Nevertheless, each word
is in some way limited in its meaning, or else it could be freely exchanged
with any other word. In some essential respect, each word is at least
relatively fixed to a certain range of meanings. By “meaning”, I wish to
suggest a certain function in the totality of the process of thought and
communication, at least during a certain moment, or during a certain
period of time.
Of course, the world is not words or thought. And as you say, we
have to understand the way in which it can be abstracted, by a process
of structural correspondence, into words and thoughts, which latter are
part of reality. I think that we have to understand the true meaning of
“sameness” or “identity” if we want to do this. Identity in the simple
sense of absolute sameness doesn’t exist. Yet, it has a real meaning, and

Truth and Understanding
165
plays an essential part in the function by which reality can be abstracted
into words and thought. If one doesn’t understand the real meaning of
identity, one will come to contradiction, and eventually this will lead to
conflict in perception, thought, feeling and action.
The letter turned out to be longer than I thought, but as you say,
this is a key problem which we must get clear. I am waiting with great
interest to hear what you have to say with regard to these three letters.
Very sincerely yours,
David Bohm
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
December 30, 1961
Dear Mr Biederman:
I would like to supplement yesterday’s letter, as I have been thinking
a bit since I sent it off and have had a few more ideas. (The vacation is
now coming to an end, so I probably won’t write much more for a
while.)
What I am thinking about is the problem of “terms” in language
again, with the question of what is the meaning of identity.
You suggest in your letter of May 29, 1961, that we should begin
with undefined terms and not with definite terms. With this suggestion,
I am in general agreement. Yet there is the problem of why you can use
any terms at all, defined or undefined. Consider, for example, your
suggestion of such a treatment for words like reality, democracy, science,
art, socialism, atom, nature, quantum, etc. Thus, there are many cases
in which we use the word democracy, which we represent by D1, D2,
D3, D4, etc. Another word is fascism (F1, F2, F3, F4, etc.). We cannot
correctly put, for example, F3 in place of D3. No matter how the situation
changes, there is some essential respect in which democracy remains
itself, even if we can’t exhaustively define what it is. I propose to treat
this problem by saying that with regard to the essential meaning of the
term “democracy”, the difference between D1 D2, D3, D4, is not
significant, at least compared with the differences between democracy
and fascism, or for that matter, between democracy and atomism,
democracy and quantum, etc.

166
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
As I said in earlier letters, I think that the definition of such terms is
only by implication. The explicit statements that we make are only
abstractions or projections, and the real meaning is that implicit process
which has these abstractions or projections. The word is always changing
its meaning as we use it. We both agree on this. Yet, I think that in some
sense, we understand or appreciate a concept in its totality, before we
appreciate its detailed meaning. By totality, I also mean the essential
process, which cannot be explicitly defined, but which can be perceived
from one instance to another, just as one can perceive that the differences
between D1, D2, D3, are inessential to the basic (implicit) meaning of
democracy.
So I think that the notion of identity as a relationship of difference
by the nullity of a certain field, or by what is inessential in a certain
“natural” kind of abstraction, makes an important contribution here to
clarifying what Korzybski was trying to express.
Your suggestion of “similarity”, for this purpose is, I think, not
adequate (as I indicated in earlier letters). For the idea is too vague.
Thus, everything is similar to everything else, as well as different.
Redness is similar to blueness in being a colour, it is different in being
another colour. Redness is similar to itself, yet, as we agree, each instance
of redness is different from another. Democracy is similar to fascism in
being a form of government and it is different in other obvious respects.
Democracy is similar to atomism in that both have a philosophical
content. So as you see, any two things are both similar and different.
Yet certain things have the right to be labelled in a given sequence D1,
D2, D3, etc. while others are put into another sequence F1, F2, F3, and
C1, C2, C3 (Communism 1 for Russia, Communism 2 for China,
Communism 3 for Albania, etc.).
Now the main point here is that with regard to a certain “natural”
field of abstraction, certain differences are essential, while others are
inessential. In other words, similarity by itself (as well as difference) is
not a very significant idea, unless one includes also the respect in which
two things are similar (or different). And this respect can be trivial or
essential. So one must include the idea of essential similarity and trivial
similarities. By the time you go thus far, you will have to bring in
effectively the idea of two things being the same in certain respects,
then differences being the nullity of a certain field of abstraction. (Trivial
differences being differences by nullity in such a field.)
This raises an important question. Is a respect similar to itself or
different? For example, if redness is similar to blueness in the respect of

Truth and Understanding
167
being a colour, is this respect identical with itself? The answer is, of
course, “Yes and no.” For each instance of colour is different. Yet these
differences are in the nullity of a certain field, so that the respect of
colour is, in this sense, similar to itself. This shows up clearly the problem
that is in all language. I think the solution lies, as you suggest, in
recognizing that all terms are undefined, along with what I suggest,
that their meaning is implicit. However, I feel that thus far, you haven’t
paid enough attention to understanding the meaning of what is usually
called “identity”. I admit it isn’t really identity, but I think there is an
important problem here, not adequately dealt with by Korzybski’s system
of labels (D1 D2,…).
Perhaps an important source of misunderstanding between us is in
the question of whether as you say in your letter, under certain
circumstances, differences appear not to affect a particular observation
of structure. I think it is not just a question of appearances but of actuality.
For in a certain “natural” field of abstraction, their differences actually
do not have any effect. In other words, I think that besides “thresholds
of perception”, there are natural, real, objective relationships between
different fields, such that certain happenings in one field have effects
which are below the threshold of another field, or which for some other
reason do not function in the other field.
Coming back to the implicit meaning of all fundamental terms, I would
like to add that a certain part of the whole set of relationships of terms
can be made explicit. For example, even though a term like democracy
cannot be fully defined explicitly, it appears to represent some kind of
totality, in the sense that there is a “natural” field of abstraction, in which
it can be perceived that the differences between D1 D2, D3, etc. are
inessential to the basic relationships which make democracy what it is. In
this connection, we must ask ourselves what leads us to bring in a term
such as democracy in the first place. It seems to me that we feel (at least
intuitively) that there is a certain total process here which really does
define itself and distinguish itself, in the sense that I have just described.
For example, we would not put the term “fly-speck” in the same category
as democracy. Have you ever asked yourself “Why not?”
With regard to the definition of terms, I don’t remember whether I
said in earlier letters that whereas all definition is implicit, we can
nevertheless explain or explicate (i.e., make explicit) certain limited aspects
of the implicit meaning of any term. One does this in order to establish a
few salient points, with the purpose of setting up in the mind of another

168
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
person essentially the same process as in one’s own (i.e., the differences
must be in the nullity of a “natural” field, defined by the problem itself).
There is evidently much that is not yet clear in this question of
language. But I agree with you that we must try to clear it up. I have
tried to answer directly your responses to my views, as you requested.
The answer has been lengthy, partly because the problem is complex,
and partly because my expression is unwieldy, because I am still
developing my ideas on the subject. Now I await your further responses
to my responses with very great interest.
Best regards,
David Bohm
P.S. One more point about the relationships of mathematics, music and
art. You ask why mathematics has not been helpful in composing music.
My answer (in previous letters) was that you cannot calculate the creative
process (you might equally well ask why mathematics cannot be used
in the very process of inventing new kinds of mathematics). You also
ask why those who do not compose music are interested in applying
mathematics to the art. I really don’t know, but perhaps it is an effort to
find a substitute for the ability to compose music. In other words, they
enjoy music, appreciate it, but are for one reason or another not capable
of creative activity in this field. Mathematics seems to provide some
control over the field, without the need for this kind of creativity. Perhaps
similarly with regard to art. If this is the case, then these people are
fooling themselves. In other words, while it would of course be useful
and interesting from many points of view to study mathematical
relationships in art, music, and even in the foundations of mathematics
itself (which are called “meta-mathematics”), such a study is no substitute
for actual creative work in these respective fields.
Your discussion of your own experience in the creative act is very
interesting, and I hope to say quite a bit more about this in another
letter. “Maintaining verbal silence”, “putting aside all I know”,
“experience of totality”, not as knowing it, but as being it. All that
suggests that we have to get out of the level of purely verbal
abstractions. And certainly, we must bring in pre-verbal experience,
as you suggest. Even mathematicians find themselves doing this, as
one can see from mathematical terminology, which is often quite
picturesque. Thus, there are singular functions which “flow up”, “act
wildly”, “pathologically”, etc.

Truth and Understanding
169
But perhaps there is even more to it than this. For there is the
experience of understanding and truth, which evidently can never be
fully referred to any other kind of experience at all. (I think that this is
the basic characteristic that is needed for intelligence.) Such an experience
contains thought, feeling, pre-verbal experience, impulse to action, and
all the rest. But it is more than any of these or all of them put together.
For it is the integrated totality of inner and outer that comes into being
from moment to moment. This totality is a process that generates all
these other aspects as sides in their proper relationships, but in its aspect
of being a concrete unique totality in a given moment of existence,
nothing else can explain it or take its place. Rather, all explanations
start from the presupposition (implicit) of such an understanding. If
you once understand something in its truth as the implicit, then you
can later explain what you understand (make it explicit). But if you
don’t understand, you can’t explain, and no amount of explanation
will substitute for understanding. Indeed, the purpose of explanation is
generally to communicate your understanding to someone else, but in
so doing, you will develop it, see it in a new light, criticize it, etc., and
eventually, you will see it in the light of someone else’s understanding.
Now, a few words on contradiction again. I think we agree that
contradiction will arise wherever we try to use terms in a well-defined
way. For example, consider the words “similar” and “different”. Both
of these are names for relationships. They are similar relationships in
many respects. Both relationships apply to everything. Everything is
similar to everything including itself, and it also differs from everything
including itself. Thus, they are similar in the respect of being a certain
kind of relationship. But they are different in precisely the same respect.
Indeed, even the use of different words indicates that we mean them to
be different. And this difference is not trivial, but essential (for the
difference between similarity and difference is evidently very
fundamental to our understanding of anything whatsoever).
Nevertheless, you will find that in the same statement, in the same
breath, you must assert their similarity and difference in the same respect.
This is a contradiction. And a “similar” contradiction arises whenever
we try to define our terms.
We agree that reality is not contradictory, because it is not any kind
of words or thoughts at all. But you ask whether it is necessary for the
contradiction to arise in our thought and language, in our effort to
abstract reality verbally and conceptually. I think we both agree that
there is a way out, if we recognize that separate concepts and words

170
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
must not be too sharply defined. The meaning is in the totality of what
is said, so that when we try to localize it in single statements, we distort
it, and come to contradictions within each statement and between
statements. The notion of many meanings to a term (T1, T2, T3, etc.)
helps in this, but then there is the deeper question of how one kind of
term, T, splits itself off, in a “natural” way, from another kind of term,
S. I have made some suggestions about this, and would appreciate your
ideas on this point. But I would like to think of meaning as containing
a total structure, including various kinds of abstractions, which in some
way reflect the total structure. Certain kinds of abstractions yield a
“true” reflection and others a “false” or distorted reflection. This point
needs more careful study too.
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
February 24, 1962
Dear Bohm:
Your last two letters seem to have moved me more toward your
point regarding the implicit character of what you call identity, but
without being able to label this with the term identity. Granted that the
term “democracy,” for instance, always calls up a quality of implicit
meaning which is automatically, silently assumed by many, not all, and
that from this implicit base each individual proceeds to generate
abstractions about democracy, identity exists only when the individual
deliberately or subconsciously identifies. This identification can only
exist as a verbalism, what AK [Alfred Korzybski] called word-noise,
having no basis in actuality.
When identification is avoided, the implicity of the term democracy
is constantly changing for the individual. If this were not so, the
abstractions generated from the use of the term would remain generally
similar to previous utterances of the particular individual. Identification
tends to congeal the implicit aspect into the confines of some absolute.
This brings us to what I consider the fundamental nature of the problem
you bring up, namely, that the implicity of the term contains our basic
assumptions about our notion of actual democracy. It is from this silent or
conscious assumption from which we prescribe the area of our abstractions
about democracy. For instance, my basic assumption would exclude

Truth and Understanding
171
from the legitimate area of abstractions, that well-known label used in
China, “the people’s democracy.”
Anyway, the “implicit process,” it seems to me, is more precisely
labeled as the assumptive process which, if we respond to the flow of
new facts in experience, is being modified and so our abstractions are
being modified too. Because of the crucial necessity of this general
process of experience and language, all connotations of identity are
harmful and frustrate the multi-ordinal attitude. Subscripts, incidentally,
would include time-place, D1962, D400BC, etc., in order to differentiate
between the changing notions of a particular individual, or the changing
notions evidenced in historical persons, and the like. Agreeing with
you that the implicity of key terms can be explicated, I would say it was
the basic assumption they contain that gives substance to their
explication.
True, the moment I say to you, “I want to speak about democracy,”
at once you are aware of a totality out of which I am presumably going
to speak, even though you are not aware of my basic assumption. What
takes place here? First of all, you assume the term will be used as it is
currently expressed in the dictionary. For this reason we would not use
the term “fly-speck” in the same sense as democracy. There is general
agreement to at least use as our starting-point language labels agreed
upon by general usage. Hence, the dictionary serves as a verbal
convenience. If now I follow my above opening sentence with
expressions of approval for the “people’s democracy” of China, we
have left the realm of the dictionary, and are now on our own confronted
with our respective basic assumptions about democracy.
If our language process is to seek a structure corresponding to the
known structure of nature, which structure does not display identity,
not even in its simplest bilateral symmetries, it follows that identity
does not exist except in mere words. The necessity of the term similarity
then becomes evident. It implies the rejection of sameness (identity), it
implies that important differences are to be expected. This is especially
important in a field where seemingly similar basic assumptions may
occur. One also avoids contradictions, that is, referring to “the meaning
of what is usually called ‘identity’,” and then having to add that “it isn’t
really identity.” (How do you resolve this contradiction, or is it that
you have and I have missed it?) It seems to me meanwhile, that however
thin you slice the notion of identity with quotes, it has only the verbal
function of frustrating the actualities of process orientation. Identity is
the sort of verbalism that compels a racist to concentrate attention on

172
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
the poor or criminal Negro, pretending Negroes of accomplishment do
not exist. The former readily feeds his static, elementalistic basic
assumption of the identification of what Negro is, the latter frustrates
the identification activity.
I agree with your criticisms of my term “appear,” regarding situations
where differences appear not to effect particular structural observations.
While agreeing to all you say, I would still prefer the term “appear” for
two reasons. One appears in the latter part of the paragraph where the
above appears in an earlier letter, namely, that one remains conscious
of the areas of nature that nevertheless surround the particular threshold
under consideration. Example: imagine what a tremendously different
cultural milieu we would each have to live in and to live from, if all
artists kept science (taught to them by competent scientists), in the
background of all their abstractions within the threshold of art, and if
scientists did likewise with art. It would be the biggest revolution ever
in the whole history of man. Second, much like the first, by responding
in terms of “appears,” rather than in terms of “do not have any effect,”
is to adopt an attitude of tentativeness in place of finality expressions,
thus remaining psychologically open to the revisions that will certainly
appear, sooner or later.
Your remarks on mathematics, art and music are very interesting.
They suggest that you are on the track of discovering means whereby
the extant confusion over these issues can be clarified. Would I be
correctly following your line of thought, if I said that mathematics cannot
be the means to creation in mathematics, art or music, because it is
only a particular subject for creation? Your explanation of why
mathematicians may apply mathematics to music—substituting the
control of mathematics for want of the control of creation (you do not
put it so, but that seems to be implied)—as similar to the effort of those
who apply mathematics to art, corresponds to my own impressions.
(By now I have seen this happen to a number of artists in the new
direction, including those who display no evidence of having a true
regard for mathematics. It serves merely as a lifebelt.) Is not this why a
work of art mathematically determined exudes a sterility? Important
too, in art the eye does not see mathematically, not even in the more
simple, more gross metrics of arithmetic. It is quite possible that this act
of vision can be accounted for mathematically, especially given the
precise character of the new art direction. But when this is discovered,
will it help any more than all the mathematics that has been applied to
explicate the music of Beethoven? Still, who would have thought, until

Truth and Understanding
173
men like Alberti and Leonardo did it, that the human image could be
accounted for with the tools of geometry and mathematics? In this
connection, however, artists eventually ceased to literally apply the laws
of perspective, regarding them only as a background while depending
on their vision. Are you familiar with William H.George, The Scientist in
Action? He sees the work of mathematics continued by the method of
“patterning,” as in crystallography, which he regards as closer to the
method of the artist.
I find your discussion apropos the creative act very good. Certainly
without the integration into totality of both inner and outer, creation
can only be confused and fragmentary, if not pathological. Would you
agree that it is not that anyone escapes some totality orientation, but
that given the tricks of language coupled with the ignorance of language
as mere verbalism, it becomes possible to conjure totality largely based
on verbalism which has a fragmentary, narrowing effect upon experience
and action?
About the contradictory relations you establish between the use of
the terms “similar” and “different.” True, both are names for relations,
both imply similar relations in many respects. But I would also add,
different relations are also implied. Everything is similar to everything
else, in the context of process structure, but not (identity) including
itself (an object, particle). The latter is always becoming different to
what it was (itself) while remaining similar to everything else. Hence,
the relations of similarity are structurally limited, while relations of
differences are structurally unlimited, in this context. It does not then
follow that you must “assert their similarity and difference in the some
respect,” in all cases. The above replies to your Dec. 30; what follows is
to your Dec. 29.
Your discussion of fields is helpful to me, I must think more in this
way. You lead this discussion into Structurist art as an example, and
then ask if what you say expressed my views. Yes, particularly on what
you say about S.A. directly, I would not discriminate mimetic art as
“just a mimesis,” as “only the content of what is reflected.” If the
Structurist direction establishes a deeper relation of art to nature, it
does not achieve a substitute for mimetic art, or cancel but its usefulness.
Mimeticism is a unique form of visual experience that is far from
exhausted. Thus it has naturally happened that it not only continues,
but continues an evolution as that can be done, meaning camera art in
all its forms.

174
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
The great mimetic artists of the past remain unique in our experience,
perhaps in the same way that you receive certain experiences in regarding
the achievements of a Newton. But most important, the past artists
were not, because they could not be, “just” mimetic. They did not
depict “only” or depend only on the content, in the sense that they
immersed the human being into a literal embrace with nature. They
did not merely reflect nature, their art reflects the meeting of man with
nature, and that alters everything, gives it meaning which would be
absent if mere reflection was involved. True, as art evolved, the capacity
to reflect nature evolved, but this was always the occasion for a new
and deeper meeting of man with nature. The fact that the genuine
mimetic artist of today uses a camera (machine), means that the art
medium has been perfected, as has been the case in the past, in order to
continue the evolution that has taken place in the past, again to new
experiences. Many mistakenly believe that the camera represents the
end of this road —far from it, it is a new beginning. From this view the
art of mimesis can be seen as a particular part of the “process of reflection
itself,” a unique part.
Mimetic abstractions, by the way, also remain as a limited case of
the Structurist artists’ more extensive mode of abstraction. If Structurism
creates art entities such as have not and could not exist in nature without
man to create them, well this could be as well said of all past art. So
where is it unique? In that it does not, in any way, reflect what nature
has created. Rather, it is a direct reflection of the total creative process of
nature. Consequently, entirely unique events arise with this form of art
in its amalgamation of man with nature, something “in its own right,”
as you well put it. So the differences between past and present forms of
art lie in the different fields of nature reflection, from which each form
of art originates and is generated.
Your remarks on the concrete and abstract are very interesting, and
I wish you had said more about it. Your notion of the abstract as an
aspect of the concrete, therefore a “concrete abstraction,” is suggestive
as a way to consider pre-verbal or sensory abstractions. Could not one
say, that all pre-verbal abstractions fall in a certain order of degrees of
concreteness? You will have noticed in my articles, that I speak of S.A.
as not representative of anything else, that it is only itself, and like
expressions. Your terminology seems to suggest the possibility of
speaking about this with more coherence. But the point is, that it is not
unique in being derived from concrete abstractions, for these are present
also in the making of mimetic art, but rather the point is the one you

Truth and Understanding
175
finally make, that it is “an aspect of concrete reality in its own right.”
Structurist art is as concrete as anything in nature, as unique as the
things of nature. Not only because it possesses all the structural attributes
of natural reality, but also because it derives its reason-for-being from
the very source of that concrete reality, nature as fundamentally a creative
process. Structurist art introduces a new field of the concrete in nature.
Until my discussions with you on the subject, I had not thought
about nature as reflected like in a mirror (except in the case of mimetic
art), in terms of nature’s process itself. It is a valuable way to look at it
for, after all, this is just the way I look at it, and the language gets a little
closer to the actuality experience. We, however, who are in the
transitional period from the old to the new have, I think, the big problem
of not carrying over habits of reflection cultivated by the old vision of
nature. I never fail to be amused, I sometimes have to laugh outright,
when I catch myself rejecting or ignoring some visual aspect of the new
reflection of nature or art, due to perceptive habits of the old reflection.
Your discussion on the problem of “understanding” in relation to
the true and the false, is certainly to the point and illuminates the
problems. In the end it is a question of the amalgamation of the self
with totality, as Cézanne might have expressed it.
While agreeing with your observations on contingency and
necessitation, their changing roles according to the field or fields
considered, still I have difficulty in following that part of your
argument establishing contingency in nature. No doubt you have
expressed some thoughts there that I missed. If you as a human
regard contingency as ever present in all your abstractions from
nature, how do you know you are not projecting contingency upon
nature, rather than reflecting it?
It is beyond my comprehension that scientists, having attained a
very precise relation of their concerns with nature, beyond that in any
other fields, will yet be content to place at the very depths of their
penetration of nature the very opposite quality of precision, namely a
randomness. As I said in earlier letters, how does one recognize
randomness in nature, how does one know that it is not a projection
upon nature?
When you note that any field will incur contradictions when it
attempts to stand by itself, I immediately think about art and science.
What holds true of any human field in relation to the totality of nature,
is just as true for all human fields in relation to each other.

176
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
I look forward to your next letter in which I hope you will continue
to have occasion to state your reactions to S.A. Those you have made
so far interested me very much.
My best regards,
Charles Biederman
 

V 


 BEYOND THE
SUBJECT-OBJECT
DISTINCTION
 
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
February 2, 1962
Dear Mr Biederman;
I have received your letter of Jan. 25, and by now, I hope that you
have received all my letters. I await your reply when you have the time,
with great interest.
In your reply, I hope that you will take into account my remarks on the
problem of understanding, as I regard the problem as central to all the
issues that you raised. Roughly speaking, I think that the mind functions in
two ways. The first of these is associative thinking plus the drawing of
conclusions by logical arguments and calculations. In other words, on the
basis of many experiences, we learn to associate certain things together
habitually, thus forming a concept. This usually happens unconsciously
(i.e., without conscious awareness that we are doing it) though it could also
be conscious process in special cases. From such associative thinking come
the premises from which we draw our logical conclusions, and on the basis
of which we make our calculations and plans. In physics, this could be
compared with observing many circles, measuring them up, finding
approximate empirical formulae such as the one for the ratio of circumference
to diameter, calculating on the basis of these formulae, etc.. etc.

180
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
The other mode of functioning of the mind is understanding. As I
said in my earlier letters, this is roughly the perception of totality, in the
sense that the parts are no longer regarded as separate things to be put
together by associative relationships. Indeed, the totality has a law, and
from this law all parts are generated, in a natural way, and in their
proper relationships. The example I gave was developing a geometrical
theory of the circle. When this is explained, then the hearer suddenly
says “I see”, meaning “I understand”—and this happens in a “flash” or
a “click”. He no longer associates the circumference to the diameter in
a certain approximate ratio, but he now sees both circle and diameter
as sides of a totality of geometrical objects, generated by the law of the
totality, in their proper relationships (e.g., the circle is generated by a
point moving equidistant from a fixed point, and the line by a segment
moving in its own direction).
It seems clear to me that all questions concerning human experience
can make sense only in the light of understanding. Understanding is
itself an undefinable. For if I try to define it, then at the end I can ask
“Have you understood?” thus showing that you already understood
before I started. Indeed, if a person could not understand this, then he
would be worse than an idiot, and could hardly be called a human
being. The best that can be done is to make explicit a few aspects of
understanding.
With regard to experience, this certainly exists on many levels (i.e.,
verbal, pre-verbal, etc.). But without understanding, each experience is
only a fragment. Understanding is the process of coming into being of
a totality, in which all is comprehended as a side or aspect of this process
of totality. On the other hand, associative thinking is always fragmentary
and self-contradictory. We could not hope fully to “verbalize” the action
of understanding, any more than talk about light could fully verbalize
all that we experience when we see light. However, we may hope that
proper use of words can help initiate the action of understanding in the
mind of another.
Best regards,
David Bohm

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
181
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
February 9, 1962
Dear Biederman:
This is just to let you know that I received your long letter, which I
hope to answer in detail when I have enough time to give it the attention
it deserves. Meanwhile I hope that you received my other two letters,
plus the short letter that I sent you last week.
Right now, I only want to say a few things about the question of
“similarity”. As I indicated in earlier letters, I do not regard this as an
adequate or clear notion, because in some ways, everything is similar
to everything else. But how is democracy similar to itself in an essential
way, whereas its similarity to fascism, to atomism, etc., is trivial and
inessential? In other words, it is necessary to face the question of why
certain concepts in Korzybski’s scheme are always given the same letter,
even though the numerical subscript varies from one case to the other.
For example, with democracy, why do we write D1 D2, D3, etc., and not
D1 D2, F3, D4, etc., where F is fascism?
I think that this question is a very deep one, and not very easy to
solve. First of all, one has to go beyond the opposition of the similar
and the dissimilar. Just as there is a sense in which we can understand
the totality of circles (as I explained in other letters), so there is a sense
in which we can grasp democracy in its totality. This doesn’t mean to
know all possible details, but rather the essential process that must take
place for the generation of a circle, for the generation of democracy,
etc. Insofar as we fail to be able to do this, we have not understood the
concept of democracy, of circularity, etc. (By generation, I also mean
maintenance, and the conditions under which the thing fails to be
generated as well.) To the extent that we fail to understand our basic
concepts as totalities, our thinking becomes confused and self-
contradictory.
I admit that this idea of totality is not yet very clear, but I think it
must be clarified if we are to make further progress on these questions.
It is clear that the simple idea of identity is false. The idea of totality
takes into account the eternal change, the eternally different character
of everything. Yet, in some sense, things may be examples of given
totalities. I can give you an example in terms of our own feelings.

182
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
Although each example of anger is always different and changing, isn’t
there a totality of the process of anger, which is distinct from, and
incompatible with, the process of understanding?
Warmest regards,
David Bohm
3 Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
March 17, 1962
Dear Biederman:
I have just received the second of your two letters, along with the
article by you containing the discussion on Structurism, for which I
thank you. Meanwhile, I hope that you have received the copy of the
article on “Truth and Understanding in Science” that I have sent you a
few weeks ago by surface mail.
Your discussion was very interesting to me. It did not change any of
the ideas fundamentally that I had gotten from my correspondence
with you, but it was illuminating, and gave me a more rounded view of
the problem. The photographs of your work were very helpful. While
they didn’t give me a good idea of what the geometrical relationships
are, they did show that you are using very beautiful colours. I think
that it is urgent that Structurist art should use rich, glowing, and “living”
colours, as these help give the feeling of an “inner” principle that causes
the work to come into being, as it were, out of a force or energy of its
own. In other words, it must not appear to be contrived and arranged
from an outside pattern by the artist.
When you say that even in mimetic art, the content is not just imposed
from the outside (i.e., nature), but is also the artist’s meeting with nature,
you are stating an important truth. However, this leads one to ask you
how you can be so absolutely sure that from now on, photography will
be the main way to pursue this line of development. The naive outsider
to art tends to wonder whether it is not still possible for the artist to
meet nature in new ways, which don’t go all the way to Structurism,
and which don’t give up mimesis altogether. Of course, your analysis
has shown that from Mondrian on through Cubism, Picasso, etc., these
efforts have broken down and led to chaos. This is certainly an important

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
183
item of evidence. Yet (both in art and in science), there is always the
unexpected. The evidence is never enough to determine the future
completely, even in its essential outlines.
So I can see that you are engaged in an important experiment, i.e.,
to continue the line of development from Monet to Mondrian. You
want art to create something new, “existing in its own right”, in which
mimesis plays no significant part. That is to say, you want the work of
art to develop and unfold its own content, without the help of associations
to the results of nature’s creative process. Rather, it must reflect the
creativity in the total process of the world, which includes man as well
as nature. That is to say, man is creative in his existence, and reflects
nature’s creative process too, in his own way, while adding something
that belongs to himself alone. Structurist art is then not just a reflection
of nature nor even of man’s meeting with nature. Rather it should be a
unique form of reality in itself, including a reflection both of nature’s
creative process and of man’s peculiar and unique contribution to this
process, but also including still more—namely—itself. But then, every
creative process adds something new belonging to itself alone. So the
distinction of Structurism is that it contains in it the principle that in
man’s relationship to nature, he can bring new possibilities that are
seen and realized by him. Yet, these possibilities shall reflect nature’s
overall creative process (since the whole of the process is always reflecting
into all of its parts and aspects.)
With regard to mathematics and art, I agree with you that the artist
should understand mathematics well, and that the scientist (and
mathematician) should similarly understand art (and that all must
understand music too, of course). There is something of art in science,
without a doubt. Whenever a deep scientific or mathematical problem
is involved, we have to do with a vision of totality, which inevitably has
“beauty”, “elegance” in it, in the sense that a deep truth cannot fail to
be beautiful, as well as elegant in its pattern and structure. All scientists
who have done fundamental work have recognized the great significance
of beauty. Moreover, the moment of artistic creation is in many ways
similar to that of scientific and mathematical creation. And in art, every
beautiful work must be “true” in a certain sense to the creative
possibilities of the artist and his medium. In both fields, there can be
false appearance of beauty, a “glossy” show that doesn’t stand up to
deeper understanding. In both fields, what was true to a given stage of
development can be false in the next. In both fields, there can be
pedestrian work, which is routine and “time saving” aimed more at

184
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
personal advancement and limited results than at truth and beauty. In
both fields, real creativity means putting one’s whole being into it, with
“all one’s head, all one’s spirit, and all one’s might” (this quotes an ancient
Hebrew prayer, but it seems relevant here). In other words, to express
totality in your creation, you must be a totality, and not mixed or half-
hearted in your motives. Yet, the scientist must also have absorbed into
him the large-scale vision of art as well as of mathematics. He comes to
his problem with knowledge and with certain instruments, but he must
be ready, if necessary, to set it all aside, in favour of something new, if
experience shows that there is something false in his starting point. The
new vision must then show just how and why the old one was false, and
it must contain the truth in the old one. Similarly, it seems to me that the
artist could profit by understanding and experi-menting with the
mathematician’s concept of space (although in his final creative moment,
this will be only in the background, and would have to be denied and
falsified, at least in part). I think that in a similar way, the scientist must
understand his own level of experience better, because:
1
All of his data finally come from perceptions and abstractions at
this level.
2
His concepts and ways of thinking are subtly influenced by all of
this experience.
3
So therefore, both in order to suggest new ideas and to see how he
is being unconsciously conditioned by all of his experience, he should
understand how the artist is seeing this level of experience.
For example, a better understanding of art would give a scientist a
new slant on space, connectedness, relationship, contingency and
necessity, totality, etc.; and a better understanding of music could give
a similar slant on time process; for example, on how rhythm,
counterpoint, etc., combine together to form new wholes. In both these
cases, something similar might happen in physics. (But it would be
different too, of course.) So there could perhaps be a creative interchange
between art, science, math and music, in which each would remain
itself, and yet notice the way in which it is also all the others too. But
here, the essential point is that in creativity, a pre-given pattern is never
what is relevant. Rather, it is an understanding of totality, in which
something new emerges. So it would be wrong for the scientist to impose
the artistic pattern on his work, as for the artist to impose the
mathematician’s conception of space in his work, etc.

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
185
Now, I shall go on to some of the questions raised in your letter Feb.
24 (leaving till a later letter the answer to yours of Jan. 18). Let us then
begin with the question of meanings of abstractions. Thus, we have the
series for democracy, D1 D2, D3, etc. And as you say, why don’t we
include “people’s democracy” in this series? You are quite right to point
out that each person starts from an implicit totality of meaning. This
totality may change from moment to moment, but at each moment, it
is a totality, including a very large set of potentialities, as well as the
actual cases that are uppermost in the mind of the man concerned at
the moment in question. In other words, the term “democracy” calls
forth a multi-dimensional structure, with many potentialities, all
interwoven into a whole, along with a certain known history, etc. You
have called this the basic assumption of the person in question about
democracy. I would prefer to call it the basic principle of structure and
operation, which is what weaves the potentialities into one whole, and
which even more, actually generates the potentialities as sides or aspects
of the totality in question, all automatically related by being thus woven
together.
Let me illustrate this idea. Most people who use the term “democracy”
imply that, in some sense, democracy is superior to other forms of
government (e.g., to benevolent despotism). In what way is it superior?
Of course, there are superficial superiorities. You cannot trust any despot,
and even if he has good intentions, he can be wrong. In a democracy,
there is a chance for checking and criticizing such mistakes. But even
the people as a whole can be wrong, so that there is no secure guarantee
against mistakes. The really essential point is in fact much deeper than
this. It is that if the people as a whole cannot find a way to work together
freely and creatively, this means that they are childish and immature;
so that their potentialities are not being realized. Even if you could
assume an indefinite succession of very wise and benevolent despots
(which we know is impossible), this would mean that people would be
restricted to remaining like little children, taking no part in helping to
make their own fate. There is a time to be a child, but then, there is a
time to grow up.
So democracy is not only the proper aim of humanity, intrinsic to
our real potentialities, but also, it is the proper means to develop them.
(Only by actually trying to work together freely can we learn what this
kind of work really means.) Here, we part company with the
Communists, who agree that democracy is the real end of current social
development, but who regard benevolent dictatorship (of the Party) as

186
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
the appropriate means (at least for the present). And we are even further
from fascists, etc., who regard human beings as incapable of anything
but being ruled by special individuals or groups who are recognized to
be of “superior” qualities.
It is in the light of this basic principle that current ideas on democracy
are woven into a totality. Of course, the principle must itself change
and develop; and in time, the very idea of an organized system of
government may lose its relevance. But for the present, this is very
dimly visible in the distant horizon only.
Moreover, the problem of applying these principles leads to endless
further developments, even in the present. Consider the fascist and
racist point of view. As you point out, this is closely bound up with
“identity thinking”, which fixes an association of qualities as permanent
and inherent. Thus, the racist sees that Negroes are often uneducated,
disorderly, etc., and he thinks that the quality of a black skin is tied to
a basic quality or principle of being. But how do we see the falsity of
this point of view? The answer is that we have enough experience to
show that the basic principle is not the colour of the skin, but rather,
humanity as a whole. Each of us, raised as the Negro was raised,
evidently has the potentiality to act as he has done; while any Negro,
raised otherwise, has the potentiality to be different. So the colour of
the skin is irrelevant. The basic principle is humanity itself, and its
essence is understanding, the perception of truth, and love. To attribute
to the Negro a less than human character is to deny truth, understanding
and love in oneself and thus to make oneself less than human. And indeed,
even some of the animals (elephants, porpoises, chimpanzees, cats and
dogs) have this principle to some degree. To fail to recognize this is to
destroy a part of one’s human potentialities. The problem is to see (with
the inward eye) what the truth actually is. Anyone can see that humanity
is one in its total potentialities; and he can understand anyone else by
seeing the corresponding potentialities within himself. If he excludes the
other person, it is a part of himself that he is also excluding. Thus, he
creates a contradiction (e.g., if you are angry with another man, you
must be angry with his image in you; and the energy of the anger goes
on to produce stomach ulcers, high blood pressure, etc.).
With regard to the Communist, the basic fallacy is that one part of
humanity can separate itself out and lead and educate another part. This
is a contradiction. First of all, the people who are being led are not growing
in understanding, but are being conditioned. Secondly, the leaders are
also conditioned to believe that they know what is best, so that they are

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
187
corrupted, artificially separated from others, etc. Besides, there is fear on
both sides, which prevents the frank vision of the falsity of the old ways
(which inevitably become false as conditions change). People are
committed to the old, and because they stand to each other in a relationship
of force, authority, worship and compulsion, they are afraid to give up
their commitments. So there cannot be truth in such a situation.
You can see then that beneath the concept of democracy, there is an
active, growing, changing, “living” principle, which explicates and
realizes itself in any number of specific potentialities. It is this principle
that is implicit in our minds. We can never explicate it fully. So the
meaning is always more than the words and illustrations.
The concept of democracy, for example, has much more to it. Thus,
consider love, understanding and truth as principles, which are really
what democracy aims to realize, and which are presupposed if democracy
is to work. To realize these, we must be ready to see the whole truth
about each man, and to try to help him realize his potentialities, whatever
they are. Arbitrary presupposition about the relative value of different
potentialities may have to be revised. Even the animals have certain
potentialities that we don’t have; and perhaps to be fully ourselves, we
should have to help the animals, in certain ways, to be fully themselves.
I sometimes feel that our notion of being superior to animals is somehow
interfering with our perception of important truths. It is clear that we
are different and in very important ways; but to establish a scale of
superiority is false to our essential principle of understanding, truth
and love.
It is clear that in explicating the meaning of democracy we pass over
into our other principles. So in this regard, democracy is similar to other
aspects of the world, as you suggest. But I do not understand what you
are driving at when you say that democracy is always different to itself
and never similar to itself. Is it not both similar to and different to itself?
Here, there is an important problem. Are we not smuggling in the
concept of identity by the back door, when we use the term “self? Granted
that this term should not refer to identity, then to what should it refer?
Is there not a real problem here, that requires careful thinking and a
new understanding?
A few things can be said now. Thus, democracy is, at each moment,
and for each person, an implicit totality. It is changing from moment to
moment, and from person to person. Even in a single moment, it has
endlessly different potentialities. Should we then say that “self” means
a true totality, that can be known only by implication? Even if we accept

188
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
this, I don’t see why a totality is only different to itself and not similar
to itself.
In this connection, fascist and racist thinking is not so different from
totality thinking as all that. Rather, I would say that the racist, for
example, is confused about totality, and not that he thinks only in terms
of abstract identities. Thus, the Nazis often spoke of a principle of
“Germanness”, of “Jewishness”, “Negro”, etc. This principle was
regarded as transmitted by heredity. Their mistake was in narrowly
associating the basic principle to secondary or trivial characteristics
such as skin colour, hair colour, shape of head, length of nose, etc. But
I think that they had the idea of the “Nordic” principle as creative, ever
developing, etc. They argued that just as certain genes are needed to
make a creature a man and not a monkey, so certain genes make them
“Nordic”, “Jewish”, etc. The falsity is that this was based entirely on
fantasy and wishful thinking. But this sense of falsity is superficial,
compared with the denial of truth, love and understanding that is implicit
in adopting such an attitude. So Nazism (like Communism) is based on
false ideas concerning the principle of humanity. It is important for us
to understand Nazism, Communism, etc. however, for several reasons:
1 There are ideas which we are all potentially capable of believing if
suitably conditioned.
2 We must perceive why they are false, and what is true in them.
(Otherwise we are rejecting a part of our own potentialities without
understanding, and thus creating a contradiction. Besides we will be
incapable of reaching people having these ideas, because we don’t fully
see why they have them.)
Similarly, with regard to Expressionist art, Surrealism, etc. There is
a certain kind of truth in these false ideas; and we must also see, in
terms of our own potentialities, what could attract people to adopt such
ideas. And in physics, there is a similar stress on techniques and getting
“results” that we must understand in terms of our own potentialities
too.
So I think a lot of work needs to be done, for a better understanding
of the totalities behind our basic concepts (i.e., the implicit totality).
About the terms “similar” and “different”, I agree with you that to say
differences “have no effect in a given field” is too rigid and final. But
instead of your term that differences do not “appear”, let me propose
that when two things are similar in certain respects, then differences do
not show or reveal themselves in a certain field. This carries the following
implications:

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
189
1
In principle, anything can show or reveal itself (by reflection or by
imaging) in anything else, but in fact only some things actually do
show their differences in certain other things. Those that do not
show differences are in this respect similar.
2
“Showing” or “self-revelation” is a basic part of the universal process
of the world (it can also be called “reflecting”).
3
“Appearance” is a special case of “showing” into the field of our
own perception and understanding.
4
We shall take into account your requirement of keeping in mind the
areas of nature that surround the particular field under consideration
and it still leaves room for “an attitude of tentativeness”.
With these ideas in mind, I accept your replacement of “sameness”
by “similarity”. So now, identity has been dropped from our set of
concepts. I would like to propose an argument here for you to think
over. Could we not say that “difference” is the logically prior category,
and that “similarity” is a special kind of difference; i.e., it is a quality
that is different from every kind of difference? This may perhaps seem
at first sight to be “word-spinning”. But perhaps it means something
really important. Thus, we are led to say that there is nothing in the
world but difference, if we go into a very basic analysis. But among all
these differences, there are some which do not register or show in a
certain field. These are the differences that are different from every
form of difference that shows in the field in question. Similarly, we
could say that in space and time, asymmetry is the basic category, and
that symmetry is a special case of asymmetry; viz., an asymmetry that
apparently balances out and doesn’t show in a certain field. Thus, you
can always get symmetry as a special case of asymmetry, but not the
other way around. Likewise, you can always get similarity as a special
case of difference, but not the other way around.
Generally speaking, our basic categories should be universal in the
sense that they contain what are usually called their opposites as special
cases. In this way, there need be no contradiction between so-called
opposites.
I shall continue this letter later, but I shall send this part off now, as
it makes a natural stopping point.
With best regards,
David Bohm

190
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
March 18, 1962
Dear Bohm:
Received your essay on Truth and Understanding. It is a most
beautiful work, and I choose the expression beautiful, deliberately. I
think you have broken barriers far more important than that of sound.
You have made some discoveries that I am confident will have a major
influence in forming future considerations of the problems you take
up. Do not misunderstand, I do not want to pose as an authority on
these problems you consider. Rather I speak as one who had a most
moving experience in reading your essay from the beginning. I
experienced a very vivid living quality in what you said, and to that I
give the very first credence.
If the “understanding” I experienced in your essay means anything,
then assuredly you are on the track of something tremendous. If I do
not stop now to express my specific reactions, as I wish I could, it is
because I am working day and night to prepare and crate ten of my
works for an exhibition devoted to “Constructions.” It will take place
from May 18 to June 18, at the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam. I
hope it will be possible for you and Mrs Bohm to see the exhibition.
Your two long letters, dated Dec. 22 and 26, were answered Jan. 18.
Your two long letters, dated Dec. 29 and 30, were answered Feb. 24.
Hope by now you have both my letters. I also sent you several short
airmail letters. It is only in your essay, however, that I began to get the
drift of what you were saying about truth and understanding.
Meanwhile, allow me to thank you for sending me your essay. You
have permitted me to share in the great pleasure you must have had in
being able to say what you did in it. In a few weeks I will be free for re-
readings of your essay, and indulge in the pleasure of responding to it,
to you.
My very best regards,
Charles Biederman

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
191
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
April 14, 1962
Dear Bohm:
I have received your essay on truth, and your letters of March 17
and 23 along with the reprint on scientific methodology. For all of these
I thank you very, very much.
Your essay is like something giving motion in many directions to things
of paramount interest. I have never read Popper and know nothing about
him. But since receiving your essay I noticed two paper-backs by him
published in England which I have ordered. One is on Plato and the
other on Hegel and Marx, both dealing with the “Enemies of Democracy.”
The very beginning of your essay opens up a whole new attitude for
me, namely, that there has been a general effort to escape the more
difficult, and one might say more hazardous, problem of truth for more
tractable goals such as utility, verifiability, operationalism, prediction,
etc. Even so could we not recognize that all these efforts were not wholly
escapes, at least originally, in that the consequence of these efforts was
to establish simple, coherent bases as a necessary preparation for deeper
searches into the truth? If it can now be said that all these efforts were
limited, is it not because of them that we can today go further?
It is a real gain for me to read that no theory can be verified conclusively,
or falsified conclusively. It is a remarkable discovery giving one a sensation
of being aware of a greater totality. Then too, the distinction between
associative relating by remembering, and totality relating by
“understanding,” is extremely important. You are really distinguishing
between lower and higher orders of a consciousness of experience. Some
30 years ago Whitehead wrote something pertinent to your discussion.
He emphasized the feeling of truth as against its verbalization, that the
goal of art is both “truth” and “beauty,” and that when there is an absence
of the one there is a “triviality” presence of the other.
Associative remembering is largely reflection, whereas, the deeper
sensation of truth and understanding is a psychobiological amalgamation
of ourselves with the living quality of reality experience. We do not
want only to know, but to know in order to be.
You write that “true relations” remain in certain theories even though
all theories are eventually demonstrated to possess falsifiability. You

192
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
cite the theory of gases treated as continuous matter, and that
temperature and pressure relations so realized remain approximately
true, even though we now know that it is false to assume matter as
continuous. I wonder if this paradoxical true-alse evaluation of all past
searches for the truth, are not the result of either-orism in our evaluation
of reality. Are we to regard an apple as a false image of reality because
it does not look like atoms? Does a theory pertaining to events on the
macro-level possess falsity because it does not apply to the micro-or
sub-micro level? Does not the falsity of a theory depend on whether it
is properly used, and is not inherently falsifiable in that respect that it
continues to possess truth?
Essentially we are concerned with the experience of nature as human
experience. On that basis nature is experienced on many related levels,
both as continuous and non-continuous. Falsity comes in when we
impose the continuous experience as valid for all experience. Just as
important, it works in reverse, that is when we impose the discontinuous
aspect of nature upon all experience. There is absolutism here in both
cases, the latter towards the past, the former towards the future. What
I am trying to speak for is what we have been trying to do in our
correspondence, to adopt an attitude that seeks the truth in the related
variability of nature as totality. To experience discontinuous nature as
actually becoming continuous in sensory experience. Excellent where
you write that it is not experiment that reveals what I would call the
falsity potentialities of earlier theories, but a new totality experience
that does so. Would you agree, however, that in each new totality view
of the universe there remain all the earlier truths? For example, I
experience a mingling of form and space in my structural observations
of nature which I have the impression is very much like the kind of
experience I have read scientists make as a consequence of the joining
of time-space. Anyway, there is something else than mere form or space
for me. Yet, and this was done spontaneously, I feel a certain coherency
to my experience by seeing Euclidean linear notions resting as a sort of
first abstraction on these problems, the base of present structural nature
experience.
You write that besides seeing the true and false, we see the truth in
the false, and the truth about the false. While agreeing, I wonder if this
is not to put it falsely. Truth is not in the false except when the truth is
used falsely, but then ceases to be the truth, there remaining only to
know the truth about the false. If the past is limited in imposing itself
upon the future, the present is limited in imposing itself upon the past.

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
193
You bring up the question of the search for truth by the subjective-
relative or absolute-objective attitudes. Sometimes when humans pursue
contradictory attitudes over extended periods, there is truth in both of
them, which when this is recognized alters both attitudes, bringing us
closer to the truth by eliminating either-orism. Subjectivism seems
inescapable in some form, and there is no doubt that outside nature is
a sort of absolute in the sense only that it is independent of man. We do
not doubt nature but only our interpretations of nature, implying that
nature is something with definite boundaries to its structure. Yet within
these boundaries lie the possibilities for the expression of man’s
subjectivism to achieve, as with Structurism, what would never appear
without man in nature. We seek the truth in order to realize the
potentialities of human life which lie dormant in the structure both of
nature and man.
Where you write of truth as continual change, that we must be alert
to the experience of truth as changing from moment to moment, is
very good. But if one must be alert to newer and fuller glimpses of
totality, one must be just as alert to new and fuller understanding of all
past truths. I believe there is a continuity in man’s search for truth, a
continuity brought about by the order of his search which inescapably
traverses from one related aspect of nature to another. No truth of any
time is independent of the truth of any other time, and to the degree we
understand this continuity to that degree we can facilitate our
continuance of it. Thus the truth in the truth has its own importance
aside from the potential falsity of truth. Both permit us to go further.
Perhaps nothing is more important than the emphasis you put on
how imperative it is that we experience the truth as in a state of constant
change, along with your criticism of the efforts for a “solid foundation.”
If it is no longer desirable to build the truth like a stone pyramid on the
earth, a precise beginning and end, it now being more like navigating
in a sea of process, open in all directions, do we not need a ship to
navigate the process? And in what way do you propose to build that
ship? Will our totality view change constantly, and is that possible, or
must we find an orientation, a center of gravity so to speak, that will
serve as a coherent base for our response to constant change?
This notion of falsifiability is completely new to me as it is presented
in your essay, especially that nothing can be completely false as nothing
can completely encompass the truth, has been a very vivid discovery
for me. I feel very strongly that it is a very wonderful preparation for
the future. It is such a startingly simple use of the past, so obvious and

194
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
yet took so long to come by. Recognizing that all theories have a limit
beyond which they become false, so now we finally recognize the need
of falsifiability as inevitably potential in any theory we make, instead of
continuing the futile search for finality.
Let me say that it has been my good fortune to have read your essay.
It has made more clear to me the way in which I think I have searched
for the truth, and will continue to do so in ways I cannot be aware of
now. For that I am in your debt.
You are on the track of something momentous and I wish for you
further success in this pursuit, which I am sure you will achieve.
With my best wishes,
Charles Biederman
P.S. If all theories are inevitably falsifiable, what of the theory of
falsifiability? If we deny it, we acquire an absolute. If we reject the
absolute, we assume it is possible to one day avoid falsification.
P.P.S. Will answer your letters, first chance.
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
April 23, 1962
Dear Bohm:
This is a reply to your letter of March 17. You ask how I can be so
“absolutely sure” that from now on photography is the proper art of
mimeticism. It is difficult to know in which of many ways would be
best to respond to your question. You do not take issue with any of the
various points I make on this in my published writings, which would
give me some clue as to why you are thinking in the way your question
implies.
It is not, as you put it again, whether or not it is still possible for the
artist to meet nature in new mimetic ways. There is all the art you can
possibly want from the past 100 years, that proves the contrary. The
question is whether it is usefully desirable, that is, whether new ways
are possible which, like past mimetic art, will sustain the evolution of
art, beside that of the medium of photography. The answer depends

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
195
upon our conscious or unconscious assumption about any form of art
abstracting from the reality of nature. My assumption is that all forms
of art that have proved useful both to general human life and to the
constant development of art, are those based on achieving and increasing
the conscious relations between man and nature. That is, ever increasing
the involvement of art in a deeper penetration of nature reality. From
the cave artist to the present this has been the crucial avenue by which
art has been able to sustain itself as a constantly living experience, by
constantly expanding man’s experience of nature. In this regard I agree
with Whitehead when he says, “Art is the education of nature. Thus,
in its broadest sense, art is civilization. For civilization is nothing other
than the unremitting aim at the major perfections of harmony”
(emphasis mine).
What then can we say about all “new” mimetic directed practices in
the post-Courbet times? Have not all such efforts, with the exception of
certain camera-artists, resulted in a heightening not of the interaction of
the subjective of man with the objective of nature, but rather attempts
to increasingly make the subjective independent of objective nature?
This is the opposite of the direction of achievement, not only of all past
great mimetic art, but also of all great art which, since Courbet, has left
the mimetic effort in the hands of camera-artists. The one attitude
expands the action of man’s subjective consciousness by means of an
expanding experience of objective nature, the other by the futile, because
impossible, path of seeking ever greater independence from nature of
which the artist himself is a part. Is it any wonder that the latter must
depend on the endless arbitrariness of obscurity, waiting for a Godot
without knowing if it exists or what it is, if anything?
The confusion of present art is due to misunderstanding each of the
steps taken in the gradual change from mimetic to non-mimetic art. This
was very, very easy to do because the mimetic element did not disappear
at once, and so each advance towards a truly new form of art became, at
the hands of the majority of aspiring innovators, easily used for the
purposes of some “new” manipulations of the old form of art. I might
add, that since the appearance of my Evolution book, which re-established
the place of nature in any new attempts at art, that since then this has
been used by would-be pure creators, some even say they are Structurists,
to return to the mimetic manipulation of nature’s creations.
On two counts, then, we see evidence of the repeated frustration of
those who would assume that mimetic art is not concluded in the old
art mediums.

196
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
1
None of the major attempts has succeeded in originating its approach
to a “new” form of mimeticism. Each has simply manipulated a
new achievement in the direction of non-mimeticism, in order to
manipulate a mimetic vision of nature.
2
No attempt to continue the past mimetic achievements, that is, to
continue ever further penetrations into nature’s reality, has been
anything but a dry, hollow echo of what has been done incomparably
better in past art, except in the case of certain camera art.
Only the latter art form has achieved (as did all past mimetic art) a new
form of mimeticism, in fact an amazingly new form, and also taken us
further into the experience of nature. In regard to the latter, to mention
only this one point, the camera reveals what no painter could ever see,
let alone paint, what no human could ever see until the camera caught
those aspects of the light which escaped vision. The difficulty is that
most of us became very habituated to the experience of camera art
before we began to realize its immense accomplishments, and how can
we “understand” when habit reigns over our vision?
It was a pleasure to read the paragraph where you expressed what you
understood Structurism was seeking to achieve. A pleasure because you
are the first person to write to me, who does understand. Only one sentence
I did not go along with. It’s where you say that Structurism is not merely a
reflection of nature, agreed, but then you say it is not “even man’s meeting
with nature.” On the basis of the points we do seem to agree upon, how
can you avoid seeing that Structurism is still a matter of man’s meeting
with nature, but on a wider and deeper plateau than previously? The
Structurist artist is only seeking to continue the whole process that began
with the Aurignacian artist—man’s meeting with nature ever anew.
I was very interested in your comments on “beauty” in both science
and art. Again I am reminded of Whitehead’s remarks which I noted
in the previous letter, namely, when experience is at the full, truth and
beauty are there together in their fullness, else truth and/or beauty are
“trivial.” Your Hebrew prayer is well chosen for the point you wish to
make between the searcher of pedestrian understanding of truth and
beauty, and that which literally envelops the whole being seems so
futile to attempt to instil this distinction in others, for it seems to be
understood only by those who already understand it in their own life.
Such a one does not have to be told for he has no choice but to give his
whole heart, his whole spirit and all his might, regardless of social
consequences.

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
197
I agree that an artist could profit from an understanding of
mathematics, even though I know I shall never have the experience. I
suspect, however, that the new art must go through a certain amount of
development before mathematics can be properly applied, the
assumption being that art may demand a unique form of mathematics.
So far there have been quite a few artists in the new direction, who
appear very gifted and deeply interested in mathematics, and nothing
has come of it that could not have been done far better without any
mathematics. It would be expecting too much to suppose that present
mathematicians are inadvertently occupied with forms of mathematics
applicable to art, as it would be to expect the physicists’ theories to do
so. It is so easy for math to give the artist’s vision a sense of certainty
which, in fact, leads him away from vision altogether, at a time when a
new vision is needed. The new art direction, for that matter, is open to
so many false roads of quick results, that some who have taken up my
research, in a year or two, speak and behave like old Rembrandts.
It probably is asking too much of you, in view of my illiteracy where
numbers are concerned, how the artist can profit from the mathematician’s
notion of space, but when he comes to his own act of creation he will
have to partially deny or falsify the notion. My reactions to such
falsifiability rights for the artist’s handling of anything science says, is a
concession to the artist which the artist I understand would decline.
In regard to the several points you make on the scientist in relation
to art, the first certainly belongs first, that the scientist operates on the
basis of perception. By becoming aware of the kind of perception that
takes place in art, both the mimetic and non-mimetic visions, the scientist
would expand the range of his perception, not only into art and that
area of nature that comes into focus there, but even in his own field. So
far, however, and for a long time now, the easier path has been taken of
seeing wherein the perception and creation of the two fields are similar,
and this has resulted mostly in crude falsification of scientific theory
and a poverty of art theory. What we need now is to discern where the
differences lie, which I think will be found resulting from the different
aspects of nature with which both are concerned. So far the general
effort is to make this whole problem very easy, and which you warn
against when you note the artist and scientist must not impose the
patterns from their works upon that of the other. Once the best creative
scientists and artists begin to seriously comprehend each other, a gross
fragmentation of totality could be ended, and an incomparable sense of
totality would become possible.

198
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
Now to your discussion of democracy. When you change my
expression of basic assumption to that of basic principle, I don’t think you
change the former but rather go on to a further order of abstraction.
When I use basic assumption I mean what all do who speak about
democracy, from the most ignorant to all others. You make a further
abstraction by pointing out the essential character, the basic principle
that is formed by and implicit in the basic assumption.
On your distinction between democracy and other forms of
government, and consistent with your analysis, the former offers a
structure of human behavior that does not permit absolutes to suppress
all opposition to those wishing to enforce the absolutes. The major
aspect of this problem, which I am sure you think too, is that the question
of democracy is mistakenly identified as wholly a political matter. This
attitude has been forming over the centuries out of the efforts of
individuals and then with such major activities as art and science.
Your whole essay on truth and understanding is also a dissertation
on the operation of democracy. As to your notion, in your letter, that
organized government may lose its relevance. Is it organized government,
or the imposition of such, that will disappear? Is it not implicit in our
present notion of democracy that its potential is to form a self-regulated
society, where the majority will become mature enough to see that their
well-being depends upon the well-being of others? That is, a world
society which, as you make clear, has humanity itself as its basic principle,
recognized essentially as the principle of truth and love. The result
would be to achieve a new natural state of man, the result of mankind’s
long journey from that natural state in which nature gave man his birth
in the world.
So far moralists, principally of churches, have emphasized that one
should do unto others as he would have done unto himself. What you
repeatedly emphasize in your letters, the other side of the coin so to
speak, that when we hate others we direct hatred against some aspect of
ourselves, making ourselves that much less human beings—if this focus
could be driven home on a public scale it would do far more than all the
ramblings of politicians and priests. I have often tried to explain to some
of my well-wishers who advise me not to speak out the truth of art as I
see it, to be quiet and thus gain acceptance from authorities, that whatever
I do with art to the others, however false their attitude toward art, this I
will end by doing in some way to myself and so to my art.
Another excellent point you make, and which the trend of events
confirms, is about the Communist basic fallacy, namely, the contradiction

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
199
that one part of humanity, both in its internal as well as external relations,
separates out with the intention of leading all other parts of the world.
I agree with your attitude toward the animal world, and we should also
include all living forms and the trees, the landscape. We might then
avoid too, acting like less than the “lowest” of animals.
I could not find where I said that democracy is always different to
itself, never similar to itself. This does not prevent me from taking your
to the point criticism, that I have indeed smuggled identity through the
back door with my use of the term “self.” But don’t you think it possible
that the notion of democracy may change in the future, to a degree
unlike anything we can even imagine today?
Your analysis of the Nazis as confused in their discernment of totality,
is very informative. It is worth being expanded into an article, that
others might benefit. For if the Nazis and Communists indulge in their
brands of wishful thinking toward the world, those in the democracies
too often respond to them with just another form of wishful thinking.
This is only to emphasize what you rightly insist is the problem, that
we must achieve a better understanding of the reality principle, ours
and that of others, if we are not to fail in both.
I think the way in which I have been using the term “similarity”,
that is, to deny identity, sameness, therefore implies that similarities are
in fact a special set of differences, and so in accord with the notions you
express. We use the term “similar” to ignore particular differences, or
to focus on them, as the case may be. These may either be differences
that have what we call similarities, or differences that do not have
similarities. I say, “The flowers are on the south, the hills on the north,
sides of our house.” The differences with similarities, flowers or hills,
are ignored for the differences between flowers and hills. The differences
in nature are like a spectrum of differing differences. The situation here
is similar to the case of symmetry and asymmetry, which you also
discuss. There is a spectrum of differing asymmetries.
In actuality there is nothing literally similar or literally symmetrical.
The former indicates a special aspect of differences, the latter a special
aspect of asymmetry. Does this not answer to the necessity you point
out for securing categories more universal? In this view there are no
opposites to be found in actuality experience. To refer to the actualities
in nature which we call similarities, and those we call symmetries, as
opposites, it seems to me is like calling the head of a man the opposite
of his whole body which includes the head. The issue, it seems to me,

200
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
is between relations garnered from experience of perception, and
relations suggested by meanings words can contain.
I hope soon to answer your final letter of March 23. In the meantime I
hope all goes well in your new place and new position. Do you have children?
My best regards,
Charles Biederman
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
March 23, 1962
Dear Biederman:
I am continuing the letter I sent few days ago. I think that I ended on
the question of similarity and difference. I said that I agree with you
that similarity and difference do not contradict each other, but that
similarity is a kind of difference. I wish to add, however, that there are
two kinds of similarity.
1
A and B may be similar in the field of C—which is to say that in this
field, their difference does not show.
2
But in addition, I would like to propose the idea of similarity for
self. As I indicated in my earlier letter, each “self” is a totality of
potentialities, generated by a principle of movement and process.
Each “self” determines a “natural” field of abstraction, in which
there is essential difference and essential similarity.
3
I think that it is necessary to introduce the idea of essential difference
+ similarity, because without it, the field is too broad. Each “self”
determines its essential field. Besides, there are differences and
similarities that are inessential or trivial for a given “self” (but which
may be essential for another “self”). For example, with democracy,
certain processes are essential, especially those having to do with
freedom, self-determination of the potentialities of people, people
working together in freedom without fear, through understanding,
love and respect for truth. Others are not essential (e.g., whether they
should organize through local governments, or by their jobs and
common interests—this being decided by the merits of each case, with
regard to how each proposal serves the basic principle of democracy).

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
201
You will notice that it was not possible to define the essential field of
democracy without freedom, understanding, truth, love, and creativity
(as the realization of human potentialities). I think that you will find
that all human activity presupposes these in the background. If this
background is confused, everything else will go bad. I sent you a paper
on “Truth and Understanding in Science” (by surface mail), and if you
don’t have it already, you will soon have it. In there, I explained in
more detail some of my ideas on the subject. Now, I would like to add
a few points. (I suggest that you read the rest of this letter after you get
the paper on “Truth and Understanding”.)
First of all, in the moment of understanding something, an action
takes place. This is, as I pointed out, the act of perceiving a totality.
Now, I regard all perception, both inner and outer, as essentially similar.
We may say that we become aware of the world through the series:
sensitivity, perception, repetition of perception under new conditions,
reflection on perception, perception of falsity in earlier perceptions,
understanding, application of what has been understood, generalization
of the understood, and eventual demonstration of falsity in this
generalization, to be followed by a new process, which must take the
truth and falsity of the old one into account; and go farther besides.
But here, I would like to stress the difference between understanding
and what has been understood. Just as you once said about creativity
in art, when you understand a given thing, you will never understand
it again in the same way. The next moment, you may remember it as
the understood, or you may understand it again, but in a new light.
This stresses that understanding is an act. I say, it is an act of perception
in which the inner, the outer, and their relationship, are perceived as a
totality. In this connection, there is a statue of Athene by Phidias (or
rather a copy) in the Louvre in Paris, showing one eye of the goddess
focused outward and the other inward. This shows that even some of
the ancient Greeks understood that true wisdom is the perception of
the inner and the outer together.
Now, the problem of the unity of the inner and outer is really the key
one in science, philosophy, art and in human relations. Indeed, I would
say that the survival of our civilization depends on whether we can really
understand this point—that is—not just as a formula in words, but rather,
by a real act of perception, in which we can truly say: “I see it”.
It is interesting that in every way of looking at the problem, we find
logically that we cannot avoid the conclusion that there is this unity.
Thus, in physics, we know that each element (e.g., atom) in the world

202
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
is connected to others by indivisible quanta, which implies that its very
being blends and merges with that of its neighbours. With regard to
ourselves, where would we draw the line between the “self” (the Ego)
and the “non-self”? It cannot be drawn anywhere in the body or the
nervous system or the brain. And according to the quantum theory,
our bodies link, blend and merge with the rest of the world through
forces of interaction, light rays, etc.
If we go to the opposite extreme and just consider immediate
perception, we can also see no division between the “self” and the “non-
self. Thus, the field of experiencing is just one totality, in which
perception is “going on”. At first sight, it seems that there is an “I”, or
“Ego”, that is seeing the world. But a little reflection shows that this
must be false. In reality, the “I” is perceived in the same field of
experiencing in which is perceived the other person, the table, the sky,
the rain, etc. A certain part of the whole field of experiencing is labelled
“I”. This part is associated with certain memories, certain desires, certain
knowledge, certain possessions, certain skills, acquired and inherited,
etc. The separation of this part of the total field is largely a habit, which
is of some practical utility. However, we have somehow gotten the idea
that this “I” actually perceives the rest of the world and makes decisions
as to what should be done. In reality, there is the individual, in which
there “shows” both the “I” and the “non-I” —that is—the whole world.
There happen to be different functional mechanisms associated with
how this “showing” takes place. Thus, through the eyes, ears and sense
of touch, it is mostly the “outer” world that “shows”, while through the
sensations of pain, pleasure, desire, fear, anger, etc., the “inner” world
“shows” in the total field of perception (memories and thoughts are also
regarded as belonging mainly to this “inner” world). But science tells us
plainly that there is only one world, in which our bodies exist, along with
our nerves, brains, etc. And our immediate perception with equal plainness
shows us only one world—in which everything is perceived. Our habit of
perceiving two worlds (inner and outer) is very strong, but a little reflection
shows how false this idea is. Thus, if we get angry at someone then (as I
pointed out in my previous letter), this anger is directed at “the other
person in me”; so that it goes on into my stomach to make ulcers, etc.
Even if it doesn’t do this, it directly creates a turmoil that confuses all
thought and perception (because I become confused regarding the “other
person in me” as being entirely outside of me).
The situation can be put like this: all perception goes by way of what
may be called an “inner show” belonging to the individual. However, it

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
203
is only apparently “inner”, in reality, it is neither inner nor outer, but it
is just “the show”, in which the whole world—“self and “non-self” —is
revealed. This perception includes thoughts, feelings, etc.; and on a
higher level, it includes understanding and perception of truth and falsity.
Indeed, because there is no fundamental distinction between “inner”
and “outer”, there can be no basic distinction either between ordinary
perception and understanding, although the functional mechanisms
involved in both are very different. Nevertheless, one passes into the
other, blending and merging in a whole process.
“The show” goes on in response to the whole world. We understand
that there must be more in the world than there is in “the show”. This
“more” includes not only the outer world around us, but the inner
world that we sense by feelings, memories, desires, etc. Science tells us
that these two worlds are one, and our logical analysis of direct perception
tells us the same. But can we actually see them as one?
I suggest that a child probably does see them as one, and that as he
grows up, he rather painfully learns how to split them in two, in order
to protect himself. To see the world as one puts a person into a very
vulnerable situation, as I shall try to explain later.
I shall try to approach this problem by an indirect route. In the
paper on “Truth and Understanding” that I sent you, I suggested that
to grasp the basic principle of truth itself in a real act of understanding
(and not just in words), one would need a very different kind and level
of understanding. Now, one may ask, “What is preventing us from
doing this right now?” I think that the answer is that our minds are
clouded, because they are full of false ideas, not just about science,
philosophy and art, but also concerning everyday life, motives, etc.
Now, truth cannot restrict itself to any field of specialization. The whole
truth passes from one field to another, first because different fields are
similar, and secondly, because everything is related.
If there is a false idea in one field, which is operative and effective
there, then it interferes with the free functioning of the mind in other
similar and related fields. The field of motivation is particularly
significant here. Consider, for example, a hypothetical scientist who
said that he understood that a certain theory was false, but who felt
that he would like to go on working on this theory, because he had
many commitments (e.g., he had hired many people to work on the
theory, and if they stopped, they would lose their jobs, etc.). We would
say that this scientist had somehow missed the whole point of scientific
research, which is that its essence is truth, so that to understand truth

204
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
and to fail to allow it to operate is an utter absurdity—if not an insanity.
Of course, such motivations can and do operate subliminally and
subconsciously, to prevent a scientist from pursuing lines that could
embarrass him in some way. Nevertheless, once a true idea comes out,
then any sane man sees that he must allow it to operate. Thus, at least
in science, we can all see that we have not perceived the whole truth
unless we have also perceived that the truth must operate. If we think it
is the “Ego”, or the “I” that operates, we are confused. (For example,
that we follow truth because we are “honest”, so that the Ego makes a
“choice” —as if the Ego could with meaning and sense choose to be
“dishonest” and thus to follow a falsehood.) In reality, it is the truth
that operates, outside of the preferences of the Ego. And indeed, the
truth can even operate on the Ego, by perceiving and understanding its
motivations deeply. So what happens is that the basic principle of the
individual ceases to be the Ego and is truth instead.
Now, at present, this happens in a restricted domain, such as science
or art. But to see the basic principle of truth itself, it would be necessary
for the individual to allow truth to operate unhindered in every field. A
basic part of the whole truth is to perceive the falsity of every operative
idea that is really false. This is extraordinarily difficult, as our motivations
are confused and twisted in a very complicated way. Many of our false
ideas operate subliminally, or even subconsciously. The problem is far
more difficult to understand, than for example the theory of relativity,
so that it requires a sustained and serious effort. Yet many people expect
to understand truth in five minutes.
Another aspect of the whole truth must be the perception that there
is no fundamental difference of “inner” and “outer”. One must see that
human feelings, aches, desires, ambitions, fears, etc., are no more
important in a fundamental sense than are those of other people, and
that all of these “inner” workings are just “going on” in the same way
that it rains and the sun shines. This is also very hard, but if one doesn’t
see it, then one is confused, and can only perceive truth in its fragmentary
form, and not as a totality.
I have tried working at the latter problem, and after some work, I
occasionally got a sudden “glimpse” in which one felt that reality is in
a different dimension (as two views of an object in a stereoscope fuse
on to three dimensions). In this new set of dimensions, one saw that the
inner and the outer are basically one. However, this glimpse lasted for
only a moment. I think that I saw why it didn’t last. In this state of
unity of “inner” and “outer”, the new truth starts to operate. But this

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
205
operation implies a totally different kind of action—an “openness” that
is at variance with all the norms of common life. It also makes one very
vulnerable, as nothing can be kept for oneself or concealed. To continue
in such a state would require a kind of love that does not exist in me,
and that probably exists in very few people. So fundamentally, our
understanding is limited by the absence of love. This is what I indicated
in an earlier letter. Understanding without love is impossible, as is also
love without understanding.
In your letter of Jan. 18, you indicated that love by itself might interfere
with understanding. But I think that this would not be real love. Rather,
it would be attraction and identification. For example, a parent might
fail to see the weaknesses of his child. This is because he is identified
with his child, and therefore doesn’t want to see these weaknesses. This
so-called love is then directed primarily at the self, which obtains
satisfaction through relationships with the so-called “loved one”. But
love in its purity does not depend on any satisfactions or identifications
for its existence. If it does, it cannot be love, but is a kind of exchange.
Such an exchange can lead to hate and frustration when the expected
satisfactions are not forthcoming. Thus, we come to the mystery of the
“love-hate” relationship, as suggested by Freud. But it seems to me that
there is no mystery. It wasn’t love in the first place, so that it was only
natural that it could turn to hate.
Pure love and understanding would have to exist together always.
There would be no motive for clouding the truth, and there would be
natural attentiveness which would lead the person continually to
understand afresh, if what he really felt was just love, and not something
else besides.
Of course, such love is rare in society, but this is perhaps, and in all
probability, the result of our conditioning. What actually exists in general
is partially love and partially something else, which is mistaken for
love. I think that if there were pure love, then the understanding would
be unclouded, and we could perceive truth whole (as a totality).
In this connection, I once told you about a painting by Rouault, The
Old Clown. I saw the foreground and the background, related by
complementary colours. Then, I saw the colours pulsating, and suddenly,
the division between “inner” and “outer” disappeared. I felt and saw
the whole being of the Old Clown pouring outwards, and I felt the
whole world including myself to be flowing inwards into him. This
was so striking that it gave me pause for reflection. Now, I think that I
understand it better. I think that the painter really saw the oneness of

206
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
“inner” and “outer” and put it down in paint (I think that when we live
this way, the world will be very different, and all our present problems
will dissolve). Of course, I may be wrong, but the experience was striking
enough to take it very seriously. I can also recall that there seemed to
be a tremendous love coming out of the Clown, also a sense of great
pain due to his state of vulnerability. Maybe it was just due to my
conditioning, as you once suggested (in terms of “resonance” in physics).
But maybe it wasn’t. Surely, it is important (at least for me) to inquire
into the truth of the matter.
This is an example of why I think there may be room for something
new, even in the field of mimesis (aside from what can be done with a
camera). So as I said in my last letter, I think you are carrying out a
very important experiment in the field of art, with implications reaching
into every field of human understanding. Yet, your direction may be
only one of a number of possible ones, which could and should be
followed. What do you think of this idea?
In this connection, it seems that a possible valid direction for the
artist to explore is the problem of the unity of “inner” and “outer”, of
subject and object. In physics, this has become an important problem.
Thus, because of the indivisible, quantal nature of all process, an
observation is impossible in which the observer does not merge and
blend with the object observed, and participate in its very being. On
the large scale, apparatus is usually too insensitive to reveal this fact.
(So it does not show up.) But with very sensitive apparatus, it does
show up. Nevertheless, our usual idea of separating the subject and
object prevents us from understanding the indivisible character of all
reality. Perhaps if our own minds became more sensitive, they could
show that the subject and object are really one, so that we could see
that there is a totality in which both “I” and “non-I” are going on, in an
essential relationship and interpenetration of being. Then, one might
understand the similar problem in physics in a new way.
Is there some way in which Structurist art faces this problem? It
seems to me that there is, in the sense that each structure seems to
blend and merge with surrounding nature, and is not just isolated inside
a frame. Yet, the problem is much deeper than this. The observer should
be led, in my opinion, to feel the structure to be moving outwards to
the world, while the world, along with the observer, is carried into the
structure. In other words, in a real masterpiece of creative art, both the
creator and the viewer should have moments of understanding, in which

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
207
that work becomes the very essence and principle of their being (as
happens with operative truth).
Finally, I should like to consider again the question of understanding
by a blind man, which we once discussed before. Is it not possible that
a blind man will develop new kinds of sensitivity, and in this way, new
modes of perception? For example, I heard on the radio an interview
with a man who had become blind. He said that he could tell people’s
character far better from intonations of voice than he used to be able to
do by looking at them, because they were able to hide their real -
intentions from the eyes, but not from the way they talked. I could not
imagine a blind Leonardo or Newton or Beethoven, to be sure. But
then, there might be some other side of the totality of all existence that
such a man might understand very well, especially if he were helped by
those with sight. This seems to me to be an open question, about which
there is no need to draw conclusions, without further inquiry and
experience. Yet, it raises an important point with regard to the nature of
understanding. Is there not a kind of understanding that goes even
beyond vision, and may it not be important for us to understand this?
With regard to pre-verbal experience and abstraction, I would say
that what is important here is something you once said—“All perception
is abstraction”. Indeed, perception is the “showing” of the world in the
field of experiencing. As such, it is necessarily abstract, since some aspects
show strongly, others weakly, and others not at all. So even pre-verbal
perception is abstract, in a certain sense. What intelligence and
understanding add to perception is of course a key problem that we
must study. Here I would like to stress one point—it helps to arrange
abstractions according to value.
The primary case of value is truth. Indeed, the words “true” and
“valid” are almost interchangeable, suggesting that truth is in fact a
value, and indeed, the basic value, or the value of all values.
But there are many other aspects of value. Thus, abstraction must
proceed by a perception of what is essential and inessential in a given
field. We abstract the essential and set the inessential aside. Indeed,
without this ability to see the essential and the inessential, our power of
abstraction would not get us very far. For then, abstraction would be
only accidental (e.g., dependent on how sensitive we happened to be to
each aspect of experience).
I think it is a mistake to say that the more primitive experience is
necessarily the more concrete. It may in fact be more abstract (and
indeed, it usually is). However, primitive abstractions are likely to contain

208
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
a great deal of accidental wealth of detail. You are probably familiar
with Lamb’s essay on roast pig. In ancient China a peasant’s house
once burned down, and since he kept his pigs in his house, the pig was
roasted. On touching the pig, he burned his finger, put it in his mouth,
and noted the delicious taste. Thereafter, houses began to burn down
with great regularity, until a great genius noted that roast pig could be
made without burning down a house. So you see that what this genius
did was to abstract the essential from the inessential. The inability of
“common sense” thinking to do this adequately is so widespread that I
should like to give it a label: “The roast pig fallacy”. Hereafter, I shall
refer to it by this name.
So a great deal of the function of intelligence and understanding is
to assign the right values (essential, inessential, true, false, etc.) to various
aspects of experience. As a result, perception with understanding is
more concrete than immediate perception usually is, because it adds
(among other things) a set of right values, which is at the foundation of
intelligent abstraction. These right values are as necessary for the
perception of reality as is the original sensitivity, by which we become
aware of the world. These right values are not “judged” (i.e., by choice),
as a judge would decide whether a criminal is guilty or not. Rather,
they are perceived, but by inner perception and sensitivity. Thus,
perception of value is as much a part of total perception as is immediate
sensory experience. If (with Athene) we turn one eye outward and the
other inward, then our vision is far more concrete than it is if we look
only outwardly or only inwardly.
So it seems that what is often called the more abstract is in reality the
more concrete. Concreteness has more truth in it than accidentally
abstracted ideas and perceptions. The concrete is closely related to your
idea of “natural abstractions”. For what do you mean by “natural”?
Clearly, you must be referring to an abstraction containing a true
perception of what is essential in a given situation. Such a perception is
more concrete than one with a wealth of detail, in which the relevance
of all this detail is not properly valued.
Finally, I would stress that truth is concrete. That is, it is a kind of
abstraction in which all aspects are properly organized, ordered,
developed and valued. All of these additions are what help to make it
concrete. Truth contains potentiality as well as what is immediately
actual—a totality of potentialities according to an actual principle of
movement and process. In this way, it is also more concrete than
immediate perception. It is the inner perception related to the outer

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
209
that makes truth concrete, but changing from moment to moment; as I
indicated in the article that I sent you.
I shall continue this in a third letter later, directed at answering your
letter of Jan. 18.
Best regards,
David Bohm
P.S. I just received your letter of March 18, for which I thank you very
much. (The one on Truth and Understanding.)
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
April 27, 1962
Dear Bohm:
In reply to yours of March 23.
In point (1) you say, A and B may be similar in field C, in which
field their differences “do not show.” In some fields, however, the
differences of the similarities show clearly, in others we know they exist
even if they did not show. Wouldn’t it be more correct to say, we are
ignoring such differences in the particular abstractions that concern us?
Wouldn’t that make our thinking, our consciousness of abstracting,
more in accord with the actuality we assume to exist? Consciousness of
“ignoring” implies the conditional status of our use of the term
“similarities,” which is to be in accord with the basic nature of the
inquiry you have been making in this problem.
Point (2), your notion of similarity in respect to “self.” I am bothered
by the term “self.” I have the impression that your use is flavored with
some identity. I want to substitute your other term “field,” “similarity
for field.” The latter suggests an order of abstractions that seems
important. Namely, if the field is man, then the first order of abstraction
would deal with the “similarities for humanity,” next for the individual
field. This would counter the prevailing tendency to start with the self,
and then stay with the self no matter how far and wide we spread the
operation of the self.
Your observations of “essential differences” and “essential
similarities,” strike me as very important. In other words, you are talking

210
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
about the multi-ordinal structure, the order of abstraction, for similarities
and differences, according to the field or fields considered. Your example
of democracy gives a good illustration. That is, the general field is first
considered, for it contains the basic principles of democracy. As you
say, if this background is confused, confusion follows from it.
Your emphasis upon understanding as an act, specifically an act of
perception, is exceedingly important. It is not too often understood
that this is so for others, as much as for artists, that it is not just a verbal
act. As you put it, one must be able to truly say, “I see it.”
Your distinction between understanding as an act of perception, and
what has been understood, is important. We could distinguish between
recollected perception and direct perception. As an example you recall
my remarks about understanding in art which could be put this way:
Every act of understanding is unique and can only be repeated by
recollection and never again by direct perception. But there is something
unique about each act of perception that passes into the field of
recollection, it can be subjected to direct perception. This means that
each recollected perception can thus be expanded as informative
experience for our efforts in direct perception. All works, of any artist
good or bad, are always changing, if for no other reason than that
every artist is changing.
All the artist’s works change with each new perceptive act of
understanding from new experiences in nature and from each new work.
Failure in these matters means the artist loses his capacity to judge his
own efforts.
The way in which you explain that the inner and outer world become
a unity in a single field of totality, is a refreshing outlook on an ancient
problem. It is process of relating everything within totality, correcting
the too easy mistake of relating a part to a totality that is lacking the
sensation of process. In this new discussion about no existing between
the two worlds, it was more forceful when you said again that the “I”
is perceived in the same field we experience the perception of the
other person.
It is all too true that the truth does not depend on the Ego’s choice,
that the basic principle of the individual ceases to be the Ego, and
becomes the truth itself. It is in just such effort that the great works of
science and art achieve their birth. But, as you say, to achieve this an
individual must pursue all the truth that operates in every field. Today
this is impossible. The biggest gulfs of all lie between the most important
fields. But if we are aware of the truth as the basic human principle,

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
211
above all that it is not dependent upon our Ego, we leave passage ways
open to all the fields around, especially around the field we work the
most in, making ourselves accessible.
I was extremely interested in your “sudden glimpses” of another
dimension of reality, brought on by your wish to see the totality which
is usually separated into parts. I wish you could hand me one of those
glimpses so that I could compare it with mine before nature. The larger
aspect of each of our perceptions is built on different kinds, so I wonder
if what we see is like different sides of a single form. Why should not
the totality be such that it is experienced in many ways, just as many
persons will experience a particular person differently? The day artists,
scientists, etc., can begin to relate their different sensations of totality,
totality might begin to take on a coherent, perceptible form.
The search for a literally perceptible sensation of totality has been
eternal with man. But if at this point the powers of man to abstract are
tremendous compared with the earliest of men who sought to understand
all the world about them, still we have lost something that earliest man
had as a natural endowment. There exists a deep split between man
and nature, especially sensory nature, which has been long in the making
but is now sharply to the fore if one wants to look at it. It is rampant
among both artists and scientists. This split from nature, it seems to
me, limits awareness of the truth as the basic human principle, and so
limits our sense of being human. It is false, because fragmentary, to
seek human principles by focusing on humanity alone. Human life
arises out of nature. What an obvious statement! Yet our century has
its pompous scientists and artists carrying on like gods who decree the
fate of nature. Where you find an art of pure creation that is sterile,
thus lacking the living human quality, there you will find an artist
confused before nature.
The critical character of the glimpses you describe is that they are non-
verbal, the difference between cogitation about and the experience of being
totality, a unique order of being biologically totality. Are your experiences
such that you can unequivocally state that they were of “another
dimension?” I would speculate that animals, birds, etc., have this unity to
such a degree that they are not aware of it. The nature of the development
of human life has compelled the fragmentizing and categorizing of nature,
but as a necessary prelude to becoming aware of the total process of nature
and themselves. No doubt man at the beginning had this unity but he
became aware of it, and began to inquire into it with worlds of totality: the
result—magic, religion, philosophy, science, etc., with art in almost all these

212
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
different times. I mention this about early man suggesting that it indicates
the primary reason we are not able to sustain the sensation of totality. One
day man may again regain oneness, another kind of oneness, however,
with nature. Surely the common practice of concentrating only on humanity,
leads to a fragmentized humanity.
In Structurism the act of creation, which takes place on paper and
not by fiddling with pieces of wood or plastic, can only be entered by
literally feeling the sense of oneness with nature, really capturing the
image of creation prepared for by previous work and experience.
Without some sense of this experience of totality, the new art will
become, for the artist, or appear for the observer, as barren forms in
empty space.
What you call the vulnerability consequences of your glimpses of
totality, I have expressed as “it makes me unfit for life,” and for the
very reasons you state, there resulting a great variance from, even an
appearance of absurdity in the eyes of, the so-called norms of life. True
enough, to sustain this sensation of totality would require a kind of
love, nor can I even remotely claim its possession. But I think you put
it all too sharply by concentrating on an ideal goal which demands an
impossible achievement of pure love for everything. But a question
about the consequences of your pursuit of this goal. Have you not
approached it by acquiring degrees of vulnerability?
You criticize my view that love can interfere with understanding,
that such is not real love but mere attraction and identification. You cite
the example of a parent feeling identification with his child, therefore
he doesn’t want to see his shortcomings. There is no doubt that your
example covers the majority of parents. We seem to arrive at a two-
valued situation, if we fall short of its perfection we can only possess an
imperfect love that is destructive. If love turns to hate, there can only be
one answer, there never was any love. Are the potentialities of human
life squeezed into such a narrow area? Perfection is impossible, and we
are indeed left only with the possibilities of imperfect love. But I suggest
that this is a matter of degrees, of a many-valued situation, that we are
not caught between an either—orism, or rather, need not be. There is a
range of possibilities from the extreme of false love toward the truth of
love. Were this not so, all forms of love, by anyone for anyone or for
anything, would remain only false until the day of perfection would
miraculously arrive. In all the things we do, whoever we are, we will
meet our death imperfect in every one of them. We can, however, if we
are fortunate, bring some perfection to some things that we do.

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
213
That you had the experience you describe before a particular Rouault
is indisputable. All we know is that this particular Expressionism acted
as the catalyst. But in what way? Was it merely a stimulus for something
that was not there, something that you largely projected into it? For me
the experience of this artist is that of an introvert revealing a state of
mind about art solely on his Ego terms, an expression that is paper
thick. I do not feel the depth of experience comparable to what you
experienced as a result of looking at the painting. If you had mentioned
instead Titian, Tintoretto, Rembrandt, for instance, any of the self-
portraits which Rembrandt did in his old age…
I think I already said something about the problem of inner and
outer pertaining to Structurist art. Yes, the work must indeed radiate a
unity with surrounding nature. Each work is born out of the effort to
secure this unity. The work fails to convey this presence of itself within
the unity of totality when the artist is impervious to the fact that each
work must inevitably enter such totality, or the observer is impervious
to such experience in art. I do not think the observer can be “led” into
this experience. It should be a mutual meeting between the person and
the art, in which the person must bring his share of awareness to the
art, as the artist has done to art.
The question of the blind man’s perception. I too have heard a blind
man on the radio, only last year, make just such a claim. When a man
loses his sight he compensates with the remaining major sense of hearing,
increasing its sensibility as with his sense of touch. But I suspect that
his new form of perception will provide false information, because he
can only hear the sound from a person. How often I have first heard
then seen, or first seen and then heard, and the impression of the one
sense was abruptly discontinued by the experience with the other. We
need to see what we hear as a dog needs to smell what he sees.
I agree very much with what you say about abstraction, value, truth.
Again truth is the end result, but I note you are not so perfec-tionist, so
either-or, as when you deal with the question of love and its relation to
truth. For, if we were just as exacting on the problem of abstracting as
you are on that of love, we would have to insist that we must deal with
everything our senses abstract because everything is in some way
essential to anything we may be doing. To deny this is to imply that the
totality has inessential aspects. But we can’t approach anything in this
complete way. Like everything in nature, like nature itself, we must
approach realization by steps along a process, not all, all at once.

214
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
You question that the primitive’s experience is necessarily more
concrete. Let me put it this way: On the visual or pre-verbal level the
primitive is more concrete, using this term in the sense that they are more
literal in their use of vision. Their capacity to abstract visually is limited,
which abstractions quickly enter into absolute verbal abstractions. Your
example of roasting pigs by burning the house, exemplifies this. Not until
your “great genius” came along was it discerned in the perceptive abstractions
by discrimination, certain essentials that made it inessential to burn a
whole house down in order to roast one pig.
The great tragedy of man is that it is easier to verbalize than to
visualize. Man has become overly verbal, thus the rise in our century
of so many inquiries into problems of semantic structure as a basic
problem of the human race. We have to peel off many layers of words
and literature, some of it dating back to primitive times, that coat all
that we see. Man has not only increased his capacity to abstract visually
but even more verbally, just as he has learned not only to be more
constructive but even more destructive. In discussing further your
notions on the concrete and abstract, and agreeing with what you intend
to mean, I question your means for saying it. I refer particularly to your
conclusion that the more abstract is in reality the more concrete. It is
my understanding that the character of man’s development is an
increasing capacity to abstract on ever higher orders, but the danger is
in becoming overly verbalistic, words becoming unrelated to the concrete
actuality. Hence, abstractions may or may not have the quality of
concreteness and, in any case, both types of abstractions are present in
what anybody tries to say.
A new correspondent of mine lives in London. He was an art student
at the time of the Hungarian revolution, and took part in it. He is now
in his early thirties. He refers to Bolyai as “my teacher” and is intensely
interested in astronomy. He says he has been a Structurist for two years.
I thought you might be interested in meeting him. If so I would suggest
to him that he look you up.
Have you seen the interview with Hans Bethe put out by The Center
for the Study of Democratic Institutions, in California? It should be
called “Portrait of a Harassed Scientist.” I hope to read your reprints
next, and for which I thank you again.
My best regards,
Charles Biederman

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
215
P.S. Yours of April 15 arrived today (28 [April]) as I was finishing this
letter, along with the art article, all of which I look forward to reading.
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
April 15, 1962
Dear Biederman:
I am now finishing the answers to your letters of Jan. 18 and Feb. 24.
First of all, we do wish to see your exhibition in Amsterdam. However,
we are not sure that we can make it. It is in a middle of a school term,
so that it is hard to find time. But the main difficulty will be the money.
We have just bought a house and furnished it from scratch, so that we
are completely out of money. (A trip to Amsterdam would cost in the
order of £75 for the two of us.) However, we will see what happens. Do
you ever exhibit in England?
Now to your letters. I think that I have answered them for the most
part, but there are a few points outstanding.
1 Creation in art, music, math, etc.
Mathematics is only the outcome, the result of creativity of a certain
kind. Just as Rembrandt’s paintings will not create any other paintings,
so the formulas written in a maths book will not create any new
mathematics. All such creation is done by human beings, who must
take previous creations into account, but who must also set these aside,
and let new creativity operate.
The chief difficulty is desire for security, or rather, the desire to feel
secure. People seek formulas, because in this way they obtain a feeling
of security. True, the feeling is illusory, and eventually they discover
that planned creation is impossible. But for a while, they may feel better;
i.e., they may cease to notice the emptiness and nothingness that is at
the core of every Ego.
I think that people are confused about creativity. They regard the
outcome, the result, the formula or the work of art as the main point,
and the moment of creation itself as incidental. The fact is that the
moment of creation is the main point and the outcome a by-product, of
secondary (but still appreciable) importance.

216
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
Our true mode of life would be to live creatively in all of our
relationships from moment to moment, and not just in certain moments
in art, music, mathematics, science, etc.
Of course, art and science cannot stand alone. Each is in the other.
The final criterion of truth cannot be separated from questions of beauty,
harmony, love, etc. But the artist also cannot ignore certain questions
of fact (e.g., that the human image can be accounted for with the tools
of geometry, mathematics, perspective, the laws of light, colour, etc.). It
is worth the artist’s while to understand space from the scientist’s and
mathematician’s point of view, as the scientist must understand space
from the artist’s point of view.
2 The Ego
We agree that our society cultivates the competitive Ego or “I” to a
destructive extent. The most destructive effect is the way it confuses
the mind and the feelings.
Suppose, for example, that I get angry at you. The “you” that I get
angry at is in reality the image of you in me. Do I understand you
when I am angry at you? Evidently not. So who is the “you” that I am
angry at? Evidently something invented by me and projected into my
own mind. As long as I reject this “you”, I do not understand you as
you really are. But if I start to understand you, then I can no longer
remain angry at you.
Now, as long as I am angry at the “you” projected by me, a terrible
confusion is going on in my own mind. I am really pouring destructive
nervous energy into your image in me, and this goes on into my stomach
to create ulcers, into my heart to create thrombosis, etc. I cannot fight
you without setting up this conflict in myself. So when I am angry, my
mind is utterly confused. One part of me (called “I”) sets up another
part (called “you”) and tries to destroy it. But it cannot, because both
“you” and “I” are in the same totality of experiencing, belong to a
certain individual.
The true reality is the individual, who is alone. But a whole world is
in him. He takes a certain part of this world, and calls it “me” or “I”,
but this is only a habit, initiated by the conditioning of children by
society.
A confused mind leads to idiotic behaviour. Thus, if I confuse the
window with a door, then I try to walk out of the window, and may
hurt myself (as well as other people). Similarly, if I get angry at you, I

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
217
do not realize that I am fighting myself, and therefore, I also behave in
an idiotic way.
Current ideas about “I” or the “Ego” are responsible, in my opinion,
for most of the confusion and idiocy that has been characteristic of
civilized life for a long time.
3 Contradiction in thinking
On the basis of the above discussion of the Ego, I want to return to a
problem that we have argued about before, i.e., the role of contradiction
in our thinking. Here, I want to avoid dogmatic assertions, but merely
wish to indicate a problem that I urge you to think about seriously.
I can best begin by quoting the mathematicians, who have shown
that if you accept a single contradiction anywhere, in any field
whatsoever, then you can prove anything you wish, in every field,
however distant it may be. Thus, a single contradiction may throw all
conclusions open to question.
For example, once when Bertrand Russell was giving a lecture on
this point, he was asked to prove from a mathematical contradiction
that he was a Pope. He said the following:
 
Let us start with the contradiction 3=2. Subtract unity from both sides.
We get 2=1. Now, the Pope and I are two. But since 2=1, the Pope and
I are one. Therefore, I am the Pope.
 
So logical reasoning is really a single domain, and you must be careful;
for if you accept a contradiction that is too subtle to have been seen, you
may make your reasoning invalid, even in apparently unrelated fields.
Now, suppose that you go outside on a clear starry night. Think of the
universe, that you are seeing. Think of its immeasurable immensity, and
all that is in it. Then think of yourself. Now, as long as you feel that you
are a separate Ego, you must say “The Universe and I are two.” Yet, you
know that this is not so. Physics tells us that our bodies and brains are
part of the universe, the totality. Similarly, in our immediate experiencing
as individuals, we see only one totality, in which there is experiencing of
“me” and “the universe”. So we must say “The Universe and I are one.”
Thus, there is a contradiction at the heart of all our thinking. This
contradiction is accepted by us implicitly in our daily habits of life.
Therefore, all of our thinking is confused and open to doubt, likely to
lead to idiotic behaviour (as in fact it very often does). Unless one can be

218
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
in a state in which this contradiction is absent, it is no use for him to say
that there is no contradiction.
If you accept a contradiction in any field, then it may lead to an
error in every field. And this contradiction about “I” must evidently
operate in every field. For every time we isolate anything, we treat it as
if it were an “I”. The basic pattern of confused thinking, which extends
through our whole experience, begins with our ideas about “I”, which
we learn from our competitive society, when we are very young.
Now, I am proposing an experiment to you. On such a night as I
have described, try to say to yourself: “This individual is experiencing;
and in this experiencing is a whole universe, a part of which is an T or
‘Ego’.” If you are really serious about it, you may find that everything
is different. The activity of the Ego may subside and take its proper
place in the whole. Then the contradiction disappears. Thinking is
different. Perhaps in such a state, the individual can think more clearly,
and avoid the universal contradiction that I described above.
Clear thinking requires that there be no contradiction anywhere in the
mind—and this means that there shall be one individual. We tend to imagine
that we can remain the sort of divided beings that we are (dividuals—one
may say—instead of individuals) and still think clearly about selected topics
such as physics or art. The fact is, however, that as long as we are what we
usually are, our minds must be confused. The confusion that arises when
we try to relate ourselves to the universe or to another person carries over
into physics, mathematics, art, politics, and everything else.
There is a problem of great significance here. All that we can know
about the universe is projected into our experiencing by the action of
our own minds, in response to our perceptions. How do we come to
understand? Does not the possibility of understanding mean that
somehow, the notion of separation of experiencing and what is
experienced is a confused and self-contradictory idea? If so, can we
think clearly on this problem, without first being clear and unconfused
in what we are? How can we do this, in spite of society, which is always
conditioning us to become ever more confused on the question of the
Ego, and through this, on every question that can be asked?
4 Understanding and the understood
I am not sure whether I called attention to the distinction between the
act of understanding and what has been understood (the understood).
The act of understanding takes place in a moment. Then with the

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
219
passage of time, its implications are unfolded—and we have the
understood, which is in memory. This is a mixture of truth and falsity.
The fact that it is such a mixture must be seen. And then, there is a new
act of understanding. Thus, understanding is a very dynamic process.
If the mind is sufficiently alert and attentive, understanding is always
on the move; and in this movement, one is in a state of true action.
There is truth and falsity in the content of what has been understood;
and this must be perceived. But there is no room for falsity in the act of
understanding. This must be a true act; or else, it will be confused, and
lead to idiotic behaviour.
So we must be in a state of true act. In this state, we perceive the
truth and falsity in the content of all our ideas, from moment to moment.
5 Randomness, chance, contingency, etc.
Let us return to this old perennial problem. Thank you for your little
note “The Molecule: Order or Disorder?” Let me say that it contains,
in germ, the idea that I am aiming to establish in physics. However, we
physicists cannot leap quite as far and as fast as you artists; and I shall
now try to explain why.
First of all, recall that (as I explained in the article on “Truth and
Understanding”) an important part of progress in science is to see the
truth in the false and the truth about the false. Every idea that we can
state in physics will have some false content, but no one would have
taken it seriously in the first place if there had not been some true
relationships implicit in the idea. So let us try to see the true relationships
in physicists’ ideas about randomness, as well as the truth about these
ideas (the reasons why they are false). This may be an important clue
as to what the next step must be.
Let me begin by explaining the physicists’ idea of random movement
a bit more. Consider a pin-ball machine, such as you have surely seen.
I am assuming a rather complicated distribution of obstacles, indicated
by shaded areas in the diagram (their precise distribution is, however,
not important). Now, imagine a small ball, which follows the dotted
line, and which bounces off the obstacles elastically. Its track is indicated
by the dotted line in the diagram.
As you can see, the track of such a ball is very complicated. But
there are certain features of this track, which are relevant when we
consider its overall or average characteristics.
 

220
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
1
The precise nature of the track is very sensitively dependent on the
position and direction of motions with which the ball starts out. For
example, if the ball had started at a slightly different position from
A, it would have struck the first obstacle in a different place; it
would have bounced off in a different direction, and its whole track
would have been very different. This characteristic is very important:
the details of the track are very sensitive to how it starts.
2
Now imagine a whole collection of balls coming into the machine,
each in a different position. Even if they all start with parallel
directions of movement, it is clear that because of the sensitivity
described above, each ball would behave in a radically different
way. They would soon cease to be moving in parallel, but would
soon be in a state where no direction of movement was favoured
statistically. In other words, in the long run and on the average, just
as many balls would be moving in any one direction as in any other.
This is part of what the physicist means by randomness. The initial
regular array of parallel movement would be broken, and instead, it
would be found that the movement of each individual ball was
essentially unrelated to that of any other such ball.
A similar process occurs when a stream of molecules strikes an
obstacle. No obstacle is in fact needed. For if they are just slightest
bit off parallel in their movement, they will start to collide with each
other, and eventually a random array results.
3
If you follow an individual ball, you find that in the long run and
on the average, no direction of motion is statistically favoured. Hence
its track is said to be a “random walk”. The direction after, for

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
221
example, the second collision, is essentially unrelated to that after
the 452nd collision.
4
We must go more deeply into the meaning of the concept of essential
unrelatedness.
Of course, if you were to calculate the track in absolutely precise
detail, the track after the 452nd collision would be seen to be
determined by the starting track. (We are working on the assumption
of classical mechanics, which is completely deterministic.) However,
as you yourself admit, there are natural thresholds appropriate to
each level. For example, for our large-scale level, effects of quantum
mechanics and individual molecular movements in the balls are
necessarily below the threshold where it makes sense to try to
consider more accurate determinations. In other words, every form
of determination and every form of existence must have a natural
threshold of sensitivity of response. So it makes no sense to talk of
determinations of unlimited accuracy. Yet, you can see that to
determine what a ball will do after, for example, a million collisions,
may well require an accuracy of determination of the initial position
and velocity that goes beyond what is meaningful, in accordance
with the natural threshold of our level. So in terms of this natural
threshold, the millionth collision is essentially unrelated to the first.
So in the concept of randomness, we have the idea of essential
unrelatedness, either of one ball to another, or of the later history of
a ball to its earlier history. This makes an important contribution to
the understanding of our experience in general, as we in fact do
find that frequently, one part is essentially unrelated to another.
5
But now, we must see the limitations of the idea of essential
unrelatedness. Here is where your ideas can come in. In a larger
totality, it may perhaps correctly be said that there is another kind
of relationship. Thus, for the whole collection of balls (as well as for
the average behaviour of a single ball in many collisions), there
arises a statistical regularity. This regularity is predictable and
observable, and agrees with what is, in fact, found, when you do
the experiment.
Now, is there a contradiction between randomness on the small scale
and statistical regularity on the large? The answer is “Of course not”.
Each is perfectly compatible with the other.
However, here is where your idea comes in. On the large-scale, long
time, and statistical level, new kinds of relationships become relevant. I

222
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
think that it is wrong for the physicists to try to say that large-scale
order is the result of microscopic disorder (or the equivalent, to say that
large-scale relatedness is the outcome of microscopic unrelatedness).
Rather, one should say that large-scale “order” is a fact of existence,
just as real as is the microscopic “disorder”. In a still larger totality,
which includes both micro- and macro-levels, you are right to say that
the molecules behave as they do in order to achieve the large-scale
results that they do. However, I think you are wrong to ignore the need
to consider the various levels separately as well. For in science, everything
is some kind of abstraction. It is necessary to see the world from within
that abstraction, to see the truth in the abstraction and the truth about
the abstraction (why it is limited in validity and in that way false). Even
the abstractions proposed by you will be, in some way, false.
So here is where contingency comes in. Every concept is an
abstraction. Within the field of this concept, certain things must be
unrelated, or otherwise, there will be no room for newer and higher
kinds of relationships in a broader totality. Indeed, man may be said to
impose his own relationships on natural processes, and this is possible
because various parts of these processes are not already held in iron-
bound relationships.
What is unrelatedness in one field is necessary for higher relatedness
in another field. So the totality must include the related and the unrelated.
In another letter, I shall have to go into the question of continuity
and discontinuity, symmetry and asymmetry, from this general point
of view.
With best regards,
David Bohm
Red Wing
Route 2
Minnesota, USA
May 7, 1962
Dear Bohm:
This is a reply to yours of April 15.
I should not blame you and Mrs Bohm for not getting to see the
Amsterdam exhibit, since I see that the cost of the trip is certainly not a
minor one for you. Perhaps one day I will show in London, and perhaps

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
223
by then I will have more of my later works to show. So far a number of
English artists have helped themselves to my work and writings, more
than a little, but none has ever made an effort to arrange for me to
publish an article, let alone to exhibit.
Your explanation of mathematics as creation makes clear what you
mean. This corresponds with what I mean when I say that mathematics
acts as a substitute for creation in art. But then, most alleged creation in
art is largely exploitation of what has already been created by others.
There is, in short, a fear of risking the demands of true creation. Even
Structurism, in the hands of the majority who use it, has been largely
exploited in the manner of personalized variations on what has already
been created.
So I concur with you when you lead this into a discussion of a
“desire to feel secure.” The false seeker of creation in art, however, does
not feel secure within himself but only in the opinion people of influence
take of him. I disagree that the formula is sought as the means for
gaining security. No one can escape some semblance of formula, like it
or not. Therefore, more fundamental is the distinction in the kind of
formula sought, the attitude toward the notion of formula. This in turn
would lead to distinctions between different kinds of security that
humans seek.
That the general attitude is to regard the created, not the act of
creation, as primary, is a good point you make. I haven’t thought of it
in exactly this way, yet that is just the point that I try to put across in
my writing on art. The way you put it, however, hits the essential point
of the matter. In my Dialogue you will have noticed my emphasis upon
“life as a creative experience and expression.” That is the essential role of
Structurist art, to give expression in its purest form to the creative
experience which is fundamental to all, from the farmer to the artist. In
all our discussions about truth, love, understanding, we should have
emphasized that these goals had the essential role of freeing us to be
truly and fully creative in all aspects of our lives. In place of what
ordinarily leads to anger and ulcers, of which you have written often,
one releases the desire to comprehend, freeing ourselves into an act of
creation, in place of destruction upon the self and others. Anger tries to
separate or fragmentize what is inseparable, the creative act of
understanding relates and makes possible a former sense of truth.
This latter effort, however, leads to complications, what you call
becoming vulnerable. For then there arise entirely new relations, new
problems. But it is just before the sensing of the new that the creative

224
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
act flourishes. I wonder if you will agree, that to the degree that one
becomes vulnerable he also becomes invulnerable, that is, to those
actions that fragmentize, confuse, actions that lead to chaos rather than
creation. This is the first time I have heard this amazing idea, that if
you accept a single contradiction about anything, than you can prove
anything, in any field. You note that there is the possibility of accepting
some subtle contradiction that escapes us, and thus throws us into false-
hoods all down the line of totality. I hope you are not suggesting that it
is possible to avoid what seems to me inevitable and inescapable. That
there is so very much that need not be inevitable, cannot be denied.
But it is as Korzybski once remarked, It’s not that we don’t know, but
that we don’t apply what we do know.
Rather than saying logic is a single domain, wouldn’t it be more to the
point to say that it is compelled to operate in the single domain of
totality, in that which is not logic, the non-verbal world of nature?
I cannot recall specifically my past experiences with witnessing the
night sky when alive with stars, in the context you mention, except
feeling the sheer infinity of this seemingly ungraspable universe. But
during the period of my more vivid consciousness of nature as a
Structurist these last 25 years, I do not recall reactions of the universe
and I as one or two. What I have been doing is what you suggest, being
an individual experiencing nature or the universe as a whole. But in my
case I have just done it without giving it any particular attention, except
where structural problems of vision enter. Just the same, to see nature
as the Structurist does is precisely to gain the fullness of an individual
experiencing, rather than limiting experience to a “piciune” (Cézanne)
self. John Constable, the English contemporary of Turner, put it well
when he said something to the effect that nature shows nothing to the
arrogant artist.
Anyway, as a result of your bringing all this up sharply to my
consciousness, several nights ago I was walking from our house to my
shop late at night when the sky was packed with stars. As I looked up I
immediately recalled your discussion and decided to try out your
experiment. But almost immediately I forgot my intentions and became
engrossed in my usual Structurist experiences. In the midst of this I recalled
my original intentions and the following took place. I had the sensation
of not being a single form in the sense of boundaries, but of really being
a structure of forms and spaces, or forms-spaces, like the experiences I
was having of nature at the time. Then I began to cull some abstractions
from this, and developed this line of interest. We (humans) are single

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
225
enclosed forms. We are not like a tree, flower, and so much that literally
spreads itself into the surrounding aspects of nature. We are like a piece
of sculpture, a single piece all around, all rounded off from nature. A
tree’s “consciousness” could never form an Ego, but with consciousness
humans can go further in what the tree does naturally and spontaneously
when it reaches into the earth and towards the sun and rain.
Your distinction between dividuals and individuals is certainly apt, as
are the consequences you draw from them. Is not one of the great sources
of difficulty here in that man, as he has become more and more urbanized,
has increasingly regarded nature as something to conquer, seeing himself
as an Ego in competition with a primitive nature around him? And, as
man sees nature, so he sees himself whether he knows it or not, and so
competition between men, a refined sort of social primitivism. And today
nature has dropped its ace on the card table, leaving man the conquerer
of nature absurdly contemplating self-destruction.
One thought I forgot to mention regarding your notion of this
individual is experiencing. When I am aware of myself in relation to nature,
it is on the basis of an “amalgamation” (Cézanne) of man and nature as
I have expressed it before. It is not merely something called “me”
experiencing, but a me seeking to experience nature through the
experience of man in general, past and present. An effort to absorb the
accumulated experience of man as artist as the fullest means potential
to me experiencing, in contrast to the “trivial” experience emanating
from a confused Ego me. So I would put a phrase at the beginning of
your sentence, to read: “Through the accumulated experience of man,
‘this individual is experiencing; and in this experience is a whole
universe,’” etc. By bringing man into the statement, we avoid what you
rightly want to avoid, separation of what is in the experience which
leads to confusion, contradiction.
I was very interested in your comments on the distinction between
understanding and understood: the former as a flash, the latter as a
gradual unfolding always in motion. For in this you say much better
what I tried to say in the letter before this one, which you have not yet
received. I would argue, however, that it is not only being sufficiently
alert of our understanding being in constant motion. This seems
inevitable, for nothing can stand still, even our consciousness cannot. It
is necessary to be alert as to the nature of the direction of motion which
our understanding is taking.
Now for your explanation of randomness, etc. These are perhaps
the major problems which modern science has brought to attention

226
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
which, if brought to some less disputable condition, might end in giving
crucial insights into the problem of creation. And I appreciate your
patience with my ignorance, in making a further effort to express the
notions of randomness, etc. I don’t know how many times I reread this
part of your letter, trying to understand first what you meant to convey.
Yet, each time I failed to understand the justification for the term
“randomness.” Even so, your exposition was very clear and relieved
me, I hope, of some portion of my ignorance.
I’d like to ask: In the experimental field, as distinct from the
theoretical, is the notion of randomness essential? I mean, would present
experiments become impossible without this notion? For it is beyond
my imagination to conceive how a physicist would claim to be
conducting experiments directly with that aspect of molecular structure
considered “haphazard, without aim or purpose or principle, heedlessly”
(Oxford dict.).
You describe the acute determination involved in a ball colliding
with a series of obstacles. That no direction of the various movements
favors any one direction, statistically, more than some other. This,
you say, is part of what physicists mean by randomness. But just what
is happening here? Have physicists achieved structural comprehension
of a new level of nature? To say something is haphazard sounds more
like incomprehension, but which has the advantage of being irrefutable
until experimental evidence will discover the character of this new
structural aspect of nature. What the physicist has in fact said, is that
the atomic level does not respond to statistical order, as does the large
scale, therefore there is no order, as though the last word in order had
been reached with statistical procedure. One might with equal reason
refute the large scale for not displaying the disorder of the small scale.
With equal reason people once refused to accept structural descriptions
of the molecular level, simply because this seemed so alien to everyday
experience.
One thing seems quite certain. If there is a particular kind of order
on the discrete level of nature, we will only experience disorder until
this order is discovered. If, however, we act on the conviction of disorder,
we have surely closed the doors to discovering the order that is to be
found. Until the disorder view is proven, the order view must reside at
least with equal attention in our perceptive activities.
From the position of randomness you logically infer the problem of
essential unrelatedness respecting the individual balls or molecules. You
enforce this conclusion by reference to the natural threshold of

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
227
determination that is appropriate to each level or field of nature. On
the atomic level, you explain, it ceases to make any sense at all to seek
determination, as this would involve a fantastic pursuit. Here again we
have the same sort of problem described in the preceding two paragraphs.
You have not shown that determination is exhausted, you have only
shown that a particular sort of determination is exhausted. We don’t
prove that determination procedure is inappropriate by showing how a
particular farm of determination fails. We only prove that the determinate
method of classical mechanics fails, nothing else. Ever since man has
been making formulations of the determinate structure of nature, these
have followed a course of change in the very notion of determination
as more and more of nature was understood.
Just the same I don’t want you to think I am arguing against your
clear exposition of essential unrelatedness, especially where you refer
to abstractions and the contingency factor, for without it, as you say,
the possibilities for abstractions of newer totality relations would be
impossible. One could also note, that if everything were essentially
related, there could not be the kind of world we experience, nor humans
to experience. There would be no objects, no different nature levels, in
short, no entities of any kind. For nothing is only relations.
I would like to argue a little on your last thought, that man imposes
his own relationships on natural processes, because aspects of the latter
are not held in absolute relationships. I do not think man imposes
anything, any more than he imposed the existence of his own kind.
Man only discovers the possibilities of introducing new relations which
the structure of nature permits. To impose is to compete, and I don’t
think nature has a competitor in man as yet.
Your letter of April 30 received. In the middle of this, will answer
first chance.
With my best regards,
Charles Biederman

228
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
3, Berkshire Road
Bristol 7
Glos., England
April 24, 1962
Dear Biederman:
This is just a brief letter to finish up the discussion of your letter of
Jan. 18.
You ask whether one shouldn’t have a spectrum of descriptions of
experience. For example “thinking-feeling and feeling-thinking”.
I say that I agree with you on this point, and would like to develop
the idea a bit, in relationship to the totality of experiencing, and the
understanding of this totality.
Now, just as I made a distinction between understanding and the
understood (which latter is the memory or trace of understanding, a
mere reflection), I also want to distinguish between experiencing and
experience (or what has been experienced). Experiencing is the act itself,
while experience is the reflection in memory of experiencing.
There can of course be partial understanding, e.g., intellectual
understanding and “feeling understanding” (this latter could be called
sympathy). But for a true understanding, the totality must be present.
Thought, by itself, is powerless to initiate action. It merely tells us how
to reach our goals and the probable results of our actions. The feelings
can initiate actions, but by themselves, these cannot in general lead to
intelligent actions. So if a person has only an intellectual understanding,
his feelings, aims, goals, desires, etc., may be badly confused, so that he
gets all mixed up when he acts. If he has only sympathy, then his ideas
may be confused, so that he also gets all mixed up when he acts. With
a total understanding, he is aware of his feelings, desires, goals, training,
conditioning, his perceptions, his thoughts, the end which he has in
view, and the means to achieve this end. All of this is integrated into
one understanding, which includes also the action that is appropriate
in this totality of experiencing. In other words, action is not opposed to
thought or to feeling, but all these are present in one totality of
experiencing.
At a given moment, one of these may dominate, but the others are
still present. Thus, we may have thought with feeling and action in it;
feeling with thought and action in it; or action, with thought and feeling
in it. But we have always the three: thought-feeling-action. Of the three,

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
229
action is the most fundamental. For even thought and feeling are actions.
They are mainly internal and nervous actions, but still they are actions.
So roughly speaking, action divides up in three ways:
1 Physical acting
2 Feeling
3 Thinking
Even perception is a kind of action. It is not merely a passive imprinting
of an outer physical world on an inner mental world. Rather, it is an
inner show that our whole being puts on in response to what is sensed.
Only through understanding is there the possibility that this inner show
is true (and not illusion or hallucination, for example). So we may now
consider four kinds of actions: perception, feeling, thought, physical action.
In addition, there are further kinds of actions. Thus, when one perceives
something, one may desire to possess it, if it is pleasant, or desire to get
rid of it, if it is unpleasant. So there is desire, and its movement towards
fulfilment. One may desire an ideal, invented by society (e.g., religion) or
by the individual himself (e.g., ambition to do some great or unusual
thing). Desire is generally fixed and limited by conditioning and by the
individual’s reaction towards or against this conditioning.
There is the totality of memory, including past desire, fulfilment,
frustration, likes, dislikes, judgements, conclusions, identifications, etc.,
etc. Every new experience calls up the whole of this complex. This complex
(which can be called memory) also acts. For example, if you have insulted
me once, then when I meet you again, I react with the memory of this
insult. I do not meet you afresh, and see you as you actually are at this
moment, but in my act of perception, I put on the “inner show” of the
man who insulted me. Thus, I see you only through the screen of past
memories, conditionings, conclusions, etc. In my perception, you are the
hateful man who insulted me, and nothing more.
So we must also add to all the other actions the action of memory
and the action of desire.
For a comprehensive understanding, it is necessary that all of these
actions be in the act of understanding. If a person does not follow all of
these, his mind may become confused. Thus, I may meet a man of another
race or religion, or nation. Through my conditioning, I do not see him,
but put on the “inner show” that he is a typical Negro, Catholic,
Communist, Methodist, American, German, or what have you. So I
confuse actuality with a reaction of my memory as conditioning. Such

230
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
confusion must, of course, lead to idiotic behaviour (which has been
characteristic of men since the beginning of recorded time, if not before).
Thus, if I confuse a window with a door (because they are both holes in
the wall), I may step out of the window and hurt myself and other people.
If I confuse an individual man with a Catholic, Negro, American, etc., I
become equally mixed up, and my behaviour is likely to be equally idiotic.
So we also have the action of confusion.
Of course, in the act of understanding, the whole being is integrated,
so that our habitual state of confusion tends to die out; and thus, it
ceases to act.
Our confusion is in every field (thought, feeling, perception,
desire, etc.).
A large part of our mental confusion comes from a misunderstanding
of negation. We usually think only of exclusive negation. Thus, I can
say “A is definitely not B”, meaning by this that A excludes B. But if I
say “A is not definitely B”, I say that while A and B are different, they
do not exclude each other.
In the act of understanding, we have non-exclusive negation. At the
moment of complete understanding, I negate all my past knowledge,
not by annihilating it, but by comprehending it as a side of a new totality.
In this way, I retain the valid features of past knowledge, while dropping
those that are false. So I could say that understanding is comprehensive
(i.e., non-exclusive negation).
The essence of process or act is comprehensive negation. Thus, if a
person says “I am walking”, this implies an “I” or an “Ego” who is the
subject, and who initiates the act of walking. But if one says “I am in
the act of walking”, this means that the act is first. This act contains (or
comprehends) both “I” and the “walking”. It is not initiated by a subject,
but rather, it generates a subject as a side or aspect of itself.
Similarly, if one says “A is becoming B”, this implies that first there
is an entity, A, which initiates a process and thus becomes B. But if one
says “A is in the process of becoming B”, this implies that the process is
first in a logical sense, and that it contains a past side, A, and a future
side, B, both being generated, as it were, in the process itself.
So we should regard the verb as the basic form of language, while
nouns are aspects of verbs. At present we tend to regard the noun as
basic (the subject), and all actions or processes are thought of as originating
in “things”, as represented by nouns (which are the “subjects” of verbs).
This must be done in mathematics too. The mathematical symbols
must refer to actions, and processes, and not to things. Things are to be

Beyond the Subject-Object Distinction
231
referred to as sides of actions and processes. I am working on this idea
now, and have made a bit of progress.
So understanding is an act in which the totality of experiencing is
comprehended as sides or aspects. In each new moment, the past is
comprehensively negated as a side of a new and fresh understanding
(or at least it should be). When we do not live this way, we try to repeat
the past, and inevitably become confused, since we regard the
understood as capable of being completely true. In fact, only
understanding can be completely true. The understood is always a
mixture of truth and falsity.
We see then that each act of understanding must comprehend a whole.
If at a given moment, the intellectual side dominates or is emphasized,
then it must comprehend perceptions, feeling, physical action, etc. When
the feeling side is emphasized, it must comprehend the intellectual side,
as well as all the others. Even when we are doing something physically,
this act must comprehend all the perception, thought and feeling, that
had gone into it. Likewise, in perception, there must be a comprehension
of thought, feeling and physical action, which contribute by entering into
the “inner show” with the aid of which we see the world.
In this point of view, the separation of “subject” and “object” is
dropped. What is fundamental is the act or process itself. “Subject” and
“object” are non-exclusively comprehended or contained as sides or
aspects of the act or process as a whole. Each act or process emphasizes
one aspect, but nevertheless, all aspects are contained in each. Thus, as
you suggest, we can have “feeling-thinking” and “thinking-feeling” with
a whole spectrum of possibilities. Only it needs to be extended to:
perception-feeling-thinking-physical action.
Even this only hits the main points. There are many finer gradations.
Besides, there is the aspect of confusion, which is now habitual, mainly
because of our training and conditioning. Our minds are generally
confused, and only occasionally are they clear. What is needed is that
they should generally be clear, and only occasionally confused.
My wife and I send you our best regards. We are a bit optimistic
now and hope that we can get to see your work in Amsterdam, but are
not yet certain.
Yours,
David Bohm

 
CHAPTER SUMMARIES
 
Paavo Pylkkänen
CHAPTER I: A NEW VISION OF TOTALITY
March 6, 1960
Biederman writes to Bohm for the first time as a result of reading Bohm’s
1957 book Causality and Chance in Modern Physics. He sees the development
in physics and art to be analogous: just as quantum physicists responded
to the crisis in classical deterministic physics by postulating
indeterminism as fundamental, so, when the old view of nature was no
longer adequate for art, the Surrealists, “unable to wrest a new order
from nature, assumed the view of nature as ‘disorder’”. Biederman, a
seeker of a new order in nature, is clearly fascinated by Bohm’s argument
in Causality and Chance, which opens up the possibility that even the
quantum level can be given a deterministic description. Biederman says
that Bohm is approaching the same problems as he himself, but from
another angle, and emphasizes the need for a dialogue between art and
science.
March 26, 1960
Bohm replies by agreeing about the necessity of bridging the gap between
science and “other fields of human endeavour”, as these have a strong
effect upon one another in any case. For example, he points out that

Chapter Summaries
233
Niels Bohr’s interpretation of the quantum theory is related to
Existentialism and Positivism in philosophy and is a part of the wider
“Modern Movement”, which includes radical developments in art,
literature, etc. Bohm says that there is a kernel of truth in these new
developments as well as a great deal of falsehood. He ends by calling
for “a new overall point of view”.
April 11, 1960
Biederman raises a question which becomes one of the recurring themes
in the correspondence: “How does one distinguish disorder from order
in the structure of nature?” He then asks for a further clarification about
the influence of other fields on Niels Bohr’s ideas about physics. He is
concerned about the adverse effects science has had on art and similarly
admits that art has failed to benefit science. He then proceeds to tell
Bohm about his own work, which can be seen as a new development in
art—both his own art and his theoretical descriptions of the new approach
in his monumental 1948 book Art as the Evolution of Visual Knowledge and
in subsequent texts. Biederman emphasizes that, contrary to Bohm, he
can see no kernel of truth in certain developments in art, such as
Surrealism, Expressionism and Action Painting. He finally mentions
how his latest book The New Cézanne (1958) tries to show “the transition
from the old mimetic view of nature to the new view of nature as a
creative process”.
April 24, 1960
This is the first long letter in the correspondence. Bohm begins by
discussing the relationship between Bohr’s quantum philosophy and
Existentialism. In quantum physics there is an indivisible link between
the subject (or his proxy, the observing apparatus) and the object. More
generally this means that each part of the universe is indivisibly related
to the whole and that all parts, considered separately, are ambiguous in
their mode of being. Existentialism, on the other hand, emphasizes a
similar ambiguity of parts in the psychological domain: our existence
as separate psychological entities is ambiguous. This underlines
wholeness, but Bohm wants to go beyond Bohr in trying to formulate
a mathematical and physical theory of the new relation of the part and
the whole, a kind of “vision of totality”. He then goes on to outline this
new point of view. The totality of the universe is infinite in space and

234
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
eternal in time, but we introduce various basic distinctions: part and
whole, past and future, etc. This leads into a discussion of freedom and
necessity, and Bohm tries hard to formulate a view in which the present
moment is not entirely determined by the past, a fascinating theme
which develops in many of the later letters. He makes here an analogy
with art: the future is not fully determined by the past any more than
the left-hand side of a picture is fully determined by its right-hand side.
He discusses further the value of various contemporary developments
in art. There is, in particular, an interesting description of his personal
experience of seeing Rouault’s painting The Old Clown.
May 22, 1960
Biederman first comments on the similarity of many of Bohm’s views
to those of Alfred Korzybski in Science and Sanity. He then raises questions
about the instruments that serve as the perceiving intermediary between
the physicist and nature: have these become too complicated? Has the
physicist forgotten his or her own role in the process? Biederman thinks
that Bohm’s vision of totality is too extensive and suggests that instead
one ought to focus on “certain arts and sciences”. He emphasizes that
man is now in charge of his own evolution and that a creative orientation
is crucial. This is why art “holds the deepest significance to the future”.
He further discusses Bohm’s views on the finite and the infinite, the
past and the future, necessity and freedom, and asks for a more creative
notion of determinism, something they go on to develop in future letters.
He makes an interesting suggestion that “…the future is always in the
process of implying…a newness to the past”. There is finally a discussion
of art in which Biederman openly reveals his personal opinions.
June 6, 1960
Bohm comments on the various books and articles Biederman has sent
to him. In particular he expresses interest in Cézanne’s ideas on space
as a unity of interpenetrating planes and notes their similarity to some
ideas which he is trying to develop on geometry. He is also in sympathy
with Biederman’s attempt to go beyond mimesis of nature while still
trying to capture the general laws of process and relationships of nature.
At the same time he questions whether Biederman is justified in claiming
that Structurism is the main line in the evolution of art. He then goes
on to clarify some of his previous ideas, emphasizing in particular that

Chapter Summaries
235
he does not want to reduce the large-scale world to the world of atoms,
but that each level makes an irreducible contribution to the whole. For
example, he suggests that the laws of living, thinking matter are not
fully deducible from the laws of the constituent atoms. There is a further
discussion of the limited and the unlimited and how the notion of a
“thing” is to be understood. The discussion about the past and the
future and about determinism vs. freedom also continues. Biederman
has mentioned how Cézanne saw the universe-as a pulsation of colour,
and this prompts Bohm to explain his pulsating model of the electron,
which emphasizes the indivisible unity of each thing with the cosmos
and makes it possible, for example, to discuss the question of lawlessness
in a new way.
June 28, 1960
Biederman begins by answering in the negative to Bohm’s question
about whether there is a dogmatism involved in seeing Structurism as
the future of non-camera art. He admits that the structural view of
nature is not readily accepted and discusses the various reasons for
this. He then comments on Bohm’s discussion of reductionism and the
limitations of the micro-level, atomic description, and explains further
the idea of “creative determinism”, which becomes a key notion in
their correspondence. He finally questions Bohm’s way of regarding
necessity and contingency as oppositions.
CHAPTER II: CREATIVE DETERMINATION
August 1, 1960
Bohm notes that Biederman’s idea of “creative determinism” is close to
his own idea of “the cosmic process forming itself and thus creating
space, time, matter, movement, etc.” Bohm prefers the term “creative
termination” or “creative determination”. There is a discussion of
creativity in human relationships and a critique of the traditional idea
of communication: ideas need to be produced “between” people, rather
than being communicated from one person to others. This anticipates
Bohm’s later ideas on dialogue. It is noted that creativity in science and
art may spread to human relations in general, giving rise to “a new

236
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
mode of existence for humanity”. He disagrees with Biederman on the
question of “law and lawlessness, regularity and irregularity, necessity
and contingency, etc.”. Biederman appears to be claiming that things
like lawlessness are subjective, arising out of our ignorance. We talk
about “lawlessness” because we do not know the law in a given situation.
Bohm claims that this denies reality to time, process and creativity itself.
For him, a creative choice is not entirely determined by the past, although
it may still be determined by something, namely the present moment
itself. There is a discussion of pairs of concepts, such as actuality and
possibility and necessity and contingency. Parts are by definition
contingent, for the necessity of a part does not follow fully from what it
is. On the other hand, “whatever the cosmos in its aspect of eternal
totality is, it cannot be otherwise, for the simple reason that there is and
can be only one such eternal totality”. In other words, the whole cosmos
is necessarily as it is. Bohm gives various arguments why contingency
nevertheless is important, has an objective significance and is thus not
merely the result of our ignorance. The letter ends with an interesting
discussion of the question of possibility and actuality.
October 3, 1960
Biederman begins by commenting favourably on Bohm’s general
discussion of creativity and communication. Instead of the technologically
coloured “communication” we need “conversation” between creative
participants, in particular between man and nature. Both art and science
are needed in determining the orientation of human life, for they have in
them “qualities that could neutralize the destructive ones inherent in each
field, since both have the potentiality for both good and evil”. In reply to
Bohm’s criticisms, he says that abstraction is creative and time is not
denied: “every creative act…is potentially open to new creation, creation
itself is constantly undergoing change… This is based on an attitude of
non-identity where anything is not the same as it was or will be or will
ever be after that.” He then claims that it is Bohm’s notion of totality as
a closed, necessary system which denies the creative and temporal quality.
Another view of nature is possible, where the cosmic totality itself is seen
as incomplete: “the cosmos itself is undergoing a constant state of growth,
and is not any more ‘self-limited’ than any of the finite experiences we
have”. Biederman still does not see contingency as an objective feature
but suggests that it is a feature of the incompleteness of our knowledge:
“Contingency exists by virtue of the kind of structural abstracting

Chapter Summaries
237
relationship of the human being with nature… There would not be any
contingencies if there were not humans to experience them.” This makes
clear that there is a tension between realism and anti-realism in Bohm’s
and Biederman’s views on contingency and many other concepts. For
Bohm contingency is, in a realist fashion, a feature of the mind-independent
world, whereas for Biederman it is, in an anti-realist fashion, a feature
dependent on human experiencing. Again with the notion of duality,
Biederman argues that from the fact that we need to introduce dualisms
in the analysis of nature it does not follow that there are dualisms in
actuality. And similarly, with the notion of possibility: “possibility is only
inherent in the interaction between a human being and nature, and not
in extra-human nature as such”. There is finally an illuminating discussion
of the mimetic vs. creative artist. The mimetic artist primarily discerns
the already present actualities perceivable in optical nature, whereas the
“purely creative” or Structurist artist also takes optical perception further
to focus on the process character of nature’s structure: “the non-mimetic
artist is a discoverer of hitherto non-actualized possibilities, which only
human nature can actualize”.
November 17, 1960
Bohm begins by discussing the question of the opposition of various
categories and suggests that we view opposition from the point of view
of process, which has one or more pairs of directions. A discussion of
the universal and particular follows. In this context Bohm introduces
notions such as “universalization” and “particularization”, which clearly
anticipate his later well-known notions of unfolding-enfolding and explicate-
implicate. By discussing an example, Bohm shows how universalization
and particularization are opposed to each other in direction but
nevertheless, when seen in their totality, they are identical. He then
discusses other oppositions, such as potential and actual, and necessity
and contingency in a similar way. Biederman’s idea of “creative
abstractions” is commented upon in light of the above. There is also a
critique of Biederman’s idea that possibility is a subjective category. A
discussion of “traces” again anticipates the implicate order: “A trace
is…a structure in which the past is…folded…but in principle capable
of being unfolded”. Bohm compares the moments experienced in human
consciousness with the moments of existence in nature. The rest of the
letter then focuses on applying the ideas of necessitation and actualization
of possibilities to understanding artistic creativity.

238
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
December 28, 1960
Biederman first compares physics and art: the physicists ponder minutely
whatever they encounter, whereas artists, even Structurist ones, need
not pursue their thought to the nth degree. He notes that aesthetics has
tried to formulate a minute penetration of art experience but dismisses
this as being too far removed from the actualities of art. There is then a
commentary on Bohm’s discussion of process with pairs of directions
and a further discussion of whether necessitation occurs in reality or is
a projection of our minds. The key idea is that because our views about
necessity are likely to prove inaccurate in the future, it is only in a
limited sense that our minds reflect what occurs in reality. Biederman
underlines the difference in their approaches: “What you want to
attribute to nature, I attribute exclusively to man.” In response to Bohm’s
arguments that contingency is an objective feature of nature, Biederman
concedes: “in some respect nature’s objective reality could be otherwise
where the intersection of man is possible”. He then articulates his view
of causality as “a process of diverse orders of creative determination”.
There is a further explanation of the nature of Structurist art and its
relation to science: the Structurist artist “reveals those creations inherent
in nature’s process which man alone actualizes”. Biederman finally
comments carefully upon the various points Bohm has made about
Structurism.
CHAPTER III: THOUGHT AND REALITY
February 2, 1961
Bohm expresses his astonishment about Biederman not admitting that
a process of contingentation and necessitation goes on not only in art
but also in nature. He then proceeds to describe his ideas on process.
Drawing on the special theory of relativity, he discusses time and how
the potentialities contained in an event are determined. He again tries
to give a precise meaning to the idea that contingency is an objective
category. The basically “inward” character of all process, whether natural
or human, is emphasized in the sense that in each moment there is a
trace of the rest of the world. He then moves on to discuss the role of
past experience in determining our response to the world. In particular,
he questions whether Biederman is limited by his evaluation of pre-

Chapter Summaries
239
Structurist art, and compares some of the Structurist ideas about
evolution with Marxist ones.
March 2, 1961
Biederman again argues that contingency is unique to human life and
that the more primitive levels of nature we examine, the more
contingency gives way to necessity. It is human consciousness with its
ability to choose which makes contingency prevalent. He then replies
to Bohm’s question about whether his evaluations of past art are too
judgemental and thus not compatible with openness and creativity: “I
try to comprehend all the major art attitudes prevailing, to literally
project myself into the artist who made the art.”
February 24, 1961
This letter breaks the “letter-reply” pattern that has been characteristic
of the correspondence thus far, for Bohm writes another letter before
receiving a reply. The order of letters in this volume are thus no longer
in the chronological order based on when the letters are dated but rather,
as much as possible, the order in which the ideas are discussed. Bohm
focuses on the problem of contradiction. He starts off by referring to
Biederman’s point that our descriptions of reality are always limited
and says that all of his own discussions attempt to “describe reality
with the aim of definite terms, which may include words, symbols,
pictures, etc.”. This then leads on to a discussion of the relationship
between thought and reality and also of naming, and of how thought
works more generally—a description of cognition is given. He argues
that contradiction and conflict are inevitable in the description of the
world by words. We can, however, seek an “adequate reflection”. Reality
is seen as “implicit” in the sense that it cannot be understood solely by
words. The rest of the letter contains, among many other interesting
ideas, a careful discussion of the notions of difference and identity, a
theme that is central in many of the later letters.
May 29, 1961
Biederman starts by discussing Bohm’s idea that the attempt to describe
reality with definite terms leads to contradiction, and suggests we begin
with undefined terms instead. He also says that the notion of identity is

240
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
“structurally destructive”: “Differentiation, not identity, is the constant
of experience.” He finds it curious that Bohm places equal emphasis on
“notions of identity” and “the differential aspects of process”. He also
suggests that we use the notion of similarity instead of identity to discuss
the relation of the properties of objects. He then goes on to relate the
rather abstract discussion he and Bohm have been having to his own
work, especially by describing his experience when he first sees a piece
of his own work. Because of the particular nature of his art, he sees it all
at once: “Now, what I see during that first moment I will literally never
see again in the actuality”. There is also a fine description of the creative
act, as experienced by Biederman himself: “I put aside all I know…At
such times I have the experience of totality…because I have removed
the barriers to being in it.” He finally summarizes nicely the shift of
focus of their discussion: “Until now we have been talking about the
structure of our interpretations of reality, now we are talking about the
structural functions of our talking.”
CHAPTER IV: TRUTH AND UNDERSTANDING
December 22, 1961
After a long delay in the correspondence, Bohm begins by summarizing
what to him seem the main recurrent themes. This list and discussion
are very useful for the reader. There is: 1) the question of creative
determination; 2) the problem of oppositions; 3) the problem of time;
4) the problem of totality; 5) our relationship to the world; 6) how to
deal with the past creatively in science and art; 7) language, thought
and semantics; 8) process; and 9) the role of abstraction. After
summarizing these, Bohm moves on to discuss the notion of understanding,
a topic that occupies him a great deal. What is basic to understanding
is to see parts “as sides or aspects generated in a total process, so that
you now understand why they are related as they actually are”. He
further emphasizes that thought, feeling and action are sides of a single
process. Truth is an adequate understanding of each moment rather
than something fixed, absolute and everlasting. In the latter part of the
letter Bohm tries to characterize the notion of identity with the help of
the notion of the field: “two processes, A and B, are identical in a certain
field, if they differ by the nullity of that field, i.e., by something which

Chapter Summaries
241
produces no effects in the field in question”. He is trying to save the
content of the concept of identity so that we can justify the common
usage of words.
December 26, 1961
In this letter, written only four days after his previous one, Bohm further
describes his reactions to Structurist art. Having noted that a great deal
of the work strikes him as cold and calculated, he asks whether it is
necessary for Structurist art to restrict itself to planes: “Doesn’t nature
structure have curves in it too?” He then applies the concept of
contingentation and necessitation from earlier letters to Carl Visser’s
art. He moves on to discuss randomness, and by considering an example
of throwing coins, he tries to demonstrate that “relative randomness”
has a clear and well-defined meaning. There is an interesting discussion
of a random relationship involving a kind of independence of two orders.
It is worth considering this discussion of the concept of order in relation
to Bohm’s later ideas of the implicate and explicate order. At the end of
the letter Bohm emphasizes that creativity cannot be planned or
calculated by a mathematical formula—a theme similar to those much
discussed today, e.g. by Roger Penrose.
January 18, 1962
Biederman refers to three letters, of Dec. 22 and 26, 1961 and Jan. 13,
1962. The Jan. 13 is (probably a short) airmail letter which has not
been preserved. Biederman says in the beginning that he is only replying
to the Dec. 22 letter, but in fact there is also a reply to the Dec. 26 letter
later on. In replying to Bohm’s Dec. 22, 1961 Biederman first defends
his idea of using the concept of similarity instead of identity. He then
agrees with Bohm’s view of creation as “instantaneous thought-feeling-
action” as well as with the idea that true creativity involves the absence
of the “I” or Ego. Bohm has said that the understanding of totality goes
beyond any of the particular senses. For Biederman this amounts to
giving understanding a transcendental status over the senses. He sees
this as a bias on the side of the physicist, who has to picture himself in
a world devoid of human habitation. He then comments on Bohm’s
ideas on the relationship between understanding and the feeling of love.
Biederman’s reply to Bohm’s Dec. 26, 1961 tackles Bohm’s question
about why the Structurist does not use curves but sticks to straight

242
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
planes: “Since the Structurist seeks the example of nature for the
structural possibilities of his developments, the cube puts him in a
position to begin on the simplest structural terms possible.” Biederman
gives further replies to Bohm’s questions about his art and comments
somewhat critically on Bohm’s discussion of randomness. Finally
Biederman expresses his fascination concerning Bohm’s remarks on
mathematics as creation, and considers the relation between art, music
and mathematics.
December 29, 1961
The intention of this letter is to summarize and add a few points to
Bohm’s previous two letters (Dec. 22 and Dec. 26, 1961). Bohm has
not yet received Biederman’s reply to those letters (Jan. 18, 1962) and
thus here comments on Biederman’s letter of May 29, 1961. He again
emphasizes, unlike Biederman and Korzybski, that the notion of
similarity is not enough, but a stronger notion of identity or sameness
is required, if language is to function. For example, if two types of red,
R
1, and R
2, are not the same in some respect, “there would be no
justification for using the same word (red), and language would turn
into utter chaos”. The letter further discusses topics like “projecting the
world into fields”, “the concrete and the abstract” and “reflection”. Bohm
then returns to the notions of understanding and truth: “Truth is not
just something wholly outside ourselves, which we approach step by
step; nor is it wholly internal and subjective. Rather, it is something
that comes into being within us, by which we are related to totality.”
He finally restates his view that contingency (just like necessity) is an
essential part of the relationships in “nature structure”.
December 30, 1961
Bohm comments further on Biederman’s letter of May 29, 1961. He
agrees, generally speaking, that we should begin with undefined terms
and not with definite terms, but notes that there is a deeper problem of
why one can use any terms at all, defined or undefined, and goes on to
discuss how to tackle the problem. Towards the end of the letter Bohm
considers the complex notion of “difference between similarity and
difference” and notes that this is fundamental to our understanding of
anything whatsoever.

Chapter Summaries
243
February 24, 1962
Biederman admits that Bohm’s last two letters (presumably Dec. 29
and 30, 1961) have moved him towards Bohm’s point regarding the
implicit character of identity. Biederman, however, still resists the term
“identity”. He characteristically suggests that identity is constructed by
the human mind: “identity exists only when the individual deliberately
or subconsciously identifies”. He still sees identity as alien to his approach
which emphasizes change, growth and movement: “however thin you
slice the notion of identity with quotes, it has only the verbal function
of frustrating the actualities of process orientation”. He notes that Bohm’s
remarks on mathematics, art and music are interesting and adds that
“in art the eye does not see mathematically”. He also agrees with some
of Bohm’s comments on Structurist art. For example, mimeticism is
not cancelled by Structurist art but is “a unique form of visual experience
that is far from exhausted” and which continues an evolution via camera
art in all its forms. The uniqueness of Structurist art lies in that it “does
not, in any way, reflect what nature has created. Rather, it is a direct
reflection of the total creative process of nature. Consequently, entirely
unique events arise with this form of art in its amalgamation of man
with nature.” At the end of the letter Biederman returns to their ongoing
debate about whether contingency is an objective aspect of nature. While
agreeing that Bohm has presented some good arguments, Biederman
remains dissatisfied: “If you as a human regard contingency as ever
present in all your abstractions from nature, how do you know you are
not projecting contingency upon nature, rather than reflecting it?”
CHAPTER V: BEYOND THE SUBJECT-OBJECT
DISTINCTION
February 2, 1962
Bohm begins by underlining the importance of the problem of
understanding. He notes that the mind functions in two ways: first
through associative thinking plus the drafting of conclusions by logical
arguments and calculations and second, via understanding, the
perception of totality. Understanding itself is ultimately undefinable;
the action of understanding is not verbalizable, but it can be initiated in
the mind of another by the proper use of words.

244
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
February 9, 1962
This is a short letter in which Bohm again expresses his dissatisfaction
with the notion of similarity: because in some way everything is similar
to everything else, it is necessary to consider something like “essential
similarity” and to understand a basic concept such as “democracy” in
its essential totality.
March 17, 1962
Bohm acknowledges receipt of a letter from Biederman, most probably
the letter dated February 29, 1962. He then comments on the
photographs of Biederman’s work, appreciating in particular
Biederman’s use of colour. There is an approval of Biederman’s point
that even in mimetic art the content is not imposed from nature but is
also the result of the artist’s meeting with nature. Bohm then questions
whether photography need be the only line of development for mimesis.
He also formulates what he sees Biederman’s art to be doing; Structurist
art is not just a reflection of nature nor even of man’s meeting with
nature: “Rather, it should be a unique form of reality in itself, including
a reflection both of nature’s creative process and of man’s peculiar and
unique contribution to this process, but also including still more—
namely— itself.” He further discusses the relation between mathematics
and art: beauty has a role in science, just as every beautiful work of art
must be “true”. More importantly, the scientist, the mathematician and
the artist will all benefit from a better understanding of other fields. For
example, it is important for the scientist to understand his or her own
level of experience because all data finally come from perceptions and
abstractions at this level. The artist is helpful in providing a new way of
understanding ordinary perceptual experience. In order to explore the
notion of similarity, Bohm considers similar but different forms of
democracy as an example. This leads to a lengthy discussion of
democracy and other political views. Importantly, Bohm is willing to
replace “sameness” by “similarity”, in other words to drop “identity”
from their set of concepts, as long as certain conditions are accepted.
This is a vivid example of how the ideas of the two men change and
develop in the course of the correspondence. Finally Bohm proposes
an argument for Biederman to think over, an argument that says that
difference is the logically prior category and similarity is a special kind
of difference.

Chapter Summaries
245
March 18, 1962
This is a short letter in which Biederman comments favourably on
Bohm’s essay “On the Problem of Truth and Understanding in
Science” (1964): “If the ‘understanding’ I experienced in your essay
means anything, then assuredly you are on the track of something
tremendous.”
April 14, 1962
Biederman comments further on Bohm’s essay on “Truth and
Understanding”, as well as the letters of March 17 and 23, 1962. He
is impressed by some of Popper’s ideas on falsifiability (in particular
the idea that there is no final verification). He also notes that some
kind of subjectivism is inescapable, and that it also makes room for
creativity: the expression of man’s subjectivism achieves, as in
Structurism, what would never appear without man in nature. He
finally approves of Bohm’s notion that truth is not static but in a state
of constant change.
April 23, 1962
Biederman begins by replying to Bohm’s question of whether
photography will be the main line of development for mimeticism. For
Biederman the question is whether new mimetic ways are possible,
besides photography, that will sustain the evolution of art. The key
point for both human life and the development of art is to expand
man’s experience of nature. Biederman thinks that most post-Courbet
mimetic art has worked to make the subjective independent of objective
nature; this is why he sees only certain camera-artists as succeeding in
taking mimesis further. He comments very favourably on Bohm’s
attempt to summarize Structurist art: “You are the first person to write
to me who understands.” He disagrees only with Bohm’s point that
Structurism is not “even man’s meeting with nature”, and says rather
that it is “man’s meeting with nature ever anew”. He further comments
on Bohm’s discussion of the relationship between science, art and
mathematics. There is a discussion of the question of democracy and
other political views, and Biederman is in general in agreement with
Bohm. Finally, Biederman agrees with Bohm on the idea that similarity
is a special kind of difference.

246
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
March 23, 1962
Bohm continues discussing the idea that similarity is a kind of
difference by suggesting that there are two kinds of similarity. First,
A and B can be similar in the field of C, which means that in this
field their difference does not show. Second, he proposes the idea of
“similarity for self”: each self determines a natural field of abstraction
in which there is essential difference and essential similarity. He
then moves on to discuss the action of understanding, the act of
perceiving a totality, both inwardly and outwardly. To divide
experience into the inner and the outer is ultimately a habit; the
division is done for convenience and for security, but it also causes
many problems. It is thus crucially important to understand the
underlying unity of the inner and the outer, the self and the non-
self. Bohm also describes his own experiences when trying to see
this unity: “I occasionally got a sudden ‘glimpse’ in which one felt
that reality is in a different dimension…one saw that the inner and
outer are basically one…. In this state of unity…the new truth starts
to operate.” Finally love and understanding are both required to
maintain this unity. The above ideas probably reflect Bohm’s
relatively recent interest in Krishnamurti’s approach, although no
explicit reference to Krishnamurti is yet made. (In the letters written
after the period published in this volume, Krishnamurti soon becomes
a central figure. One of the reasons why the correspondence ended
in 1969 was precisely disagreement about the importance of
Krishnamurti. For Bohm he was crucial while Biederman remained
unconvinced about his importance.) Bohm then discusses again his
experience when seeing Rouault’s painting The Old Clown, now in
relation to the problem of the “inner” and the “outer”. This painting,
he says, is an example of how non-camera mimesis could still be
useful. He suggests that Structurist art ought to and could explore
the unity of the subject and the object; in quantum physics this has
already become central. Finally, there is a discussion of the role of
pre-verbal experience and abstraction.
April 27, 1962
Biederman first addresses Bohm’s idea that there are two kinds of
similarity. In particular, Biederman criticizes Bohm’s use of the term
“self”, suspecting that Bohm’s use is “flavored with some identity”.

Chapter Summaries
247
He then comments on Bohm’s discussion of the act of understanding,
relating it to his own ideas on art: “Every act of understanding is
unique and can only be repeated by recollection and never again by
direct perception.” Bohm’s discussion of the inner and the outer is “a
refreshing outlook on an ancient problem”. Biederman regrets the
split between man and nature which is now sharper than ever. He is
particularly fascinated by Bohm’s description of a glimpse of another
dimension: “The critical character of the glimpses you describe is
that they are non-verbal, the difference between cogitation about and
the experience of being totality”. There is a discussion of love and
understanding, in which Biederman feels that Bohm’s ideas are too
much directed towards an ideal goal. He then discusses Bohm’s
experience with the Rouault painting. Not denying the experience
itself, Biederman remains critical of Rouault’s Expressionism. He then
discusses the way in which Structurist art addresses the question of
the inner and the outer: “the work must indeed radiate a unity with
surrounding nature”. Finally there is a discussion of the importance
of pre-verbal experience.
April 15, 1962
Bohm makes a systematic list of the topics he wishes to cover in response
to Biederman’s letters of January 18 and February 24, 1962. This letter
acts as a kind of summary and is very useful to the reader. Bohm’s list
of topics includes: 1) creation in art, music and mathematics; 2) the
Ego; 3) contradiction in thinking; 4) understanding and the understood;
and 5) randomness, chance and contingency, etc. The letter discusses
all these points. For example, Bohm argues that there is no
contradiction between randomness on the small scale and statistical
regularity on the large.
May 7, 1962
Biederman replies to the various points taken up by Bohm in his April
15, 1962 letter. He reports that he has tried to experiment with going
beyond the subject-object distinction in the way Bohm has suggested.
He still remains dissatisfied with the notion of randomness and disorder:
“Until the disorder view is proved, the order view must reside at least
with equal attention in our perceptive activities.”

248
Bohm–Biederman Correspondence
April 24, 1962
The letter begins by addressing Biederman’s question about the necessity
of having “a spectrum of descriptions of experience”, e.g. “thinking-
feeling and feeling-thinking”. Bohm develops this into what he calls
“thought-feeling-action” and emphasizes that action is the most
fundamental, including the act of understanding. The letter ends by
underlining a point which has by now become a key one in the
correspondence: “In this point of view, the separation of ‘subject’ and
‘object’ is dropped. What is fundamental is the act or process itself.”
 

BIBLIOGRAPHY
 
BOOKS BY DAVID BOHM
The Quantum Theory, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey (1951).
Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London ([1957]
1984).
The Special Theory of Relativity, The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Company,
Inc., Advanced Book Program, Reading, Massachusetts (1966).
Fragmentation and Wholeness, The van Leer Jerusalem Foundation, Jerusalem
(1976).
Wholeness and the Implicate Order, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London (1980).
Unfolding Meaning: A Weekend of Dialogue with David Bohm, ed. Donald Factor,
Foundation House Publications, Mickleton (1985).
Co-authored with J.Krishnamurti, The Ending of Time, Harper & Row, San
Francisco (1985).
Co-authored with J.Krishnamurti, The Future of Humanity, Mirananda, The
Hague (1986).
Co-authored with D.F.Peat, Science, Order and Creativity, Bantam, New York
(1987).
Co-authored with Mark Edwards, Changing Consciousness: Exploring the Hidden
Source of the Social, Political and Environmental Crises Facing Our World, Harper,
San Francisco (1991).
Co-authored with B.J.Hiley, The Undivided Universe: An Ontological Interpretation
of Quantum Mechanics, Routledge, London (1993).
Thought as a System, Routledge, London (1994).
On Dialogue, Routledge, London (1996).
On Creativity, Routledge, London (1998).

250
Bibliography
SELECTED ARTICLES BY DAVID BOHM
“A Suggested Interpretation of the Quantum Theory in Terms of Hidden
Variables I & II”, Phys. Rev. vol., 85, no. 2, pp. 166–193 (1952). Republished
in J.A.Wheeler and W.H.Zurek (eds) Quantum Theory and Measurement, 369–
96, Princeton University Press, Princeton (1983), pp. 369–96.
“On the Relationship between Methodology in Scientific Research and the
Content of Scientific Knowledge”, The British Journal far the Philosophy of
Science, vol. XII (1961), pp. 103–16.
“Classical and Non-Classical Concepts in the Quantum Theory”, The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, vol. XII, no. 48 (1962), pp. 265–80.
“Problems in the Basic Concepts of Physics” (an inaugural lecture delivered at
Birkbeck College, February 1963). In Satyendranath Base 70th Birthday
Commemoration Volume, Part II, Calcutta (1965), pp. 279–318.
“On the Problem of Truth and Understanding in Science”, in M.Bunge (ed.)
The Critical Approach to Science and Philosophy, in Honor of Karl R.Popper, Collier
Macmillan, London (1964), pp. 212–23.
“A Proposed Topological Formulation of the Quantum Theory”, in I.J.Good
(ed.) The Scientist Speculates, Putnam, New York (1965), pp. 302–14.
“Space, Time and the Quantum Theory Understood in Terms of Discrete
Process”, Proceedings of the International Conference on Elementary Particles, Kyoto
(1965), pp. 252–86.
“On Creativity”, Leonardo, vol. 1 (1968), pp. 137–49.
“On the Relationship of Science and Art”, in A.Hill (ed.) Data: Directions in Art,
Faber & Faber, London (1968).
“Some Remarks on the Notion of Order and Further Remarks on Order”, in
C.H.Waddington (ed.) Towards a Theoretical Biology, vol. 2, Aldine Press,
Chicago (1970), pp. 18–40.
“On Bohr’s Views Concerning Quantum Theory”, in T.Bastin (ed.) Quantum
Theory and Beyond, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1971), pp. 33–
40.
“Science as Perception-Communication”, in F.Suppe (ed.) The Structure of Scientific
Theories, University of Illinois Press, Illinois (1977), pp. 374–423.
“Time, the Implicate Order and Pre-Space”, in D.R.Griffin (ed.) Physics and the
Ultimate Significance of Time, State University of New York Press, New York
(1986), pp. 172–208.
“Meaning and Information”, in P.Pylkkänen (ed.) The Search for Meaning, The
New Spirit in Science and Philosophy, Thorsons Publishing Group,
Wellingborough (1989), pp. 43–62.
“A New Theory of the Relationship of Mind and Matter”, Philosophical Psychology,
no. 3 (1990), pp. 271–86.

Bibliography
251
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BOOKS AND
ARTICLES ON DAVID BOHM
Cushing, J.T., Fine, A. and Goldstein, S. (eds), Bohemian Mechanics and Quantum
Theory, Kluwer, Dordrecht (1996).
Griffin, D. (ed.), Physics and the Ultimate Significance of Time: Bohm, Prigogine and
Process Philosophy, State University of New York Press, New York (1986).
Hiley, B.J. and Peat, F.D. (eds), Quantum Implications: Essays in Honour of David
Bohm, Routledge, London (1987).
Peat, F.D., Infinite Potential: The Life and Times of David Bohm, Addison Wesley
Publishing Company Inc., Reading, Mass, and Harlow, England (1996).
Pylkkänen, P. (ed.), The Search for Meaning, Thorsons, Wellingborough (1989).
Schindler, D.L. (ed.), Beyond Mechanism, University Press of America, Lanham
(1986).
BOOKS BY CHARLES BIEDERMAN
Art as the Evolution of Visual Knowledge, Red Wing, Minnesota (1948).
Letters on the New Art, Red Wing, Minnesota (1951).
The New Cézanne: from Monet to Mondrian, Red Wing, Minnesota (1958).
Search for New Art, Red Wing, Minnesota (1979).
Art, Science, Reality, Red Wing, Minnesota (1988).
The Dehumanization and Denaturalization of Modern Art, Red Wing, Minnesota
(1992).
Nature and Art Anew, Red Wing, Minnesota (1993).
The End of Modernism: Figurative or Abstract, Red Wing, Minnesota (1994).
SELECTED ARTICLES BY CHARLES BIEDERMAN
“Art and Science as Creation”, Structure, vol. I, no. 1, Amsterdam (1958), pp.
2–18.
“Instinct-Intuition and Emotion-Intellect in Art”, The Structurist, no. 1, Saskatoon
(1960–1), pp. 42–51.
“A Non-Aristotelian Creative Reality”, Structure, vol. IV, no. 2, Amsterdam
(1962), pp. 38–43.
“Art in Crisis”, Studies in the Twentieth Century, no. 1, Troy, NY (1968), pp. 39–
59.
“Dialogue II: Creative or Conditioned Vision”, Data: Directions in Art, Theory
and Aesthetics, London (1968), pp. 76–94.

252
Bibliography
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY OF ARTICLES ON
CHARLES BIEDERMAN
Craven, D., “The Art of Charles Biederman”, unpublished PhD thesis,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill (1980a).
Craven, D., “Charles Biederman’s Art of Complicity”, Arts Magazine, March
(1980b), pp. 130–5.
Denny, Robyn, “Introduction”, in Charles Biederman: A Retrospective Exhibition
with Especial Emphasis on the Structurist Works of 1936–69 (exhibition catalogue
for the Hayward Gallery, London, and the Museum and Art Gallery,
Leicester), Arts Council of Great Britain, London (1969).
Hill, A., “The Climate of Biederman”, Studio International, vol. 178, no. 914,
London (1969), pp. 69–70.
Kuspit, D.B., “Charles Biederman’s Abstract Analogues for Nature”, Art in
America, May/June (1977), pp. 80–3.
Van der Marck, J., “Biederman and the Structurist Direction in Art”, in Charles
Biederman: A Retrospective Exhibition with Especial Emphasis on the Structurist Works
of 1936–69 (exhibition catalogue for the Hayward Gallery, London, and
the Museum and Art Gallery, Leicester), Arts Council of Great Britain,
London (1969).
 

  
abstractability: of nature 160, 164
abstraction 16, 37, 40, 132, 160, 227; as
ability 98; compared to mirroring
130; as concrete 161, 174, 214; as
correct reflection 136; as creative
56, 66, 139; inadequate 131; as
intelligent 208; as natural 141, 155,
160, 166; natural fields of 166;
need to go beyond 151, 168; as
partial 58; and perception of
totality 128; preverbal 116, 168,
207; as source of scientific data 184;
visual 119
action: and feeling 129, 162, 229;
inner 91; and thought 129, 162,
229
action painting 5, 7, 17, 80, 96, 133,
141
actuality 52–3, 59, 69; and
actualization 60, 75–6; as limit of
series of possibilities 53; reality as
91; see also possibility
aesthetics 74
AK see Korzybski, A.
amalgamation: of self with totality 175,
191
ambiguity 8–9, 11, 20, 31, 34, 39, 49,
234; in all divisions 15; of events
and things 29; of every description
of anything 29–30;
of future 15; leaving room for freedom
15, 29; of mode of being of parts
8–9, 15, 31–2; of “now” 15; of past
xx, 15, 29, 126; of quantum
phenomena xiv, xx, 8, 29–30
animals: and human character 186;
different potentialities of 187, 199
antirealism: about atoms 38; about
finite things 12, 22, 28
appearance 91, 172
applied arts 157
architecture 157
Aristotelianism 117
Arp, H. 158
art: evolution of 27, 35, 80; and
freedom 77; and future 21; history
of 60, 75; indeterministic and
molecular 21, 78, 80, 103, 158;
living quality in 35–6; and
mathematics 80, 149, 154–5, 158,
168; and nature 24, 59; nature of
13, 15, 71, 82; role of story in 157;
and science 4, 38, 46, 55, 73, 78,
88, 155, 184, 197; as totality
relation with nature 21; see also
realism in art; structurist art; work
of art
aspects: of totality 11, 127
association: of ideas 107–9
associative thinking 179; as
fragmentary and self-contradictory
180, 191
INDEX

254
Index
assumptions: silent 170
asymmetry 147, 150; as basic category
for space and time 189
attention: as reflection 108
 
Bach, J.S. 156
Baljeu, J. 61
beauty: in science and mathematics
183, 196; of truth 183
Beethoven, L. 80, 152, 156, 173, 207
being: as ambiguous 15; not exhausted
by causal relation in time 16; see also
cosmos, reality, totality, universe
Berger, J. 47, 55, 83
Bethe, H. 214
Biederman, C.: brief introduction of
his work xv-xvii; his analysis of
Monet and Mondrian 76–7; impact
of his work 156; see also structurist
art “big bang” 60, 156
blindness: and new kinds of sensitivity
207, 213
Bohm, D.: brief introduction of his
work xiii-xv; his essay on “Truth
and Understanding” 198, 201, 203;
his experience of Rouault’s The Old
Clown 18, 26, 205–6, 213; his
experience of unity 205–6, 210,
213; his view of modern art 17
Bohm, S. 34, 41, 53–4, 150;
description of her art 54
Bohr, N. xiii-xiv, 7–9, 11, 15, 21, 78;
discouraging new categories 15–16;
see also quantum theory
Bornstein, E. 26, 34, 96, 103 brain 98;
and memory 92
 
camera art: as evolving mimeticism
173
categories: need for their universality
189; opposition of 34, 53, 62; as
universal 34
causality 14, 16, 23, 144; as creative
77; see also determinism, necessity
causation: as an active process 65
cave painting 77, 195
Cézanne, P. xvi, 25, 27, 32, 76, 80, 94,
155–6, 175, 224–5
chance 77–8, 125, 157, 162; subjectivity
of xv chaos 29, 144
choice: of contexts as artificial 51; as
creative 48, 56
colour: in art and science 155
communication 62, 78, 129; limits of
the current notion of 46, 55
communism 102, 185, 188; and anti-
communism 143–4, 156; and
contradiction 186–7, 199
comparison 121; cannot detect
creativity 139
complementarity 20–1, 40–1, 117; of
actuality and possibility 53; of
determinism and indeterminism
16; of finite and infinite 29; of law
and lawlessness 34; of regularity
and irregularity 34
computers: memory in 92
concepts: generality of 114; as
reflections 135; as traces 135
concreteness 131, 150–1, 208; as
ground of abstractions 161, 174,
214 conditioning, psychological
93–5, 205, 230
confusion 216; and ego 217, 230–1
consciousness xxi, 68, 70, 92, 98;
stream of 108; and unconscious
151
Constable, J. 224
Constructionism xv; see also Structurist
art
Constructivism 154; Russian 156;
British 103, 156
contexts: as real 51–2
contingency 31–4, 40–1, 47, 49, 50–1,
58, 66, 69–71, 77, 160, 162, 227; as
context-relative 31; and
contingentation 64, 70–1, 91, 125,
147–8; definition of 31;
disappearance of 31; as essential
50; and evolution 98; as genuine
51, 163; in nature 146; as necessary
49–50; relativity of 162; and
unrelated orders 144, 146, 222; see
also necessity

Index
255
contradiction 104–5, 186; as arising
from well-defined use of terms 169;
inevitability of 111; in the mind
138; possibility of avoiding 127,
134; as property of each partial
field 164; in thinking 217–18, 224
conversation 129, 151
correspondence: between words and
world 164, 171
cosmos 49–50, 57, 60, 74; asserting
truth about 50; forming itself 45;
identity of its being and necessity
31, 49, 52; inclusive of every law
31; undergoing growth 57; see also
totality
counter-diction 112–15, 118
Courbet, G. xvi, 36, 41, 75, 195
creative act 39–40, 48, 56, 67, 94, 101,
120, 151; Biederman’s description
of 168; contributing to its own
reasons for being what it is 30, 39–
40; and lack of “I” 130, 151; and
mathematics 149, 168; as not
determined fully by anything else
30; opening up new possibilities
49; as self-limiting 14; terminating
possibilities 49; and unity of inner
and outer 173
creative determination xix-xx, 38–40,
45–6, 48, 54, 77, 125; in human
relations 46, 54
creative process: as infinite 57
creativity xx, 30, 38–9, 46–7, 54–5, 57,
60, 69, 93–5, 184, 215; as better
than freedom 40; confusion about
215; and counter-diction 112;
denied 57; as growth 156; as
instantaneous thought-feeling-
action 130, 151; in mathematics
159, 215, 223; as mutual 47; and
past 127; and science 155; as
understanding of totality 184
crystallography: and art 173
cubism 77, 182; and quantum
discreteness 141
 
da Vinci, L. 20, 88, 173, 207
dadaism 25
death 13
Delacroix, E. 36
democracy: as an example of
fundamental term 181, 185–7, 198,
200; as implicit totality 187
Denny, R. xv-xvii
desire 138, 229
de Stilj 6, 155
determination 29, 38, 45, 49, 56, 66,
75; as consequences of limitation
28, 38; as relative 28–9
determinism xx, 13, 16–17, 24; as
creative 23, 38–40, 45; implying
indeterminism 16; impossibility of
15; limits of 16; mechanistic 40, 48,
78, 125; as non-absolute 16;
teleological 48, 57; as trivial 164; as
wrong conclusion 29
dialogue: Bohm’s later idea anticipated
46, 236
difference 112, 114–15, 118, 173, 209;
as hidden 188; as most basic
category 189; as prior to similarity
189; its recognition 109; sensitivity
to 150
differentiation 117
disorder 16, 24, 25, 125, 144–5, 157
diversity: and diversification 70
duality 40, 57–8, 60–1, 65–6;
importance of asserting 50
 
Eddington, A. 22
ego 216–17
Einstein, A. xiv, 25, 40, 61, 72, 82,
153, 157
electron 41; ambiguity of 29–30, 32;
Bohm’s 1952 model of xiv;
Bohm’s pulsating model of 32–3, 40–
1; its non-existence at a fixed
moment 33, 41; its wave-particle
nature xiii, 32
emotions: anger 138, 181–2, 186, 202,
216, 224; and physical health 138,
216; the role of mental images in
138; and seeing truth 152
enfoldment 67–9, 76, 79

256
Index
Engels, F. 13
eternity 15, 48, 50
events: as ambiguous 29; mental 90; as
part of a causal chain 16; as unique
16
evolution 21, 23, 37, 88, 101; beyond
abstractions 128, 131; directed
consciously 21, 37; of humanity 21,
131, 150; of mental processes 92;
unconscious and conscious 102
existence 10; as action 91; of past 76;
in time and space 13; wholeness of
13
existentialism 5, 8, 20, 234; and
ambiguity 8–9; and quantum
physics 8
explanation 169
expressionism 5, 7, 17, 141, 188, 213
experience: of art 82; and
contradiction 137; and
experiencing 228; importance of
understanding 184; of nature 150,
192, 225; pre-verbal 120, 168–9,
207, 214; of qualities 111; role of
“nothing” in 110; role of past 93,
100; of truth 169; of understanding
169
 
falsification 191–4
falsity 131
fascism 186, 188
feelings 11, 78; and action 129, 162;
and contradiction 138; and passion
149; and thought 129, 162; and
totality 149; of truth 129, 149; of
understanding 129, 149
feeling-thinking 151, 162, 228, 231
fields: of abstraction 162–8, 166–7; as
closed 134; of contradiction 113;
defining identity with 160; in
mathematics 110; of thought and
experience 110, 133; of time 113
finite: as incomplete and transient 12,
28, 38–9; as limit in the infinite 10,
28
fragmentation: and creativity 175; as
result of arbitrary projection 160;
as result of mental contradiction
138
free will xx
freedom 12–14, 23–4, 31, 40; in art 95;
and creative determinism 39;
Engels’ notion of 13; as
indetermination by past 14; as
infinite 12; limited by past 13–14;
and limits of necessity 13; merging
with necessity 31; and necessity
163; positive content of 13; as self-
limitation 14
functions: mental 107–8; second order
108
future 11; ambiguity of 15; implying
newness to past 24, 27, 29, 37;
implying past 11; as incomplete 57;
not fully determined by past 30;
novelty of 13; removing ambiguity
of past 29
 
Gabo, N. 56
generality 107; see also universality
generation: of aspects of process 169;
of elements of world 161
generative order: Bohm’s later notion
anticipated 45–6
geometry 27; and human image 173;
non-Euclidian 72; and
understanding 128, 148, 180
George, W.H. 158
Giotto 75
 
hate 132, 198
Hegel, G. 191
Heisenberg, W. 21
Hiley, B. xiv
Hill, A. xiii, xv, 87, 140, 154
human beings: in charge of their
evolution 21, 37; as potentially
infinite 12, 23, 38
human life: distinguishing features of
98; as inexhaustible 23, 148; its
freedom requiring wholeness 14
human relations 5, 46, 54–5; creative
determinism in 46; and creativity
132

Index
257
humanity: survival of 100–2, 201;
unlimited aspects of 115
 
Ibsen, H. 67, 77
identity 74, 109, 111–12, 114, 118,
133, 160, 165, 167; and attitude of
non-identity 56; destructiveness of
116–17; falsity of idea of 181;
necessity of understanding
meaning of 164–5; non-existence of
127, 164; and nullity of a field 134,
166; rejection of 171, 199; and self
187, 199
illusions 38
implicate order xiv; Bohm’s notion
anticipated 10, 67–9, 76, 79
impressionism 17; saving the notion of
134; and scientific view of colour
155
incompleteness: of future 57; of past
57; of totality 57
independence: of orders 145
indeterminism 3, 16, 20, 24; appeal of
79, 157; as non-absolute 16;
subjectivity of xviii; as surreal 158
infinity 9–10, 22–3, 38, 48, 50, 57;
infinite 29; as “nothingness” 12; of
possibilities 126; as questioning the
mechanistic view 10; as self-limiting
9; of time 10
irrationality 39, 78
irregularity 33, 41, 144–5; see also
regularity
irreversibility 74, 76
inner show 202
intelligence 169; as assigner of values
208
 
Keyser, C. 21
Kierkegaard, S. 8
knowledge 3, 11, 39, 48–9, 52, 218;
and art 21; coarseness of 150;
limits of 39, 75; as necessarily
incomplete 47–9; and “not-
knowing” in art 25; of objective
existence of contingency 175;
possibility of 114; as precondition
of being 191; as projection towards
future 11; as selection out of
infinite totality 11; of totality 10–
11; see also reflection
Korzybski, A. 19, 127, 150, 164, 224;
his notion of time-binding 150; his
view of knowledge 150
Kuspit, D. xii
 
language 127; and general usage 171;
as having a narrowing effect 173;
and identity 127, 160, 167; and
nature 150, 171; see also identity,
meaning, terms
laws 11, 28, 31, 33–4, 41, 47–51, 144;
of chance 21; as following from
unity of totality 16; included in
cosmos 31; as limiting case 34–5;
limits of any particular law 16; as
merely contributions 33; non-
deducibility of 28; of perspective
173; of a picture 71; their lack of
absolute necessity 34; of totality
180; of unity 16; and universal
truth 88
lawlessness 33, 41; as feature of limited
context 33; inevitability of 34; see
also laws
learning 92–3; to create 156
levels of reality: relatively autonomous
existence of 27–8, 38
limitation 10, 13–14, 28–9, 57; limits of
12
logic 217, 224
Londsdale, K. 158
love: as essence of humanity 186–7;
and hate 205; and objectivity 153;
and perception of totality 139; and
understanding 132–3, 152–3, 205;
and vulnerability 205–6, 212
 
macroscopic level: not fully deducible
from atoms 30; not reducible to
atoms 27–8; relation to microscopic
192, 221–2, 226–7
mathematics: as crutch in art 154, 159,
168, 172, 223; as crutch in music

258
Index
168, 172; foundations of 168; and
group theory 135, 137, 149; of the
infinite 10; and limits of calculation
149; and music 148–9, 168; see also
geometry, music, nullity
Martin, M. 148
Marx, K. 191
Marxism 93–6, 102
meaning: of abstractions 185; and
contradiction 169–70; as explicit
167, 171; as function 164; and
general usage 171; as implicit 166–
7, 170–1, 185; of words 111, 114,
119, 164; as multi-ordinal 127; of
musical composition 129, 164; of
totality of reality 164; its
understanding as whole 166
mechanistic world-picture 3–4; denial
of 8
memory 67–8, 92, 98–9, 109, 111; as
action 229; and identity 134; see also
trace
mental: events 90; objects 109
meta-mathematics 168
mimetic art 25, 35, 59–60, 71, 79; and
anti-mimeticism 143–4, 157;
content vs. process in 174;
liberation from 157; new
possibilities in 206; post-
Courbetian 195–6; transitionfrom
76, 82, 155; as unique visual
experience 173; weakness of 161
mind: as clouded 203; its two ways of
functioning 179
mirrors: need for self-reflective 162,
175
modern art: confusion in 195; and
fragmentation 137; and quantum
physics xvii; see also art, Structurist
art
moments 50, 67–8, 70, 75, 91; of
creativity 148
Monet, C. xvi, 25, 60, 76, 155, 183
Mondrian, P. xvi, 24, 60, 76, 79, 94,
182–3; his neoplastic theory of art
74, 103, 154
Mozart, W.A. 80
multiordinality 171, 209–10
music: and mathematics 103, 113, 121,
148–9; and meaning 129; and
mimesis 88; role of story in 157
 
naming 107: of objects 107–8
nature 11–12, 22; abstractibility of
146; as art 23; and artist 159;
Biederman’s experience of 121;
contingentizability of 146; as
creation 41; as creative process
xviii, 77; diversity in 152;
fragmentizing of 211; its relation to
human beings xviii; as non-
contradictory 120; as opening
freedom to artist 23; renewal of 78;
seen differently by physics and art
xviii, 22–3, 153; split between
humans and 211
nazism 26, 186, 188, 199
necessity 13, 23, 30–2, 40, 47–51, 58,
90; arising from the singular 50; as
context-relative 31; and
contingency apply to everything
31; of cosmos 31;
definition of 30; as fundamental to
experience of structure 40; limits of
13, 47; merging with freedom 31;
and necessitation 64–6, 70–1, 75–6,
91, 125, 147–8, 159; relativity of
163; of structurism 142; without
contingency as trivial 50–1; see also
contingency
negation 230
Newton, I. 25, 174, 207
nothing: as relative 110
nothingness 12
nullity: of a field 134–7, 160, 168; in
mathematics 110; in physics 110
 
objectivity 36; of contingency xix, 49,
51, 69–70, 77, 87, 90, 125, 144, 163;
of creative process 49; of existence
of parts 49; and feelings 78; of
fields of abstraction 167; of
incompleteness of past 48; of
necessity 48, 51, 58, 70, 75; as love
153; of particularization 70; of

Index
259
possibility 52–3, 59; of randomness
144; of space-time 92
objects 107–8; mental 109
observation 9, 126; and unity of
observer and observed 138
opposites 74, 126; limits of thinking in
terms of 143–4, 156; as special case
189; unity and diversity of 70
order 16, 25, 125, 144–5; as
asymmetrical 147; compatibility of
orders 146; of crystal 146–7;
difficulty of distinguishing from
disorder 6; independence of orders
145, 157, 222; related orders 146;
as serial 127; tension between
orders 147; as transitive 127;
unrelated orders 146
 
particularity 14, 50, 62–3, 74–5; and
particularization 63–5
parts 64; ambiguity of 31–2;
contingency of 31, 49, 126, 237;
existence of 126; whole in 10
past 11; as constantly changing 24; as
implying future 11; incompleteness
of 47–8, 57; as limiting future 13; as
terminated 48
Pasmore, V. 54, 61
Peat, F.D. xv
Penrose, R. 242
perception 22, 37, 59, 75; and
abstraction 130; as action 229; in
art and science 197; coarseness of
150; of concreteness 131: and
instruments 20; limited by concepts
131; similarity of inner and outer
201; as thought-feeling 132;
thresholds of 167; of totality 130,
139
perfection: as too ideal 212
perspective 173
photography 35, 82, 157; as future of
mimetic art 182, 194
physics: and art 26; deterioration of
ideas in 143; its sensory dilemma
152; molecular theory of gases
146–7, 158, 192; order of crystals
146–7; see also quantum theory,
relativity theory
Picasso, P. 26, 77, 101, 103, 133, 137,
141, 153, 182
Pissarro, C. 155
Planck, M. 153
Plato 191
Poincar, H. 152
Popper, K. 191
positivism 5
possibility 31, 37–9, 48–9, 52–3, 59–
60, 69–71, 126; as applying only to
partial moments 52; as meaningless
in totality 52; as real 52; as
relationship in cosmic process 52–
3; as structural 155; as universal
category 67
potentiality 88, 155, 185; and truth
208
Poussin, N. 80
present moment: as ambiguous 15;
made up of past and future 11;
possibilities in 52–3; as reflection of
past and future 11, 15; see also
future, moments, past, time
process 10, 19, 22, 53, 60, 62, 65, 74,
89; as creative 49, 57, 69;
experience of 81; as generative 169;
as implicit 171; inward character of
91; as no “thing” 22; as primary
230; and projectability 135;
reflection of 105; of reflection 161;
and static objects 88; and totality
126–7; and traces 135; underlying
structure 150; verbal and non-
verbal 135
projectability: of nature 135, 161
projection 135; as arbitrary 160
Pryce, M. 116, 120
 
qualitativeness 150; and identity 136
qualities: self-identity of 115, 134;
change of 128
quantitativeness 150; as abstraction
from qualitative 136; and identity
136

260
Index
quantum theory: acceptance of 36;
and ambiguity 15, 29, 32;
andambiguity of “now” 15; Bohr’s
interpretation of xiii, xvii, 5, 7;
indeterminism in 29–30, 157; and
measurement 8, 19–20, 29, 33, 41,
206; and participation 3, 41, 126,
206; unity of observer and
observed in 206, 234; and wave-
particle character of matter xiii, 32,
40–1; see also Bohr, N., electron
quantum discreteness: similarity to
Impressionism and Cubism 141,
155
 
racism 186, 188
randomness 16, 144–5, 219–22;
Biederman’s unwillingness to
accept 158, 175, 226; and essentialb
urnrelatedness 221, 227; as
independence of two orders 145; as
relative 145, 147; subjectivity of
xviii
realism 238; and antirealism 238
realism in art 75; romantic 36; socialist
18
reality 11, 22; implicit character of 106,
135; as infinite 9; as indivisible
206; of non-actualized possibilities
52; see also totality
reasoning: logical 217
reduction: limits of 27, 37
reflection 11, 15, 51, 57, 65, 108; and
concreteness 131; content vs.
process of 161; as false 170; habits
of 175; and memory 92–3; of past
and future in present 15; of self-
reflectivity 161–2, 174; of totality
161; as true 170
regularity 33–4, 41, 47; implying its
limits 34
relativity theory: time in 89
Rembrandt 79, 81, 152, 197; his self-
portraits 213
repetition 127
representation: of objects 108; see also
reflection
representational art 17, 25
Renault, G.: Bohm’s experience of his
art 18, 26, 205–6, 213
Russell, B. 61, 153
 
Sartre, J.-P. 20
Schrodinger, E. 39
science 78; and art 184; and music
184; and nature as creation 82; as
process 116; role of motivation in
203; self-deception in 203
scientific experiments: artificiality of
157
scientific instruments 19–20; their
subjective influence 41
seeing as understanding 127
selection: of aspects of reality 11
self 200, 209
self-deception 138, 215; in science 203
semantics 127, 133
separation: of artist and art 159;
between people 55; between
humans and nature 55; of “I” and
“non-I” 202, 216
sex 138
similarity 118; difficulties of denning
127, 135; essential vs. trivial 166,
181, 200, 209; inadequacy of the
notion of 166; necessity of the term
171; for self 200, 209; as special
kind of difference 189, 199
society: as uncreative 46, 55
space 67; mathematical space and art
184 space-time: privacy of 92
structural view of nature 36
structure 40; in description of process
127; as the trace of process 88; as
process 150; as relationship in
process 127
Structurism xv; see also Structurist art
Structurist art xv, 35, 54, 61, 70–1, 76,
94; Biederman’s approval of
Bohm’s definition of 196; Bohm’s
definition of 183; Bohm’s reactions
to 140–8, 161, 163, 182; colour in
182; and cubism 154; and curves
140, 154; and freedom 163; and

Index
261
evolution of language 120, 137; as
evolutionary direction 154;
inconsistent elements in 94–7, 101–
3; and integration with
surroundings 140, 206; as
introducing a new field of
concreteness 175; its demand for
new mathematics 197; its demand
for new visual abstraction 36–7;
living quality in 159; and Marxism
93–6, 102; materials used in 154; as
“new art” 37, 154; as part of reality
72, 161; as pure creation 80, 82,
157; rejection of 36–7; and special
role of human beings xviii; and
structure of reality 71–2, 82; as too
mathematical 140, 154, 197
subject: and object 8–9, 126, 132
subjectivism 193
subjectivity 36, 41, 92, 195; of
contingency xviii, 40, 58, 98–9; of
dualism 58; of irregularity 47; of
lawlessness 47; see also objectivity
surrealism 4–5, 17, 26, 133, 188
symmetry 41, 74, 127, 147, 149–50,
158; as special case of asymmetry
189
sympathy 228
 
Tachism painting 80, 96–7
tension: between necessity and
contingency 159; creative 147–8;
inner 158
terms 104–5, 115, 165; definition of
166; essential meaning of 165;
implicit meaning of fundamental
terms 167, 171; as indefinite 116,
165, 169–70; as multi-ordinal 119,
160; and process of terming 106
theories, scientific 88; falsification
of 191–4; importance of
contingency for 50–1; inevitability
of lawlessness in 34
things 12, 28; as ambiguous 29; as
arbitrary 12; as basically infinite 10;
as contingent 12; as finite in only
crude sense 12, 38–9; limited by
past 13; as non-existent 12, 22, 28
thinking: associative 179; and logical
argumentation 179; as unconscious
179
thinking-feeling 129, 151, 228, 231
thought 11, 65, 127; and action 129;
and feeling 129, 139; as logical 114;
as process 105–7; as response of
memory 109; and world 117
time: xix, 10–11, 16, 22, 24, 27, 29, 31,
37, 39, 47–8, 52, 56, 60, 67–9, 75,
126; its reality denied 48, 51, 56–7;
measurement of 67; as most
fundamental division 15; as
movement from moment to
moment 169; order of 146; as
order in process 10; split into past
and future 11; see also future, past,
process
Tintoretto 213
Titian 213
topology 149
totalitarianism 78, 116, 185
totality: as closed system 57–8; as deep
and fundamental 129; difficulty of
denning 127; and feeling 149; as
incomplete 57; as infinite and
eternal 10–11, 16, 21, 40, 48–9, 51–
2, 57, 60, 64–5, 67–8, 70, 79; and
natural abstraction 160; as limit of
process 70; and perception 131; as
self-limiting 57; as starting point of
inquiry 16; and understanding 132;
uniqueness of its understanding
169
trace 67–9, 76, 79, 88–93, 99, 111, 132;
concepts as 135; and tracing 135
truth 67, 203–4; in art 183; basic
principle of 204, 210; Biederman’s
reaction to Bohm’s essay on 190–3;
Biederman’s vision of 142; as
concrete 131, 162, 208; as
developing 162; difficulties of
defining 127; difficulty of
understanding 204; and ego 204;
experience of as fundamental 169;
and feeling 149, 191; as non-

262
Index
contradiction 162; operation of
204; as our relation to totality 162;
as perception 132; plurality of 152;
as process 131; theories of 191; and
totality 131; and understanding
129, 131
 
unconscious: self-deception as 204
understanding: as act 201, 210, 218,
226, 231; basic concepts as totalities
181; and contradiction 138; as
creative 132; difficulties of defining
127–8; as essence of humanity
186–7; experience of as
fundamental 169; as feeling 149,
151; flashes of 128; in geometry
128, 148; levels of 148; and love
132–3, 137, 205; as mode of
functioning of mind 180; of past
93; as perception of totality 132,
162, 201; as process 132; as seeing
127–9; and senses 152, 207;
undefinability of 180; and values
208
uniqueness 16; of abstractions 142; of
creative acts 139; of events 100,
117; of human beings 99; as non-
reflection of past 16; of structurist
art 174
unity 66: of atomic elements 8–9, 201–
2, 206, 234; of body and
environment 202; of humans and
nature 211; of each thing with
cosmos 32; of “I” and “non-I” 130,
132, 138–9, 202–3, 206; of inner
and outer 169, 173, 201–6, 210,
213, 218; of observer and observed
8–9, 138, 234; of past and future
16; of subject and object 130, 138,
206, 231; of understander and
understood 149; and unification 70
universality 14, 62–3, 74–5; and
universalization 63–4, 68; see also
particular
universe: as ambiguous without us 11
unlimited 29
urbanization 78
 
value 207; eternal values as alterable
12; truth as 207
Van der Marck, J. xv-xx
verbalization: tragedy of 214
verbs: as basic form of language 231
verification: limits of 191
vision: and comprehension 119; of
totality 9
Visser, C. 54, 61, 83, 87, 140; Bohm’s
experience with his art 143–4
vulnerability 203, 205–6, 212, 224
 
Whitehead, A.N. 73, 82, 191, 195
whole: as containing full reasons for
parts 30
wholeness 14, 30
work of art: as always changing 210;
Biederman’s experience of 119;
contingency and necessity in 51,
59, 71, 79–81, 87, 91, 142–3, 158;
function of 47; inexhaustibility of
148; reflection in 10; as static 81;
unanalyzability of 13; unity in 13;
universal significance of 14, 21

