Chalmers University of Technology
Qualify for a Global Career
Master's studies
Download free books at

YOU’RE 
			  THE SOLUTION FOR 
	  A SUSTAINABLE 
FUTURE
Algeas - healthy, protein-rich and environmentally friendly!
And trendy! First we need to learn to refine them.
A research team at Chalmers is trying to find energy-smart, efficient 
and sustaibable ways to get the proteins out of the algeas.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

The technology of today and tomorrow 
won’t be developed in solitude. It is and will 
be, carried out in collaborative research, in 
teams with a broad international set-up. 
At Chalmers University of Technology we have approximately 1,000 international 
Master’s students. With teachers and students from various cultural backgrounds, 
the whole experience is designed to broaden your horizons and provide access to 
a greater network. 
Here you will learn to think independently and to meet future challenges with 
the help of engineering methods. We emphasise your creativity and we believe 
in the necessity of free thinking, so that you can be sure that you are able to test 
your own ideas for real. To facilitate an open environment and a close cooperation 
between students and teachers we pursue a truly informal atmosphere. 
All teaching is in English and through project-based assignments we provide 
hands-on experience of teamwork in everything from planning and organising to 
meeting deadlines and presenting results. 
Through these projects you also learn to apply your theoretical knowledge to 
tackle complex problems – a necessary approach to real-life situations. 
Chalmers occupies a prominent international position in research and education 
in engineering for sustainable development. This means we play a key role in find­
ing solutions to some of today’s urgent and complex global environmental and 
resource problems. Sustainable development is a key part of all programmes. 
We have established a clear 
link between the Master’s 
programmes, our research 
and the industry. Your teachers are active in research projects which 
means that you as a student will be close to the latest findings within your field. 
During your studies you will meet guest speakers from the industry and visit 
relevant working environments, bringing you closer to real-life settings. There are 
many opportunities for you to do your Master’s thesis in close cooperation with 
the industry or a research team at the university.
”
”
Poornima Joshi 
– Alumna – MSc Software Engineering
I studied the master’s in Entrepreneurship and Business Design, where I had 
the opportunity to create a Start-up. Thanks to Chalmers and the education 
I received, my team won the award for Best Start-up of the year in the business 
incubator at Chalmers. Today I continue working with my Start-up as CTO, 
where I test everything learned in business and engineering during my time 
at Chalmers.
”
”
After my studies, I got employed at Opera Software AS which I also found 
through the career fair called CHARM at Chalmers. Most employees at Opera 
have also graduated from Chalmers. The Chalmers culture exists even at the 
company which according to me was a key factor to have been employed here.
 The education I received has complemented me to perform well as a 
professional at Opera.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

SCHOLARSHIPS
Scholarships are a great source of funding for 
Master’s students who are liable to pay tuition fees. 
Chalmers University of Technology offers numerous 
scholarship opportunities. Some of these are admin­
istered by the university itself and others by external 
institutions.
They cover 75-100% of the tuition fee and some even 
include a travel grant and cover the cost of living.
www.chalmers.se/scholarships
EMPLOYABILITY
A Chalmers degree will make you attractive in the 
global labour market. Many of our students receive 
job offers even before completing their education.
There are also a number of students who start their 
own ventures and enterprises, often with support from 
our top ranked business incubator: Chalmers Ventures. 
This is a not so surprising step considering our close 
cooperation with the business and industrial commu­
nity throughout the different master’s programmes.
GOTHENBURG
CHALMERS UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY
- Founded: 1829, in Gothenburg, Sweden
- Full-time students: 11 000
- Master’s students: 3 000
- International Master’s students: 1 000
- Ranked among (QS World University Rankings by Subject, 
2016): the top 100 universities in the world within:
	
Architecture/Built Environment
	
Civil and Structural Engineering
	
Electrical and Electronic Engineering
	
DOUBLE MASTER’S DEGREE
Chalmers has agreements with other universities in the world, 
making it possible for students to graduate with a double 
Master´s degree. Double degree students take the first year at 
Chalmers and the second year  at one of our partner universi­
ties, including project work. When the project is concluded, 
the student will be awarded two Master’s degrees – one from 
each university.
PHD
- Full-time paid position during PhD
- Develop your own scientific concepts
- Teach at undergraduate level
- Get tuition in generic and professional skills
www.chalmers.se/masters
GOTHENBURG
- City founded: 1621
- Inhabitants: approximately 540 000, 2nd largest city in Sweden
- Largest private companies: Volvo Cars, Volvo Trucks, SKF, 
  Volvo Info Technology, Ericsson
- Green space per citizen: 175m2
- Airport: Landvetter
- Public transport trams: more than 240
- Public transport ferries: 9
- Bicycle lanes: 800 km
www.studentgoteborg.com
SWEDEN
- Capital: Stockholm
- Inhabitants: 9.8 million
- Length from North to South: 1 574 km
- Currency:  Swedish krona (SEK)
- Recycled household waste: 99%
- Swedish companies: Ericsson, Volvo, Electrolux, SKF, Sandvik, 
   Atlas Copco,  IKEA and H&M
- Global competitiveness index 2016: 9th in the world
- Global creativity index 2015: 7th in the world
- Global innovation index 2016: 2nd in the world
www.studyinsweden.se
”
I was awarded the Swedish Institute scholarship after being admitted at
Chalmers University of Technology. The scholarship is considered to be 
very competitive and applicants have to show their academic and social 
excellence. The Swedish Institute had gathered students from different 
backgrounds, studies, and cultures from all over the world. I am glad 
I was given the opportunity to study at Chalmers, meet people and 
build bridges between continents.”
Khaled Alaydi 
– Swedish Institute Scholarship Winner
– MSc. Infrastructure and Environmental Engineering
Joseph Chamochumbi 
– MSc – Entrepreneurship and Business Design 
– CTO Enatics Sports
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

APPLICATION
The application for a Master’s programme 
at Chalmers needs to be submitted through 
the Swedish national application website: 
www.universityadmissions.se
APPLICATION TIMELINE
OCTOBER
Application starts (online).
JANUARY
Application deadline for Master’s programmes.
Application deadline for Scholarships.
FEBRUARY
Deadline for receipt of supporting documents for all 
applicants, and receipt of application fee if required.
MARCH
First notification of selection results – Reply required!
APRIL
Deadline for response to your offer
Second notification of selection results – No reply 
required.
AUGUST/SEPTEMBER
The academic year starts.
GENERAL ENTRY REQUIREMENTS
A Bachelor’s degree or ongoing studies, with a 
Major in Science/Engineering/Architecture. 
Exception: the Master’s programme in 
Entrepreneurship and Business Design.
Proof of English language proficiency
•	
IELTS (academic training), 6.5 (with no part of 
the test below 5.5)
•	
TOEFL (paper based): 575 (with a minimum of 
4.5 on the written part)
•	
TOEFL (Internet based): 90 (with a minimum of 
20 on the written part)
SPECIFIC ENTRY REQUIREMENTS
All applicants must meet the programme-specific 
requirements.
FEES
Non-EU/EEA Applicants
Application fee: SEK 900.
Tuition fee: SEK 140 000/year, except for programmes 
within Architecture. The tuition fee for Architecture 
and Urban Design; Design for Sustainable Develop­
ment is SEK 190 000/year.
EU/EEA Applicants
Students who are EU/EEA or Swiss citizens are 
exempted from paying tuition and application fees.
SCHOLARSHIPS
Chalmers offers several scholarships for international 
fee-paying Master’s students, awarded on the basis of 
academic excellence. 
www.chalmers.se/scholarships
COST OF LIVING
7 974 SEK/month – Required for obtaining a 
residence permit.
CONTACT
If you have questions about how to apply; 
please contact admissions@chalmers.se
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden, Phone +46 31 772 1000
          facebook.com/NextStopChalmers   
	       facebook.com/groups/nextstopchalmersglobal
  instagram.com/nextstopchalmers
 	       youtube.com/nextstopchalmers   
  vimeo.com/chalmersuni
GET IN TOUCH WITH US 
MASTER’S PROGRAMMES 
TOUGHT IN ENGLISH, 2 YEARS, 120 CREDITS
ARCHITECTURE
Architecture and Urban Design
Design for Sustainable Development
CIVIL ENGINEERING
Design and Construction Project Management
Infrastructure and Environmental Engineering
International Project Management
Sound and Vibration
Structural Engineering and Building Technology
BIOTECHNOLOGY & CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
Biotechnology
Innovative and Sustainable Chemical Engineering
Materials Chemistry
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING 
& ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Biomedical Engineering
Communication Engineering
Computer Science – Algorithms, Languages and Logic
Computer Systems and Networks
Electric Power Engineering
Embedded Electronic System Design
Interaction Design and Technologies
Software Engineering
Wireless, Photonics and Space Engineering
ENGINEERING FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Industrial Ecology
Sustainable Energy Systems
ENGINEERING PHYSICS, MATHEMATICS
Applied Physics
Complex Adaptive Systems
Engineering Mathematics and Computational Science
Nanotechnology
Nuclear Science and Technology
Physics and Astronomy
MANAGEMENT OF INNOVATION AND TECHNOLOGY
Entrepreneurship and Business Design
Management and Economics of Innovation
Quality and Operations Management
Supply Chain Management
MECHANICAL, AUTOMATION AND INDUSTRIAL 
DESIGN ENGINEERING
Applied Mechanics
Automotive Engineering
Industrial Design Engineering
Materials Engineering
Production Engineering
Product Development
Systems, Control and Mechatronics
MARITIME AND NAVAL ENGINEERING
Maritime Management
Naval Architecture and Ocean Engineering
NORDIC FIVE TECH JOINT MASTER’S PROGRAMMES
Cold Climate Engineering
Environmental Engineering
Innovative Sustainable Energy Engineering
Maritime Engineering
Polymer Technology
 
         www.chalmers.se/masters
FOLLOW US
          www.chalmers.se/signup
	       nextstop@chalmers.se   
                 
READ MORE AT
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent  
the wheel we reinvent 
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of 
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new  
markets provide both opportunities and challenges. 
An environment in which your expertise is in high 
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere 
within our global group and benefit from international 
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close 
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to 
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing 
light every day.
Light is OSRAM

