Quantum Mind and Social Science
There is an underlying assumption in the social sciences that conscious-
ness and social life are ultimately classical physical/material phenomena. In
this ground-breaking book, Alexander Wendt challenges this assumption by
proposing that consciousness is, in fact, a macroscopic quantum mechanical
phenomenon. In the ﬁrst half of the book, Wendt justiﬁes the insertion of
quantum theory into social scientiﬁc debates, introduces social scientists to
quantum theory and the philosophical controversy about its interpretation,
and then defends the quantum consciousness hypothesis against the orthodox,
classical approach to the mind–body problem. In the second half, he develops
the implications of this metaphysical perspective for the nature of language and
the agent–structure problem in social ontology. Wendt’s argument is a revo-
lutionary development which raises fundamental questions about the nature
of social life and the work of those who study it.
alexander wendt is Ralph D. Mershon Professor of International Secu-
rity and Professor of Political Science at The Ohio State University. He is
the author of Social Theory of International Politics (Cambridge University
Press, 1999), which won the International Studies Association’s Best Book of
the Decade Award in 2006.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Praise for Quantum Mind and Social Science
“Wendt’s second monograph has been eagerly anticipated. Was it worth the
wait? Of course. Beautifully written and painstakingly argued, Quantum Mind
and Social Science explores the potential impact that advances in quantum
mechanics may have on the social sciences. Notwithstanding the fact that this
is probably one of the best introductions to quantum mechanics I have read, the
book also raises a series of pressing questions about how a careful engagement
with quantum mechanics might alter how we think about social science and
social practice. Do I agree with it? No. But that’s not the point. This is a book of
speculative grand theorizing that is sadly lacking in the social sciences today.”
Colin Wight
Professor in the Department of Government and
International Relations, The University of Sydney
“Alexander Wendt, one of the leading and most original voices in International
Relations, has now produced what may be his most daring effort yet. In Quan-
tum Mind and Social Science Wendt argues for a new kind of physicalism that
encompasses elements of mind all the way down to the quantum processes
governing elementary particles. For most social scientists, all that Wendt takes
us through will be a revelation. Wendt’s discussion of this material is just fab-
ulous, the best lay discussions of the issues I have seen. Whatever one thinks
of the ﬁnal thesis, the journey here is deﬁnitely worth the ride.”
Douglas V. Porpora
Professor of Sociology in the Department of
Culture and Communication, Drexel University
“This book is very well written and engaging and introduces some very contro-
versial new ideas. The author takes a courageous stance on a number of deep
and difﬁcult issues in philosophy of mind. Some of these ideas may ultimately
not be supported, and some others may engage never-ending debates. But if
even one of them turns out to be right, then the book will have made a great
contribution.”
Jerome R. Busemeyer
Provost Professor in the Department of Psychological
and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum Mind and Social
Science
Unifying Physical and Social Ontology
Alexander Wendt
Department of Political Science
The Ohio State University
Published online by Cambridge University Press

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781107442924
C⃝Alexander Wendt 2015
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2015
Printed in the United Kingdom by Clays, St Ives plc
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-107-08254-0 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-107-44292-4 Paperback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication,
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

For Emma and Otto
Published online by Cambridge University Press

“ . . . the worst of all possible misunderstandings would occur if psychology
should be inﬂuenced to model itself after a physics which is not there any
more . . . ”1
Physicist Robert Oppenheimer in 1956
1 The quote is from Young (1976: 26).
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Contents
Acknowledgments
page x
1
Preface to a quantum social science
1
Why are we here?
1
Introduction
2
The causal closure of physics
7
Classical social science
11
The anomaly of consciousness
14
The mind–body problem
14
Intentionality and consciousness
18
The threat of vitalism
21
The anomaly of social structure
22
Where is the state?
23
The threat of reiﬁcation
25
As if explanation and unscientiﬁc ﬁctions
26
My central question, and answer in brief
28
Re-inventing the wheel?
34
Situating your observer
36
Part I Quantum theory and its interpretation
39
Introduction
39
2
Three experiments
43
The Two-Slit Experiment
43
Measurement is creative
46
Collapse of the wave function
46
Complementarity
48
The Bell Experiments
50
The Delayed-Choice Experiment
54
3
Six challenges
58
The challenge to materialism
59
The challenge to atomism
60
The challenge to determinism
62
The challenge to mechanism
63
The challenge to absolute space and time
65
The challenge to the subject–object distinction
66
vii
Published online by Cambridge University Press

viii
4
Five interpretations
70
The problem and a meta-interpretive framework
71
Instrumentalism: the Copenhagen Interpretation
73
Realism I: materialist interpretations
76
The GRW Interpretation
76
The Many Worlds Interpretation
77
Realism II: idealist interpretations
81
The Subjectivist Interpretation
81
The Bohm Interpretation
85
Part II Quantum consciousness and life
91
Introduction
91
5
Quantum brain theory
95
Your quantum brain
96
The Fr¨ohlich tradition
98
The Umezawa tradition
101
Assessing the current debate
102
6
Panpsychism and neutral monism
109
Panpsychism
111
Background
112
Deﬁning ‘psyche,’ aka subjectivity
114
Projecting subjectivity through the tree of life
116
. . . And then all the way down
119
The combination problem and quantum coherence
123
Neutral monism and the origin of time
124
7
A quantum vitalism
131
The materialist–vitalist controversy
132
Life in quantum perspective
137
Cognition
139
Will
139
Experience
141
Why call it vitalism?
143
Part III A quantum model of man
149
Introduction
149
8
Quantum cognition and rational choice
154
Quantum decision theory
157
Order effects in quantum perspective
157
Paradoxes of probability judgment
159
Quantizing preference reversals
161
Rationality unbound?
164
Quantum game theory: the next frontier
169
9
Agency and quantum will
174
Reasons, teleology, and advanced action
175
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Contents
ix
Free will and quantum theory
182
The philosophical literature
183
The Libet experiments
185
10
Non-local experience in time
189
The qualitative debate on changing the past
191
The Epistemological view
192
The Ontological view
193
The physics of changing the past
198
Part IV Language, light, and other minds
207
Introduction
207
11
Quantum semantics and meaning holism
210
Composition versus context in meaning
212
Quantum contextualism
215
12
Direct perception and other minds
222
The problem of perception
223
The dual nature of light
226
Holographic projection and visual perception
228
Semantic non-locality and intersubjectivity
230
The theory of mind debate
230
Semantic non-locality and other minds
233
Three objections considered
237
Part V The agent–structure problem redux
243
Introduction
243
13
An emergent, holistic but ﬂat ontology
247
Supervenience meets externalism
250
Agents, structures, and quantum emergence
255
Downward causation in social structures
260
14
Toward a quantum vitalist sociology
267
The holographic state
268
The state as an organism
273
The state and collective consciousness
275
The politics of vitalist sociology
281
Conclusion
283
Night thoughts on epistemology
284
Too elegant not to be true?
288
Bibliography
294
Index
345
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Acknowledgments
Writing this book has been very much a “quantum” experience. On the one
hand, locked in my own personal bubble of subjectivity, I have found it quite
isolating to venture into and try to get a grip on literatures with which I often
had no initial familiarity, and where an iconoclastic interloper could expect
little systematic help from local guides. On the other hand, my experience has
also been quite holistic in the sense that innumerable individuals have joined
me along the way, whether in the form of written comments on parts of the text,
meetings over lunch to discuss problems I was having, countless questions at
seminars, references sent that I had not seen, and a striking number of random
emails from people around the world who had heard of my work and either
had something substantive to say or just wanted to offer encouragement. By no
means has everyone agreed with me, but their comments were overwhelmingly
constructive. I was not able to incorporate all of the input I received, but a great
deal of it is now enfolded in one form or another within the ﬁnal product, which
is participatory epistemology at its best.
The journey to this book has been a long one, over ten years depending on
how you count, and over the course of this period the logistics train carrying
my records of all this feedback simply broke down. Thus, much to my regret
I am unable to recall every individual who helped me to clarify and formulate
my ideas – or even every institution where I have presented them. All the more
reason, therefore, for me to begin by expressing my heartfelt thanks to everyone
I have encountered along the way, and my apologies to those whose names are
now lost in the sands of time.
Those whom I do recall fall into three groups: outside help, colleagues, and
family. In the ﬁrst category, Stuart Hameroff has been supportive of this project
from its very inception. Stu not only commented twice on early drafts of my
quantum brain chapter but also invited me – at the time a complete stranger –
to be a plenary speaker at the 2004 Tucson conference on “Toward a Science of
Consciousness.” Being at this large and hugely stimulating conference showed
me that while my thesis might be crazy, at least I was in good company.
I am very grateful to Stefano Guzzini and Anna Leander, who in a 2006
volume gave me the opportunity to crystallize my argument in the form of
x
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Acknowledgments
xi
an “auto-critique” in response to critics of my ﬁrst book, Social Theory of
International Politics. This led to the ﬁrst published version of these ideas, and
generated a number of subsequent comments that encouraged me to keep going
with the project.
John Haslam at Cambridge University Press gave my initial proposal for the
book a warm reception, and found an outstanding and diverse set of reviewers
for the manuscript. Their enthusiasm – despite varying degrees of skepticism
about the argument – made it possible to muster the last burst of energy I needed
to take their many comments on board.
Among the colleagues who contributed extensive written comments and/or
signiﬁcant moral support for my work, my (again, incomplete) records include
Bentley Allan, Badredine Arﬁ, Bear Braumoeller, Steve Brooks, Zoltan Buzas,
Aldous Cheung, Bud Duvall, Karin Fierke, Caleb Gallemore, Chris Gelpi, Eric
Grynaviski, Xavier Guillaume, Stefano Guzzini (again), Ted Hopf, Tahseen
Kazi, Jim Keeley, Jason Keiber, Oliver Kessler, Tim Luecke, Eric MacGilvray,
Sebastien Mainville, Patchen Markell, Dragan Milovanovic, Mike Neblo, Karen
O’Brien, Heikki Patomaki, Sergei Prozorov, Randy Schweller, Alex Thompson,
Srdjan Vucetic, Lisa Wedeen, Colin Wight, and RaﬁYouatt.
Many of these colleagues are or were at The Ohio State University, which I
joined in 2004 and where most of the work on this book was done. The Political
Science department and the Mershon Center for International Security Studies
provided tolerant intellectual environments for their new colleague and his
strange ideas, and – under Rick Herrmann’s leadership in both cases – also
remarkable institutional patience as my required yearly productivity reports
continually promised that the manuscript would be done “in a year or two.”
Among my Ohio State colleagues Allan Silverman deserves signal recogni-
tion for commenting in detail on large parts of the manuscript, and for being
a good friend and constant source of intellectual guidance – and humor –
throughout my time here.
Jerome Busemeyer, Doug Porpora, and Abe Roth were exceptionally kind
to take several days out of their lives ﬁrst to read and then discuss the whole
manuscript at a Mershon workshop in 2013. Their thorough and probing com-
ments clariﬁed many smaller points and also affected the framing of the book
as a whole.
Zac Karabatak undertook the daunting task of reconciling the footnotes
against the bibliography, which saved me an immense amount of time and
would have driven me crazy in the process.
Ann Powers was the ﬁrst person to agree unambiguously with my thesis
and provided essential moral and administrative support throughout its realiza-
tion. I especially appreciated her irreverent attitude toward academics, which
reminded me that just because the Experts say something is true doesn’t mean
that it is.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

xii
Acknowledgments
Turning ﬁnally to family, Chris Wendt, my brother and a physicist by train-
ing, patiently answered my many na¨ıve questions over the years about quantum
mechanics, which was an invaluable resource that saved me from numerous ele-
mentary mistakes (though he bears no responsibility for those that undoubtedly
remain).
My father, Hans Wendt, taught me that the way forward in science is to look
for anomalies, not just patterns, which as you will see found its way into the
structure of many parts of the book.
I owe a special gratitude to Jennifer Mitzen, who has been my companion
the whole way, which means that more than anyone she had to deal with all
the anxiety and stress that accompanied my undertaking. Despite her own
many responsibilities and hesitation in the face of quantum theory she was
always willing to drop everything to talk about my ideas. Jennifer also gave me
extensive comments on several chapters, both line-by-line ones that sharpened
many points and structural ones that forced me to recast whole sections. The
ﬁnal product would have been much the worse without her.
Quantum Mind and Social Science is dedicated to Emma and Otto, who have
never known a day of their lives when I was not working on it, and who may
live long enough to ﬁnd out whether Daddy’s conjecture is right.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

1
Preface to a quantum social science
Why are we here?
Almost from its inception as an academic discipline in 1919, International Rela-
tions (IR) has featured “Great Debates” about what we today would call the
relationship between ideas and material conditions, human agency and social
structures, and naturalist and anti-naturalist modes of inquiry. While often
disparaged as mere “meta-theory,” at least implicit positions on these essen-
tially philosophical questions play an important role in the ﬁeld. Intellectually,
they structure our substantive theorizing, methods, empirical ﬁndings, and ulti-
mately the normative and policy implications we draw from our research; and
sociologically, they affect who we hire (and sometimes, ﬁre), where we publish,
and how we train our graduate students. Unfortunately, despite considerable
disciplinary investment in meta-theory since the 1980s, from my own vantage
point, as someone who has been involved in these debates for 25 years, I see
no progress toward ending them. IR scholars have a better sense today of what
the issues are and how, why, and when they matter, but the debates remain
as intractable as ever. When it comes to the ontological and epistemological
foundations of IR scholarship, we are in a “Land of Confusion”1 from which
escape is nowhere on the horizon.
Of course, the confusion is not IR’s alone, but the social sciences’ as a whole.
Although over the years sociologists, economists, political scientists and oth-
ers have acquired better data and statistical techniques that have signiﬁcantly
improved empirical understanding of trends and relationships in society, social
scientists’ ability to cumulate deeper, theoretical knowledge has lagged seri-
ously behind. This is true even in economics, where despite greater theoretical
homogeneity, vigorous heterodoxies survive. In contrast to physical sciences
like chemistry or geology, where there is broad agreement on the nature of
reality and how we should study it, in the social sciences there is no such
I am very grateful to Colin Wight for exceptionally detailed comments on a draft of this chapter,
especially since he disagrees with the whole idea.
1 If you’ll pardon the reference to the 1986 hit by Genesis; cf. Disturbed’s 2005 cover.
1
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2
Preface to a quantum social science
consensus. As a result social scientiﬁc theories rarely die, and if they do, like
zombies they inevitably come back to life later.
As I argue below, the reason for this state of affairs is that social phenomena
are mind-dependent in a way that chemical elements and rocks are not, and
as such do not present themselves directly to the senses. Thus, before social
scientists can even “see” what they are studying they must make a number of
philosophical assumptions about the mind that are easily contested by those
who would make different ones.
In philosophy there is a long-standing suggestion2 that when debates persist
for many years with no discernible progress, this is because all sides are making
an assumption that is in fact mistaken. If such an assumption could be identiﬁed
in the philosophy of social science, then that might enable IR scholars and social
scientists more generally to ﬁnd the Undiscovered Country of philosophical
clarity that has eluded us for so long. But what might it be?
My own “aha!” moment came in 2001 after reading Danah Zohar and Ian
Marshall’s book The Quantum Society, which I had picked up almost randomly
at the University of Chicago bookstore.3 Zohar and Marshall were writing for a
general audience, so I did not ﬁnd the discussion of social and political theory
entirely satisfying. However, their basic idea – that the mind and social life are
macroscopic quantum mechanical phenomena – hit me as just the kind of thesis
that could help move philosophical debates in the social sciences forward. That
is because it calls into question a foundational assumption taken for granted by
all sides – namely that social life is governed by the laws of classical physics.
I don’t know if the conjecture is right, but I felt it deserved a more systematic
treatment that could be subjected to serious academic scrutiny. That is what I
have tried to do in this book. Doing so took much more space (and time!) than I
expected, and so unlike my ﬁrst book,4 which was half philosophy and half IR,
this one is all philosophy. So for my colleagues in IR, all I can offer here is the
promise of a more IR-focused “volume 2” down the road. In the meantime, I
hopetheywill ﬁndsomethingof valueinabookaddressedtoall social scientists.
Introduction
The advent of quantum theory in the early twentieth century revolutionized
physicists’ description of reality. Exactly what conclusions should be drawn
from that description of reality is still being debated today, but the theory
is extraordinarily well conﬁrmed and all sides agree on its basic ﬁndings. In
particular, whereas mathematical symbols in classical physics correspond to
the properties of real material objects and forces, in quantum physics they
2 Due, I believe, to Frank Ramsey in the 1920s.
3 See Zohar and Marshall (1994).
4 See Wendt (1999).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
3
represent only the probabilities of ﬁnding certain properties when they are
measured. Moreover, these quantum probabilities, which are expressed by
“wave functions,” are completely unlike classical probabilities. Whereas the
latter denote our ignorance about what is actually the case and as such are
incomplete descriptions of reality, the former denote all that could even in
principle be known about quantum systems. Despite its probabilistic character,
in other words, the wave function is a complete description of a quantum
system, until its measurement, at which point it “collapses” and just one,
classical outcome is observed. So, unlike in classical physics, where we can
safely assume that objects have, for example, a momentum or position even
when we are not observing them, in quantum physics we have no basis for such
an assumption. Wave functions are potential realities, not actual ones.5
Understanding how the indeterminate quantum world results in the determi-
nate classical world – a process known as “decoherence” – is one of the deep
mysteries of quantum theory. However, its immediate signiﬁcance in the present
context is that, although quantum mechanics subsumes classical physics, its
practical applicability is generally thought to be conﬁned to sub-atomic parti-
cles. Above that level, it has long been assumed that quantum effects wash out
statistically, leaving the decohered world described by classical physics as an
adequate approximation of macroscopic reality. That includes social life, the
contemporary study of which, I argue below, is all based at least implicitly on
the worldview of classical physics.
In this book I explore the possibility that this foundational assumption of
social science is a mistake, by re-reading social science “through the quantum.”
More speciﬁcally, I argue that human beings and therefore social life exhibit
quantum coherence – in effect, that we are walking wave functions. I intend
the argument not as an analogy or metaphor, but as a realist claim about what
people really are. Scholars have long pointed to a number of strong analogies
between human and quantum processes: between free will and wave function
collapse, the holism of meaning and non-locality, observer effects in psycholog-
ical experiments and quantum measurement, and even double-entry accounting
and quantum information.6 These and other analogies are sufﬁciently sug-
gestive that one might apply quantum thinking to social life simply on that
basis.
While one could read this book entirely in that way, as an interesting anal-
ogy, my personal belief is that human beings really are quantum systems. I
defend that belief explicitly only in the Conclusion, but the book as a whole
5 While there is debate about the ontological status of the wave function, no one argues that it is
real in the same sense as classical objects.
6 See Brandt (1973), Rosenblum and Kuttner (1999), Bitbol (2002), Heelan (2004), Pylkk¨anen
(2004), Filk and M¨uller (2009), Grandy (2010), Kuttner (2011) and – since you’re probably
wondering about the case of accounting – Fellingham and Schroeder (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

4
Preface to a quantum social science
is written with a view toward showing how this hypothesis could possibly be
true. This realist stance will take me into controversial, speculative and frankly
dangerous territory that could be avoided by an analogical road to “quantum
social science.” However, it would also come at a cost, which is that it would
make quantum theory just another tool for social scientists to pick up – or not –
as they see ﬁt, and bracket some of the theory’s most profound potential impli-
cations. In contrast, if human beings really are quantum, then classical social
science is founded on a mistake, and social life will therefore require a quantum
framework for its proper understanding.
This is not the ﬁrst call for a quantum social science. Already in 1927 –
just weeks after the Solvay conference marking the culmination of the quan-
tum revolution – the President of the American Political Science Association,
William Bennett Munro, challenged social scientists to come to grips with
the new physics.7 Philip Mirowski argues that to a limited extent they did, in
that its probabilistic “spirit” facilitated social scientists’ embrace of statistical
methods in the 1930s.8 But until recently there has been almost no reﬂection on
the signiﬁcance of quantum theory itself for the social sciences. As if to drive
home this neglect, the methods embraced in the 1930s were based on classical
probability theory – which came from the previous, Newtonian revolution in
physics – not quantum probability theory.
While the social sciences have prospered in the ensuing years, there is
today a good reason to re-open the quantum question: growing experimental
evidence that long-standing anomalies of human behavior can be predicted
by “quantum decision theory.” This is a quantized version of expected utility
theory, which replaces the latter’s either/or Boolean logic with the both/and
logic of quantum probability theory.9 Quantum decision theory predicts most10
of the deviations from rational behavior found by Daniel Kahneman, Amos
Tversky and others using expected utility theory as a baseline – order effects,
preference reversals, the conjunction fallacy, the disjunction fallacy, and so
on. Psychologists have devoted enormous energy to trying to explain these
anomalies, but the results have been partial and theoretically ad hoc. In contrast,
with a single axiomatic framework, quantum decision theory shows they are not
anomalies at all, but precisely what we should expect. Prestigious journals like
Journal of Mathematical Psychology (2009), Behavioral and Brain Sciences
(Pothos and Busemeyer, 2013), and Topics in Cognitive Science (2014) have
taken notice and devoted substantial space to this unfamiliar approach. While
the theory is new and its larger reception remains to be seen, its ﬁndings are
7 See Munro (1928).
8 See Mirowski (1989).
9 See especially Busemeyer and Bruza (2012), which includes an accessible introduction to
quantum theory, probability and logic.
10 My sense is that this qualiﬁcation is necessary only because the literature is so young that it has
not been able to take up all the relevant anomalies; see Chapter 8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
5
extraordinary. Rarely in the social sciences has one theory explained so much
that was so puzzling before.11 Quantum decision theory seems as clear a case
as one could hope for of progress in social science, not just within a research
program, but from one research program to the next.12
But that’s only the half of it. Quantum decision theorists have been cautious in
speculating about the philosophical implications of their work, focusing instead
on just proving that it predicts previously anomalous behavior. In doing so they
have embraced what is known as “generalized” or “weak” quantum theory,
which applies the quantum formalism to phenomena beyond the domain of
physics – like social life – while remaining agnostic about what is going on
underneath.13 While this “as if ” strategy has pragmatic attractions, it overlooks
the fact that quantum decision theory’s success at the behavioral level fulﬁlls a
key prediction of a controversial hypothesis about what is happening deep inside
the brain: quantum consciousness theory, according to which consciousness
is a macroscopic quantum phenomenon.14 That could help solve one of the
deepest mysteries of modern science: the mind–body problem, or how to explain
consciousness in scientiﬁc terms.
Since the Enlightenment it has been assumed that to explain consciousness
scientiﬁcally means showing how it is compatible with the worldview of classi-
cal physics. Classical physics implies a materialist ontology in which reality is
ultimately made up of just matter and energy. It is therefore ironic that quantum
wave functions are not material at all, at least not in any ordinary sense. This
has led some philosophers of physics to argue that, far from materialism, quan-
tum theory actually implies a panpsychist ontology: that consciousness goes
“all the way down” to the sub-atomic level. Exploiting this possibility, quan-
tum consciousness theorists have identiﬁed mechanisms in the brain that might
allow this sub-atomic proto-consciousness to be ampliﬁed to the macroscopic
level. Modern neuroscience can’t test this claim yet, but one of its implications
is that human behavior should have quantum characteristics, which quantum
decision theory bears out. From this standpoint, in short, there is the possibility
not only of a progressive problem shift in behavioral social science, but of a
paradigmatic change in the modern scientiﬁc worldview.
Social scientists might reasonably doubt that a hoary philosophical con-
troversy like the mind–body problem could be relevant to their work. Yet
we have hoary controversies of our own. In social epistemology there is the
11 Something similar may be starting to happen in the biological sciences with the emergence of
“quantum biology,” which I discuss in Chapter 7.
12 See Lakatos (1970).
13 See Atmanspacher et al. (2002) and Walach and von Stillfried (2011). Because it uses the
formalism to make quantitative predictions I would say quantum decision theory goes beyond
a purely analogical approach.
14 See Chapter 7 and Atmanspacher (2011) for a recent overview.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

6
Preface to a quantum social science
“Explanation vs. Understanding” debate between naturalists or positivists,15
who think there is no essential difference between physical and social science,
and anti-naturalists or interpretivists who think there is because people act on
meanings that must be interpreted.16 In social ontology there is the “Agent–
Structure” debate, between individualists who think that social structures can be
reduced to the properties and interactions of individual agents, and holists who
think they can’t.17 And then there is perhaps the biggest debate of all, between
materialists who think social life ultimately can be explained by material con-
ditions and idealists (or idea-ists) who think that ideas play an autonomous
or even decisive role. This latter debate arguably subsumes the other two,
since without ideas in play there would be no meanings to interpret or social
structures to reduce. Moreover, this debate is not merely like the mind–body
problem in seeming intractable, but of a piece with it substantively, because
ideas are dependent on consciousness. Which is to say: some of the deepest
philosophical controversies in the social sciences are just local manifestations
of the mind–body problem. So if the theory of quantum consciousness can
solve that problem then it may solve fundamental problems of social science
as well.
I have put a lot of balls in the air and will not try to catch them all. First, except
in Chapter 8, I will not deal extensively with quantum decision theory. Work
in this vein is in full swing, and now spreading from psychology to the social
sciences at large,18 and with no formal training myself, I am in no position
to contribute to it. My focus instead will be on its philosophical implications,
which have been neglected so far. Second, only in the Conclusion will I take
up the Explanation–Understanding debate. One reason is frankly practical; this
book is so long already that to ﬁnish it I need to focus its argument as much
as possible. Another is that pioneering contributions in this area have already
been made by scholars such as Karen Barad, Michel Bitbol, Patrick Heelan, and
Arkady Plotnitsky – although they are by no means all in agreement.19 But most
importantly, in my view we will not make clear progress on the epistemology
of a quantum social science until we have a ﬁrm basis in its ontology, where
little work has been done. That leaves just one – albeit still very large – ball
to catch, the nature of ideas and consciousness, and its implications for the
agent–structure problem.
15 I will use these terms interchangeably, giving ‘positivism’ a broader meaning than it carries in
much social scientiﬁc discourse, where it is often juxtaposed to scientiﬁc or critical realism.
Realists are naturalists and thus positivists in my sense.
16 See Apel (1984) and Hollis and Smith (1990) for introductions to this debate.
17 See for example Wendt (1987), and Wight (2006) and Elder-Vass (2010a) for the state of the
agent–structure art in IR and social theory respectively.
18 See, for example, Haven and Khrennikov (2013) and Khrennikova et al. (2014).
19 See Barad (2007), Bitbol (2002; 2011), Heelan (1995; 2009), and Plotnitsky (1994; 2010).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
7
Since the start-up costs for thinking in quantum terms are high, my goal in
this “preface” is motivational: to explain why it is necessary to turn to such an
exotic theory to solve basic problems of social ontology. In particular, I show
that the agent–structure problem stems from the fact that the ways in which
social scientists have dealt with an essential feature of the human experience –
namely experience itself – originate in classical assumptions about the
mind–body problem. The chapter ends with an overview of the book’s positive
argument.
The causal closure of physics
There are at least two long-standing anomalies in social ontology: the existence
of subjectivity, speciﬁcally its conscious aspect; and the unobservability of
social structures. The two are related through the agent–structure problem, of
which they are in effect opposite sides, and in the end I argue that the second
is a function of the ﬁrst. However, they involve distinct issues and literatures,
and as such are treated separately below.
In social theory, subjectivity and unobservable social structures are usually
referred to as “problems” rather than “anomalies,” but this understates their
signiﬁcance. By calling them anomalies I mean that, given a classical world-
view, they simply should not be there any more than the anomalies in physics
which sparked the quantum revolution should have been there. To be sure, sub-
jectivity and social structures cannot be seen with the naked eye or recorded on
instruments, and as we will see this has prompted some philosophers to argue
that they are illusions and thus aren’t there. However, most social scientists, I
suspect, think they are, so before we give in to philosophers of illusion it makes
sense to explore all possible means to justify this belief.
But ﬁrst, I need to do some work on the other side to convince credulous
social scientists that subjectivity and social structures are anomalies at all. To
do that, in this section I begin with a foundational principle to which all social
scientists should agree, the “causal closure [or completeness] of physics” or
“CCP.”20
The CCP means that the social (and all other) sciences are subject to a physics
constraint: no entities, relationships, or processes posited in their inquiries
should be inconsistent with the laws of physics. The idea is that because
physics deals with the elementary constituents of reality, of which macroscopic
phenomena are composed, everything in nature21 is ultimately just physics. This
20 With apologies to the Chinese Communist Party; for good introductions to the CCP and its
rationale, see Papineau (2001) and Vicente (2006; 2011).
21 Or at least everything with causal powers in the temporal world; the CCP does not rule out the
existence of God or other spiritual phenomena as long as they mind their own business; see
Papineau (2001).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

8
Preface to a quantum social science
gives physics a foundational role with respect to other sciences, which today
are often collectively called the “special” sciences to signify their subordinate
status.22
At a working level the CCP is almost universally accepted today in the
physical and biological sciences. The situation may seem less clear in the
social sciences, where even positivists may be skeptical of “social physics,”
and interpretivists reject naturalistic approaches to social inquiry altogether.
Nevertheless, I argue in a moment that the CCP is almost universally accepted
in the social sciences as well. But before defending that perhaps provocative
claim let me prepare the ground by ﬁrst emphasizing two things that the CCP
does not commit us to.
First, epistemologically speaking, the causal closure of physics does not
mean social scientiﬁc theories must be reducible to physics, in the sense of
being able to replace their laws with laws of physics without loss of explanatory
content. Such reductions have proven elusive even in the physical and biological
sciences, the objects of which are often closer to physics in scale and complexity
than human beings are. If chemistry is not reducible to physics, then all the
more reason to think that social science is not either. Our knowledge of the
world is “dappled,” in Nancy Cartwright’s suggestive image, disparate and
fragmented rather than integrated and uniform.23
However, as Lawrence Sklar has argued in response to Cartwright, we should
not confuse the epistemological point that our knowledge is currently frag-
mented with the ontological point that the laws of physics do not apply to
everything in the world.24 All objects and forces are made up of the phenom-
ena described by fundamental physics,25 and thus “the laws of the fundamental
theory are as true of these objects as they are of the carefully isolated systems
of small numbers of particles constructed in the laboratory.”26 In other words,
whatever law-like processes exist in social life, they cannot force the elemen-
tary constituents of nature to violate their laws. So while the CCP does not
imply reductionism, it does limit ontologically what can exist and happen at
the macro-level.
The other thing that the CCP does not commit us to is the philosophical
doctrine of physicalism,27 according to which everything in the world is ulti-
mately physical. That may sound counter-intuitive, since ‘physical’ is usually
deﬁned by “whatever physics says there is,” so how could the causal closure of
22 See Fodor (1974).
23 Cartwright (1999); also see Dupr´e (1993) and Ziman (2003).
24 Sklar (2003); also see Pettit (1993b) and Hoefer (2003).
25 Today taken to be quantum ﬁeld theory.
26 See Sklar (2003: 433), emphasis in the original; also see Ladyman (2008: 745–746), “[s]pecial
science hypotheses that conﬂict with fundamental physics . . . should be rejected for that reason
alone.”
27 At least as it is currently understood; see below.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
9
physics not imply physicalism? And indeed the two are often conﬂated in the
literature.28 In my view this conﬂation is a mistake, and since this will form a
crucial wedge in my argument it is important to see why.
Physicalism is the modern descendant of classical materialism. Materialists
held that reality is ultimately purely material, understood as the little bits of
matter and (later) energy described by classical physics. Importantly, these bits
of matter were assumed to lack any trace of consciousness within them. With
this claim materialists opposed not just theism, which gave God a temporal
role, but also all doctrines that gave consciousness or mind a fundamental sta-
tus, like idealism, dualism, and panpsychism. For materialists, at the end of the
day everything is just mindless matter in motion. However, with the quantum
revolution materialists were betrayed by their physicist allies, who found that
the classical idea of matter broke down at the sub-atomic level. In effect, quan-
tum physics falsiﬁed classical materialism.29 Rather than abandon materialism,
however, materialists morphed into physicalists. In doing so they retained their
opposition to theism and all doctrines that give mind a fundamental status, but
now deferred to the ongoing inquiry of physics to tell us what precisely the
fundamental level looks like.
The problem with this is not only that physicalism lacks a stable meaning
of ‘physical,’ which has worried some physicalists themselves.30 The prob-
lem, as Barbara Montero points out,31 is that unlike classical physics, quantum
physics does not rule out the possibility that mind is an elementary feature of
reality (see Chapter 4). So in the quantum world, ‘physical’ does not neces-
sarily mean ‘material,’ and as such, physicalism (or more precisely “physics-
calism”) does not entail and might even end up contradicting materialism.
Conﬂating physicalism with the CCP begs the question against non-materialist
“physicalisms,” in other words, making it non-falsiﬁable and thereby trivially
true.
Faced with this ambiguity we have two options. One is to go with the open-
ended deﬁnition of ‘physicalism’ implied by deference to physics, and give
up any inherent connection to old-fashioned materialism. That would be in
the spirit of the discursive change to ‘physicalism,’ and of my own argument
below, which is physicalist in this broad sense. However, it would be against
how physicalism is usually understood today (i.e. as twenty-ﬁrst-century mate-
rialism) and thus potentially confusing. Instead I shall follow Montero and
others who argue that physicalism should be deﬁned separately from the CCP
as the doctrine of “No Fundamental Mentality,” which a future physics might
28 See, for example, Kim (1998: 147), Papineau (2001), and Vicente (2006: 168, note 5).
29 See Montero (2001: 63; 2009).
30 A problem known as “Hempel’s Dilemma,” for a good discussion of which see Crook and
Gillett (2001); see Poland (1994) for a comprehensive introduction to physicalism.
31 Montero (1999; 2001; 2009); also see Crane and Mellor (1990) and Davies (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

10
Preface to a quantum social science
or might not conﬁrm.32 That preserves the historical continuity of ‘materialism’
with ‘physicalism,’ and also makes clearer what I am arguing against. Unless
otherwise noted, I will use the two terms interchangeably below.
So accepting the CCP commits us neither to reductionism nor to a materialist
physicalism – all we have to accept is that everything that exists and occurs in
nature, including social life, is constrained by the laws of physics. It seems hard
to disagree with that, since consider the alternative: things happen to which the
laws of physics do not apply. But in that case, what – or where – are their
extra-physical causes? One possibility is God, though in that case we are in
the realm of faith and engaged in an altogether different enterprise. The other
main historical answer was Descartes’ substance dualism, according to which
mind is its own reality entirely separate from matter, but still part of nature.
But substance dualism is no longer widely seen as credible,33 and it seems
a second-best solution in any case, to be embraced only if a comprehensive
physicalism (now in the broad sense) proves impossible to articulate. Since I
do not think that this has yet been proven, insofar as we are committed to social
science, I take it that the laws of physics constitute a basic constraint on what
social objects can be and do.
I cannot think of any social scientist who does not accept the CCP. For posi-
tivists it is constitutive of the very idea of science, so this case is clear. However,
it might not seem so for interpretivists. Interpretivists explicitly reject natural-
istic approaches to social science on the grounds that intentional phenomena –
mental states such as beliefs, desires, and meanings – play a central role in
human life, and do not seem to be anything like physical objects or causes.
Thus, if we want to capture the speciﬁcity of social life – what makes it essen-
tially different than geology or chemistry – then looking to physics will at least
be no help, and might positively hinder our understanding.
Still, I know of no interpretivist, post-modernist, or other critic of naturalistic
social science who says that social phenomena can violate the laws of physics.
To be sure, the people interpretivists study might believe in things that violate
the laws of physics, like a God with powers to intervene in the physical world,
and on that basis create institutions that have real effects. However, whatever
their personal views about God, in their scholarship interpretivists would not
32 See Montero (2003), Wilson (2006), Brown and Ladyman (2009), and G¨ocke (2009); for
skepticism about the No Fundamental Mentality constraint on physicalism see Judisch (2008)
and Dorsey (2011).
33 Though see G¨ocke, ed. (2012) and Swinburne (2013) for recent exceptions, and Stapp (2005)
and Barrett (2006) for arguments that dualism is implied by quantum mechanics. The skepticism
toward substance dualism does not extend to property dualism, according to which complex
forms of matter can give rise to irreducible mentality; see for example Koons and Bealer, eds.
(2010).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
11
treat such beliefs as true.34 Interpretivists agree with positivists on the princi-
ple of “methodological atheism,” which brackets the question of God’s reality
and temporal role.35 As J¨urgen Habermas puts it, “a philosophy that oversteps
the bounds of methodological atheism loses its philosophical seriousness.”36
Similarly, in their work no interpretivist embraces the claims of astrology, div-
ination, or other pseudo-sciences that contradict the laws of physics – or, for that
matter, even of ESP, the reality of which is at least open to scientiﬁc debate.37
Notwithstanding their explicit anti-naturalism, in other words, implicitly
interpretivists too seem to accept that social life is physically constrained and
constituted. And why shouldn’t they? Human beings have material bodies
that think and interact with each other through thought, voice, sound, sight and
touch, all of which seem indisputably subject to the laws of physics. Intentional
phenomena might not be reducible to those laws, but they are still subject to
them. From this perspective, therefore, interpretivists are not anti-naturalists
but more like naturalists-plus – accepting the CCP at the level of fundamental
ontology, while offering other, mostly epistemological arguments about what
makes the social sciences special.
Classical social science
But the causal closure of which physics? Today the “P” in ‘CCP’ refers to
quantum physics, which is universally acknowledged to be more fundamental
than classical physics. However, quantum phenomena are also widely believed
to wash out above the sub-atomic level, and so it might be thought that, for all
practical purposes, the relevant principles of causal closure in social science
are classical (call this the CCCP).38 In this section I argue that this is indeed
how social scientists have understood the constraints of the CCP with respect
to their work.
Making this argument is complicated in two ways. First, few social scientists
have written on the CCP. This is not for want of philosophical reﬂection more
generally, since almost from the start issues of ontology and epistemology
have been deeply contested in the social sciences. But since the turn of the
twentieth century there has been almost no discussion of our relation to physics
speciﬁcally,39 so I am forced to infer implicit views about which CCP social
34 Thanks to Ted Hopf for sharpening this point for me.
35 For two provocative exceptions see Porpora (2006) and Gregory (2008).
36 Habermas (2002: 160).
37 See Jahn and Dunne (2005).
38 With apologies now to the former Soviet Union; these authoritarian associations of ‘CCP’ and
‘CCCP’ are of course entirely accidental . . .
39 Though there has been some on our relationship to physicalism; see Neurath (1932/1959),
Papineau (2009), and for a critical response to Papineau, Shulman and Shapiro (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

12
Preface to a quantum social science
scientists see as the relevant constraint. Second, as we shall see, what social
scientists might say about the CCP if asked and what we do in our research may
be different things. Nevertheless, the simple answer to whether social scientists
feel bound by a CCCP is yes. Both historical and substantive considerations
point to this conclusion.
On the historical side, substantial scholarship has been done showing that
from their origins in the seventeenth century to their consolidation in the late
nineteenth the social sciences were deeply inﬂuenced by (classical) physics,
the most successful and prestigious science of the day.40 For both intellectual
and political reasons, our Founders – Hobbes, Hume, Smith, Comte, Jevons,
Walras, Marshall, Pareto, and others – borrowed frequently from physics in
their thinking about society. Bernard Cohen shows that this took various
forms – analogies, metaphors, homologies, and identities – and argues that
efforts to establish homologies and identities usually failed, leaving the overt
impact of physics on the social sciences mostly on the analogical and metaphor-
ical level.41 But even if classical physics was not fruitful for substantive the-
orizing about social life, at a deeper level its impact was profound. By the
early twentieth century the metaphysical assumptions of the classical world-
view – materialism, determinism, locality, and so on – were deeply ingrained
in the minds of social scientists. These assumptions were taken to be true
of reality as a whole, and thus fundamental constraints on social scientiﬁc
inquiry.
That this history is still with us is suggested by what happened next – or
didn’t. At the same time that the quantum revolution was transforming physics
in the early twentieth century, in the social sciences “physics envy” went out
of fashion. Whether because borrowing from physics yielded few insights,
because social scientists had become more self-conﬁdent, or because they
thought quantum effects washed out at the macroscopic level, the effect was
that until quantum decision theory came along social scientists had almost
never considered the signiﬁcance of quantum physics for their inquiry.42 Thus,
by default if nothing else, I think social scientists today would appeal to the
CCCP as the relevant constraint on their work.
On the substantive side, in turn, classical thinking permeates the ontology
of positivist social science. Since it would require a long detour to show this,
consider instead the following classical assumptions about social life: 1) mental
40 See for example Mirowski (1988), Cohen (1994), and Redman (1997) with reference mostly
to economics, and Gantt and Williams (2014) on psychology. Note that the moniker ‘classical’
was only added after the emergence of quantum physics.
41 See Cohen (1994).
42 There are exceptions – including Matson (1964), Brandt (1973), Weisskopf (1979), Schubert
(1983), Karsten (1990), Becker, ed. (1991), and Peterman (1994) – but they were not cumulative
and are little known today.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
13
states are set by our neural constitution; 2) neural states are physically well
deﬁned; 3) human behavior obeys the laws of classical probability theory;
4) consciousness is epiphenomenal and thus not relevant to explaining human
behavior; 5) the mind is a computer; 6) reasons are efﬁcient causes; 7) there
is no action at a distance; 8) social structures are reducible to the properties
and interactions of individuals; 9) time and space are objective background
conditions for action; and 10) in principle we can observe social life without
interfering with it. I think positivists would accept most if not all of these
principles unhesitatingly, as simple common sense. As evidence, consider the
methods training that graduate students across the social sciences are given
in formal theory and statistics. It’s all based on classical logic and probability
theory, which assumes that the world our students will be studying in their
careers is a classical one, and in my experience is so taken for granted that the
question never even comes up.
On the other hand, interpretivists would reject many if not most of these
assumptions.43 But if social life is not subject to the CCCP then are interpre-
tivists saying it is to the CCQP? Certainly not explicitly, since the question
has almost never been raised;44 yet as I suggested above, neither have inter-
pretivists said social life can violate the laws of physics. Instead, they have
opted for epistemological arguments that while the assumptions and methods
of the physical sciences may be useful for studying rocks and glaciers, they are
not appropriate for studying the intentional phenomena that constitute society.
This “Two-Sciences Settlement”45 makes sense as a pragmatic defense of the
autonomy of the social sciences, but it seems to concede that, ontologically,
at the end of the day the social world is all just matter and energy. And if
that’s right, then why are intentional phenomena not amenable to the methods
of the physical sciences? In short, what are intentional phenomena physically?
The problem here is that, like positivists, interpretivists have implicitly equated
naturalism with classical naturalism, and so their rejection of naturalism is
framed by the classical worldview as well. This is not to say that interpretivism
is classical in the same way as positivism, since as we will see its focus on
meaning is hard to square with a materialist ontology.46 Indeed, an important
goal of this book is to legitimate that focus, which in the social sciences is
43 As would critical realists like Roy Bhaskar (1979; 1986) and his followers, who espouse a
kind of hybrid interpretivist naturalism (also see Wendt, 1999: Chapter 2). The interpretivist
aspect of critical realism is subject to the question raised here about interpretivism more
generally, whereas its naturalist aspect, especially its concern with identifying unobservable
deep structures, is dealt with below.
44 See Apel (1984) for an exception, though his discussion is focused more on epistemology than
ontology.
45 See Ephraim (2013).
46 For that matter, as I suggest below, in practice even much positivist social science does not
observe a classical physics constraint.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

14
Preface to a quantum social science
intellectually marginalized. But to do that, intentional phenomena need to be
made consistent with the CCP.
The anomaly of consciousness
Even if it is accepted that social life is governed by the laws of classical physics,
it may be objected that the constraint is so loose that it is irrelevant to either the
content or practice of social science. Positivists are interested in the behavior
of people, who are subject to different laws than matter and energy in their
simplest forms. And even assuming that interpretivists grudgingly conceded
that human action is constrained by the laws of classical physics, so what? It
still doesn’t tell us anything about meaning, discourse, and other intentional
phenomena.
As a social scientist myself I ﬁnd such skepticism understandable – after
all, what do physicists know about social science? So the burden of proof is
on me to show that physics could matter to social science in any interesting
way. As a ﬁrst step, in this section I argue, by way of the mind–body problem,
that if we approach social science under a classical physics constraint, then
intentional phenomena have no place in our work. I develop this suggestion
in three stages. I ﬁrst deﬁne the mind–body problem, and more speciﬁcally
the problem of consciousness, and show how it constitutes an anomaly for the
classical worldview. Second, although social scientists might not care about
consciousness, I argue it is presupposed by intentional phenomena, which we
routinely invoke in our theories. Third – and here’s the kicker – if consciousness
cannot be reconciled with the classical worldview, then intentional phenomena
no more belong in a classically conceived social science than vitalism’s ´elan
vital belongs in a classical biology.
The mind–body problem
In its most general form, the mind–body problem is how to understand the
relationship between mental states, which are subjective, and brain states, which
are objective. However, this general formulation has traditionally been twisted
by an assumption that brain states must be understood in classical and therefore
materialist terms.47 According to materialism, the elementary constituents of
all macroscopic objects are purely material. “The problem” is thereby recast
in narrower terms as how to explain mental states by reference to brain states,
the bases of which contain no trace of mentality.
47 This made sense when the modern mind–body problem was framed by Descartes in the seven-
teenth century, but such is the grip of materialism that even after quantum physics it continues
to be a mostly unquestioned assumption today.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
15
The mind–body problem in this narrower sense is really several problems,
which differ in their tractability for a materialist approach. Due to David
Chalmers it has become customary to group them into two categories, the
“easy problems” and “the hard problem,” which deal with different aspects
of the mind.48 Difﬁcult as they are, what makes the easy problems at least
easier is that they concern the functional aspects of the mind, or what it does –
information processing, pattern recognition, and so on – which there is lit-
tle reason to think cannot be explained by purely material forces. After all,
computers process information and recognize patterns, and no one thinks they
are not material. So insofar as the mind is like a (classical) computer, as the
computational theory of mind has it, we can expect future neuroscience to
unravel its functional mysteries.49 The hard problem, in contrast, is explaining
consciousness. The deﬁnition of ‘consciousness’ is highly contested, and for
some it encompasses even the functional aspects of the mind.50 For that reason,
following Chalmers, I shall deﬁne it as the experiential aspect of mind, the
feeling, in Thomas Nagel’s famous words, that there is “something it is like” to
be conscious.51 Thus, henceforth I will treat ‘consciousness’ and ‘experience’
as synonyms.
Especially for social scientists, who mostly study adult human beings, it
is important to note that consciousness-as-experience does not imply self-
consciousness, or consciousness that one is conscious.52 Self-consciousness
may be necessary for the kind of social life that humans have constructed, but
that is not what is at stake in the hard problem: it is the kind of raw, pre-linguistic
experience one might expect a dog, bat, or newborn child to have. Of course, it
is open to skeptics to argue that dogs, bats, and newborns aren’t conscious, but
that seems implausible, since they clearly experience pain. Self-consciousness
is not reducible to consciousness in this more primitive sense, but it is dependent
on it, so if we cannot explain the latter then there is no hope of explaining the
former. The hard problem is not about the reﬂexive awareness that underlies
social institutions, in short, but the simple experience of a subjective point of
view.
Explaining consciousness is “hard” for the classical worldview because it is
unclear how a purely material world could ever give rise to it. As Joseph Levine
has put it, there is an “explanatory gap” between the objective physical descrip-
tions of neuroscience and the subjective experience of those descriptions.53
48 See especially Chalmers (1995; 1996); for an excellent review of contemporary mainstream
positions on the mind–body problem see van Gulick (2001).
49 And indeed social scientists themselves are increasingly getting in on this action, as exempliﬁed
by the emergence of a new discipline of “social neuroscience.”
50 See G¨uzeldere (1997); Ram (2009) identiﬁes forty different deﬁnitions in the literature.
51 Nagel (1974); also see Siewert (1998) and Horgan and Kriegel (2008).
52 See Kriegel (2004) for a good discussion of the distinction.
53 Levine (1983; 2001); also see Gantt and Williams (2014), who argue that the gap is also
ontological.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

16
Preface to a quantum social science
A thought experiment by Frank Jackson illustrates the problem compellingly.54
“Mary” has lived her entire life in a black and white room and as such never
seen colors, but she is also a brilliant neurophysiologist who knows every-
thing that can be known scientiﬁcally about the physics of light and vision.
If one day she were freed from her room and could see red for the ﬁrst time,
would she learn anything new? Although philosophers still debate the point,55
the reason Jackson’s argument became a classic is that, intuitively, the answer
seems to be yes. She would know what red was like, which all the science in
the world alone would not have told her. As Chalmers puts it, the hard prob-
lem is that “[e]ven if we knew every last detail about the physics of the uni-
verse . . . that information would not lead us to postulate the reality of conscious
experience.”56
When confronted with this, social scientists may respond that consciousness
must be an “emergent” phenomenon from the immense complexity of the brain,
which we are only just beginning to understand. So whatever the physical
details, since we know humans are conscious, we can get on with our work,
which mostly uses folk psychological rather than physical concepts anyway.
But while the idea of emergence has its advocates, as a solution to the hard
problem it has not been an easy sell to philosophers of mind.
The basic idea of emergence is that qualitative novelty can appear when
parts which themselves lack that quality are organized in a certain way, like
unsolid molecules becoming a solid rock. Although this kind of emergence is
contested even in the physical sciences,57 let us grant that emergence in rocks,
and other purely material phenomena, is possible. The novelty involved in the
hard problem is qualitatively different, so to speak: emergence must explain
something that seems more than purely material – namely Mary’s experience
of the material. What has to emerge is subjectivity from objectivity, feeling
from no feeling, almost life from death, for which no plausible account has
been provided. Thus, critics have argued that whatever the status of emergence
in chemistry, when it comes to explaining consciousness it boils down to
“ . . . and then a miracle happens.”58 If most philosophers of mind are not sold
on the emergence solution to the mind–body problem, then it will not get social
scientists off the hook.
In sum, while lately there has been progress on the easy problems of mind,
after centuries of hard work there seems to have been none on the hard problem.
54 See Jackson (1982: 130; 1986).
55 See for example Cummins et al. (2014).
56 Chalmers (1996: 101).
57 See Clayton (2006), Kim (2006), Wimsatt (2006), Corradini and O’Connor, eds. (2010), and
O’Connor and Wong (2012) for good introductions to the debate.
58 As Bedau (1997: 377) puts it, emergence is “uncomfortably like magic.” See van Gulick (2001)
on emergence and the mind–body problem, Megill (2013) for a defense of emergentism in this
context, and Strawson (2006) and Lewtas (2013b) for critiques.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
17
Or at least that is what I take away from philosopher of mind Jerry Fodor’s
sobering assessment of his ﬁeld: “[n]obody has the slightest idea how anything
material could be conscious. Nobody even knows what it would be like to have
the slightest idea about how anything material could be conscious. So much
for the philosophy of consciousness.”59 To which he might have added, “and
so much for neuroscience too,” since the problem Fodor is pointing to is not
scientiﬁc, as if our modern theory of the brain is on the right track but just not
there yet in terms of explaining consciousness.60 The problem is philosophical.
As long as the brain is assumed to be a classical system, there is no reason to
think even future neuroscience will give us “the slightest idea how anything
material could be conscious.”
Faced with such a long-standing anomaly, contemporary materialists are in
disarray, and some are even beginning to think that something has gone wrong in
their framing of the problem.61 But what? One suggestion, in a Wittgensteinian
spirit, is that the hard problem is a pseudo-problem caused by philosophical
confusion. David Papineau, for example, argues that the supposed “explanatory
gap” is due to our inability to stop thinking in dualistic terms; if we could get
over dualism then the gap would disappear.62 Perhaps, but this is a minority
view even among materialists, who one might expect to be receptive to it.
Another materialist, Colin McGinn, thinks the problem is genuine but argues
that beings with our limited brains are “cognitively closed” to ever solving it.63
That too might be right, but it’s a ﬁshy argument that says materialism can’t
explain consciousness yet leaves materialism intact as our ontology,64 so before
we go down this road we should be sure that all others have been tried. And
then there is the most recent materialist re-think, which is that consciousness
(and for good measure, free will too) is actually an illusion.65 I discuss this
view in Chapter 9, so here let me just say that it seems a singularly unattractive
answer. First, denying the reality of experience is highly counter-intuitive; as
59 Quoted in Kirk (1997: 249). See Levine (2001), Bitbol (2008), Majorek (2012), Nagel (2012),
and Lewtas (2014) for good overviews of the challenges facing a materialist solution to the
mind–body problem.
60 My sense is that many philosophers share No¨e and Thompson’s (2004) doubts that neuroscience
alone will solve the problem. However, neuroscientists continue to try; see for example Feinberg
(2012).
61 Another fresh approach is offered by “New Materialists” coming mostly out of the humanities,
who are trying to bring a kind of materialism into ﬁelds long dominated by social constructivism;
for a good overview see Coole and Frost, eds., (2010b). By virtue of its re-thinking of matter,
New Materialism has some afﬁnities with my own argument that I address in Chapter 7, but
since its proponents are not engaged with the philosophy of mind literature I will bracket it
here.
62 See Papineau (2011), and for more explicitly Wittgensteinian approaches to similar effect see
Bennett and Hacker (2003), Overgaard (2004), and Read (2008).
63 See McGinn (1989; 1999).
64 Lewtas (2014: 337) likens it to theists’ response when confronted with the problem of evil.
65 See No¨e, ed. (2002), Wegner (2002), and Sytsma (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

18
Preface to a quantum social science
one critic puts it, “believe it if you can.”66 Second, rejecting the explanans
(consciousness) rather than the explanandum (classical brain states) is in effect
to reject uncomfortable data, which is not rational and makes it unclear how
materialism could ever be falsiﬁed.67 Illusionism about consciousness seems
moved more by blind faith in materialism than anything else.68
Yet illusionism, I take it, is an advance in our understanding, since it seems
the logical culmination of the materialist approach to the mind–body problem:
given the problem’s persistence, if materialism must stay then consciousness
must go, because like the soul there is no place for it in nature. Unfortunately,
given that consciousness is widely seen as essential to the human condition,
that means there is no place for us in nature either – that we are not “at home
in the universe.” Thus, many materialists still hope a materialist way to explain
consciousness without denying its reality will be found. And perhaps it will.69
In the meantime, however, the failure to make progress on this issue suggests a
worldview in deep paradigmatic crisis.70 It’s not for nothing that consciousness
is considered one of the deepest mysteries facing the modern mind.
Intentionality and consciousness
But is it a mystery that should concern social scientists? Judging from our
practice the answer might at ﬁrst seem to be no. Although the elementary
objects of social science, human beings, (I think most of us would agree) are
conscious, social scientists mostly take that for granted, such that the term
‘consciousness’ is largely absent from our discourse.
On the positivist side, the ambition is to make social science as much like
physical science as possible, generalizable and objective. Since consciousness
is idiosyncratic and inaccessible to third-person observation, it is best left aside.
Thus, while most positivists routinely attribute intentional states to human
beings, the fact that these states are conscious is rarely considered, except
perhaps as a methodological barrier to objectivity.71
On the interpretive side, matters are less clear, but there is deﬁnitely a
reluctance to thematize consciousness. Interpretivists mostly focus on what
66 O’Connor and Wong (2005: 674).
67 See Lewtas (2014) on the irrationality of materialism at this point in history.
68 On commitment to materialism as a faith see Montero (2001: 69), Velmans (2002: 79) and
Strawson (2006: 5).
69 Though in the absence of reasons to expect such a breakthrough it is unclear why we should
still hold out hope for it; see Lewtas (2014: 329).
70 See Nagel (2012) for a particularly eloquent statement of the crisis, ranging well beyond the
mind–body problem to evolutionary considerations and more.
71 Though if human beings were not conscious then requiring scholars doing research on human
subjects to get their work approved by an “Institutional Review Board” would presumably not
be necessary.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
19
is public and shared, like language and norms, not on what is experienced
by individuals. To be sure, many are interested in subjectivity, a concept
closely related to consciousness. Yet outside phenomenology, psychoanaly-
sis, and feminist theory, which have always taken experience seriously, the
experiential aspect of subjectivity is mostly extruded in interpretivist work, in
favor of distinct concepts like intersubjectivity, the discursive production of
subjectivity, and subject-positions that do not foreground experience per se.72
Although I lack the space for exegesis here, consider three giants of interpre-
tivist philosophy: Wittgenstein, Foucault, and Habermas – each in different
ways trying to get away from a “philosophy of the subject” that they associate
with a bankrupt Cartesianism.73 So despite engagement with the problematic
of subjectivity (sic), interpretivists exhibit at least a serious ambivalence about
what makes it subject-ivity in the ﬁrst place, namely its conscious aspect. In
short, in most of contemporary social science there seems to be a “taboo” on
subjectivity.74
However, while most social scientists neglect consciousness, we do care
about intentional phenomena, which I shall now claim presuppose it. If that is
right, then our work makes at least implicit assumptions about consciousness
and its place in nature.
Intentionality refers to the fact that mental states like beliefs, desires, and
meanings are intrinsically “about” or directed toward things beyond themselves,
whether real objects in the world, ﬁctional objects in one’s own mind, or the
minds of other people.75 This is in contrast to the states of objects that lack
minds, like rocks and glaciers, which are not “about” anything. Although
social scientists rarely cite this technical, about-ness meaning of intentionality,
it pervades the purposive, folk psychological discourse that we use throughout
our work. This is not to say that explaining intentional action is always the
goal of social science, much of which studies unintended consequences –
but those are only meaningful in relation to what was intended. Even self-
consciously non-intentional approaches like structural and evolutionary social
theories assume purposive action at the micro-level, and insofar as institutions
are collective intentions, intentionality is present at the macro-level as well.76
This reliance of social science on intentional discourse is hardly surprising,
since in everyday life we routinely attribute intentional states to other people.
72 See Scott (1991) for a particularly sophisticated discussion of experience that I think illustrates
this point.
73 The neglect of subjectivity in modern social theory has led to a number of recent efforts to
“bring the subject back in,” for which the argument of this book may be seen as providing
a physical basis. See for example Frank (2002), Freundlieb (2000; 2002), Henrich (2003),
Ankersmit (2005), Ortner (2005), Archer (2007), and Heelan (2009).
74 See Wallace (2000).
75 See Jacob (2014) for a good introduction to the philosophical literature on intentionality.
76 See especially Gilbert (1989) and Searle (1995).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

20
Preface to a quantum social science
A social science that could not accommodate this fundamental fact would be
an impoverished social science indeed.
The relationship between intentionality and consciousness has long been
debated by philosophers. Some think that consciousness is dependent upon
intentionality, others that intentionality is dependent upon consciousness, and
many just ignore one while focusing on the other. However, in recent years the
balance of opinion seems to have shifted toward the view that “consciousness
is the irreplaceable source of intentionality and meaning.”77 As John Searle
puts it,
I now want to make a very strong claim . . . The claim is this: Only a being that could have
conscious intentional states could have intentional states at all, and every unconscious
intentional state is at least potentially conscious. This thesis . . . has the consequence that
a complete theory of intentionality requires an account of consciousness.78
To me at least, intuitively this makes sense. Could a machine have genuine
intentional states – i.e. of its own rather than ones attributed by us – if it
did not also have consciousness?79 We can program a machine to act as if it
had intentional states – in the way that a thermostat may be said to be “goal-
directed” – but the real intentionality resides in the designer, who is conscious,
not the thermostat. Nonetheless, Searle’s “very strong claim” is still very much
contested.80 This poses a threat to my narrative if you too have doubts, since if
Searle cannot convince his fellow philosophers, then even if I went through all
his arguments I should not convince you either.
In the interest of pressing my attack, therefore, I am going to expose a
ﬂank here by resorting to stipulation: intentionality depends ontologically on
consciousness.81 Note, with Searle, that this is not to deny the existence of
unconscious intentions, as long as they could in principle be made conscious.
And nor is it to deny the existence of collective intentions, which are grounded
in individual intentions and as such derivatively dependent on consciousness. It
is to afﬁrm only that where there is no consciousness there is no intentionality,
and so by attributing intentionality to human beings social scientists are also
attributing to them consciousness.
77 Siewert (2011: 17).
78 See Searle (1992: 132), quoted in Kriegel (2003: 273); also see McGinn (1999) and Strawson
(2004).
79 On really having vs. merely ascribing intentional states see Dennett (1971: 91), and Gamez
(2008) and G¨ok and Sayan (2012) for contrasting views on the possibilities for machine
consciousness.
80 See Siewert (2011: 16–19) for an overview of the debate, and Kriegel (2003) for a concise
analysis of Searle’s (and McGinn’s) arguments for the consciousness-ﬁrst view.
81 If you’ll pardon the military metaphor, blitzkrieg is the only way to wage this campaign,
concentrating all of my argument on the weak point in the opposition’s lines (the mind–body
problem), breaking through, and then bypassing local resistance in the hopes that global success
will render it moot.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
21
The threat of vitalism
Nevertheless, the fact that the origin of consciousness and therefore intention-
ality is a mystery has not stopped social scientists from doing their work, which
might suggest that the mind–body problem doesn’t matter to us after all. I want
to argue now that it does, because the questionable reality of consciousness
puts explanations that invoke intentional phenomena into question as well, on
the grounds that they are analogous to vitalism.
Vitalism is a theory of what makes life “life,” and was widely held in the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Against materialists, vitalists argued
that the only way to explain life is by reference to an unobservable, non-material
´elan vital or “life force.” Materialists were withering in their philosophical
criticism of this idea, but what really turned the tide against vitalism were
revolutionary scientiﬁc advances in biology like genetics, which seemed to
eliminate the explanatory need for an ´elan vital. As a result, there are few
recently respectable theories that are today as totally discredited as vitalism,
which is now considered to be a pre- if not pseudo-scientiﬁc doctrine.
What makes vitalism instructive in the present context is that two of the
main reasons that scientists and philosophers rejected it apply to explanations
that invoke intentional phenomena – and by implication consciousness – as
well. First, just as we have no public evidence for the ´elan vital, which vitalists
claimed was inherently unobservable, we have no public evidence for con-
sciousness either, only our own experience. Second, as an extra-material force
the ´elan vital conﬂicts with the CCP – or more precisely, the CCCP. It’s not
just that we can’t see it because it’s unobservable; the ´elan vital can’t be there
because classical physics tells us that no such thing exists. By the same token,
if consciousness cannot be reconciled with the CCCP then it cannot be there
either (whence illusionism).
These similarities suggest that a strong analogy exists between the status
of consciousness in modern science and the debate a century ago over the
´elan vital. Indeed, Daniel Dennett uses this analogy to criticize those such
as Chalmers who think materialism can’t explain consciousness. He argues
that if that were right then vitalism could be true as well – and since “we all
know” that vitalism is false, there must be a material basis for consciousness.82
Chalmers tries to deﬂect the criticism by rejecting the analogy, arguing that
the vitalists sought to explain only the form and functioning of organisms –
akin to the easy problems of mind – which we have since learned can prob-
ably be explained by material forces alone; as such, there simply is no “hard
problem” of life analogous to consciousness. But that is not so clear. Brian
Garrett shows that, historically, some vitalists were concerned with more than
82 See Dennett (1996).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

22
Preface to a quantum social science
just form and functioning, but the nature of life itself.83 And as we will see
in Chapter 7, notwithstanding the advances in biology that seemed to make
vitalism redundant, there is still no consensus on what life is, suggesting that
there is indeed a hard problem of life. As such, I take Dennett to be right that
the two debates are related.
If so, then presupposing consciousness in explanations of human action is
like positing an ´elan vital to explain life. We see this conclusion in at least two
materialist critiques of intentionalist social science. One is behaviorism, which
eschews reference to intentional objects because it invokes causes that cannot
be known scientiﬁcally. Like Dennett, B. F. Skinner made an explicit analogy to
vitalism, arguing that “mentalism” is to psychology what vitalism is to biology
(and for good measure, what animism is to physics).84 The other hardline
approach is “eliminative materialism,” which foresees the eventual replacement
of intentionalist, folk psychological theories with materialist explanations that
refer to brain states alone.85 On both views, social “explanations” that invoke
intentional phenomena are at best pre-scientiﬁc placeholders until real science
comes along, after which they will be seen as no more legitimate than vitalism
today.
In sum, there is a tension between social scientists’ commitment to a material-
ist, classical physics constraint on their work, and the routine use of intentional
states to explain human action, which are inconsistent with such a constraint.
This tension belies any simple claim that “social science is classical,” since
much of our practice is not. But if we want to keep intentional phenomena in
our accounts, and if that presupposes consciousness, then it raises the threat of
a “vitalist” social science with no physical foundation.86 Giving up the quest
for such a foundation might be welcomed by some interpretivists, yet even they
do not seem prepared to argue that social life could violate the laws of physics.
If social scientists want to avoid the charge of pseudo-science, in short, then
we will need to rethink what the CCP means for our work.
The anomaly of social structure
Up to this point I have focused on the agent side of the agent–structure problem.
Starting there made sense because consciousness poses such a clear problem
for the belief that social life is subject to the worldview of classical physics.
83 See Garrett (2006).
84 See Ringen (1999: 168–169). See Moore (2013) for a recent behaviorist critique of mentalism,
and Foxwall (2007; 2008) for a sympathetic treatment of behaviorism and its limits.
85 See especially Churchland (1988), and more recently Irvine (2012), who argues that the concept
of consciousness has no place in science.
86 In Chapter 8 I shall defuse this threat not by abandoning vitalism but by giving it an alternative,
quantum foundation.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
23
However, many social scientists are not interested in what goes on inside
actors’ heads, but in the structures that constitute macro-level social systems
like capitalism, the state, and international system. A good reason for this is
that patterns of behavior exist at the macro-level that do not depend on people
holding speciﬁc desires or beliefs – in the jargon, macro-level patterns are
“multiply realizable” at the level of agents.87 For example, people may follow
the law because they think it is legitimate and therefore the right thing to do,
because they think it is in their self-interest to obey, or because they are forced
to comply. Since motives vary, if the goal is to explain the survival of a state, say,
then it makes sense to do so by reference to its structure rather than individual
intentions or consciousness.
On this much many social scientists will agree. However, there has long
been controversy about how to understand the nature of social structures and
their relationship to agents. I address this debate in Part V; here I argue that
any conception of social structure that depends on intentional phenomena and
therefore consciousness will be an anomaly for a classical social science. The
main symptom of this anomaly is a feature of social structures that we mostly
take for granted: they are invisible. I show how this symptom points to the
mind–body problem, and suggest that it poses a “threat of reiﬁcation.”
Where is the state?
Imagine if extra-terrestrials came to the solar system and started surveying
Earth from the sky, with sophisticated equipment that enabled them to track the
movements of billions of individuals, but not what we were thinking or saying.
Would the ETs see any social structures?
Take the state, the ontology of which is typically understood in three different
ways, though all of which are ultimately structural.88 In everyday life and
international politics itself the state is usually treated as an agent or “person.”
These persons pervade the media, our history books, and IR scholarship too,
most of which assumes that states are agents with interests, beliefs, rationality,
and a capacity for purposive action. Yet ETs would not see any such agents,
because notwithstanding clever arguments to the contrary,89 states do not have
material bodies and thus can’t really be people too. If the real people who act in
the name of a state act “as if” they are a unitary agent, then it is only in virtue
of a social structure that binds them together.
87 See Wendt (1999: 152–156) for a discussion of multiple realizability and citations.
88 See the “Forum on the State as Person” in Review of International Studies (2004), and also
Wight (2006: 215–225) for an account that nicely integrates all three perspectives.
89 See Wendt (2004).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

24
Preface to a quantum social science
Students of domestic politics are more likely to conceptualize the state
explicitly as a social structure, as a set of institutions that enable collective
action on behalf of the common good. Yet our ET friends would not ﬁnd
any states in this sense either. Not just because states are really big and thus
difﬁcult to see in their totality, but because institutions are no more material
objects than states as agents are.90 It might be objected that modern states do
have well-deﬁned boundaries marked with fences and barbed wire. But how
could the ETs distinguish these boundaries visually from the fences and barbed
wire which surround cattle ranches or gated communities? Perhaps by plotting
the movements of millions of individuals, but in a globalizing world those
patterns might be as likely to cross territorial boundaries as to coalesce within
them.
Finally, the state may also be seen as a practice. Here it is not being an agent
or a structure that constitutes the state, but the material practices of policemen
pulling over speeding drivers, diplomats talking to other diplomats, and soldiers
shooting enemy soldiers. The ETs might do better seeing states in this sense,
since their cameras would at least pick up something that is literally the state –
its individual agents. But how could they know who those people are without
ﬁrst knowing the (invisible) social structure that constitutes their identities as
members of a state?
So where then is the state, physically in space? If the question seems strange
it is because normally we do not think of the state as something that should
have a location or be visible in the ﬁrst place, like a car or cat. Instead, it is a
collective intention, an object of thought to which our beliefs and desires may
be directed, but is not in itself a material object.91 The state is a state of mind, in
other words, before it is an agent, structure, or practice. Nor is it unique in this
regard. The Catholic Church, capital markets, and universities are all collective
intentions that can only be “seen” if you already know they are there. Whereas
with material objects seeing is believing, with social structures believing is
seeing.
Of course, some material objects cannot be seen with the naked eye either,
like viruses, distant galaxies, and infrared light. But in these cases, there is no
question of their being directly observable at least in principle, as the inventions
of the microscope, telescope, and infrared glasses attest. That is because they
are classical material phenomena and as such mind-independent. In contrast,
social structures are mind-dependent, and so no as yet un-invented technology
90 Also see Coulter (2001: 33–34).
91 For a contrary perspective readers should consult Paul Sheehy’s (2006: 97–130) systematic
defense of the idea that groups actually are material objects, by virtue of consisting of individuals
organized in relations that create causal powers. Overall I am in strong agreement with Sheehy’s
holist theory of groups (see Chapter 12), but the relations that constitute groups are ultimately
mind-dependent and as such in my view cannot be reconciled with a classical understanding of
physicality as materiality.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
25
will enable ETs to see them. Indeed, even if ETs could scan our brains they
would not see them, since social structures are not “in” our brains either, but
in our minds.92 This is not to say that, through careful study of our behavior
and perhaps extrapolation from their own experience, ETs could not infer the
presence of states. But that would mean coming to see them as we do, by
learning to read our minds. Short of that, the ETs would have to report back
home that while Earth was teeming with life, perhaps even intelligent life,
nowhere were there any states.
The threat of reiﬁcation
Practically speaking the “location problem”93 in social ontology is not difﬁ-
cult to solve, since most of us can ﬁnd states and other socially structured
systems when we want to. Moreover, critical and scientiﬁc realists have built
an entire philosophy of science around the idea that we can know unobserv-
able entities at least theoretically. Nevertheless, given their mind-dependence,
it is not clear how social structures are consistent with a materialist ontology.
If reality really is nothing but classical matter and energy, then unobservable
social structures should not be there, any more than consciousness should be
there. So if the latter is ultimately an illusion, then social structures must be
illusions too.
This poses a threat of reiﬁcation to those who insist on positing social
structures anyway. By ‘reiﬁcation’ I mean “the socially induced illusion of
thinglikeness.”94 The idea here is that although we often treat social structures
as objects out in the world, from a classical standpoint there can be no such
objects. Of course, the shared belief that social structures exist makes them real
for us, since we will act upon those beliefs much like believing in witches will
induce people to act as if there are witches. Moreover, social theorists routinely
warn against reifying social structures into things in a material sense. But that
is precisely the point, for if social structures are not things in a material sense
then in a classical world in which everything is material, what could they be
if not illusions? In other words, if we accept a classical physics constraint,
then to posit the existence of unobservable social structures is necessarily to
reify them.
In saying this I am not trying to suggest that social structures do not, in some
sense, exist and have causal powers. Rather, it is that the CCCP provides no
grounds for such a claim, and so if we want to retain them in our ontology then
it will have to be on a quantum basis instead.
92 As McGinn (1995) points out there is a similar problem in locating consciousness.
93 The phrase is Hindriks’ (2013); cf. Sheehy (2006: 104–107).
94 Hull (2013: 54); also see Maynard and Wilson (1980). Although originally a Marxist idea, the
concept of reiﬁcation has since been appropriated by other social theories; see Hull (2013) for
an excellent, theory-neutral conceptualization.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

26
Preface to a quantum social science
As if explanation and unscientiﬁc ﬁctions
It might be objected that this argument presupposes a realist epistemology. For
realists the purpose of science is to disclose the world as it really is and so
to invoke intentional phenomena – whether at the agent or structural levels –
in social explanations is to posit them as at least provisionally real. As the
philosopher of mind Jaegwon Kim puts it, referring to the related issue of
mental causation in psychology,
[t]he possibility of psychology as a theoretical science capable of generating law-
based explanations of human behavior depends on the reality of mental causation:
mental phenomena must be capable of functioning as indispensable links in causal
chains leading to physical behavior. A science that invokes mental phenomena in its
explanations is presumptively committed to their causal efﬁcacy; for any phenomenon
to have an explanatory role, its presence or absence in a given situation must make a
difference – a causal difference.95
However, many social scientists today subscribe to non/anti-realist epistemolo-
gies, from post-structuralism on the one end to empiricism and pragmatism on
the other. From their perspective, it might appear that explanations invoking
consciousness or social structures only lead to the threats of vitalism and
reiﬁcation if we insist on treating them as real – which there is no need
to do.
Consider, for example, how an empiricist or pragmatist might think about
explanations that invoke intentional states. On their view, theory should be
judged not by how well it discloses the world as it really is – which ultimately
cannot be known – but by how well it enables us to predict, solve problems, or
otherwise get by in the world.96 Theory is a tool or instrument, not something
to be taken as literally true. Since the assumption that people act as if they
have intentional states helps us explain their behavior, then even if they are
ultimately illusions, it would be a signiﬁcant loss of knowledge if such states
were excluded from our theories a priori while we wait for proper materialist
accounts to come along.97 Thus, whatever the problems that consciousness
and social structures might pose for realists, from an instrumentalist or “as if ”
perspective we should not let ourselves be bullied by philosophers into giving
up our best tools, threats of vitalism and reiﬁcation or not.
Indeed, one might press this objection further against the whole idea of a
physics constraint on social science, by pointing out that even in the physical
sciences it is common to make assumptions, such as ideal gases and frictionless
95 See Kim (1998: 31), emphasis in the original; also see Maul (2013).
96 Friedman (1953) is perhaps the most well-known exposition of such a view, but in different
forms it is widely held across the social sciences.
97 See also Dennett (1971; 1987) on the “intentional stance.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
27
planes,98 which are explicitly ﬁctional. If ﬁctions are essential to the practice
of all science, as Hans Vaihinger argued in his “philosophy of the As If,”99
then why should social scientists eschew reference to consciousness or social
structures just because philosophers cannot explain them? As long as they
advance knowledge, they should be countenanced just like any other scientiﬁc
ﬁction.
Yet, while advocating a liberal attitude toward ﬁctions in science, empiricists
and pragmatists nevertheless want to hold the line against ﬁctions that cannot
possibly count as scientiﬁc,100 such as God or ghosts, and here the threats
of vitalism and reiﬁcation still have force. What deﬁnes an “unscientiﬁc” ﬁc-
tion? This has received surprisingly little attention in the literature,101 perhaps
because as methodological atheists modern scientists are not generally inclined
to bring supernatural forces into their theories in the ﬁrst place. But why not?
Some Christians think that evil behavior is caused by the Devil. This expla-
nation is coherent, parsimonious, and even supplies a causal mechanism. Yet
I suspect most social scientists would reject it a priori. Or take the ´elan vital.
It might not explain organisms’ functioning, but it does purport to explain the
nature of life, the riddle of which materialists themselves have not solved. Yet
in today’s debate about life, no one considers the ´elan vital a valid construct,
even as a convenient ﬁction.
The implicit reason for these exclusions seems to be that in modern science,
ﬁctions are legitimate if they refer to something that at least in principle could
fall within the CCP, which is to say, is physical.102 As Peter Godfrey-Smith
describes ﬁctionalized models, “each model system itself is something that
would be concrete if real; it would be an arrangement of physical entities.”103
That makes sense, and as such I too would reject the Devil as a legitimate scien-
tiﬁc ﬁction. However, there is still the question of what ‘physical’ means, which
turns on which physics we are talking about. In quantum physics physicality
can encompass mentality, which opens the door to intentional states (and,
I will argue, the ´elan vital as well). In classical physics, physicality means
materiality, and there seems little prospect that materialism will ever be able
98 Godfrey-Smith (2009: 101). For recent discussions of the value of false models in the social
sciences see Rogeberg and Nordberg (2005) and Hindriks (2008).
99 Vaihinger (1924); see Fine (1993) for a contemporary revival of Vaihinger’s ideas, and Contessa
(2010) for recent discussion in light of Fine’s article.
100 So much so that Giere (2009) worries that in today’s “cultural climate,” embracing too eagerly
the idea that scientiﬁc models are ﬁctions may provide succor to creationists and others who
threaten to break the distinction down. Also see Sklar (2003: 438).
101 Though see Janzen (2012), who draws the line at ghosts.
102 Such an assumption seems to be implicit in Bokulich’s (2012) sophisticated defense of the
view that ﬁctions can be explanatory, for example, as it is also in Schindler’s (2014) critique
of Bokulich.
103 Godfrey-Smith (2009: 104).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

28
Preface to a quantum social science
to explain consciousness. Even from an “as if” perspective, in other words, as
long as social science is thought to be constrained by a classical CCP, inten-
tional states and social structures have no more place in our work than the Devil
or ´elan vital.
My central question, and answer in brief
My point in raising the threats of vitalism and reiﬁcation is not to suggest that
social scientists should abandon intentional phenomena in our explanations, as
behaviorists and eliminative materialists would have us do. First, theories that
assume intentionality work much better than the alternatives. Behaviorism told
us little, and neuroscience is still young (and even when it matures, what about
Mary?), so at this point intentional phenomena are the only explanatory game in
town. A second reason to keep intentional phenomena in the mix is ethical.104
It is through attributions of intentionality that our subjects – conscious
individuals – make an appearance in our work. Insofar as social science is
addressed to those subjects, in the form of normative implications for their
behavior, it is important that their subjectivity not be written out altogether –
for otherwise who is our addressee?105 Part of the point of social science I take
it is to give meaning to events, by taking what seems inexplicable and ﬁtting it
into a pattern that is relevant to people’s lives, which will be hard to do if we
deny the subjectivity of our audience.
Yet, given a classical CCP, the result is then a de facto dualism between
mental and material phenomena.106 In ontology we face “two incompatible
ontologies . . . the ontology of subjectivity and free agency, on the one hand,
and that of things or objects and their relations in the external world, on the
other.”107 And in epistemology the best we can do is a Westphalian Settlement,
in which positivists and interpretivists live and let live with irreconcilable
differences. Since there is only one reality, from a naturalist perspective such
dualisms should be accepted only if we have no choice, and indeed going back
to the behavioral revolution social scientists have long called for transcending
them.108 However, if the argument above is correct, such efforts are doomed
to failure as long as we retain a classical framing of the mind–body problem.
104 Also see Wight (2006: 211–212).
105 See Frank (2002: 391). For a sampling of views on the link between consciousness and moral
cognition see the special issue of Review of Philosophy and Psychology edited by Phelan and
Waytz (2012).
106 See for example Wendt’s (2006) trenchant critique of Wendt (1999).
107 Freundlieb (2000: 238).
108 See Jackson (2008) for a particularly sophisticated recent effort.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
29
Nothing short of a root-and-branch approach will overcome the “bifurcation of
nature” that is materialism’s legacy.109
Hence the central question(s) of this book: (a) how might a quantum theo-
retic approach explain consciousness and by extension intentional phenomena,
and thereby unify physical and social ontology, and (b) what are some implica-
tions of the result for contemporary debates in social theory? While obviously
philosophical, these questions have practical implications far up the chain of
social science, from methods training, to concept formation, theory-building,
and empirical research. So the audience to which the book is addressed is all
social scientists, not just those interested in the philosophical foundations of
their work.
When philosophical debates persist for a long time with no apparent progress,
one way to gain traction is to look at what all sides have in common. In the
mind–body problem a key, generally unstated assumption is that the nature of
the body is clear, and as such “the problem” is with the mind. Speciﬁcally, it
has been assumed that the matter of which bodies are composed is completely
and only material in the traditional sense. This assumption stems both from
our experience of ordinary physical objects as things with mass and extension
but no subjective inside, and from the development 350 years ago of classical
physics, which described a universe of such objects with great success.
Yet since the quantum revolution we have known that at the sub-atomic
level matter in the classical materialist sense breaks down into wave functions.
Indeed, it is not just that which breaks down, but the whole classical worldview,
which is also atomist, determinist, mechanist, and objectivist (Chapters 2 and
3). However, that is not to say that, individually, all of these assumptions are
wrong, because it is not clear what precisely quantum physics is telling us about
reality. This has been the subject of intense debate since the 1930s between
advocates of at least a dozen “Interpretations” of quantum mechanics (Chapter
4). One of the big issues in this debate is which (if any) classical assumptions
can be salvaged, and at what metaphysical price. For example, despite the
breakdown of the classical view of matter as tiny little objects, quantum theory
does not necessarily show that mind is present at the sub-atomic level, which
would preserve the core principle of materialism in a broader sense – No
Fundamental Mentality. But it does force those who would keep materialism
to accept some very radical consequences indeed. And so it goes for every
other reading of quantum theory, each of which makes different trade-offs but
is equally counter-intuitive.
Regardless of which interpretation of quantum theory one prefers, the exis-
tence of such a debate shows that the nature of matter is no less mysterious
109 The phrase is Whitehead’s; see Jones (2014), and more generally Barham (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

30
Preface to a quantum social science
than the nature of mind. In Montero’s words again, in the mind–body problem
we have not only a mind problem but also a “body problem.”110 Materialists
will object that the problem of mind takes place on a macroscopic scale far
above the quantum level, where matter has its familiar corpuscular/energetic
properties and classical physics is for all practical purposes a valid descrip-
tion. That is not to say that quantum theory does not apply to the macro level,
since it applies everywhere; the whole universe is quantum. But except in very
special conditions, wave functions collapse or decohere into particles as soon
as they interact. This is why the macroscopic world appears to us as it does –
classical. So, materialists can say that even if matter in the ultimate, quantum
sense is not good old fashioned matter anymore, the kind of matter relevant to
the mind–body problem still is.
But what if the orthodoxy is wrong? What if the physics of the mind is not
classical, but quantum – not in the trivial sense that all of reality is quantum,
but in the substantive sense that consciousness itself is quantum mechanical?111
That is the radical hypothesis of “quantum consciousness theory” (Part II). The
theory has two parts: quantum brain theory and panpsychism. The latter does
the crucial work in solving the hard problem, but the former plays a key role
in overcoming long-standing objections to panpsychism. From these elements
I then go further than most advocates of the theory, arguing that it implies a
new, quantum form of vitalism.
Quantum brain theory hypothesizes that the brain is able to sustain quantum
coherence – a wave function – at the macro, whole-organism level (Chapter 5).
How the brain might do this is not agreed on by the theory’s advocates, who
have explored the possibility from different angles. The pioneering and most
well-known approach is due to Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose,112 but as
we will see there are other approaches as well. Notwithstanding their differ-
ences, however, their conclusion is the same – that the brain is a quantum
computer.
Whether quantum brain theory is true is speculative and deeply controversial,
but it has attracted a growing number of advocates. Two facts may account for
this interest. First, we understand very little about the brain below the neural
level, so things that today we “know” as false might well turn out to be true.
Second, there is the zero progress from a classical standpoint on the problem
of consciousness. Thus, to skeptics who say there is no way a quantum theory
110 See Montero (1999).
111 That it has to be one or the other stems from the fact that classical and quantum physics are the
only two physics we have (relativity theory is part of classical physics). Contemporary physics
is admittedly incomplete, but one would expect a future physics to subsume quantum physics
in the same way that the latter did classical.
112 See Hameroff (1994) and Penrose (1994) for their seminal statements.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
31
of consciousness could be true, one could easily retort there is no way a classical
one could be either!
Quantum brain theory takes known effects at the sub-atomic level and scales
them upward to the macroscopic level of the brain. However, by itself this
would not explain consciousness, since it does not tell us why any physical
system, even one as mind-bogglingly complex as a quantum computer, would
be conscious. This question is addressed by the ontology of panpsychism
(Chapter 6).
Panpsychism takes a known effect at the macroscopic level – that we are
conscious – and scales it downward to the sub-atomic level, meaning that
matter is intrinsically minded. With this principle of Fundamental Mentality
panpsychism opposes not only materialism but also idealism and dualism.
Against idealists who privilege the mind panpsychists see mind as only an
aspect of matter, not something to which matter can be reduced. By the same
token, while panpsychists agree with dualists that mind and matter are distinct,
against dualists they do not think that matter is purely material and thus that
mind is a substance over and above it. Mind and matter constitute a duality,
not a dualism, one that I will argue emerges from an underlying reality that is
neither mental nor material (a view known as neutral monism).
Panpsychism can be traced to the ancient Greeks, but it also ﬁnds expression
in the great modern philosophical systems of Spinoza, Leibniz, Schopenhauer,
Whitehead, and others. However, like vitalism, after the 1940s panpsychism
became an object of ridicule in Western philosophy, and as such for decades
was ignored in the literature on the mind–body problem. It is therefore perhaps
symptomatic of the contemporary crisis of materialism that since the 1990s
there has been a strong resurgence of the idea within philosophy of mind and –
interestingly – the philosophy of physics.113 For unlike classical physics, there
is a clear place in quantum mechanics for mind – the collapse of the wave
function. As physicist Freeman Dyson put it, “mind is already inherent in every
electron, and the processes of human consciousness differ only in degree but
not kind from the processes of choice between quantum states which we call
‘chance’ when they are made by electrons.”114 To be clear, quantum theory does
not imply Fundamental Mentality, but it allows for it physically, and results in
quite an elegant interpretation of the theory. As such, quantum consciousness
theory suggests that two of the deepest mysteries confronting modern science –
how to interpret quantum theory and how to explain consciousness – are two
sides of the same coin. Although I will not be primarily concerned with the
former here, I argue that putting them into conversation enables us to bootstrap
a solution to the latter.
113 See Malin (2001), Primas (2003), Pylkk¨anen (2007), and others cited in Chapter 6.
114 Quoted in Skrbina (2005: 199).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

32
Preface to a quantum social science
This puts the threat of vitalism in a new light (Chapter 7). Earlier I used this
threat to develop a reductio of intentional explanation: since “we all know”
there is no such thing as the ´elan vital, intentional explanations are no more
scientiﬁc than vitalism. Now it appears that the vitalists were right all along.
Extrapolating from the rapidly growing literature in quantum biology, I argue
that there is an irreducible “life force,” quantum coherence, which can only
be known from the inside, through experience. In this “quantum vitalism”115
we end up with an updated version of the Lebensphilosophie of Goethe and the
nineteenth-century Romantics, and later Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Merleau-
Ponty, and others. Such a perspective calls into question a basic metaphysical
assumption of modern science, that all ultimate explanatory principles must
be “dead.”116 By suggesting that experience goes all the way down, quantum
consciousness challenges this philosophy of death, echoing the great physicist
Eugene Wigner’s intuition that it is through biology that the deepest problems
of physics will eventually be solved.117 Far from excluding intentional states
from social science, quantum vitalism would be their very basis.
If quantum consciousness theory is true then the physics constraint to which
human beings and society are subject is quantum rather than classical. This
matters, because in a quantum world lots of things are possible that aren’t in a
classical one, and so a quantum perspective presents an opportunity not only
to overcome dualism in social science, but to expand our conception of social
reality altogether.
The basic directive of a quantum social science, its positive heuristic if you
will, is to re-think human behavior through the lens of quantum theory. To this
end, in the second half of the book I explore some implications of quantum
consciousness theory for social ontology, and speciﬁcally the agent–structure
problem. In doing so I cannot hope to engage properly the vast literature on that
problem, which has been framed to date by implicit classical premises. Instead,
my goal is to theorize the agent–structure problem through the quantum, as if
we were theorizing it for the ﬁrst time.
In Part III I focus on human agents in isolation from their social context,
in order to unpack what individual quantum minds bring to the social table. I
devote a chapter each to three mental faculties – Cognition, Will, and Experi-
ence. In Chapter 8 I summarize quantum cognition, decision, and game theory,
where the evidence for a quantum model of man (sic) is strongest. The upshot
is that, in contrast to the classical view that people have a portfolio of actual
mental states in their heads upon which they then act, these states exist only as
115 The phrase is Hameroff’s (1997).
116 See Montero (2001: 71); as Schopenhauer put it, materialism “carries death in its heart even
at its birth” (quoted by Hannan [2009: 11]).
117 See Wigner (1970), and also Matsuno (1993).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
33
“superpositions,” or wave functions of potential states, until they are elicited
in interaction. I link this to the performative view of agency developed by
post-structural theorists, arguing that quantum mind is its physical basis. In
Chapter 9 I take up Will, arguing that a quantum model supports two claims
that comport with common sense but are anomalous from a classical standpoint:
that Will is inherently free, and that its causal power is teleological rather than
mechanical. Finally, in Chapter 10 I address Experience, in particular our expe-
rience of time, which I argue exhibits temporal non-locality. This suggests that,
in certain respects, it is possible to change the past, not just narratively, but
literally.
In Parts IV and V I turn to the nature of social structure. Notwithstanding my
treatment of agents in Part III in isolation from each other, the key idea running
through these chapters is that, by virtue of our entanglement from birth in social
structures, human minds are not fully separable. Non-separability refers to the
fact that the states of quantum systems can only be deﬁned in relation to a
larger whole. It is the basis of non-local causation in quantum mechanics, and
what makes quantum phenomena irreducibly holistic.
In Part IV I focus on the special case of language, which is the medium of all
other social structures. Here I draw on the rapidly growing literature on quantum
semantics, which shows that concepts exhibit “semantic non-locality.” I draw
two major implications from this work. First, against the dominant view that
linguistic meaning is compositional, built up out of separable elementary units,
semantic non-locality implies that meaning is irreducibly contextual (Chapter
11). Second, this in turn provides a new perspective on the Problem of Other
Minds, or how human beings can know each other’s thoughts. Building on an
analogy to light, which enables non-local “direct perception” of visual objects,
I argue that language enables us to do the same with other minds – that language
is like light (Chapter 12).
Finally, in Part V I address the agent–structure problem more directly, chal-
lenging both the emergentist ontology associated with critical realism and the
reductionist ontology associated with rational choice theory. Against the for-
mer, I argue in Chapter 13 that social structures are not actual realities existing
somewhere above us in space, but potential realities constituted by inherently
non-local shared wave functions. In this way, quantum theory underwrites a
“ﬂat” rather than stratiﬁed social ontology, in which individuals are the only
real realities. While that might seem to vindicate individualism, the holism
and non-locality of quantum theory belies that conclusion. The key here is the
unique character of emergence in quantum contexts. When applied to social
life, quantum emergence leads to a solution to the agent–structure problem not
unlike the recent “practice turn” in social theory, according to which agents
and structures are both emergent effects of practices. In Chapter 14 I sug-
gest that all this points toward a vitalist sociology. Taking the state as an
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

34
Preface to a quantum social science
example, I argue that the state is a holographic organism endowed with collec-
tive consciousness.
Re-inventing the wheel?
The social ontology developed in Parts III–V recapitulates many ideas that are
already held in the social sciences, in some cases widely (such as intentional
explanations being legitimate). This is not surprising. Despite my suggestion
above that, if asked, most social scientists would say their work is ultimately
grounded in classical mechanics, they don’t think very often or explicitly about
that constraint. Instead, they have pressed ahead with trying to make sense of
social life with whatever tools seem to work best, most of which originate in folk
psychology rather than physics. Folk psychology relies heavily on intentional
phenomena in its accounts, and since I have argued that such phenomena cannot
be reconciled with the classical worldview, a good deal of extant social science
must at least implicitly have a quantum aspect.
However, that then raises the question of whether taking an explicitly quan-
tum approach to social science will just re-invent the wheel. By the end of this
book I hope you will be convinced that the answer is no, that there is real value
added in such an exercise, so for now let me just highlight six contributions
that I think it can make.
First, by providing a naturalistic basis for consciousness and intentional
phenomena, the argument seeks to unify physical and social ontology. If it is
correct, that would not only justify theoretical practices that social scientists
often take for granted but are illegitimate from a classical point of view. It
would also point well beyond the social sciences to philosophy and more, by
creating the possibility of giving the human experience a home in the universe.
Second, even when it afﬁrms extant theoretical practices a quantum approach
may force a re-thinking of how they are understood. For example, intentional
explanations will not be seen as a mechanical unfolding of preexisting mental
states, nor will unobservable social structures be seen as really real.
Third, by virtue of these changes phenomena that are currently considered
anomalous would be explained. The clearest example to date is the success of
quantum decision theory in explaining the Kahneman-Tversky effects, but as
we will see there are many other anomalies for classical social science that are
predicted from a quantum perspective.
Fourth, and more prospectively, the conceptual, logical, and methodologi-
cal tools of quantum theory offer the potential for revealing new social phe-
nomena. Consider structural power, a concept often invoked by critical the-
orists but which from a classical perspective is impossible to see as any-
thing other than a concatenation of local power relations – and thus can
only be illusory. Conceptualizing structural power as a form of non-local
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
35
causation suggests that it is indeed quite real, at least in the quantum sense
of the term.
Fifth, if quantum consciousness theory is taken as an explanation for con-
sciousness, then the concept of complementarity could resolve the controversy
between positivists and interpretivists. Although I will not address epistemol-
ogy much in this book, given how bitter and intractable the dispute has been,
this may be one of the most important pay-offs of a quantum social science.
Finally, there would be signiﬁcant normative implications as well. Most
mainstream normative theorizing about social life today, especially in the liberal
tradition, assumes a world of separable, constitutionally pre-social individuals
who then struggle to achieve sociability (the state of nature and all that). It is
not hard to see the imprint of the classical worldview on this atomistic and
competitive picture, but either way, quantum phenomena are marked by their
holistic and “cooperative” character. That points toward a more communitarian
andrelational startingpoint for normativetheory, whichsuggests that sociability
is less a hard-fought achievement than the pre-condition and norm of human
existence, and if so, that our obligations to others run correspondingly deeper.
As with the epistemology question, I will only gesture in this direction, but
if trying to make society a better place is one of the main reasons social
scientists do what they do, then it is a thematic that needs to be developed down
the road.
In sum, although the idea that social life is quantum mechanical may seem
bizarre at ﬁrst, and some of the arguments I make are indeed radical, I hope to
show that it is actually quite intuitive, far more so than treating social life on
the classical model of clashing billiard balls. And not only that, as I argue in
the Conclusion, it is too elegant not to be true. For the price of the two claims
of quantum consciousness theory – that the brain is a quantum computer and
that consciousness inheres in matter at the fundamental level – we get solutions
to a host of intractable problems that have dogged the social sciences from the
beginning. These claims are admittedly speculative, but neither is precluded
by what we currently know about the brain or quantum physics, and given the
classical materialist failure to make progress on the mind–body problem, at
this point they look no more speculative than the orthodoxy – and the potential
pay-off is huge. If classical social science is in fact founded upon a mistake,
then far from re-inventing the wheel a quantum social ontology would give our
wheels the right ground on which to roll.
Having said that, however, I should emphasize that this book may be read in
an “as if ” rather than realist way. My personal belief in the argument certainly
helped make it possible to spend ten years of my life working on it. But the
test of my narrative is not that you come away thinking that social life really is
quantum mechanical. After all, many of the experts upon whose work I draw,
like quantum decision theorists, are themselves agnostic about the philosophical
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

36
Preface to a quantum social science
implications of their work, much less ready to embrace panpsychism! The test
is whether you come away convinced that a quantum perspective offers at
least a fruitful heuristic for thinking about long-standing controversies in social
theory, and ultimately for doing empirical social science. If so, then I will count
my effort as a success, and we can argue about the realism issue later.
Situating your observer
As we will see shortly, observation plays a critical role in quantum phenomena.
Although the nature of that role is contested, what is clear is that observation
has a very different status in the classical worldview. There, a subject–object
dichotomy is assumed such that we can at least aspire to observe in a neutral
and passive way, by accurately recording the properties of objects that are
assumed to exist independently of us.118 Injecting an observer’s values or
interests into this process breaks down the subject–object distinction, resulting
in measurement bias relative to the true values. Observing sub-atomic particles
is an altogether different matter. In most interpretations of quantum theory
particles cannot be said to exist prior to measurement, and in preparing quantum
systems for observation an entanglement is created with the observer that affects
what is eventually seen. That does not mean that the observer literally creates
reality, but it does mean that she participates in what is actually observed, and
as such observation cannot even in principle approximate the classical ideal of
separation.
This breakdown of the subject–object dichotomy makes it natural to wonder
about my relationship to the reality I will be observing for you. On one level
that reality is the same as yours, namely social life, which I will be arguing is
quantum mechanical. However, I will be making that case not directly, through
experimental tests of quantum hypotheses, but indirectly through readings of
philosophical and scientiﬁc discourses in several disciplines to which I am a
complete outsider. While I have worked hard to make sense of these discourses,
I cannot speak with any real authority about them. The risks of dilettantism
and just plain silliness are obvious, as well as of my observations creating a
putative reality rather than just measuring it. In short, caveat emptor!
Yet there is one useful epistemic role that I think I can credibly play in this
book, which is that of an anthropologist.119 Each of the bodies of scholarship
I take up in effect constitutes a distinct culture, with its own assumptions and
concerns. As anthropologist I make no pretense of having an insider’s knowl-
edge of these cultures, especially since my “ﬁeldwork” consisted of reading
118 See Jackson (2008) for a good discussion.
119 More skeptical readers might say Marco Polo is more like it, whose tales of wonder were of
dubious veracity – but at least he encouraged others to go see for themselves.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface to a quantum social science
37
their texts rather than talking with the natives.120 Moreover, I approached my
reading selectively, with a view not toward mastering the cultures on their own
terms, but toward supporting my own, quantum view of social life (so more like
a nineteenth- than twenty-ﬁrst-century anthropologist perhaps!). In part for this
reason I have provided extensive references to work outside the social sciences
that relates to my argument so that readers may follow up,121 but even then I
do not aim to provide comprehensive overviews of each literature. Instead, my
goal is to show how things look to me, from my situated “somewhere” rather
than an objective “nowhere.”
While this means that everything that follows should be taken with a large
grain of salt, an anthropological attitude does have two virtues, not just for
my own argument but – if they will bear with an itinerant and iconoclastic
guest – even for my “subjects.” First, judging from citation patterns, a striking
feature of the cultures I look at, even ones that are talking about the same
things, is how isolated they are from each other, making them more like a vast
archipelago than a system of contiguous states. “Island hopping” will enable me
to highlight potential connections, and perhaps start some conversations in the
process. Second, as an outsider I have the freedom to say things that cannot or
would not be by insiders – like my Emperor Has No Clothes suggestion above
that after 350 years of failing to explain consciousness, perhaps materialism is
simply wrong. Whether in each case I am playing the fool or stating the obvious
will be up to each of you – also situated, participant observers – to decide.122
As you do so, however, my hope is that you will approach this book holis-
tically. Whatever plausibility is due to its argument will stem not from a close
reading of everything in the bibliography, much less from expert knowledge,
but from how the underlying ideas ﬁt together into a coherent whole. Despite
the complexity of the narrative, the book’s main thesis is quite simple – that
human beings are walking wave functions – and not particularly dependent on
the details. Like the social reality it purports to describe, it is emergent in a
quantum sense.
120 My discussion in Part I did, however, beneﬁt considerably from conversations with and com-
ments from two physicists, Chris Wendt (my brother) and Badredine Arﬁ, as well as a psy-
chologist who knows the physics, Jerome Busemeyer.
121 In contrast, I only cite social scientiﬁc scholarship as necessary to make my case, since to
reference properly everything that social scientists have written on the topics I cover would
vastly expand an already long bibliography.
122 Either way, for me this book has been “Alex’s Excellent Adventure.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Part I
Quantum theory and its interpretation
Introduction
Chapter 1 dealt with one of the deepest mysteries in modern science: how
to explain consciousness. This Part deals with another mystery: how to make
sense of quantum mechanics. Both involve a problem of reconciliation with the
classical worldview, which is one hint that the two mysteries might be related.
A second is that, unlike classical physics, which makes no reference to or
allowance for consciousness, quantum theory raises the issue of consciousness
and its relationship to the physical world in a very direct way. These hints do
not necessarily mean there is a connection between the two mysteries, but by
the end of this Part I hope to have shown why it would be natural to look
for one.
My more immediate aim here is to give the social scientiﬁc reader an intro-
ductory understanding of the experimental ﬁndings of quantum theory, its key
concepts, and the debates about its interpretation. The discussion assumes no
prior knowledge of quantum physics and makes no use of mathematics. Quan-
tum theory without equations might seem like an oxymoron, and certainly
reading this Part will not enable anyone to use quantum theory. But to a per-
haps surprising degree it is possible to understand quantum theory without
being able to use it. Its ﬁndings can be communicated in ordinary language,
and the same goes for its main concepts and interpretive debates. One conse-
quence of this has been the emergence of a virtual cottage industry of books on
quantum theory for a lay audience. Most are written by physicists, and many
are quite good.1 However, it is not just popular treatments that do without
equations: much of the professional philosophical literature does as well. (I
draw on both kinds of literature below.) Philosophers of physics are trained to
understand the math, of course, which is necessary for a full appreciation of the
issues. But the primary questions about quantum theory are about metaphysics,
1 See for example Zukav (1979), Herbert (1985), Friedman (1997), and Rosenblum and Kuttner
(2006); also see A. Goff (2006) on “quantum tic-tac-toe,” which was written as an aid for teaching
students with no background in the area. For braver souls Haven and Khrennikov (2013) provide
an excellent technical overview of quantum theory aimed at social scientists.
39
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

40
Quantum theory and its interpretation
not physics. Once we understand the basics we should be in a position to have
a reasonably well-informed discussion.
That said, “understanding” in this context is something of a misnomer, since
no one, not even physicists, understands quantum theory, if by that we mean
what it is telling us about reality. Richard Feynman has often been quoted as
saying that anyone who claims to understand it clearly doesn’t know what he
is talking about. It would seem, then, that just as it is possible (within limits) to
understand quantum theory without being able to use it, it is possible to use it
without fully understanding it. As such, my real goal here is to give readers an
understanding of why we do not understand quantum mechanics. It will take
most of this Part to do that, but let me summarize the problem here in two ways,
one from a common-sense perspective and the other more theoretically.
The simplest characterization of the problem is that the reality quantum
theory depicts is nothing like the macroscopic material reality described by
classical physics. This is not because its constituents are so much smaller than
everyday objects; scale is not the issue. It is because the properties of quantum
systems seem fundamentally inconsistent with macroscopic reality: material
objects dissolve into ﬁelds of potentiality, larger objects cannot be reduced to
smaller ones, events seem not to have causes, and so on. Put another way, since
the classical worldview is the basis of what we today take to be common sense
about the world, at a gut level quantum theory just doesn’t make sense – indeed,
so much so that John Bell, one of the great physicists of the twentieth century,
argued that whatever picture of reality eventually emerges from quantum theory
will surely “astonish us.”2
A more precise characterization of the problem is that the predictions of
quantum theory are probabilistic, yet the outcomes of experiments on quantum
systems are always deﬁnite, classical events. Of course, most social scientiﬁc
theories are probabilistic as well, but if the macroscopic world is classical,
then there must be an ontologically deterministic process underlying those
probabilities about which we are simply ignorant at present. In the quantum
world such an assumption is problematic. Quantum probabilities behave quite
differently than classical ones (whether objective or subjective),3 and although
there are ways to make quantum theory deterministic, these are contested and
come at a high price in other respects. As such, most physicists today believe
that quantum theory is “complete,” in the sense that there is no deeper, as
yet undiscovered, classical theory or “hidden variable” that could explain its
predictions deterministically. Hence the mystery: how to explain the transition
2 The quote is in Rosenblum and Kuttner (2002: 1291).
3 For a good overview of philosophical questions pertaining to quantum probability theory see the
special issue on the topic in Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, June 2007.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum theory and its interpretation
41
from the quantum to the classical world? Is it a real process, and, if so, how
does it happen? If not, then what is it?
In short, quantum theory does not answer crucial questions about the reality it
describes, and strongly suggests that they cannot be answered even in principle
by science. As Steven French puts it, we face an “underdetermination of meta-
physics by physics.”4 Understanding the theory is therefore a philosophical
rather than scientiﬁc problem, of “interpreting” it to produce a coherent picture
of reality. Since the 1930s over a dozen interpretations have been proposed
that make strikingly – indeed, wildly – different ontological and epistemolog-
ical assumptions (Chapter 4), and once proposed they never die because of
the under-determination problem. As they are designed to explain the same
data, it is difﬁcult if not impossible to discriminate among them empirically.5
Fortunately, this does not prevent scientists from using quantum theory, which
means the philosophical debate is actually of little interest to practicing physi-
cists. But in considering its relevance to social science the debate is harder to
avoid, since some interpretations suggest there are no such implications, while
others suggest there are many.
So we are in something of a bind: unable to determine which interpretation
of quantum theory is correct, and unable to determine quantum theory’s rel-
evance to social science as long as that is the case. This might seem to call
into question my decision to set epistemological questions aside in favor of
ontology, and to reduce the question of social ontology to a matter of per-
sonal metaphysical taste, but I don’t think so. The fact that physicists cannot
(yet?) adjudicate scientiﬁcally among interpretations of quantum theory does
not mean there is no other way to do so: the criteria are simply more philosoph-
ical. The philosophy of quantum theory is full of arguments for and against
each interpretation. Reasonable people disagree about these arguments, but that
is true in any area where the data do not yield deﬁnitive answers. No doubt
you the reader, when encountering some of these interpretations below, will
make judgments about their relative plausibility, and even though you could not
prove your judgments empirically, you could offer principled considerations
on their behalf. The interpretive debate about quantum theory is about how to
weigh those considerations, which thanks to the debate are much clearer today
than they were eighty years ago. Moreover, we have an ace in the hole: quan-
tum consciousness theory (Part II). As an independent, ontological reason for
4 French (1998: 93).
5 However, on the plus side this may account for the mutual respect and relative lack of polemic
evident in the debate; strong opinions notwithstanding, almost everyone seems to understand
that their preferred interpretation is speculative and could be totally wrong. At least in their
writings, in my experience philosophers of physics are the most open-minded academics in the
world (though admittedly this is a low bar!).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

42
Quantum theory and its interpretation
thinking that the two great mysteries of modern science are linked, it suggests
what a correct interpretation of quantum theory should look like.
This Part is organized into three chapters. Chapter 2 summarizes three of
the major experimental ﬁndings of quantum theory and key concepts that have
been developed to describe them. In Chapter 3 I consider six challenges that
the theory poses for the classical worldview, which might be considered its
“negative” implications, or what it tells us the world is not like. Finally, in
Chapter 4 I address a sample of ﬁve positions in the interpretive debate about
the theory’s “positive” implications, or what the world is like. I concentrate on
the debate between materialist and idealist interpretations, with a view toward
setting up the panpsychist argument of Part II.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2
Three experiments
Quantum theory is a mathematical formalism that allows physicists to predict
the probability of observing different outcomes in experiments on sub-atomic
systems. It has been tested more rigorously than any theory in science, and has
never been wrong. However, strictly speaking it does not “explain” the behavior
of sub-atomic systems, since it does not propose a mechanism to account for
it.1 It tells us that they will behave in certain ways, but not why. Thus, quantum
mechanics is not a theory in the sense familiar to social scientists, namely a
body of laws that explains some part of reality. The explanatory question is the
subject of the interpretive debates that surround the theory, not of the theory per
se. That said, the literature routinely refers to quantum mechanics as a theory,
and I shall use the terms interchangeably below.
A common way to introduce quantum theory is through some of the key
experiments that have conﬁrmed its predictions. In this chapter I describe three
of the most well-known: the Two-Slit Experiment, the Bell Experiments, and
the Delayed-Choice Experiment.2 While painting the same overall picture,
each reveals distinct features of the quantum realm. While their interpretation
is contested, here I will do my best to present just the theory’s ﬁndings, saving
interpretive questions for later.
The Two-Slit Experiment
This experiment actually had its origins long before the quantum revolution.
One of the most controversial questions in classical physics was whether light
was made of particles or waves. In keeping with his atomistic worldview,
Newton favored the particle or “corpuscular” theory of light, which was the
majority view among physicists through the eighteenth century. However, in
1 Squires (1994: 3).
2 Plotnitsky (2010: Chapter 2) provides a more detailed but still highly readable introduction to
the Two-Slit and Delayed-Choice Experiments, which I discovered too late to draw upon in this
manuscript.
43
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

44
Quantum theory and its interpretation
1801 Thomas Young performed an experiment that seemed to prove conclu-
sively that the wave theory was correct.3
In his experiment, Young set up a light source behind an opaque screen with
one small opening or slit, through which the light passed in a concentrated
beam. The light then struck a second screen with two slits side by side, through
which it passed on to a third screen with no slits. The slits on the second screen
were close enough together that light passing through them would illuminate
a partly overlapping area on the third screen. If light were made of particles,
then we would expect the overlapping area to be more brightly lit than the non-
overlapping regions, since it was being struck by particles from both slits. But
this is not what Young found. Instead, the light hitting the third screen formed
an “interference pattern” of alternating bright and dark bands. This is what we
would expect if light were made of waves. When one wave crest meets another
crest they amplify each other (the bright bands on the screen), whereas when a
crest meets a wave trough they cancel each other out (the dark bands). Young’s
demonstration of this interference pattern seemed to settle the debate in favor
of the wave theory, and as such was important in the subsequent development
of energy physics, which culminated in Maxwell’s theory of electro-magnetic
waves in 1864.
But despite Young’s achievement, by the end of the nineteenth century two
anomalies for the wave theory had emerged, the black box radiation problem
and the photoelectric effect. The former was concerned with the question of why
objects glow when heated. Classical physics predicted that energy in the form of
radiation will be emitted from a heated object in a continuous stream, with the
level of radiation increasing with higher frequencies of light. But experiments
had shown that the relationship was in fact curvilinear, with radiation levels
low at both low and high light frequencies, and peaking in the middle. Even
more disturbing for classical theory at the time was the fact that when all the
frequencies were added together the result was an inﬁnite amount of radiation,
which did not make sense. In what he later called an “act of desperation,” Max
Planck solved these problems in 1900 by assuming that energy does not ﬂow
continuously, as posited by the wave theory, but in discrete particles or “quanta.”
With this as his premise, he introduced a mathematical constant to predict the
pattern of radiation at different frequencies, which it did successfully. “Planck’s
constant” became the fundamental building block of quantum mechanics, and
its discovery now marks the beginning of the quantum revolution.
The importance of Planck’s discovery became clear in 1905, when Einstein
published a paper on the photoelectric effect. It was known that, under certain
conditions, shining a light on a piece of metal causes the metal to emit electrons.
The wave theory predicted that as the intensity of light at a frequency is
3 The following discussion draws on Zukav (1979: 83–86), Friedman (1997: 51–54), and Malin
(2001: 27–29).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Three experiments
45
increased the energy of electrons emitted should go up proportionally as well;
it also predicted that the photoelectric effect should occur at all frequencies as
long as the intensity is sufﬁciently high. But experiments had shown that this
was wrong – the intensity increased the number of electrons that were emitted
but had no effect on their energy, and the photoelectric effect disappears when
the wavelength exceeds a cutoff. Why? Einstein showed that this could be
explained by Planck’s model. Energy varies according to wavelength and not
intensity, and at short wavelengths the energy of particles of light (photons)
is higher, enabling them to dislodge electrons in the metal, whereas at long
wavelengths the energy of the photons is too weak to produce this effect.
In short, Planck and Einstein’s ﬁndings implied light was not a wave but a
“shower of particles,”4 suggesting that Newton’s corpuscular theory had been
right all along. However here’s the rub: Young’s results still stood. Planck and
Einstein had shown that in their experiments, which were designed to answer
different questions than Young’s, light behaved as if it were a particle, not that
Young was wrong about his experiment, where light still behaved as if it were
a wave. Thus, rather than vindicating Newton, the implication of Planck and
Einstein’s work seemed to be that light was both wave and particle, which
makes no sense in the “either-or” world of classical physics.
If light or energy can behave like a particle, or matter, it soon turned out
that the reverse was also true, that matter can behave like a wave. This was
predicted theoretically in 1924 by Louis de Broglie in his doctoral dissertation,
and conﬁrmed experimentally for electrons two years later. In contrast to the
long-accepted view that electrons were tiny objects, it now appeared that they
could also be “standing waves.”5 Normally we do not see this wave-aspect of
matter because the “matter waves” of ordinary objects are so small relative to
the size of the objects that their effect is negligible, but at the sub-atomic level
the waves are sufﬁciently large to have a measurable effect.6
That all matter-energy can behave like both waves and particles has since
been proven in modern, quantum versions of the Two-Slit Experiment. In
these experiments a particle “gun” shoots a stream of electrons (or any other
type of particle) toward a screen with two slits. They pass through the slits and
the location of their hits is recorded on a photographic screen.7 If we ﬁrst close
one slit, then the distribution of hits is concentrated directly across from the
open slit, with a small tail on either side. If we then close the open slit and open
the other one, we get a similar result across from the second slit. These results
are what we would expect if electrons were particles. That might suggest that
if we leave both slits open then the result should be a simple sum of the two
4 See Herbert (1985: 57–58).
5 Zukav (1979: 122); the phrase is Schr¨odinger’s.
6 Zukav (1979: 119).
7 The following discussion draws on Albert (1992: 12–14), Friedman (1997: 53–54), and Nadeau
and Kafatos (1999: 46–51).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

46
Quantum theory and its interpretation
distributions, with two bells separated by connected tails. However, that is not
what we observe: with both slits open, in the region of overlapping tails we get
the characteristic interference pattern associated with waves.
To rule out the possibility that the electrons are interfering with each other
before they pass through the slits, physicists have recently devised a way for
the gun to ﬁre one electron at a time. Yet, even in this case with both slits open,
a series of shots still generates an interference pattern, which suggests that
each electron passes through both slits and then interferes with itself!8 Since an
electron cannot be divided, that seems impossible; common sense tells us that a
particle must go through one slit or the other. We can test that belief by putting
“detectors” on each slit. Sure enough, the detectors show that each electron
passes through only one slit, which seems to support the idea that electrons
are particles. Yet, adding this extra measurement has an unintended effect: it
destroys the wave interference pattern on the photographic plate. This result
reveals several other paradoxical features of the quantum world.
Measurement is creative
The build-up of an interference pattern in a two-slit experiment without detec-
tors indicates that each electron goes through both slits, and therefore behaves
like a wave before it hits the photographic plate. The disappearance of this pat-
tern when detectors are put on the slits challenges that conclusion, since each
electron then goes through only one slit, suggesting that electrons are particles
the whole time. But that can’t be right, since it does not account for the inter-
ference pattern when the detectors are removed. Thus, the correct conclusion
is that as long as the electron is not being observed it behaves as if it is a wave,
and as soon as it is observed it behaves as if it is a particle. Measurement is
somehow intrinsically connected to a change in our description of the electron.
The implication is that in the quantum world, observer and observed form a
single system, rather than being separable as in the classical world. Shimon
Malin likens this to the “refrigerator door effect” on a small child: whenever
she opens the door the light is on, and so she assumes that it must be on when
the door is closed.9 But eventually she learns that opening the door (measure-
ment) is what turns the light on. Although it is less clear that electrons “really”
change, something analogous is going on here. Whether in an ontological or
merely epistemological sense, measurement is “creative.”
Collapse of the wave function
At this point it is natural to ask what kind of ghostly phenomena are these
waves, which seem to exist only as long as we do not observe them? This is
8 For discussion see Malin (2001: 45–46).
9 Malin (2001: 48).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Three experiments
47
one of the fundamental interpretive questions in quantum mechanics that I am
deferring in this chapter; here I just want to discuss how waves are deﬁned
within the formalism itself (about which all sides agree), and relate them to the
measurement process.
The dynamics of waves in quantum mechanics are described by a math-
ematical equation discovered in 1925 by Erwin Schr¨odinger (“Schr¨odinger’s
equation”). Since waves vary, the content of wave functions will vary as well,
but their deﬁnition is always the same: a wave function represents the potential
for all outcomes – the location of particle hits – that might be observed when
we perform a measurement. Importantly, therefore, a wave function consists
only of possibilities, and as such the wave it describes is not in any actual or
deﬁnite state like a classical wave. Instead, in quantum mechanics all of the
wave’s possible states are said to have potential to exist, in a mathematical
sense, simultaneously in “superposition.”10 We might think of a wave function
as a “ﬁeld of potentialities.”11 The probability of any of these potentials being
actualized is determined by squaring the amplitude of the wave function at each
point. These probabilities tell us the likelihood of ﬁnding a particle at any given
location, but the meaning here is not like our conventional, classical idea of
probability. In classical physics, probability refers to our degree of uncertainty
about some actual state of affairs, for example how many red balls there are in
an urn of red and blue balls. In the quantum case, we cannot say that there is an
“actual state of affairs” with respect to the question we want to ask, and so the
probabilities refer only to possible observations. Put another way, some kind
of reality is out there which gives answers to our questions, but the answers
are not out there until we ask them. More than this we cannot know, even in
principle. Prior to its measurement, the wave function constitutes a complete
description of a quantum system; there is no deﬁnite reality hiding behind the
wave function about which we could obtain further knowledge if only we had
the means.
Wave functions are dynamic and evolve deterministically. This means that,
as long as we do not perform a measurement, we can predict exactly how the
probabilities of particle hits will change over time (though not where actual
hits will be observed). It is important to keep this in mind given the popular
association of quantum mechanics with indeterminism; at least with respect to
the evolution of the wave function, quantum mechanics is deterministic.
What is not deterministic is the process by which waves “change” (sic)
into particles. This process goes by various names in the literature, depending
on interpretive sensibilities. Those who think it describes a change in the
real world usually call it “collapse of the wave function,” whereas those who
10 For an excellent introduction to the idea, and puzzle, of superposition states see Albert (1992:
1–16).
11 Malin (2001: 47).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

48
Quantum theory and its interpretation
think it merely describes a change in our knowledge usually prefer the less
ontological sounding phrase “state reduction” (for “quantum state”). Either
way, all agree that when a measurement is performed, the probability of all the
possible outcomes that are not actually observed goes to zero, and that which
is observed goes to one. This result is immediate, occurring in “no time”; it
is indeterminate, there being no way to predict exactly what outcome will be
observed; and it lacks any apparent causal mechanism. So what determines
where the particle hits? According to the formalism itself, the answer is purely
unpredictable (though this is not to say that all outcomes are equally likely).
The nature of wave function collapse is one of the most puzzling issues in
quantum mechanics, and we will return to it below.
Complementarity
The fact that wave functions describe quantum systems only up to the instant at
which we perform a measurement means that descriptions of these systems as
waves and as particles are mutually exclusive but jointly necessary. Depending
on the experiment, we always see only one aspect or the other: put detectors on
the slits and we get particles, take them off and we get waves; close one slit and
we get particles, open both and we get waves. Yet, the two descriptions are also
jointly necessary in the sense that a complete description of the system requires
both; each by itself is only a partial representation. A particle model cannot
account for the interference pattern we observe on the photographic screen,
while a wave model cannot account for the hits we observe individual electrons
making. Since quantum systems seem to exhibit both wave and particle aspects,
this has been dubbed the “wave-particle duality.” This duality poses a signiﬁcant
challenge to a classical understanding, since it requires a conceptual framework
with mutually incompatible elements.
In 1927 the Danish physicist Niels Bohr came up with such a framework,
which he called the principle of “complementarity.”12 On the surface, the prin-
ciple seems straightforward enough, since in daily life we often think in such
terms. Descriptions of a house from different sides, for example, are comple-
mentary: they are mutually exclusive but jointly necessary for a total picture.
However, in quantum theory the concept is more subtle. When we look at a
house from multiple vantage points, there is no suggestion that our descriptions
are incompatible, or that when we are looking at one side of the house the
other sides do not exist. We know the other sides of the house are out there
even though we can’t see them, and a simple change of view will prove it.
This is exactly what we do not know in quantum mechanics. If we design an
12 See Bohr (1937). He apparently got the idea from a book by William James. The concept has
since taken on several meanings, a good survey of which may be found in Hinterberger and von
Stillfried (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Three experiments
49
experiment to demonstrate the velocity of an electron, then we no longer have
any basis for saying that a particle is located out there (and vice-versa), since
there is no way to acquire information about its location without destroying
the interference pattern across positions from which we infer the existence
of velocity. Indeed, “[t]he absence of any such information is the essential
criterion for quantum interference to appear.”13 So the mutual exclusion here
is deeper than the merely perspectival problem in the classical case: knowl-
edge of one precludes knowledge of the other, and to that extent they are
inconsistent.
The wave-particle duality illustrates one way to think about complementar-
ity, where a trade-off exists between knowledge of an unmeasured quantum
system and that of a measured one: as soon as we perform a measurement
(which “creates” particle behavior) the wave function is no longer an appro-
priate description of the system. Another way into complementarity is through
perhaps the most widely known idea from quantum mechanics, the “Uncer-
tainty Principle.”14 In 1925 Werner Heisenberg showed that it is impossible
to measure the exact location and momentum of a particle at the same time
and indeed that there was a direct trade-off between the two: the more precise
our knowledge of a particle’s location, the less precise our knowledge of its
momentum, and vice-versa. So the particle has either a well-deﬁned position or
well-deﬁned momentum; it cannot have both. We can only “know” both if we
are willing to settle for approximate information about each, since the exper-
iments necessary to measure position and momentum precisely are mutually
exclusive.
The combination of wave-particle duality and the Uncertainty Principle sug-
gests that complementarity is a general feature of the quantum world, and in
fact Bohr thought that it might apply at the macroscopic, biological level as
well – a hunch I pursue in subsequent chapters. However, as we will see below,
it is not clear what inference should be drawn from the fact of complementar-
ity, and in particular whether the problem is only an epistemological one of
inherent limits to knowledge, or whether it also has ontological implications.
Even Bohr himself took several years after ﬁrst enunciating the principle to
settle on one view.15 But the point for now is that quantum systems cannot be
completely described by either a particle or a wave model alone, and thus the
quest for a uniﬁed or coherent description in the classical sense must be given
up.16 The best we can hope to do is to bolt mutually exclusive descriptions
together within the framework of complementarity.
13 Zeilinger (1999: S289), emphasis in the original.
14 See Malin (2001: 32–35) for a good discussion of the Uncertainty Principle.
15 See Bohr (1937; 1948), and Held (1994) for a good discussion of Bohr’s evolution, and the
problems of interpreting complementarity more generally.
16 Malin (2001: 37). I say “in the classical sense” here because a description in terms of super-
position is in a sense “uniﬁed.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

50
Quantum theory and its interpretation
The Bell Experiments
In the years following the consolidation of quantum mechanics in 1927 Einstein
and Bohr engaged in an intense debate about whether its apparent conclusion
that reality was non-deterministic could be correct. Einstein was skeptical,
based on the conviction that “God does not play dice.”17 Over the next three
years he came up with several seemingly decisive objections to quantum the-
ory, each one of which Bohr was able to parry. After one last, dramatic but
failed attempt in 1930, Einstein was forced to concede that at least quantum
theory’s description of the world was accurate. However, still convinced that
reality could not be non-deterministic, he then took another tack: instead of
challenging the correctness of quantum mechanics, he would challenge its com-
pleteness. In 1935 Einstein and his Princeton colleagues Boris Podolsky and
Nathan Rosen published a landmark paper (known ever since as “EPR”) that
seemed to prove that, if we assume that quantum mechanics is correct then it
had to be incomplete. Guided by an analogy to statistical mechanics in clas-
sical physics, in which probabilistic patterns at the macro-level are explained
by deterministic causes at the micro-level, EPR argued that there must be a
more fundamental, sub-quantum theory that can explain, deterministically, the
probabilistic character of quantum outcomes.18
Their argument was based on an ingenious thought experiment.19 To prove
that quantum mechanics is incomplete EPR had to demonstrate that there are
“elements of reality” which cannot be accounted for within the framework.
Since what constitutes an “element of reality” had been thrown into doubt by
quantum theory, in order not to beg the question they chose as their criterion
of reality the following condition: if one can predict with certainty the value
of a physical quantity, without in any way disturbing (i.e. measuring) it, then
it is “real.” They then came up with what they thought was a proof that a sub-
atomic particle can have a well-deﬁned position and a well-deﬁned momentum
simultaneously, which according to quantum mechanics is impossible.
The proof begins with a system of two particles, A and B, moving in oppo-
site directions after interaction. Quantum theory allows us to know the total
momentum of the system (the sum of the momentum of each particle), and
the distance between them. EPR further assume that each particle has an equal
momentum, which means that the total momentum of the system is zero (since
they are moving in opposite directions). The question then is: can we know
the position of B without disturbing it? The answer is yes: by measuring A we
acquire knowledge of A’s position, and since we know the distance to B, we
can then calculate B’s position. Therefore, B must be an “element of reality,”
even though we have not measured it. Moreover, we can perform the same trick
17 Malin (2001: 63).
18 See Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen (1935).
19 The following discussion draws on Malin (2001: 63–66).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Three experiments
51
with momentum: by measuring A’s momentum, we can calculate B’s, since we
know the total momentum of the system is zero. The position and momentum
of B are therefore real, since they are both well deﬁned in the absence of mea-
surement. Since quantum mechanics cannot describe such a particle, it must be
incomplete.
EPR’s thought experiment hit Bohr like a “bolt from the blue,”20 and it
took him some time to formulate a response. However, three months later he
published a reply, in which he argued: (1) that A and B are “entangled” by virtue
of their relationship and thus should not be considered fully separable particles,
and (2) measurements of position and momentum are still complementary,
since only one can be measured at a time. Measuring the position of A and
thus knowing the position of B does not imply that B has a momentum sitting
out there waiting to be recorded, because momentum was not measured for
A. Momentum does not exist until it is created by measurement.21 These
two arguments challenged EPR’s conclusion that particles were “elements of
reality.”
This response had considerable force, but so did EPR, and thus, unlike Bohr’s
previous debate with Einstein about the correctness of quantum mechanics, it
was less clear who had won this one about its completeness. Most physicists
sided with Bohr’s “Copenhagen Interpretation,” though for reasons having as
much to do with the sociology of knowledge in physics as the substantive merits
of his argument.22 But EPR had their supporters as well, and so the question
of completeness was left unresolved. One reason for this was that at the time
both sides thought that it was impossible to test experimentally which view was
right. After all, all agreed that the quantum mechanical description was correct,
and both views were consistent with the available evidence. EPR had raised a
fundamental question about how this evidence should be interpreted, but the
question seemed to be only a philosophical one with no empirical implications.
All that changed in 1964 when an Irish physicist, John Bell, ﬁgured out
a way to test which side was right. EPR had based their argument on two
ontological assumptions, both reﬂecting the classical worldview. The ﬁrst was
realism, the principle that the world exists independent of the human mind.
This assumption is implicit in EPR’s deﬁnition of an “element of reality” as
something that can be known to exist without disturbance by human beings,
and was the main focus of the Bohr-EPR debate. The second assumption, less
remarked upon at the time, was locality, which is the principle that no causal
inﬂuence can propagate faster than the speed of light. This was meant to rule
out what Einstein called “spooky action at a distance.” (The combination of
these two assumptions is called “local realism.”) By modifying EPR’s original
20 Malin (2001: 66).
21 Thanks to Jerome Busemeyer for clarifying this point to me.
22 For a thorough study of how Bohr’s view became dominant, see Cushing (1994).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

52
Quantum theory and its interpretation
model, Bell was able to derive a theorem that stipulated some inequalities
regarding expected correlations between test results that must be satisﬁed if
local realism was true.23 It turned out that these inequalities are not satisﬁed
when calculated via quantum mechanics, which meant that either the latter was
wrong (if the inequalities were satisﬁed in experiments) or that local realism
was wrong (if they were not satisﬁed).
Bell’s Theorem had another consequence. Bell proved that EPR was wrong
if quantum mechanics is correct (which EPR had accepted). But there was
some lingering doubt about that assumption, and as such it was still possible to
argue in the face of Bell’s Theorem that perhaps it was quantum mechanics that
is wrong, rather than EPR. After all, local realism is the foundation not only
of classical physics but of all our experience of material objects in daily life;
to reject it would be to call everything we think we know about the universe
into question. The second result of Bell’s paper was that it suggested ways to
test local realism – and speciﬁcally the locality assumption – experimentally.
Beginning in 1972, these experiments culminated in a decisive test by Alain
Aspect and his colleagues at the University of Paris in 1981. The “Bell Exper-
iments” proved that quantum theory was indeed correct, and that local reality
was therefore not a basic feature of the universe.
The set-up of the Bell Experiments is similar to EPR’s thought experiment.24
It starts with a light source that emits two identical photons, A and B, in opposite
directions. One of the properties of photons is their polarization, which refers
to their “spin” or angular momentum. Like any quantum property, polarization
is subject to different descriptions (i.e. there are multiple “bases” for looking
at it), but for the sake of simplicity these can be reduced to two: horizontal and
vertical. Although mutually exclusive, these descriptions are in superposition,
which means that in its wave aspect the photon’s polarization does not have a
deﬁnite value.
The photons are then sent toward two polarizers, behind which are measure-
ment apparatuses that record the hits made by the photons, as in the Two-Slit
Experiment. A polarizer is a device that allows photons having the same polar-
ization as itself to pass through, but not photons with a different polarization
(as in sunglasses, for example). Thus, if the polarizer is polarized along the
vertical axis, then photons polarized vertically will get through, and be recorded
as hits on the measurement device standing behind, whereas photons polarized
horizontally will not pass and be recorded. (The opposite pattern would be
23 The details of Bell’s Theorem are too complicated to review here, but are nicely summarized
in Albert (1992: 66–70).
24 The following discussion draws on Zukav (1979: 307–312), Herbert (1985: 215–227), Nadeau
and Kafatos (1999: 70–80), and Rosenblum and Kuttner (2006: 142–152).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Three experiments
53
observed for a polarizer polarized along the horizontal axis). These effects are
what allow us to determine the actual state of the photon.
Now, despite the fact that in their unmeasured, wave state the polarization
of each photon is a superposition of vertical and horizontal, quantum theory
predicts that when the photons are measured – when their wave functions
collapse into particles – whatever the polarization of A, it will be perfectly
correlated with the polarization of B. And this is in fact what physicists observed
in the initial tests of Bell’s inequalities in the 1970s. If the axes of both polarizers
are arranged to be parallel, so that each one lets through the same kind of photon,
then the measured polarization, whether horizontal or vertical, of each photon
will be the same. Every time a hit is recorded for A (because its polarization
is on the same axis as the polarizer), a hit is also recorded for B; and every
time no hit is recorded for A (because its polarization is on a different axis than
the polarizer) no hit is recorded for B. Moreover, if we rotate one polarizer
so that its axis is perpendicular to the other, so that each now allows photons
through with opposite polarizations, the measured states are still correlated,
only negatively so: every time a hit is recorded for A, no hit is recorded for
B, and vice-versa. Finally, if we rotate the polarizers so that they are neither
parallel nor perpendicular to each other, then for every angle in between the
measured states will still be correlated. The correlations produced by these
experiments violated Bell’s inequalities, and as such strongly supported the
correctness of quantum mechanics.
However, by virtue of how the initial experiments were designed, there was
still the logical possibility that each photon somehow “knew” the state of the
two polarizers in advance, either through the initial set-up of the experiment
or through the communication of a signal between the two photons after it
began. Admittedly, it was not clear how such a possibility could happen or
affect the outcome, but since it would save the assumption of locality the
skeptics wanted more proof. Aspect and his colleagues provided this proof
in 1981 in a decisive ﬁnal experiment, in which the orientation of the two
polarizers was randomly determined while the photons were in ﬂight. There
was therefore no way the photons could “know” the ﬁnal state of the polarizers,
and given that no signal can travel faster than the speed of light, nor was
there any possibility of communication between the photons. And yet upon
measurement their polarizations were still correlated. Aspect’s results were
conﬁrmed in 1982 by Nicholus Gisin at the University of Geneva, who further
showed that the correlations did not degrade over longer distances. In the
Gisin variant the photons were not measured until they were eleven kilometers
apart, yet even then their measured states were perfectly correlated. Given
the enormous distance represented by eleven kilometers relative to the sub-
atomic scale, this indicated that the polarization of entangled photons would be
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

54
Quantum theory and its interpretation
correlated no matter how far apart they were, even across the universe. And,
since what goes for photons goes for other particles, and since all particles
in the universe have at some time or other been entangled, the upshot is that
everything in reality is correlated. The universe, in short, is one big quantum
system.25
What is going on here? The crucial issue at stake in the Bell Experiments was
the classical assumption of local reality: the reality principle and the principle
that no signal can be transmitted faster than light. In effect, the conjunction
of reality and locality is ruled out; we can retain locality and reject reality
or retain reality and reject locality. Bell’s experiments showed that even in
the absence of a faster-than-light signal one could still get interference across
separated particles, which suggests that reality is fundamentally non-local. To
see the signiﬁcance of this, it is important to keep in mind the difference
between the polarization state of the photons before and after measurement.
Before measurement each is in a superposition of both vertical and horizontal
polarization. Thus, the problem is not one of our ignorance: there simply is
no “fact of the matter” about a photon’s polarization before measurement.
Yet, when we measure them correlation is what we ﬁnd. When the actual
polarization of one is determined, the value assigned to the twin now interferes
with any other tests in other directions of polarization that can be performed on
the twin – and this happens instantaneously, no matter where in the universe
the twin is. It is almost as if each photon “knows” what is happening to the
other, without any signal being transferred between them (“spooky action at a
distance”).26 So what is going on here is not superluminal communication, but
something more like “communing.” In this regard a distinction is sometimes
drawn between “inﬂuencing” and “signaling.” Unlike local causation, which
depends on the transmission of a signal, in “non-local causation” there is mutual
inﬂuence, but no signaling.27 Making sense of non-local causation is another
interpretive challenge of quantum theory, and it will also play a key role in the
social ontology I develop in Part V below.
The Delayed-Choice Experiment
The non-locality exhibited in the Bell Experiments is spatial: instantaneous
correlations can occur between events that are widely separated in space. How-
ever, in quantum mechanics non-locality can also be temporal: correlations
can occur between events separated in time as well.28 This contradicts the
25 Nadeau and Kafatos (1999: 81).
26 See Hardy (1998) for a good, if somewhat technical, introduction to this idea.
27 See Berkovitz (1998 and 2014) for thorough analyses of these issues.
28 See Filk (2013) for a good overview of temporal non-locality.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Three experiments
55
classical assumption that time is a linear succession of “Nows,” and – even
more provocatively – suggests that events in the present can, in a certain sense,
affect the past. The idea of temporal non-locality began with a thought experi-
ment by the eminent physicist John Wheeler, and has since been conﬁrmed in
“Delayed-Choice Experiments.”29
In these experiments a beam of light enters the apparatus from the left and
is split into two by a half-silvered mirror, which “is a piece of glass coated
with a layer of silver so thin that it reﬂects half the light and transmits half
the light, rendering the glass half transparent and half reﬂective.”30 Half of the
light beam is deﬂected away from the mirror along path A, while the other
half passes straight through the mirror along path B. The light on A then
encounters two regular mirrors set at angles such that it is eventually diverted
back toward B. At the point where the two paths rejoin stands another half-
silvered mirror that splits each beam into two, so that each half of each beam is
now traveling in unison with a half from the other beam. The traveling pairs are
then in superposition, which means they should exhibit an interference pattern
on detectors. Long before the quantum revolution, physicists had veriﬁed that
we do in fact observe such an interference pattern.
So far the experiment is operating at an aggregate level, with beams of light
consisting of trillions of photons. In this set-up, it might still be reasonable to
say – in a classical vein – that some photons travel along A and some along
B, even though all together they produce an interference pattern. But consider
what happens if we narrow the light down to a series of individual photons. If
classical physics is right, then each photon must choose a path. Which path will
it take, and when will it choose? Quantum mechanics tells us that we cannot
know which path it will take for sure, but one might at least think the choice is
made when the photon encounters the ﬁrst half-silvered mirror at the start of
the experiment, since that is where the two paths initially diverge. But that is
not the case. (For reasons I do not understand) none of the mirrors performs a
measurement and as such there is no collapse of the photon’s wave function. It
remains in a state of superposition, traveling through both paths simultaneously
so to speak. No “choice” is made at all.
Now for the “delayed” part. We ﬁrst need to make one adjustment to the
experiment, mounting one of the corner mirrors on path A on a spring so
sensitive it will cause the mirror to vibrate if it is struck by even a single photon.
The spring can be set to “on” or “off.” When on, its vibration will perform a
measurement, collapsing any passing wave function into a particle, in the same
29 See Wheeler (1978). The following discussion draws on Herbert (1985: 164–167), Nadeau
and Kafatos (1999: 48–50; 186–189), and Malin (2001: 180–183). For a comprehensive but
technical overview see Bahrami and Shaﬁee (2010).
30 Malin (2001: 129). I draw heavily on Malin (2001: 128–131 and 180–183) in what follows.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

56
Quantum theory and its interpretation
way that the detectors on the slits in the Two-Slit Experiment induce collapse.
With the spring on, in other words, the photon will come out of superposition
and make a “choice”: either a hit will be recorded on the spring-mounted mirror,
indicating that the photon took path A, or none will be recorded, indicating that
it took path B. When is this choice made? Classical thinking tells us it must
have been when the two paths initially diverged at the ﬁrst, half-silvered mirror.
But the facts are otherwise. To see this, we manipulate the experiment in the
same way we did in the Bell Experiments. First we run the experiment with the
spring off. In this case we observe a wave interference pattern, indicating that
no choice of path was made. Then we run the experiment again, only this time
we quickly turn the spring on after the photon has passed the presumed point of
choice at the ﬁrst, half-silvered mirror. In this case we observe a particle hit (or
not), indicating that the wave function collapsed and the photon took one path
(or not). However, since the change in the spring’s state occurred while the pho-
ton was in ﬂight, after the choice point, what this experiment shows is that what
we do in the present is instantly correlated with what happened in the past (i.e.
temporal non-locality). In other words, by our intervention the photon’s choice
is “delayed” until after the point at which it could have chosen in a classical
sense.
Wheeler highlights the far-reaching implications of this ﬁnding with a
thought experiment on a cosmological scale.31 He begins with Einstein’s dis-
covery that gravity is a curvature in space-time that bends light. Gravity is
associated with objects, and the larger the object, the greater the curvature.
Now consider a quasar, a phenomenon billions of light years away that is an
intense source of light. The fact that it takes light that long to reach us means
the information it carries reﬂects what was happening on its source back then,
not today; for all we know the quasar could have long since disappeared. So
in looking at quasars we are quite literally seeing into the very distant past.
Next, assume that a galaxy stands somewhere precisely between the quasar and
ourselves. This galaxy exerts a massive gravitational pull that causes the light
coming from the quasar to curve around the galaxy to both its left and its right.
After passing the galaxy the curved beams of light then meet up again and cross
before continuing in separate directions. The question is: will a photon from
the quasar pass to the left or the right of the galaxy?
Intuitively one would think that the answer must have been determined long
ago, when the photon encountered the galaxy. Yet, quantum theory shows that
depending on where we measure the photon we can get different descriptions. If
we measure it at the point at which the left and right beams cross, then we get a
wave interference pattern, suggesting that the photon went both ways (as in the
Two-Slit case with both slits open and no detectors). However, if we measure
31 See Wheeler (1994: 124–125).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Three experiments
57
it after the beams diverge – i.e. on one of the two, post-galaxy trajectories –
then we get a particle hit rather than an interference pattern, indicating that
the photon took one of the two paths (as in the Two-Slit case with detectors
on the slits). So despite our powerful intuitive assumption, it turns out that our
choice of measurement procedure today affects how we should describe what
happened in the past.
Does this mean that we can literally change the past? Well, in a sense –
although here we begin to get into interpretive issues.32 Recall that as a wave,
before measurement, a photon is in a superposition of possible states. This
means that relative to a classical frame of reference it exists as a potential, not
an actuality. Thus, when we measure it, what we are changing is not its actual
properties before we measured it but its potential to take on one actual property
rather than another. In other words, once a measurement is done, the photon’s
actual past or “history” is determined.33 However, the process by which that
history was made does change the photon’s potential past, or what could have
happened. That might not sound counter-intuitive; after all, in everyday life we
routinely assume that the future is “open,” which implies that what actually
does happen – history – is contingent and thus could have turned out differently.
But as we will see below, this way of talking is loose and inconsistent with
the classical worldview. Classical reality is ontologically deterministic; in such
a world, there is no meaningful sense in which what could happen can be
different than what does happen. By contrast, in the quantum world what could
happen includes events that might not actually happen, and it is the act of
bringing actual events into being that constitutes what could have happened in
the past. In short, if we are going to argue that the future is open and history is
contingent, it will have to be on quantum grounds – but, as I suggest below, we
then have to accept the possibility that the past is open as well.
32 The following draws on Herbert (1985: 167), Malin (2001: 180–183), and Grove (2002). See
Chapter 10 for further discussion in the context of the human sciences.
33 Surprisingly, however, this does not mean it cannot be undone. Another bizarre (and experi-
mentally veriﬁed) prediction of quantum theory, known as “quantum erasure,” allows one to
return a collapsed state to its superposition state; see Aharonov and Zubairy (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

3
Six challenges
Despite scholarly consensus on the empirical facts, ever since its inception in
the 1920s there has been deep disagreement about how to interpret quantum
theory. “To interpret a physical theory is to say what the world would be like,
if the theory were true.”1 All scientiﬁc theories require interpretation, since
strictly speaking what they describe are our experiences of the world rather
than the world itself. Thus, whether we are trying to explain or merely describe
the world, we are always engaged in inference.2 To make inferences we need a
context for interpretation. For any given claim this context is provided locally
by related theories, more broadly by disciplinary paradigms, and ultimately
by worldview claims about the nature of reality. The challenge in interpreting
scientiﬁc theories is to integrate them into this hierarchy of knowledge. Usually
this is not too difﬁcult. New theories often require adjustments to nearby
theories, but in doing so we can rely on paradigms to make them cohere.
More rarely paradigmatic assumptions are themselves challenged, but in that
case scientists can fall back on their worldview to make sense of the needed
changes. By implication, the most difﬁcult interpretive problems arise when
our worldview is called into question, which leaves us without any frame of
reference on which to fall back.
Quantum theory poses a worldview problem. Prior to the quantum revolution
the classical worldview could not be tested scientiﬁcally and so it was essen-
tially metaphysical. Even though it corresponded to our experience of material
objects, we lacked proof that it adequately represented the deep structure of
reality. By giving us access to that deep structure for the ﬁrst time, quantum
mechanics made it possible to do such a test, or “experimental metaphysics.”3
Unfortunately, the results seemed to contradict classical assumptions, at least
on the sub-atomic level. This led to a widely acknowledged “crisis” in the clas-
sical worldview, and to the suggestion that we are on the “edge of a paradigm
shift.”4 But shift to what? Without a still higher-order framework of knowledge
1 Ruetsche (2002: 199).
2 King, Keohane, and Verba (1994).
3 Esfeld (2001: 225).
4 See Peacock (1998).
58
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Six challenges
59
on which to rely, it is very difﬁcult to make sense of what is going on.5 In short,
while quantum theory tells us deﬁnitively that the world behaves in certain
non-classical ways, it does not tell us why.
In the rest of Part I I address the problem of interpreting quantum theory,
which I have split into two. Chapter 3 pits the experimental results against six
assumptions of the classical worldview: materialism, atomism, determinism,
mechanism, absolute space and time, and the subject–object distinction. Call
these the negative implications of quantum theory, about which there is con-
siderable agreement. In each case I begin with a brief review of the classical
assumption, show how it is challenged by quantum theory, and conclude with
a few comments about where contemporary thinking is at. (This format will
create some redundancy with Chapter 2, but on this unfamiliar terrain that is
probably not a bad thing). In Chapter 4 I turn to the more contested positive
implications of the theory.
Two caveats are in order before proceeding. First, the language one should
use to describe the negative implications of quantum theory depends partly on
whether it is interpreted “realistically” (as referring to reality) or “instrumen-
tally” (as just a tool for making predictions). This is itself a matter of dispute
and so even at the stage of just describing the challenges posed by quantum
theory it is hard to avoid interpretation. Since it poses the challenges most
clearly in this chapter I shall adopt a realist discourse, but will note as needed
how an instrumentalist might see things differently.6 Second, even on a realist
construal, quantum theory does not necessarily mean the classical worldview
is completely wrong (though there are signiﬁcant constraints on how right it
can be).7 Although the classical worldview is a coherent whole, it may be
possible to save some of its assumptions if others are jettisoned, and much of
the interpretive debate over quantum theory is about just that. But even if not
all of the classical worldview is wrong, what is clear is that the overall picture
of reality emerging from quantum theory will not be classical.
The challenge to materialism
Materialism is the view that at base reality is composed exclusively of mat-
ter, within which there is no trace of mentality. The elementary constituents
of classical matter are very small, but their properties are understood by ref-
erence to the macroscopic matter with which we are all familiar. Classical
material particles are objects, things, or substances; their existence is context-
5 Squires (1990: 177).
6 Those uncomfortable with this binary choice might consider Richard Healey’s (2012) pragmatist
approach to quantum theory. I thank Stefano Guzzini for raising this point.
7 See Ferrero et al. (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

60
Quantum theory and its interpretation
and mind-independent; they have hardness or mass; they have deﬁnite location
and extension in space; and they are dead. Macroscopic phenomena that seem
not to have these properties, like life and consciousness, are to be explained in
terms of more microscopic phenomena that do.
Quantum mechanics casts doubt on this ontology. Sub-atomic particles are
not objects or things in the materialist sense. We have no basis for saying
they exist until we measure them, and so they are not context-independent.8
Prior to measurement, what “exists” (using that term loosely) at the quantum
level is the wave function, which does not have hardness or mass. And given
the Uncertainty Principle, we cannot even say that quantum systems have
deﬁnite locations in space. About the only materialist assumption that is not
immediately threatened by quantum mechanics is that matter is dead, though
I argue later that even this is open to doubt. In short, until we measure it, in
the quantum world there seems to be “no there there.” The bedrock material
objects of the classical worldview, upon which it was thought we could anchor
our knowledge of macroscopic reality, seem to have vanished into thin air.
What conclusion should we draw from this? Contemporary physicalists try
to save materialism by broadening our deﬁnition of ‘material’ to incorpo-
rate the ﬁndings of quantum physics. However, as we saw in Chapter 1, it is
problematic to move the goal posts in this way, since the likelihood of future
discoveries in physics means that the content of materialism could change yet
again. Moreover, what if future physicists conclude (as some already have) that
mind is an elementary property of reality? Given that it is precisely against
such an idealist view that materialism has always been deﬁned, should we then
redeﬁne materialism as idealism? That would make it non-falsiﬁable and triv-
ially true. For materialism to be interesting it must at the very least mean No
Fundamental Mentality. Beyond that constraint, however, quantum theory does
not tell us what ontology to replace classical materialism with. Various non-
mental candidates for fundamental status have been proposed – “information,”
“dispositions,” “processes,” “events” – none of which squares easily with clas-
sical materialism’s thing-ontology. Bottom line: as a result of quantum theory
the nature of matter is just as problematic as the nature of mind.
The challenge to atomism
Atomism makes three claims: 1) large objects are reducible to the properties
and interactions of smaller ones; 2) objects have deﬁnite properties; and 3)
objects are fully “separable,” meaning that their identity is constituted solely
by their internal structure and spatio-temporal location rather than by their
8 Paty (1999: 374).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Six challenges
61
relationships to other objects.9 These claims generate a methodological injunc-
tion for scientists to try to explain phenomena by decomposing wholes into
parts. In the social sciences this demand for “micro-foundations” leads to
methodological individualism, the doctrine that explanations are not complete
until we have shown how social outcomes are produced by the properties and
interactions of independently existing individuals.
All three of these atomist claims are problematic today. The ﬁrst, reduc-
tionism, has been challenged even on classical grounds. Wholes often seem
to be “more than the sum of their parts,” and as a result the anti-reductionist
idea of emergence has gained increasing acceptance.10 Defenders of atomism
now typically defend only the weaker claim of “supervenience,” according to
which macro-level facts are determined or “ﬁxed” by micro-level ones, but not
reducible to the latter.11 However, even supervenience presupposes the other
two claims of atomism, both of which are called into question by quantum
theory.
The requirement that objects have deﬁnite properties is threatened by the
Uncertainty Principle, which suggests that quantum systems lack such proper-
ties until measured; until then they are superpositions of potential properties.
The claim of separability, in turn, is threatened by quantum entanglement and
non-locality. When two or more quantum systems are entangled, the parts of
the combined system are not fully separable, since their properties depend on
their relationship to the whole. The fact that the parts of entangled quantum
systems have only relational properties upsets the fundamental principle of
atomism that the nature of wholes is determined by the attributes of parts, and
even raises doubts about whether “parts” exist at all.12 Paul Teller offers a
helpful analogy to clarify the latter problem.13 If we put two identical coins in
a piggy bank on successive days, and then take one of them out, it makes sense
to ask whether we drew the ﬁrst or the second coin; this corresponds to the
idea of individuality in classical physics. In contrast, if we deposit a dollar in a
checking account on two successive days, and then withdraw one a day later, it
makes no sense to ask this question. The dollars in a checking account do not
have an individual existence before they are withdrawn (“measured”). Even if
we do not go as far as Teller in rejecting the very existence of parts, however,
it is widely agreed that at least the properties of entangled quantum systems
9 On separability see for example Healey (1991), Esfeld (2001: 207) and Belousek (2003).
10 See Sawyer (2005) for an excellent overview of emergentism, especially as it pertains to the
social sciences, though he remains within a classical frame of reference; cf. Humphreys (1997a).
11 See Horgan (1993) for a good introduction; these ideas are discussed at length in Chapter 13.
12 See Teller (1986) and Esfeld (2004). This is a matter of debate. Some argue that even if their
properties are entangled, we can still speak of individual particles; others argue the whole idea
of individuality must go. See for example Castellani, ed. (1998), French (1998), Esfeld (2001:
Chapter 8), French and Ladyman (2003), Arenhart (2013), and Dorato and Morganti (2013).
13 Teller (1998: 114–115 and passim).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

62
Quantum theory and its interpretation
are dependent on the state of the combined system, which therefore forms an
indivisible whole.14 And since entanglement is a universal phenomenon, this
suggests that at the quantum level the assumption of separability is nowhere
correct.
If not atomism, then what? In contrast to the uncertainty about what should
replace materialism, there seems to be a broad consensus that quantum mechan-
ics implies holism, atomism’s traditional rival. How exactly holism should be
understood is less clear;15 but some kind of holism seems essential. Note
that this does not necessarily imply holism at the macroscopic level, where
separability might still hold for all practical purposes. However, in that case,
macroscopic atomism would be a contingent effect of the ongoing process by
which quantum reality becomes classical, which strips it of its ontologically
privileged status.
The challenge to determinism
Determinism is the view that there is no inherent randomness in nature, that what
happens in the present and future is completely ﬁxed by the laws governing the
motion of matter in the past.16 In a sense, the present and the future “have already
happened.”17 Of course, this does not mean we can necessarily know what will
happen in the future. Determinism is an ontological rather than epistemological
thesis. Given the complexity of the world and the imperfections of our science,
there are many things that we cannot predict and as such appear random. But the
fact that an event appears to be random does not mean that it is random. We
cannot predict the outcome of the throw of a fair die, but according to deter-
minism it is completely ﬁxed by its properties and the conditions of its fall.
That seems intuitively plausible, and indeed like much of the classical world-
view determinism conforms to common sense, except in one respect: it conﬂicts
with our experience of free will. Determinists have wrestled with this anomaly
for centuries, and as we will see in Part III many have concluded that free will
is an illusion.
The probabilistic behavior of quantum systems poses a more serious threat
to determinism than does free will because it cannot be dismissed as an illusion.
Early in the quantum revolution this led to much hand wringing, especially by
convinced determinists like Einstein, who concluded that quantum mechanics
could not be a fundamental theory. The problem is rooted in the collapse of
14 For a good discussion see Maudlin (1998).
15 See Teller (1986), Esfeld (2001; 2004), Seevinck (2004), and Morganti (2009) for good
overviews of the options.
16 Shanks (1993: 21).
17 Malin (2001: 23).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Six challenges
63
the wave function. Before measurement the wave function evolves determin-
istically, just like a classical system; the Schr¨odinger equation yields precise
values that enable us to predict its motion over time. However, as soon as we
perform a measurement it collapses instantaneously into a particle whose loca-
tion cannot be predicted in advance; all we can know is the probability that it
will be in one place or another.
The implications of this indeterminism are not clear. Some interpreters resist
drawing any ontological implications, and treat it as an epistemological prob-
lem only. Others would rescue determinism by assuming that hidden within the
wave function is a real particle whose behavior is “piloted” by the wave to its
ﬁnal location. On this view, the stochastic aspect of quantum theory is “super-
imposed” on an underlying deterministic process.18 However, many physicists
today accept that indeterminism is a fact of nature.19 Another question is
whether quantum indeterminism extends to macroscopic reality. Given that the
statistical signiﬁcance of quantum phenomena quickly washes out above the
molecular level, many would probably agree with John Searle in rejecting such
an extension. In his view, quantum theory does not imply “any indeterminacy
at the level of objects that matter to us.”20 On the other hand, Bruce Glymour
and his co-authors have argued that the price of this conclusion is that we have
to give up the physicalist view that macro-states supervene on micro. They
believe this is a price not worth paying, and as such conclude that quantum
indeterminacy must “percolate upward” to the macro level.21 This relates to a
ﬁnal question of whether quantum theory provides any support for free will.
From the start of the quantum revolution some have argued that it does.22 But
even if we grant upward percolation, most have thought that any linkage to free
will founders on the fact that a random process is inconsistent with the idea
of “will” or “choice.” While unpredictability to an outside observer may be a
necessary condition for free will, it is not sufﬁcient. I will come back to this
question in Chapter 9.
The challenge to mechanism
The classical worldview assumes that all causation is mechanical and local.
Although in the social sciences the term ‘mechanical’ has narrow, machine-
like connotations, in physics it means nothing more than that causation involves
the transmission of force or energy from one object to another. The “object”
18 This is the Bohmian or “pilot-wave” interpretation.
19 For a different line of criticism of indeterminism as a “philosophical sham,” this one driven by
the Bell Experiments, see Shanks (1993).
20 The quote is from Grifﬁn (1998: 168).
21 See Glymour et al. (2001).
22 E.g. Eddington (1928).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

64
Quantum theory and its interpretation
assumption is crucial here; causation can take place between material phenom-
ena only, which precludes genuine mental causation. Other, non-mechanical,
ways in which causation has been understood, like Aristotle’s categories of
material, formal, and ﬁnal causation, are also ruled out, for being either not
really causal, or, in the case of ﬁnal causality (teleology), impossible. ‘Local-
ity,’ in turn, means that no causal inﬂuence can propagate faster than light. This
implies a temporal separation of cause and effect, which rules out instantaneous
causation or “action at a distance.” Mechanism and locality presuppose mate-
rialism, atomism, and determinism, and especially atomism or separability.23
To a signiﬁcant extent, therefore, the fate of mechanical and local causation is
bound up with the fate of those assumptions.
As if reinforcing its challenge to the latter, however, quantum theory provides
independent evidence for the inadequacy of the classical view of causation.24
This comes in two main forms: (1) the collapse of the wave function, which
occurs instantaneously upon measurement with no apparent cause, and (2)
the Bell Experiments, which proved the existence of non-local correlations
between entangled quantum systems. These ﬁndings do not mean there is no
such thing as mechanical causation at the macro-level. But they undermine the
view that mechanical causation exhausts how things happen in the world, and
raise a hard question of what conception of causality, if any, should be put in
its place.
Three main alternatives have been proposed, none obviously satisfactory.
The ﬁrst is to abandon the language of causality at the micro-physical level and
replace it with another framework, such as “complementarity.”25 However, that
leaves unanswered the question of how wave functions collapse and non-local
correlations happen. The second alternative is to broaden our view of causality
to include non-local causation. The challenge here is doing that without simply
restating the fact that we have no idea what “causes” non-local causation. One
option is to take a page from Aristotle’s pluralistic approach and conceptualize
non-local causation as “extended” or “structural” causality.26 Another would
be to adopt David Lewis’ “counterfactual” model of causation, which already
has wide currency at the macro-level. Lewis’ model is agnostic about the
means by which causal inﬂuences are transmitted, which would allow quantum
entanglement to count as one means.27 The third and most radical alternative is
to explain wave function collapse and non-local causation by reference to a non-
material mental ﬁeld underlying reality. The problem for all three alternatives is
that their causal mechanisms are hard to reconcile with materialism. Whatever
23 On the latter connection see Healey (1994: 346), Esfeld (2001: 221), and Malin (2001: 22).
24 For a comprehensive introduction to the quantum challenge to causation see Price and Corry,
eds. (2007).
25 Bohr (1937; 1948).
26 See, for example, d’Espagnat (1995: 414–415).
27 On this approach see Esfeld (2001: 219–220) and Frisch (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Six challenges
65
the choice, quantum “mechanics” is something of a misnomer, there being
nothing “mechanical” about it at all.28
The challenge to absolute space and time
In classical physics space and time are deﬁned in absolute terms, as objective
realities independent of other phenomena in the universe.29 The latter are
thought to exist “in” space and time, which were likened to a neutral stage on
which events unfolded. In addition, space is assumed to be local, which gives the
concept of distance a precise meaning; time is uni-directional, always ﬂowing
from the past to the future; and both are assumed to be continuous, inﬁnitely
divisible into smaller units.
This absolutist picture was partially overturned by relativity theory, according
to which space and time are relative to objects and observers. Relativity shows
that space bends or warps as a function of objects’ gravitational ﬁelds, and that
time varies with the speed at which an observer is traveling. Space and time
are therefore not completely independent of the content of the universe. How-
ever, relativity theory continues to make the classical assumptions that space is
local, and that both time and space are continuous.30 Thus, it would still make
sense to conceive of objects and processes as existing “in” space and time, even
if that relationship is more complex than in the absolutist view.31
Quantum theory overturns these remaining classical assumptions about space
and time. The challenge to classical intuitions about space is three-fold. First,
in most interpretations of quantum theory particles lack deﬁnite locations in
space until they are measured.32 Second, the Bell Experiments break decisively
with locality. If entangled quantum systems are correlated non-locally then the
concept of distance, and with it the whole idea of space as something “in”
which objects are situated, no longer has a precise meaning. Finally, quantum
theory shows that space is discrete rather than continuous, which means there
is a limit to our ability to divide it into units; at the “Planck scale” (several
orders of magnitude smaller than the atomic scale) space is “granular.”33 The
challenge to classical intuitions about time, in turn, stems from the Delayed-
Choice Experiment, which suggests that the future can in a certain sense affect
the past. For different reasons that I address in Chapter 10, Huw Price has argued
that quantum mechanics is also compatible with “backwards causation,” which
would equally imply a reversal in the “arrow of time.”34 Finally, there is the
problem that, strictly speaking, wave functions do not evolve “in” time so much
28 See Hiley and Pylkk¨anen (2001: 127).
29 For an overview of classical and relativistic conceptions of time see Ehlers (1997).
30 Monk (1997: 3).
31 D’Espagnat (1995: 322).
32 Ibid: 324.
33 See Monk (1997: 8).
34 See Aharonov and Vaidman (1990) and Price (1996); cf. Grove (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

66
Quantum theory and its interpretation
as collapse “into” time when they are measured. This has led to the suggestion
that like space, time is discontinuous: “the past consists of a discontinuous
series of events when measurements have taken place, with nothing happening
in the intervals between these measurements.”35
I will not try to characterize the esoteric debate about how space and time
should be positively deﬁned, if not in classical or relativistic terms. Nicholas
Monk surveys no less than six different proposals for conceptualizing space.36
These are intimately related to the current effort to develop a theory of quantum
gravity, itself seen as the key to the uniﬁcation of quantum theory and relativity
theory – the incompatibility of which stands as one of the biggest unresolved
problems in physics today.37 The debate about the nature of time is no less
wide open.38 The one thing that seems to be clear, however, is that the classical
idea that objects and processes exist “in” space and time is now dead, and that
space and time should instead be seen as phenomena that somehow “emerge”
from relationships. As Lee Smolin puts it with respect to space, the world is
nothing but an evolving network of relationships that are not themselves “in”
space. If there were no relationships there would be no space; relationships
deﬁne space, not vice-versa.39 His comments could readily be extended to the
conceptualization of time as well.40
The challenge to the subject–object distinction
Finally, the classical worldview assumes that a categorical distinction exists
between subjects and objects. This places human beings in a spectator relation-
ship to nature, as onlookers rather than participants in its workings.41 Maintain-
ing this separation is considered essential to science, since otherwise there is
the danger that knowledge will be contaminated by our choices and subjective
beliefs. If all goes well the result will be a 1:1 correspondence between theory
and reality. Of course, no one denies that human beings are part of nature, and
since we can only acquire knowledge of the world through our minds, the ques-
tion arises even within the classical worldview whether it is really possible to
excise subjectivity from science completely. Schr¨odinger, for example, argues
that although we take for granted that the world exists independent of us, the
subject–object distinction is in fact produced by acts of “objectivation,” since
35 Feinberg et al. (1992: 638).
36 See Monk (1997); also see Boi (2004).
37 For a highly readable survey of these efforts see Smolin (2001).
38 See Price (1996) and Albert (2000) for good introductions to questions of time in the context
of quantum mechanics.
39 See Smolin (2001: 20, 96).
40 See Wheeler (1988: 124), and the discussion of time-symmetric approaches to quantum theory
in Chapter 6 below.
41 See Matson (1964: Chapter 1) and Schr¨odinger (1959: 38); cf. Hutto (2004).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Six challenges
67
it is only by taking the mind out of nature that the world can be constituted
as an object.42 This bifurcation of nature suggests a paradox, in that observers
are necessary to know reality yet are assumed to be external to it. However,
in the classical worldview this paradox is benign because experiments paint a
relatively constant picture of reality regardless of who is observing. The ques-
tion of the observer’s status can therefore be bypassed in practice, and subjects
treated “as if” they were distinct from objects.43
The question is harder to avoid in quantum mechanics, where the observer is
no longer clearly extraneous to the system under study. The intrusion of subjec-
tivity into knowledge about the quantum domain is known as the “measurement
problem” because it concerns the apparent impossibility of an objective mea-
surement of quantum systems. The problem arises at two distinct points in the
measurement process, today sometimes referred to as the “Heisenberg choice”
and “Dirac choice.”44 In both cases the difﬁculty is that measurement is asso-
ciated with a kind of creativity: before measurement quantum systems are
potentialities, yet afterward we get actualities.45 Since perhaps more than any
other this problem sets the stage for the debate about quantum theory’s positive
implications, let me discuss it in more detail than the others.
The Heisenberg choice refers to the choice of what to measure, such as
position or momentum. When implemented in an experiment, it is always
associated with a change in the quantum system from a superposition of states
to a deﬁnite outcome. Thus, the problem is not just that the results of the
measurement depend on what we choose to measure, which would be true in
any experiment. Rather, it is that before measuring, say, position, a quantum
system literally does not have a position (as far as can be known), but afterward
it does. Moreover, had we performed a different measurement, we would have
ended up with a different actuality.
By construing the Heisenberg choice as one of “what question to ask of
nature,” Wheeler offers a useful analogy to a quantum version of the game of
Twenty Questions.46 In the standard version of the game one player is asked
to leave the room while the others decide on a word; the ﬁrst player then
gets twenty questions to guess what it is, to which the others answer only yes
or no. There is no measurement problem here, since the chosen word exists
independent of the ﬁrst player. In the quantum version of the game, while the
ﬁrst player is out of the room the group decides not to choose a word. Instead,
they agree that as the ﬁrst player goes around the room asking questions, the
42 Schr¨odinger (1959: 36–51); also see Malin (2001: 233 and passim).
43 See, for example, Shimony (1963: 755–756), Rosenblum and Kuttner (2002: 1274).
44 See Stapp (1999: 153), Malin (2001: 113–114), and Rosenblum and Kuttner (2002).
45 Malin (2001: 49). This apparent creativity is the basis for Diederik Aerts’ “Creation-Discovery”
Interpretation of quantum theory; see for example his (1998).
46 See Wheeler (1990: 11) and the discussion in Malin (2001: 213–214).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

68
Quantum theory and its interpretation
members of the group will still answer yes or no, but are required in each
case to have some word in mind that is consistent with all the other answers
that have already been given. Although there are some differences from the
quantum case, Wheeler sees intriguing similarities:
Second, in actuality the information about the word was brought into being step by step
through the questions we raised, as the information about the electron is brought into
being, step by step, by the experiments that the observer chooses to make. Third, if we
had chosen to ask different questions we would have ended up with a different word –
as the experimenter would have ended up with a different story for the doings of the
electron if he had measured different quantities or the same quantities in a different
order.47
In short, in contrast to the classical view that objects (“words”) exist indepen-
dent of the choice of what to measure, in quantum theory no such assumption
can be made.48
The Dirac choice refers to the process by which the wave function collapses
into a particle. The problem here stems from the fact that this collapse does not
happen, independent of the act of measurement. That seems to implicate the
observer as a participant in the transition from quantum potential to classical
actuality, meaning that she is entangled with the system under observation – in
effect forming a larger quantum system of both observer and observed.49 The
problem here is that the experimental apparatus and the observer herself are in
classical states (since both are experienced only as actualities), and the result of
the experiment – a particle hit – is also a classical phenomenon. Thus, it seems
impossible to dispense with classical concepts altogether.50 So somewhere in
the transition from quantum to classical states a “cut” gets made. The question
is, where?
Theanswer is oneof themajor sources of disagreement amonginterpretations
of quantum theory, and we will come back to it below. But by way of set-up: the
physicist John von Neumann (also of game theory fame) tackled the problem
by breaking the collapse process down into a series of steps, known since
as the “von Neumann chain.”51 He concluded that the collapse occurs at the
very end of the chain when the results of the experiment are registered in the
observer’s mind, since this was the only point in the process that does not seem
to consist of mere molecules in motion.52 However, von Neumann’s argument
implied that the observer’s body and the measurement apparatus must be in
47 The quote is from Malin (2001: 213).
48 See Bitbol et al., eds. (2009) for diverse perspectives on the problem of object-constitution in
quantum physics.
49 See Esfeld (2001: 275) and Heelan (2004).
50 Shimony (1963: 768), Esfeld (2001: 274).
51 See Shimony (1963), Herbert (1985: 147), and Esfeld (2001: 275).
52 See Shimony (1963: 757), Herbert (1985: 148), and French (2002: 469).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Six challenges
69
quantum states (i.e. entangled with the system in question), even though we
never observe macroscopic systems in superpositions.
Von Neumann’s conclusion ﬂies in the face of common sense, and it was in
part to demonstrate its absurdity that Schr¨odinger – who, with Einstein, sought
to defend the classical worldview – devised one of the most famous thought
experiments in quantum physics.53 In his scenario a cat is put inside a sealed box
with a vial of lethal poison gas, the release of which is determined quantum
mechanically, i.e. randomly. We know that if we open the box (perform a
measurement) we will observe the cat to be either alive or dead. The question
is what is going on inside the box before we open it? According to the classical
worldview the cat must be either alive or dead; since objects exist independent
of subjects, opening the box merely conﬁrms what has already transpired.
However, if we take seriously that the cat is itself in a quantum state by virtue
of entanglement with the quantum mechanically determined release of the
gas, we must conclude that as long as the box remains sealed the cat is in
superposition, which is to say that both alive and dead have some potential
to be observed at each moment. Since that seems absurd, Schr¨odinger argued
that macroscopic systems could not be quantum mechanical, thereby justifying
a subject–object distinction at that level. Yet, the question then arises, if the
cut between quantum and classical systems takes place someplace in the von
Neumann chain before the observer and her measurement device, where exactly
is that? There is no obvious place to make it, or, put another way, no obvious
limit to the domain of quantum theory.54 Thus whether or not Schr¨odinger was
right about his cat, the measurement problem is still with us: at some point in
the chain measurement becomes “creative.”
Enormous intellectual effort has been devoted over the past few decades
to the measurement problem, and with the advent of several recent proposals
some analysts are suggesting that it has ﬁnally been solved.55 However, my
own sense is that Bruce Rosenblum and Fred Kuttner are right when they argue
that these apparent solutions are only that: apparent – more pragmatic devices
that enable physicists to ignore the problem than genuine solutions.56 Be that
as it may, since this issue is central to the debate about the positive implications
of quantum mechanics, let us now turn our attention there.
53 See Zukav (1979: 94–96), Herbert (1985: 150–152), Nadeau and Kafatos (1999: 56–57), and
Esfeld (2001: 275).
54 Esfeld (2001: 274).
55 Rosenblum and Kuttner (2002: 1291).
56 Ibid.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

4
Five interpretations
While there is general agreement that quantum theory poses a fundamental
challenge to the classical worldview, there is none on what worldview should
replace it. This lack of clear positive implications is the heart of the interpre-
tation problem in quantum theory, or understanding what the world must be
like assuming the theory is true. The difﬁculty is twofold. First, if the theory is
correct and complete then there seems to be no way to adjudicate empirically
among its interpretations, forcing us to rely on metaphysics instead. Second,
the classical metaphysics upon which human beings have relied in the past to
interpret new theories is now itself problematic, leaving us without an interpre-
tive backstop to anchor our thinking. Bell is surely right in expecting whatever
picture of reality eventually emerges from quantum theory to “astonish us,” but
by the same token it is very hard to see what that picture should be.
In this chapter I address the debate about the positive worldview implications
of quantum theory. Of all the chapters in this book it is the farthest removed
from the concerns of social scientists. However, it plays an important dialectical
function in my argument, which is to introduce and help justify the panpsychist
interpretation of quantum theory that I will embrace and discuss at more length
in Chapter 6. By ‘justify’ I do not mean that I will defend this interpretation as
superior to others. My purpose is more modest, which is simply to show why,
despite what might seem to be its bizarre and counter-intuitive nature, panpsy-
chism is taken quite seriously by philosophers of physics as a way to interpret
quantum theory. That’s because (a) there are strong analogies between quan-
tum systems and the human mind, and (b) the alternatives are equally bizarre
and counter-intuitive. If readers are prepared to accept that panpsychism is a
valid approach to the mind–body problem, then this chapter may be skipped –
which I have made less costly by deferring until Chapter 6 a discussion of
time-symmetric approaches like the Transactional Interpretation, which will
play an important role later in the book. But if – like me at ﬁrst – you have a
hard time wrapping your head around the suggestion that mentality could go
all the way down to sub-atomic particles, I urge you to read on, to see how such
a position could seem reasonable.
70
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Five interpretations
71
I ﬁrst review some challenges that any interpretation of quantum theory must
address, and then turn to the interpretations themselves. With over a dozen in
the literature there is no way to be comprehensive.1 Instead, I have selected
ﬁve for discussion, guided by a desire to include some of the most well-
known and to capture something of the full range of metaphysical options, both
materialist and idealist, on the table. My treatments will be more descriptive
than evaluative, though with a few words about the recognized strengths and
weaknesses of each account.
The problem and a meta-interpretive framework
It would be helpful if physicists agreed on what the speciﬁc source of the
interpretive problem was, but even that is elusive. As Richard Feynman put it,
“I cannot deﬁne the real problem, therefore I suspect there’s no real problem,
but I’m not sure there’s no real problem.”2
Nevertheless, there seems to be some convergence on the view that the fun-
damental question is how to integrate the two processes by which quantum sys-
tems evolve.3 Before measurement, they evolve according to the Schr¨odinger
equation, which is deterministic and linear; whereas upon measurement wave
functions collapse into particles, which is non-deterministic and non-linear.
The problem is that these two forms of evolution do not receive a uniﬁed
treatment within the theory; or, more precisely, that quantum theory is really
only about the ﬁrst, the second being bolted on to the theory ad hoc to account
for what we actually observe. Moreover, there is no obvious reason, from the
standpoint of quantum theory, that macro-level objects like cats or observers
should not also be wave functions and as such have quantum properties – but
when we observe them they always have deﬁnite properties. So the problem
of relating the two types of evolution is in part explaining how and where the
“cut” between quantum and classical systems takes place. In short, how can we
square classical appearances with quantum reality?
Closely bound up with this question are three others whose answers – were
they known – would help us to interpret the theory. The ﬁrst is the physical
signiﬁcance of the fundamental concept of quantum theory, the wave function.4
Technically it represents the probabilities of ﬁnding a particle at various loca-
tions on a measurement device. But since we have no evidence that particles
exist before they are measured, what exactly are we measuring? In the classical
world probabilities refer to our degree of uncertainty about the properties of a
1 For more thorough reviews see Albert (1992), d’Espagnat (1995), Home (1997: Chapter 2), and
Laloe (2001). Maudlin (2003) provides a remarkably succinct introduction to the debate.
2 Quoted in Bub (2000: 597).
3 See Home (1997: 76) and Laloe (2001: 680).
4 On the debate about the nature of the wave function, see for example Matzkin (2002), Friederich
(2011), Gao (2011), and Ney and Albert, eds. (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

72
Quantum theory and its interpretation
real physical thing or process, which, we can safely assume, has deﬁnite proper-
ties. In the quantum world this assumption is problematic, since the properties
of wave functions appear themselves to be indeﬁnite. This suggests that the
wave function either does not describe a real phenomenon, or, if it does, that it
is not material. Both options have problems.
A second question is the nature and cause of wave function collapse. Again
we face the issue of whether the collapse is a real process, or merely a mathe-
matical artefact of our description. And if it is real, what brings it about? We
know that it is not caused in any classical sense of causation, but then how does
it happen? Perhaps it “just happens,” randomly. But how can objective chance
exist in nature?
Finally, and implicit in the preceding questions, is a basic metaphysical
question about the place of mind in nature. In the materialist worldview of
classical physics it has no place: one way or another, the mind must be reducible
to the brain. Quantum theory does not directly challenge this assumption, and
some interpretations seem to justify and/or presuppose it. But the breakdown of
the subject–object distinction in quantum measurement does put the question
of mind squarely on the table, and raises the possibility that not only is mind
not reducible to matter, but is itself a fundamental constituent of reality.5
The answers in the interpretive literature to these questions vary along so
many dimensions that it is not obvious how they should be categorized. A
number of meta-interpretive frameworks have been proposed that group inter-
pretations in different ways, each structured by what its author sees as the
central issues at stake. While illuminating, none brings sharply into focus the
central issue at stake in this book, namely the mind–body problem. As such, I
shall organize the literature in my own way, around two distinctions.
The ﬁrst, which is standard in the literature, is between realist or ontological
interpretations and instrumentalist or epistemological ones. Realists think that
quantum theory is telling us something about reality, whereas instrumentalists
are agnostic about reality and see the theory as just a device for predicting the
outcomes of experiments. The majority of interpretations today are realist, but
since the most widely known one, the Copenhagen Interpretation, is instrumen-
talist, I shall begin there. Within the realist category, in turn, I make a second
distinction between interpretations that assume a materialist ontology and those
that reﬂect what I will call an idealist one, addressing two examples of each.
Materialists want a quantum theory consistent with the assumption of No Fun-
damental Mentality, whereas idealists assume that mind plays an irreducible
5 Marin (2009) shows that this question was recognized already in the 1930s, and helped give
quantum theory an air of “mysticism.” Eighty years on the debate about whether the theory needs
to invoke consciousness is no closer to being settled; see for example Yu and Nikolic (2011) and
Pradhan (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Five interpretations
73
role in nature. This organizing framework will make for some strange bed-
fellows, since idealism is often thought to be incompatible with realism, but it
makes sense for reasons that emerge below.
Instrumentalism: the Copenhagen Interpretation
The Copenhagen Interpretation is due primarily to Bohr, who spent his career at
the University of Copenhagen. It was the dominant reading of quantum theory
from the 1930s to the 1970s, and although less popular today among philoso-
phers it is still considered the orthodoxy among working physicists. Without
minimizing its intellectual appeal, the reasons for its dominance had more to
do with the sociology of the physics profession, and the fact that it justiﬁed
physicists turning away from the seemingly intractable questions of metaphys-
ical interpretation and toward simply getting on with concrete applications of
quantum theory.6 The Copenhagen Interpretation is also notoriously difﬁcult to
deﬁne. This is partly because it has many “interpretations” of its own; Bohr’s
student Heisenberg, for example, is usually seen as a subscriber, but had his
own spin that was in some ways antithetical to Bohr’s.7 But the difﬁculty also
stems from the opaque (or subtle, depending on your biases) quality of Bohr’s
writings. In 1972 Henry Stapp attempted to cut through the confusion with
a deﬁnitive statement, and his essay is today perhaps the most widely cited
secondary treatment.8 Even so, it gives the approach a pragmatist gloss that
Bohr might have resisted.
What all sides seem to agree on, however, is that the Copenhagen Interpre-
tation is epistemological rather than ontological. It brackets as unanswerable
the question of what the quantum world is really like, and focuses instead on
the more limited question of what kind of knowledge can be obtained about the
quantum world.9 Thus, its concern is not with reality per se but the description
of reality; physics is not about how nature is, but about what we can say.10 This
ontological agnosticism is motivated by the breakdown of the subject–object
distinction in quantum measurement. In Bohr’s view quantum systems can only
be known via a description that includes the totality of the experimental situa-
tion (i.e. both observer and measurement device), which means that, unlike the
case of macroscopic objects, we have no warrant for saying that the attributes
of those systems (position, momentum, and so on) inhere in quantum sys-
tems themselves.11 By virtue of this emphasis on the indivisibility of quantum
6 See Cushing (1994) for a comprehensive study of this question.
7 On the varieties of “Copenhagenism” see Henderson (2010).
8 Stapp (1972/1997); cf. Healey (2012). For a lengthier reconstruction of Bohr’s philosophy see
Honner (1987).
9 Honner (1987: 84).
10 Shimony (1978: 11).
11 Herbert (1985: 160–161), d’Espagnat (1995: 223).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

74
Quantum theory and its interpretation
systems and the experimental situation the Copenhagen Interpretation is holis-
tic, but in an epistemic rather than ontological sense, since we also have no war-
rant for saying that measurement creates the attributes of quantum systems.12
This epistemological holism creates a problem for the possibility of objective
knowledge. This is because in describing quantum systems we are necessarily
limited to classical concepts like causality, space, and time, since these are the
concepts that pertain to the macroscopic world in which we live – yet they do not
apply to quantum phenomena. The inapplicability of our classical conceptual
framework is what generates the paradoxes of quantum mechanics described
earlier in this chapter, and points to the need to ﬁnd a new framework to ensure
unambiguous communication about quantum phenomena. Bohr’s master con-
cept of complementarity was intended to serve this function, enabling us to
entertain incompatible classical descriptions without degenerating into para-
dox. But it does so at the price of eschewing ontological claims about the nature
of quantum reality. Thus, in considering the four questions above that drive the
interpretive debate, the answers provided by the Copenhagen Interpretation
amount to: “we simply cannot know.”
Bohr’s refusal to engage ontological questions has led some commentators to
perceive his approach as anti-realist in the strong sense of denying that there is
any quantum reality. One of Bohr’s former assistants, for example, quotes him as
saying “[t]here is no quantum world. There is only an abstract quantum physical
description.”13 Statements like this have been taken by some to provide support
for the post-modern or relativist view that knowledge of an independently
existing reality is impossible, and thus science is not an epistemically privileged
discourse.14 However, that was not Bohr’s own view. While agreeing that
objective knowledge in the classical sense is impossible in the quantum domain,
he was centrally concerned with securing the conditions for unambiguous
communication about quantum systems, and as such defended what Bernard
d’Espagnat calls “weak” objectivity. This is the kind of objectivity constituted
by intersubjective agreement, which can be had about the quantum world (i.e.
in an experiment all observers can agree that they saw the same thing).15
As such, Bohr’s approach is neither relativist nor subjectivist. Moreover, he
remained a realist about the macro-level, since he thought that the material
objects of everyday experience can be known in classical terms, and he was
even a realist about the sub-atomic level insofar as he accepted that quantum
systems exist independent of observers and cause their experiences.16 In view
12 D’Espagnat (1995: 221), Esfeld (2001: 232–235).
13 Shimony (1978: 11); also see Herbert (1985: 158).
14 See for example Plotnitsky (1994), and for a realist response see Norris (1998).
15 See d’Espagnat (1995: 324, passim).
16 See Honner (1987), Stapp (1972/1997: 140), and Barad (2007: 125–131).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Five interpretations
75
of these qualiﬁcations it is perhaps better to see the Copenhagen Interpretation
as “arealist” than “anti-realist.” It simply says that, at the end of the day, we
cannot know what quantum reality is really like.
By the same token, however, if by an interpretation of a physical theory
we mean an account of what the world must be like if the theory were true,
then Copenhagen is in a sense not an “interpretation” at all.17 This is taken to
its logical conclusion by Christopher Fuchs and Asher Peres, who argue that
quantum theory needs no interpretation.18 In their view, while in science we
would ideally be able to extract a clear ontology from experimental results, the
inability to do so in quantum mechanics is not a problem because it does not
prevent us from using the theory. As such, the only “interpretation” we need of
quantum theory is that it is a useful algorithm for computing the probabilities
of events. Absent new empirical predictions, which most interpretations do not
provide, speculating about how the theory relates to reality inevitably leads to
paradox and the mere “illusion” of understanding. It is enough that quantum
theory can predict, even if it cannot explain.19
Notwithstanding its attractions to some, this refusal to deal with ontological
issues also underlies the main objection to the Copenhagen approach: that it
is essentially incomplete.20 In particular, it offers no answer to a crucial epis-
temological question: why is our knowledge of the quantum domain so unlike
our knowledge of the macro-world?21 Why the Uncertainty Principle? Why
complementarity? Why non-local correlations? The answers cannot be found
solely in epistemology, but only by engagement with ontology. Proponents of
instrumentalism would say that such questions simply cannot be answered, and
that trying to do so anyway will yield only unscientiﬁc speculation. As such,
we are better off with a “therapeutic” approach to quantum theory, in which
we try to cure the desire for answers to ontological questions by clearing up
conceptual confusion.22 However, critics argue that such a conclusion is prema-
ture, and that instrumentalism’s “there be dragons” mentality about ontology
slows the advance of knowledge. Indeed, in the 1930s Einstein worried that if
physicists adopted Bohr’s approach they would abandon efforts to “complete”
quantum theory, and Murray Gell-Mann has argued that the long dominance
of Copenhagen delayed needed philosophical reﬂection on the implications of
17 In fact, Bohr had a rather different view of what an “interpretation” is, one that focuses not on
what reality is like but on reconciling the theory with what we observe and can communicate
(Omnes, 1995: 607); cf. Ruetsche (2002: 199) and also Friederich’s (2011; 2013) “epistemic”
conception of quantum states.
18 See Fuchs and Peres (2000). That said, Fuchs has since developed his approach into a Quantum
Bayesianism (or “QBism”) that makes an interesting connection to the kind of neutral monism
I defend in Chapter 6; see Fuchs and Schack (2014: 104).
19 Ruetsche (2002: 208).
20 Squires (1990: 183).
21 See, for example, Shimony (1978: 12–13), Esfeld (2001: 234–235).
22 See Friedrich (2011: 150), who invokes the spirit of Wittgenstein’s philosophy.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

76
Quantum theory and its interpretation
quantum mechanics.23 There are risks to an ontological turn, since without
new predictions our judgments will lack an empirical basis. On the other hand,
empirical testing might not be the only way to advance knowledge, and this now
seems to be the majority view among philosophers of physics. So let me turn
to four realist interpretations, grouped into materialist and idealist categories,
which assume that quantum theory has something to tell us about the world.
Realism I: materialist interpretations
Of all the assumptions of the classical worldview, materialism – understood as
No Fundamental Mentality – may be the hardest to give up. Although I have
not seen any surveys, I would guess the majority of physicists and philosophers
of physics are materialists,24 and most interpretations of quantum theory fall
into this category as well. This is not surprising, since the connection between
materialism and physics runs deep, as suggested by the contemporary term for
materialism – “physicalism.” Given that quantum theory forces us to give up
something from the classical picture, therefore, we should expect materialism to
be the last assumption to go. In this section I discuss two prominent materialist
approaches to quantum theory.
The GRW Interpretation
One approach has focused on providing an account of wave function collapse
that would bridge the gap between the linear evolution of the Schr¨odinger
equation and the non-linear evolution of the collapse. Since orthodox quantum
theory does not offer such an account, one possibility is that it is not (quite)
correct.25 In that case the solution would be to postulate new laws that integrate
the two kinds of evolution, thereby modifying the theory.
Several interpretations of quantum theory fall under this heading, but the most
widely accepted one has been proposed by Giancarlo Ghirardi, Alberto Rimini,
and Tullio Weber, and is usually known as “GRW.”26 The key problem as GRW
see it is with the Schr¨odinger equation itself, which allows superpositions of
macroscopic states that are never in fact observed. Their solution is to modify
the equation by positing that in addition to its deterministic evolution, quantum
systems are subject to “spontaneous localizations”: for any given time interval
there is some probability that the system will randomly collapse from a quantum
to a classical state.27 Building a model of this process is tricky, since it must
23 See, respectively, Ruetsche (2002: 201) and Squires (1990: 180).
24 Not to mention most neuroscientists, cognitive psychologists, and social scientists.
25 Squires (1990: 178).
26 The original proposal is in Ghirardi, Rimini, and Weber (1986); see Ghirardi (2002) for a good
overview that responds to a number of criticisms.
27 Ghirardi (2002: 33).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Five interpretations
77
satisfy two different requirements: respecting predictions for quantum systems
considered in isolation, while generating collapse once they become entangled
with measurement devices.28 In other words, too much modiﬁcation does not
preserve what we know about quantum systems, too little does not yield deﬁnite
macroscopic objects. GRW thread this needle by adding to the Schr¨odinger
equation a probability term for random collapse that is set low enough that
for isolated quantum systems there is virtually no chance of collapse, but high
enough that as soon as they interact with a measurement device an avalanche
of correlations with the trillions of particles in the device is triggered, causing
the systems to collapse extremely rapidly.
The GRW approach has several virtues. It solves the key problem of yielding
deﬁnite states at the macro-level, while preserving superposed states at the
micro-level. IntheGRW model, Schr¨odinger’s cat is bothaliveanddeadfor only
a “split second.”29 Importantly, it achieves this result in an integrated fashion,
as a consequence of the normal evolution of the wave function rather than by
treating wave function collapse as an independent process.30 Moreover, it does
so without attributing any special role to the consciousness of the observer,
making it consistent with materialism. Finally, unlike other interpretations, its
modiﬁcation of the Schr¨odinger equation means it is essentially a new theory,
and as such it generates predictions that in some cases differ from those of
orthodox quantum theory, making it at least in principle testable (the jury is
still out on its empirical success).31
Yet, the GRW approach is not without problems. Apart from various technical
difﬁculties that have dogged the program,32 the key criticism is that it amounts
just to an assertion that spontaneous localizations occur, not an explanation.33
Since we already knew that wave functions behave strangely, it is not clear we
know anything more with GRW than we did before. We have a mathemati-
cal description of wave function collapse, one widely admired as a technical
achievement, but in the end it still leaves us asking why it happens, giving it an
ad hoc feel. Various answers compatible with GRW’s materialism have been
offered, but none has been compelling enough to command broad assent.
The Many Worlds Interpretation
A different materialist approach is offered by the Many Worlds Interpretation
(MWI), an approach so radical that those encountering it for the ﬁrst time might
wonder how physicists could take it seriously. But they do: Laura Ruetsche calls
28 Ibid: 36.
29 Ibid: 37.
30 Laloe (2001: 684).
31 Ibid: 686.
32 See Albert (1992: 100–104) and Ruetsche (2002: 210), and for a response Ghirardi (2002).
33 Squires (1990: 189); Laloe (2001: 685). See Lewis (2005) and Dorato and Esfeld (2010) for
recent assessments and interpretive extensions.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

78
Quantum theory and its interpretation
it the “preferred framework” of working physicists,34 although that is probably
not true of philosophers of physics, among whom there is much more division.
Its origins lie in Hugh Everett’s 1957 doctoral thesis, but in fact he never used
the phrase “Many Worlds,” and what many today understand MWI to be is
actually due more to a variant of Everett’s theory developed in 1970 by Bryce
DeWitt.35 Indeed, there are many Many Worlds Interpretations,36 particularly
if a descendant of MWI, the “Many Minds” Interpretation, is included in this
category. Given this confusing situation, I will concentrate on the assumptions
of the approach and DeWitt’s canonical reading of it, and at the end brieﬂy
consider Many Minds.
More than any other interpretation, MWI takes quantum theory at face
value.37 Rather than bring in exogenous considerations to interpret or sup-
plement the theory, it uses the structure of quantum theory itself to guide the
interpretation.38 Namely, since the theory tells us that the fundamental physical
entity in the world is the wave function, and all wave functions are entangled,
we should assume that the universe is one gigantic wave function. Since the
theory says that wave functions evolve solely in accord with the determinis-
tic Schr¨odinger equation, we should assume that they never actually collapse.
Since the theory makes no provision for a cut between quantum and classical
systems, we should assume that macroscopic objects are also quantum systems.
And since the theory makes no reference to consciousness, we should assume
that observers are purely material systems.39 The difﬁculty, of course, is that
these assumptions conﬂict with what we observe in experiments, where we
get apparent collapses into classical objects. However, if we take the theory
literally, then this should not be seen as a problem so much as a challenge of
deducing classical appearances from the theory.
What follows is a breathtaking claim: when a wave function is measured all
its possibilities are actualized, but in different “worlds.” Each measurement
causes the universe to “split” or “branch” into separate universes, one for each
possibility in a given wave function. And since acts of measurement are going
on everywhere all of the time, this means that the universe (or “Multiverse”?)
is constantly splitting into zillions of sub-universes.40 These many worlds all
exist simultaneously, in superposition with each other as part of the Universal
wave function. However, the laws of quantum mechanics do not allow us to
34 Ruetsche (2002: 217); Jeffrey Bub (2000: 613) makes the same point about the popularity of
MWI in the quantum computation literature.
35 Lockwood (1996: 168); see DeWitt and Graham, eds. (1973).
36 D’Espagnat (1995: 247), Barrett (1999: 149).
37 Laloe (2001: 690–691), Matzkin (2002: 289). The most systematic account of this interpretation
of which I am aware is Barrett (1999). D’Espagnat (1995: 247–253) offers a particularly clear
short presentation.
38 Barrett (1999: 64).
39 D’Espagnat (1995: 247).
40 D’Espagnat (1995: 247), Butterﬁeld (1995: 132), Barrett (1999: 150).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Five interpretations
79
perceive these other universes,41 which accounts for the appearance of a single,
classical universe in our experiments.
Despite its counter-intuitive quality, MWI has several virtues. In particular,
if we set aside the matter of proliferating worlds, it is seen as the most parsi-
monious and aesthetically pleasing of all approaches to quantum theory.42 By
following the theory relentlessly through to its logical conclusion, it accounts
for the appearance of a classical world without appealing to extraneous consid-
erations like new dynamics, hidden variables, consciousness, or wave function
collapse – none of which, after all, appear in the bare theory. Moreover, even
though the appearance of a classical world is now only that – an appearance,
behind which stands the reality of the many worlds of the Multiverse – since we
have no access to those worlds we can ignore them for all practical purposes.
Thus, in a sense, by shoving all the weirdness of quantum theory off onto hidden
worlds, MWI actually vindicates the materialism, determinism, and realism of
the classical worldview. Indeed, by arguing that quantum systems evolve solely
according to the Schr¨odinger equation, which is classical and local, MWI is
even able to eliminate the troubling problem of non-locality.43
Yet there remains a sense among many that, in Ruetsche’s understated assess-
ment, MWI is philosophically “suspect.”44 In particular, many critics cannot get
past the “metaphysical monstrosity” or “ontological extravagance” of claiming
that the universe is constantly splitting into zillions of sub-universes.45 This
seems to violate the principle of Occam’s Razor – that we should not multiply
entities unnecessarily – and suggests that the theoretical parsimony of MWI
comes at a high price in ontological proﬂigacy.46 There are also other issues.47
One concerns the compatibility of MWI with other physical theories, especially
the principle of the conservation of mass. The latter is based on and corrobo-
rated by our experience of this world, which is difﬁcult to reconcile with the
idea of many other worlds that we cannot see. Then there is the question of
what exactly constitutes a world in the ﬁrst place. We experience our world
as if it had identity over time, which seems inconsistent with the proposition
that it (and also each of us) is constantly splitting into new worlds.48 “History”
thereby seems to disappear. Further questions have been raised about how
exactly the world splits, why we do not feel it splitting, and why we cannot
see other worlds. Finally, there is MWI’s assumption that human beings are
purely material entities. As we saw in Part I, it is not clear then why we should
experience classical appearances at all.
41 D’Espagnat (1995: 248).
42 Zukav (1979: 92–93), Squires (1990: 198–199), Laloe (2001: 691).
43 Squires (1990: 199), Lockwood (1996: 164).
44 Ruetsche (2002: 217).
45 Stapp (1972/1997: 133), Barrett (1999: 155), Esfeld (2001: 280).
46 Barrett (1999: 156).
47 See Barrett (1999: 154–179) for a comprehensive overview of critiques.
48 Butterﬁeld (1995: 143).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

80
Quantum theory and its interpretation
Objections like these have given rise to a variant of MWI, the Many Minds
Interpretation (MMI), which provides a useful bridge to the idealist interpreta-
tions considered below.49 MMI retains the overall interpretive frame of MWI,
but proposes a different understanding of the branching process that occurs
when all the possibilities in a wave function are actualized during measure-
ment: instead of the world, it is minds that branch. The starting point of this
argument is that when an observer measures a quantum system he or she
becomes entangled with it, now constituting a larger quantum system with the
original object. Although the details vary with different versions of MMI, the
basic idea is that for each possibility in the wave function there is a correspond-
ing mental state of the brain.50 When the results of the experiment come in
only one of these “minds” is experienced (i.e. we see a deﬁnite particle hit).
The others branch off and become inaccessible to us, but are still in some sense
real.
MMI has many of the same virtues as MWI without its heaviest metaphysical
baggage, and zeroes in on the fact that the real anomaly for quantum theory, and
thus what needs to be explained, is that observers have deﬁnite experiences.
However, like all interpretations it comes at a cost: reliance on a debatable
and exogenous theory about how experience relates to the physical world.51
If quantum mechanics is complete and universal, then we should be able to
deduce consciousness from the theory (reduce mind to brain), but it is not clear
how this can be done with a materialist ontology. There is nothing in quantum
theory itself requiring that each possibility in a wave function correspond to
a mental state. Moreover, since all physical states (including brain states) are
superposed quantum states, their associated mental states should be superposed
as well, but this is not what we experience.52 Why are only some mental states
experienced and not others? Acknowledging such difﬁculties, David Albert and
Barry Loewer argue that the mind must be something intrinsically different than
the physical reality described by quantum theory, which actually leads them
to reject materialism in favor of an explicit mind–body dualism.53 Michael
Lockwood sees this as a “desperate expedient,” and has developed an alternative
form of MMI that tries to save materialism through the idea of supervenience
of the mental on the physical.54 If my claim in Chapter 1 is correct, however,
this approach to consciousness is unlikely to pan out in the end.
49 This is actually closer to Everett’s original argument; see d’Espagnat (1995: 251–252). On
the Many Minds Interpretation see for example, Lockwood (1996), Home (1997: 92–94), and
Barrett (1999).
50 Butterﬁeld (1995: 148), Ruetsche (2002: 216).
51 Lockwood (1996: 170).
52 At least in a given instant; the feeling of ambivalence between two states of mind might be what
it is like to be in a superposition over a period of time.
53 Albert and Loewer (1988); also see Barrett (2006).
54 See Lockwood (1996: 176 and passim).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Five interpretations
81
In my view two lessons should be taken away from this discussion of MWI/
MMI. The ﬁrst is the powerful grip of materialism on the modern scientiﬁc
imagination. That physicists could take seriously an ontology as extravagant
as MWI, let alone as a preferred framework, shows that they are willing to pay
a very high price indeed to save materialism. The second is that, in MMI, the
internal logic of MWI has nevertheless forced at least some materialists to come
directly to grips with the recalcitrant nature of consciousness. This is a signiﬁ-
cant development, and suggests that more explicitly idealist interpretations of
quantum theory are worth a look in themselves.
Realism II: idealist interpretations
By “idealist” interpretations of quantum theory I mean those that assign an
explicit role to consciousness in quantum processes. This may be seen as either
a virtue or a vice: in my view it opens the door to the possibility of solving
two “hard problems” with one throw; for materialists it is an undesirable and
unnecessary expedient.55 Like the materialist interpretations discussed above,
however, these idealist ones are realist in the sense that they ascribe ontological
status to quantum systems. This may seem counter-intuitive, since philosophers
have often treated idealism as the opposite of realism: if realism assumes that
science gives us access to the world “out there,” then traditional idealism
denied the possibility of such access. But that presupposes that realism implies
materialism, which is precisely what idealist views of quantum theory reject.56
They ﬁnd within quantum theory a basis for arguing that consciousness is
objective and real, but not reducible to material stuff.
There are two basic ways in which consciousness might enter into quan-
tum theory: what might be called “exogenously,” through the role of the human
observer in the measurement process, and “endogenously,” through sub-atomic
particles themselves possessing a primitive form of mentality.57 Since histori-
cally the former came ﬁrst let me start there.
The Subjectivist Interpretation
Unlike most interpretations of quantum theory, what Walter von Lucadou58 has
called the Subjectivist Interpretation lacks a systematic, canonical statement,
55 See for example Yu and Nikolic (2011).
56 The result with respect to the realism question might be what Bernard d’Espagnat (2011) has
suggestively called “open realism.”
57 See Ward (2014) for a good overview of different ways to think about the potential connection
between quantum mechanics and consciousness.
58 See von Lucadou (1994).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

82
Quantum theory and its interpretation
but it does have a recognizable family of proponents going back to the 1930s.59
Their basic claim is that it is only as a result of interaction with the mind of the
observer, which stands outside the quantum system in question, that the latter’s
wave function collapses. As such, it treats quantum theory from the start as a
theory of mind–matter interaction, as impossible to do without reference to con-
scious observers who in effect help “create” reality.60 As Wheeler puts it, “[n]o
elementary phenomenon is a phenomenon until it is a registered (observed)
phenomenon.”61 This does not mean the approach is anti-realist, since reality
is still “real.” The point is that we need to rethink our relationship to reality
from one that assumes a strict subject–object distinction to a “participatory”
view.
The Subjectivist starting point is the von Neumann chain (see above, p. 68).
Against the Copenhagen treatment of measurement devices in classical terms,
von Neumann argued that any physical device will immediately become entan-
gled with a quantum system it is used to study, creating a larger quantum system
that would preclude a deﬁnite outcome to an experiment. This problem will
propagate on up the chain to the body of the observer, which as a material object
will also become entangled with the system in question. However, since in the
end we do observe actual outcomes, von Neumann reasoned that the measure-
ment process must have a non-material terminus in the observer’s mind.62 In
short, quantum systems collapse at the interface of the brain and the mind.63
On the basis of this argument von Neumann added the “projection postulate”
to quantum theory to describe wave function collapse, which enables us to
connect the theory to our experience of deﬁnite outcomes.
However, in his thought the philosophical signiﬁcance of the projection
postulate remains obscure.64 Fritz London and Edmond Bauer clariﬁed matters
somewhat in an important 1939 paper,65 but it was not until the work of
Eugene Wigner in the early 1960s that the metaphysical implications of this
approach began to receive sustained attention.66 Wigner begins with what has
become a well-known thought experiment. Consider the situation if in place
of a measurement device we could substitute a friend of the experimenter with
similar abilities. From the experimenter’s standpoint the friend is a physical
system and so like the original device should be in a superposition, unable to
register a deﬁnite state. However, after doing the experiment, if the experimenter
asked her friend whether she observed a deﬁnite outcome, she would say yes,
since with her capacity for subjective experience she stands in an identical
59 See for example London and Bauer (1939/1983), Wigner (1962; 1964), Stapp (1993; 2001),
Wheeler (1990; 1994), and French (2002).
60 Stapp (2001: 1470), Wigner (1962: 285).
61 Wheeler (1994: 120).
62 French (2002: 469).
63 Butterﬁeld (1995: 130).
64 French (2002: 469).
65 See London and Bauer (1939/1983).
66 See Wigner (1962), and Esfeld (1999) for a good overview of Wigner’s work.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Five interpretations
83
relation to the quantum system as the experimenter herself. The “Paradox of
Wigner’s Friend” supports von Neumann’s idea that consciousness must play a
different role in quantum theory than purely material measuring devices.67 But
Wigner drew a clearer conclusion: that there are two “kinds of reality,” physical
reality and consciousness, and since the latter selects the former, consciousness
is “primary.”68
Wigner’s view is not widely held today, for two main reasons.69 First, given
the manifest dependence of the mind on the brain, it seems to imply that if
the brain is in superposition, then the mind should be as well. Yet, in any
given instant we do not experience superpositions of our mental states, but
actual ones.70 One could avoid this problem by adopting an explicit mind–body
dualism. However, second, we then have Descartes’ problem of explaining
mind–matter interaction. Wigner says that the mind causes changes in the
physical world, yet he proposes no mechanism by which this could occur.
How could a non-physical mind choose physical outcomes if they are different
substances? Wigner tried to answer these questions, but most physicists were
unconvinced.71
Despite this skepticism, in recent years Wheeler and Stapp have advanced
new forms of Subjectivism that avoid some of these problems. In contrast to
Wigner, Wheeler emphasizes not the role of the observer in inducing wave
function collapse (the “Dirac choice”), but her decision of what question to ask
nature in the ﬁrst place (the “Heisenberg choice”), which determines whether
a quantum system has, for example, a deﬁnite position or a momentum. This
leads to Wheeler’s idea of “it from bit”: “every it – every particle, every ﬁeld of
force, even the spacetime continuum itself – derives its function, its meaning,
its very existence entirely – even if in some contexts indirectly – from the
apparatus-elicited answers to yes-no questions, binary choices, bits.”72 Like
Wigner, for Wheeler reality is “observer-dependent,” but the role of observers
is more indirect. Rather than directly causing state reduction, with its dualistic
implications, they merely “participate” in the process.73 Admittedly, this leaves
unresolved the cause of wave function collapse. Moreover, from the standpoint
of Subjectivism there is an important ambiguity in Wheeler’s theory. It seems
to presuppose the mind’s freedom and irreducibility to the material world,
yet nowhere does Wheeler address the ontological status of consciousness,
67 Wigner (1962: 294).
68 See Wigner (1964).
69 See French (2002) for critical discussion of the ensuing debate, and Butterﬁeld (1995: 130) for
a summary of current objections to this approach.
70 Though see Lehner (1997). I argue later that this is because it is the unconscious part of the
mind that is in superposition.
71 Though see Barrett (2006) for an argument using Wigner’s approach to defend mind–body
dualism.
72 Wheeler (1990: 5).
73 Wheeler (1988: 113; 1990: 5).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

84
Quantum theory and its interpretation
and in contrast to Wigner’s positing of mind as the primary reality, he sees
“information” as basic. However, it will be argued below that there is an
intimate relationship between information and consciousness, and as such it
makes sense to treat Wheeler’s view as a form of Subjectivism.
Stapp’s approach emphasizes both the Heisenberg and Dirac choices, which
he associates with the “active” and “passive” roles of mind respectively.74 As
such, it might be seen as combining the approaches of Wheeler and Wigner.
On the Heisenberg choice Stapp follows Wheeler, while being more explicit
that the posing of questions to nature involves “top-level guidance” by the
mind of the brain, or free will.75 However, Stapp also sees a role for mind in
the Dirac choice, though one different than that posited by Wigner. Whereas
Wigner argued that consciousness causes collapse, Stapp sees the role of the
mind here as more passive, as coming to know the answer nature returns to a
question.76 Importantly, the two roles of the mind both involve the brain/mind
complex. In contrast to Cartesian dualism, therefore, Stapp’s ontology is more
like a psycho-physical duality or parallelism, in which every quantum event is
actually a pair: a physical event in an entangled brain-world quantum system
that reduces the wave function to an outcome compatible with an associated
(not causal) psychical event in the mind.77
Stapp makes a start connecting his approach to the philosophy of mind,78 but
Steven French’s “reinterpretation” of the Subjectivist Interpretation I think best
grounds it philosophically.79 French argues for a “phenomenological” solution
to the measurement problem in the spirit of Edmund Husserl.80 He begins by
criticizing both Wigner and his critics for assuming that the mind or ego is some
kind of Cartesian substance that ﬂoats above experience. The assumption is an
easy one to make, since in ordinary language we talk as if the ego is a distinct
entity that “has” experiences, but according to Husserl this is wrong. When
we look closely for the subject of experience, the “I,” we only ﬁnd the unity
of experience itself. There is no further object “experiencing” experience.81
French then applies this to quantum measurement, which he describes as an
ensemble of three systems – the quantum object, the measurement device, and
the observer. These systems are entangled – i.e. not fully separable – through a
von Neumann chain, and as such described by a global wave function. His next
move is the key. From the observer’s standpoint the object and the measurement
device are part of the external world, but with ourselves we have a more intimate
relationship by virtue of the “faculty of introspection,” which enables us to gain
“immanent knowledge” of her own (brain) state. By acquiring that knowledge
74 See especially his (2001); for earlier treatments see Stapp (1993; 1996).
75 See Stapp (2001: 1483 and 1488).
76 Ibid: 1485.
77 Ibid: 1486; for a more recent discussion along similar lines see Pradhan (2012).
78 See especially his (1993).
79 French (2002); von Lucadou’s (1994) reinterpretation of Wigner is similar.
80 Also see Heelan (2004).
81 See French (2002: 476–479).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Five interpretations
85
through performing a measurement she “separates” herself from the ensemble’s
wave function, which cuts the von Neumann chain and collapses the wave
function into a deﬁnite outcome. Thus, what is going on is not a preexisting mind
with deﬁnite properties interfering with an already fully distinct matter, but the
creation through an act of reﬂection of the subjective/objective distinction in
the ﬁrst place.82
French’s phenomenological approach addresses at least three of the charges
that have been directed at the Subjectivist Interpretation. (1) It avoids dualism
by its refusal to treat the mind as a distinct substance. As with Stapp, what we
have here is more of a duality, in which the brain’s introspective capacity is
associated with the production of both mind and matter. (2) By the same token,
it avoids having to posit a mysterious causal interaction between mind and
the physical world: their relationship is not causal but constitutive, a “mutual
separation” of an ego-pole and an object-pole through an act of reﬂection.83
(3) Finally, it explains the contradiction between brains being in superpositions
and the fact that we do not experience such superpositions: the “I” that is the
“subject” of experience can only be posited after the separation of the ego- and
object-poles has already taken place.84
Nevertheless, there is one important element missing from French’s model,
which is an explanation of how it is possible for an observer to have “immanent
knowledge” of her superposed brain states, and why this should be associ-
ated with the experience of consciousness. By his rigorous phenomenological
description of the ego French gives us strong reasons for rejecting both dualism
and materialism, but this does not yet amount to a positive ontology of con-
sciousness. However, what is clear, as he suggests cryptically at the end of his
article, is that this will require “an utterly radical re-conception of the natural
world and our place within it.”85
The Bohm Interpretation
Panpsychist interpretations of quantum theory offer such a radical view.
Whereas Subjectivism treats consciousness as a property only of the observer
and thus exogenous to the sub-atomic level, panpsychism endogenizes it, giv-
ing mind a place within the formalism itself. There have been a number of
panpsychist interpretations of quantum theory lately, which I address at more
length in Chapter 6.86 Here I discuss just one of the earliest arguments along
these lines: that of David Bohm.
82 Cf. Schneider’s (2005) view of quantum measurement as a “speech act.”
83 French (2002: 484).
84 Ibid: 485.
85 Ibid: 489.
86 See for example Atmanspacher (2003), Nakagomi (2003a, 2003b), Primas (2003), Pylkk¨anen
(2007), Gao (2013), and Seager (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

86
Quantum theory and its interpretation
For two decades after the consolidation of the Copenhagen Interpretation in
the early 1930s it was thought that no other reading of quantum theory was
possible. This reﬂected a belief that the wave function was an absolutely com-
plete description of quantum systems, and as such there was neither any need
nor any way to incorporate “hidden variables” into quantum theory that might
explain its predictions.87 However, in 1951 Bohm developed a hidden variables
theory that was observationally equivalent to orthodox quantum mechanics. At
the time Bohm’s model went almost completely unnoticed, but by the 1970s it
was being taken seriously, partly because it has many classical elements, which
to some offered the hope of restoring the classical worldview to its rightful
central place.
Nevertheless, Bohm himself saw his ontology as non-classical, and nowhere
is this more apparent than in his view – emphasized more in his later works –
that the wave function has a primitive form of mentality.88 Curiously, this sug-
gestion is often completely ignored in the interpretive debate within the Bohm
Interpretation, giving it a more materialist spin than he perhaps intended.89
Such neglect is possible because although panpsychism is a natural inference
from his approach, it is not logically entailed by it and as such has an ad hoc
quality.90 Moreover, Bohm may have added to the confusion by criticizing
“exogenous” idealists like Wigner speciﬁcally for bringing mind into quantum
theory.91 In any case, given this slippage, I shall discuss Bohm’s view in two
parts, ﬁrst just laying out its structure, and then addressing its implications for
the idealist/materialist debate.
Bohmian mechanics makes three fundamental claims.92 First, contrary to
every other interpretation of quantum theory, it posits that particles are real
material objects with deﬁnite positions and trajectories. Because of the Uncer-
tainty Principle the latter cannot be known before measurement and as such
are hidden variables, but by using Bohm’s rewritten Schr¨odinger equation they
can be calculated after the fact. Quantum theory can then be read as a the-
ory about the evolution of particle positions.93 Second, the wave aspect of
particles describes a real phenomenon – a genuine ﬁeld, which Bohm calls a
“quantum potential” – as opposed to being just a mathematical expression from
87 See Home (1997: 16 and 54).
88 See especially his (1990); this thesis is less prominent in his classic (1980; though see
pp. 207–208), but was already present in his (1951: 168–172).
89 See Sole (2013) for a recent illustrative overview; also see Albert (1992), Home (1997), and
Ruetsche (2002). See Pylkk¨anen (2007) for a comprehensive study and panpsychist reading of
Bohm’s philosophy, and Seager (2013) for a diagnosis of its “Janus-faced” reception in similar
terms.
90 Stapp (1993: 137).
91 Bohm and Hiley (1993: 24).
92 Bohm and Hiley (1993) is the most systematic treatment of the theory.
93 Albert (1992: 134).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Five interpretations
87
which the statistical properties of observed phenomena are derived.94 The job
of the quantum potential is literally to guide particles in their movement toward
observed outcomes.95 Although the details differ, this idea is similar in spirit to
de Broglie’s early “pilot-wave” model, in which the wave function is assumed
to refer to a real wave that pilots particles to their destination.96 Finally, a
quantum system is an indivisible union of two separate entities, a particle and
a wave. This means that the wave function is not a complete description of a
quantum system, since hidden within any given wave is a real particle with a
deﬁnite position.97
Bohm’s framework has a number of classical features. (1) It restores the idea
of particles as tiny material objects. (2) The quantum potential is treated as
a real phenomenon, not unlike a ﬁeld in classical physics, by which particles
are carried and inﬂuenced like a cork ﬂoating on the sea. (3) It is causal and
ontologically deterministic. By enabling us to retrodict particle positions it
connects a quantum system’s initial state and the outcome of an experiment,
while faithfully reproducing the ex ante epistemic indeterminism of the ortho-
dox theory.98 (4) Wave functions no longer mysteriously collapse in reality,
even though they appear to when we measure them.99 (5) Finally, the observer
plays no special role in the theory, thereby reinstating a clear subject–object
distinction.100 All the action is taking place endogenously rather than through
the intervention of a human being. In effect, Bohm’s approach adds the quan-
tum wave function to a classical description of the world, rather than forcing
us to choose between them. For this reason proponents see it as the “natural
embedding of the Schr¨odinger equation . . . into a physical theory.”101
Given these classical characteristics it is perhaps not surprising that the
secondary literature has neglected the idealist implications that Bohm himself
drew from his approach. However, there is that new force that Bohm introduces,
the “quantum potential,” which Euan Squires calls a “very peculiar object.”102
While akin to a ﬁeld in classical physics, it has two non-classical features.
First, whereas the effects of a classical ﬁeld depend on both its form and
amplitude, the effects of the quantum potential depend only on its form. Thus,
in contrast to a cork bobbing on a wave of water, which will move less the
further it is from the center of the wave, a particle bobbing on a quantum ﬁeld
will do so at full strength regardless of its distance from the source. As such,
94 Kieseppa (1997: 56).
95 Albert (1992: 135). This is where Bohm introduces non-locality into this theory.
96 Home (1997: 37–40); for an overview of the pilot-wave model see Squires (1994: 79–84).
97 Callender and Weingard (1997: 25).
98 Albert (1992: 164); Home (1997: 44). For this reason it is also sometimes called a “causal”
interpretation of quantum theory.
99 Albert (1992: 163), Hiley (1997: 39).
100 Hiley (1997: 39).
101 Goldstein (1996: 163).
102 Squires (1990: 195).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

88
Quantum theory and its interpretation
even remote features of the environment can affect a particle’s movement.103
Second, whereas the effects of a classical ﬁeld are transmitted to objects in a
push/pull fashion, the quantum potential doesn’t work that way. Indeed, how it
does work is not entirely clear, which raises the metaphysical question of what
it is made of.
The view of Bohm and his followers is that the quantum potential con-
sists in “active information.”104 Information here is understood to be objective
rather than a measure of our knowledge, which accords with the conventional
deﬁnition of information due to Shannon.105 However, unlike Shannon infor-
mation, which Bohm and his co-author Basil Hiley call “passive” because it
cannot do anything without a subject to use it, active information exercises
causal agency on its own. The powers of this agency are not mechanical but
“informational”106 – the quantum ﬁeld informs its associated particle about the
environment, giving it a “perspective,” to which the particle responds deter-
ministically according to the Schr¨odinger equation. In this way a quantum ﬁeld
can affect a particle without providing much of the energy needed to move it.107
As such, it is possible for even a very weak quantum ﬁeld to move a particle
with a great deal of energy, an implication that will prove important later in
thinking about the mind–body problem.
What all this amounts to is that information is a fundamental aspect of
reality. This suggestion is being heard increasingly today both within quantum
physics (by Bohmians and non-Bohmians alike) and outside.108 But Bohm’s
idea that information in the quantum world is “active” gives it an added and
provocative dimension. In particular, it leads to the view that, by virtue of their
indivisible union with quantum ﬁelds, particles have an inherent (if primitive)
form of mentality.109 Mind is not exclusive to human beings, or even organisms
in general, but goes all the way down in nature. Given that physicalism bases
itself on physics, this raises the question of what ‘physical’ means. Hiley
and Paavo Pylkk¨anen argue that the quantum world is still “physical,” but its
physicality is “subtle” and thus “mental.” As such, they see Bohm’s theory
as an “objective idealism”: idealist because it posits mentality as irreducible
and objective because this mentality exists independent of people.110 The more
common name for this position is panpsychism.
In sum, quantum theory calls into question all of the metaphysical assump-
tions upon which the classical worldview is based: materialism, atomism, deter-
minism, mechanism, the subject–object distinction, and that space and time are
103 The example is from Bohm and Hiley (1993: 31–32).
104 Ibid: 35–36.
105 See Shannon (1949).
106 Pylkk¨anen (1995: 340).
107 This is proposed to come from the quantum vacuum; see Bohm and Hiley (1993: 37).
108 See, for example, Wheeler (1990) and Chalmers (1996).
109 Bohm (1990: 281); also see Hiley (1997) and Pylkk¨anen (2007).
110 Hiley and Pylkk¨anen (1997: 76).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Five interpretations
89
absolute. Again, “calling into question” does not necessarily mean they are
wrong, but at the level of appearances there is a challenge to every one. Most
interpretations of quantum theory save one or more classical assumption, but
while the balance of philosophical opinion has swung this way and that, there
has been little interpretive progress over time. No interpretations have been
deﬁnitively eliminated, and all have their problems; the only question is which
problems you want to have.111 About the only thing everyone seems to agree
upon is that the eventual solution will astonish us.
One of the deepest divides in this debate is over the role of consciousness.
Materialists preserve the classical assumption that everything is ultimately
material. Idealists give this assumption up and argue that consciousness plays
an irreducible role in nature. Considered in the context of quantum theory alone,
there is no deﬁnitive choosing between them. What I want to suggest now is
that if we link the problem of interpreting quantum theory to the problem of
explaining consciousness, it becomes clearer what choice should be made.
111 This reminds me of Kenneth Waltz’s (1979: 18) characterization of IR, where “nothing seems
to cumulate, not even criticism.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Part II
Quantum consciousness and life
Introduction
We saw in Part I that in addition to explaining consciousness there is another
hard problem for the modern scientiﬁc worldview – understanding what quan-
tum physics is telling us about reality. And if anything this one is harder. In
philosophy of mind there is at least consensus enough for an orthodox position
to exist (materialism), and a widespread expectation that it will be vindicated by
future neuroscience. By contrast, in philosophy of physics all sides understand
that quantum theory is compatible with a variety of metaphysical interpreta-
tions, and have little hope that new empirical discoveries will settle the matter.
But both problems are “hard” in the sense that, despite tremendous intellectual
effort over many decades, no clear progress has been made toward solving
them.
The basic idea of quantum consciousness theory is that bringing the two
problems into contact may be the key to solving both (though I will be address-
ing only the mind–body problem in what follows).1 That this could be a novel
idea attests to the fact that their philosophical discussions have evolved quite
separately. While philosophers of physics have long been interested in the role
of consciousness in the measurement process, they have engaged little with the
mind–body problem per se; and philosophers of mind have been almost unani-
mous in dismissing the suggestion that consciousness has anything interesting
to do with quantum physics. Social scientists might echo such skepticism, won-
dering how adding the problem of interpreting quantum theory to the problem
of consciousness will help them. Besides piling up jargon and arcane debates,
in moving to the sub-atomic level we are now even farther removed from the
human world, and seemingly poised to engage in the most vulgar reductionism.
Yet, na¨ıvely one might expect the two problems to be related, for two reasons.
The ﬁrst is the intriguing analogies mentioned in Chapter 1 between the mental
and quantum domains. Of course, these might be nothing more than analogies,
1 On what it might mean for the quantum debate see Aerts’ (2010) interpretation of quantum
particles as “conceptual entities,” modeled explicitly on concepts in daily life, and also Hameroff
and Penrose (1996) and Manousakis (2006).
91
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

92
Quantum consciousness and life
with no basis in reality (it would be more telling if they did not exist). But
they suggest that a similar conceptual architecture might be applicable to both
domains, which has since been conﬁrmed by quantum decision theory.2 As
philosopher of physics Michel Bitbol puts it, “certain domains of the human
sciences (economy, psychology of perception, rational choice theory, etc.) share
exactly the same (and not just analogous) characteristics and backbone structure
as quantum mechanics.”3
The second is that the problem in each case is a mirror image of the other,
although perhaps not as one might expect. Normally in the mind–body case
the mind is seen as the problem, whereas in quantum theory it is matter. But if
‘problem’ refers to what is anomalous relative to what is already established,
then in the mind–body problem what is known ﬁrst is consciousness (“I think,
therefore I am”). If we were not sure about that then there would be no more
reason to problematize materialists’ failure to explain consciousness than their
failure to explain ghosts. So what is recalcitrant here is really a kind of body,4
one that is conscious. Similarly, in quantum theory what is known ﬁrst is the
Schr¨odinger equation, which describes a world of deterministically evolving
potentialities. Yet when we measure this world we experience one actual reality
that emerges non-deterministically. So what is recalcitrant here is what is
present to consciousness, or the role of the mind in physics.5 Thus, there is a
complementarity between the two issues that, while not evidence for a link per
se, is also suggestive and provides a frame for relating them.
Quantum consciousness theory builds on these intuitions by combining two
propositions: (1) the physical claim of quantum brain theory that the brain is
capable of sustaining coherent quantum states (Chapter 5), and (2) the meta-
physical claim of panpsychism that consciousness inheres in the very structure
of matter (Chapter 6). Of these claims it is the second, panpsychism, which
does the crucial work in explaining consciousness. However, quantum brain
theory offers a solution to what has long been a key objection to panpsychism,
the “combination problem” of how the zillions of proto-conscious elements in
matter combine into the unitary consciousness of the brain, and as such I will
treat it ﬁrst. Then, after discussing panpsychism, I defend a third claim that
I take to be an important implication of quantum consciousness theory: that
quantum coherence is the essence of life (Chapter 7). This leads to a quantum
form of vitalism, in which quantum coherence is the elusive ´elan vital.
2 See Filk and M¨uller (2009) and Bitbol (2011).
3 Bitbol (2012: 247), emphasis in the original; also see Filk and M¨ueller (2009) and Pradhan
(2012). Bitbol here is referring speciﬁcally to epistemological questions, but his point I believe
holds for ontological ones as well.
4 See Montero (1999) on the “body problem” in the philosophy of mind.
5 See the discussion of the “von Neumann Chain” in Chapter 3, p. 68.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum consciousness and life
93
This argument amounts to an epistemological double movement, taking what
is known at each level – the third-person knowledge of quantum theory and the
ﬁrst-person knowledge of consciousness – and projecting it toward the other,
scaling all the way up and all the way down respectively. The goal of this
maneuver is not to reduce one kind of knowledge to the other but quite the
opposite, to keep them separate until they are face to face across the micro-
macro spectrum. There they can then be joined in the phenomenon of life, which
embodies both the ﬁrst- and third-person (sic) points of view, understood as
complementary in the quantum sense. This might sound like a new form of
Cartesianism, but unlike Descartes’ ontological dualism, which posited two
distinct and unrelated substances, the dualism here is only epistemic (so one
might call it a ‘duality’ vs. a ‘dualism’). With respect to ontology, I argue
for a quantum version of “neutral monism,” which posits a single underlying
reality that is neither mental nor material but from which the distinction itself
emerges. With respect to epistemology, it is true that by keeping the argument
on parallel tracks a subjective–objective distinction is built in from the start,
which might be criticized for privileging subjectivity. However, the “taboo on
subjectivity” ultimately stems from the inability of the classical worldview to
explain a phenomenon which we all know intuitively, is real – ﬁrst-person
experience – and as such, philosophers must ﬁnd ways to deny, dismiss, or
deconstruct it instead. Since quantum consciousness theory purports to offer
such an explanation, there is no reason to embrace that taboo here.
But if consciousness goes all the way down, then what kind of “explanation”
of it will this be? To answer that we ﬁrst have to deﬁne what precisely the
mind–body “problem” is. In the classical view, it is to explain consciousness
by reference to phenomena that are purely material, which is to say contain no
trace of consciousness. Such an explanation might take the form of reducing
consciousness in a causal, functional, or logical sense to material reality, or,
for those favoring a more hierarchical ontology, explaining its emergence at
some level of material complexity.6 Either way, according to this deﬁnition of
the problem, it will not be solved until the explanandum is wholly material.
But that begs a key question, which is whether the ultimate constituents of
reality are indeed wholly material. As we have seen, in the quantum world
that assumption is debatable: there, physicality is not equivalent to materiality,
and as such is compatible in principle with mentality. Changing the physics
constraint in this way, from the CCCP to the CCQP, would re-found “the
problem” on an altogether different basis, abandoning materialism in favor of
a more encompassing naturalism, in which consciousness might itself be part
of the foundation.
6 For a good discussion of the traditional options see van Gulick (2001).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

94
Quantum consciousness and life
But ultimately the argument I make may be less about explaining conscious-
ness than about understanding it. This distinction is familiar in the epistemology
of social science, where it has been used to distinguish naturalists who think
that social science is not essentially different than physical science from anti-
naturalists who think that it is. However, the distinction also crops up in the
philosophy of physical science. There, against Hempel’s view that the two are
synonymous, some philosophers have recently argued that understanding pro-
vides an epistemic beneﬁt over and beyond explanation, and may even exist
when the latter is absent.7 This beneﬁt is characterized in various ways – “intel-
ligibility,” “pragmatic skill,” or “grasping” the phenomenon in question – but
what they share is a psychological, user-relative dimension. And that seems
quite apropos here, both because my argument puts subjectivity front and cen-
ter, and because what counts as explaining depends on one’s ontology and as
such – in the quantum context at least – may be contested. So while I personally
think that what follows is an explanation of consciousness, I will be satisﬁed if
you merely think that it helps us understand it.
7 See de Regt and Dieks (2005), Grimm (2006), Lipton (2009), Khalifa (2013), and Van Camp
(2014); and for a defense of Hempel’s view see Trout (2002). This literature makes curiously
little reference to its social scientiﬁc cousin, which is seen as pertaining to the “special case” of
social cognition only (Khalifa, 2013: 162).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

5
Quantum brain theory
In recent decades it has become common throughout the social sciences to
think of the human mind simply as a very complex computer. Drawing on
an older materialist metaphor of the mind as a machine,1 the “computational”
model of the mind took off after the mid-century invention of the computer
and subsequent cognitive revolution in psychology, and has since permeated
the social sciences in the form of rational choice and other prominent social
theories. The contributions of this model have been huge; but it has always been
assumed that the computations going on inside our heads are classical. Quantum
brain theory challenges this assumption by proposing that the mind is actually
a quantum computer. Classical computers are based on binary digits or “bits”
with well-deﬁned values (0 or 1), which are transformed in serial operations by
a program into an output. Quantum computers in contrast are based on “qubits”
that can be in superpositions of 0 and 1 at the same time and also interact
non-locally, enabling every qubit to be operated on simultaneously.2 The idea
of a quantum computer was ﬁrst proposed in the 1980s and is still far from
being realized technologically, but it has ﬁred the imagination of scientists
by raising the prospect of unimaginable increases in computational power,
and other neat tricks besides. If quantum brain theory is true, then our model
of the mind would be similarly radically altered, irrespective of the issue of
consciousness.
Quantum brain theory hypothesizes that quantum processes at the elementary
level are ampliﬁed and kept in superposition at the level of the organism,3 and
then, through downward causation constrain what is going on deep within
the brain. On this view, information from the environment is continuously
transformed from the macro- to the micro-level, and then channeled back
1 On the history of the mind-as-machine metaphor see especially Mirowski (1988), and also Cohen
(1994) and Maas (1999).
2 See Siegfried (2000) for a very accessible, if now somewhat dated, introduction to quantum
computation.
3 The possibility of such ampliﬁcation has a long pedigree among physicists who think that
quantum mechanics and biology might be related, going back to Pascual Jordan in the 1930s.
For subsequent work see Elsasser (1951), Platt (1956), and Gabora (2002).
95
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

96
Quantum consciousness and life
upward into an “internal quantum state,”4 a decoherence-free sub-space of the
brain within which quantum computational processes are performed.5
Postulating a non-trivial role for quantum processes in the brain breaks with
a foundation of modern neuroscience, the “Neuron Doctrine,” according to
which neurons are the smallest units of the brain relevant to explaining con-
sciousness. With about 100 billion in the average human brain neurons are
already extremely small, but still orders of magnitude larger than sub-atomic
particles, and well within the classical domain. As such, the Neuron Doctrine
assumes a priori that the physical states of the brain are “collapsed.”6 Propo-
nents of the Neuron Doctrine acknowledge of course that quantum processes
take place in the brain, since they take place everywhere. But they argue that
in an environment as “warm, wet, and noisy” as the brain, interference from
zillions of interactions induces all wave functions to collapse, or “decohere,”
above the molecular level. Since this is far below the neural scale we do not
need quantum theory to explain neural behavior. To take on the Neuron Doc-
trine, therefore, quantum brain theorists must identify physical structures and
processes in the brain that can solve the decoherence problem, the difﬁculty of
which no one denies.
But to keep things in perspective the Neuron Doctrine too faces formidable
difﬁculties. There is the hard problem of consciousness that got us here in
the ﬁrst place, plus at least three hard sub-problems: (1) the transition from
unconscious to conscious states: most information processing in the brain is
unconscious, so why not all of it?; (2) our experience of free will; and (3)
the unity of consciousness or “binding problem,” the fact that in experience
huge numbers of neurons ﬁre at the same time. Various classical hypotheses
have been proposed in an attempt to solve these problems, so saying the issues
are unresolved does not mean quantum brain theory is true. However, its ability
to solve them in a clear and uniﬁed way is an important test of how well
the argument is doing, and so I will come back to them at various points
below.
Your quantum brain
Quantum brain theory is not one theory so much as a family of hypotheses,
all of which suggest that the brain is able to “continuously generate quan-
tum coherent processes among particles/waves distributed along its volume.”7
However, different branches of the family work at different levels of analy-
sis, and between them they have proposed a variety of possible supports for
4 See Igamberdiev (2012: 24–28).
5 See Conrad (1996: 97) and Glymour et al. (2001).
6 See Pereria (2003: 101).
7 Vannini (2008: 176); for an overview of much of this literature see Tuszynski, ed. (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum brain theory
97
sustaining quantum coherence in the brain. While these hypotheses seem mostly
complementary some might be inconsistent, and/or some might turn out to be
true while others are false. Add the fact that the subject matter is neuroscience,
and this is a difﬁcult discourse for outsiders to penetrate. Fortunately, most of
the technical details are not relevant here, since as long as at least one of the
proposals pans out the larger, the macro-level hypothesis would be true. Thus,
rather than try to review the literature in detail, my primary objective is just
to give social scientists a sense that serious work is being done, organize this
work into rough categories, and supply references for those who want to follow
up. In the second half of the chapter I then take up some critiques of quantum
brain theory and assess where the debate stands now.
In parsing quantum brain theory an initial distinction should be made between
two different arguments that are often discussed under this heading. What might
be called the “weak” argument hypothesizes that the ﬁring of individual neurons
is affected by quantum processes, but it does not posit quantum effects at the
level of the whole brain. Friedrich Beck and John Eccles have advanced the
most detailed proposal along these lines, which they link to an explicitly dualist
solution to the mind–body problem.8 Because the decoherence problem is much
less severe at the neuronal than whole-brain level their model has the advantage
of facing lower physical barriers to its realization. However, the weak thesis is
not where the action is in quantum brain theory these days, and since it has few
discernible implications for social science (no walking quantum computers . . . )
I shall set it aside below, while recognizing that it might be as far as the theory
can go. That leaves the “strong” argument, which does posit quantum effects
at the organism level.
Here, two main branches of the family may be distinguished, originating in
articles published independently just one year apart – by Luigi Ricciardi and
Hiroomi Umezawa in 1967 and by Herbert Fr¨ohlich in 1968.9 Although these
branches have on occasion intersected, for the most part they constitute separate
research programs within the quantum brain “paradigm.” Their differences
originate in the levels of analysis of their starting points: the Umezawa tradition
uses quantum ﬁeld theory to think about the whole brain and from there scales
downward; whereas the Fr¨ohlich tradition is interested in what is going on deep
inside individual neurons and from there scales up. (Neither is very concerned
with the intermediate, neural scale of the conventional wisdom). Although
Umezawa beats Fr¨ohlich by a year, the latter sets up the larger argument better
and so I will begin there.
8 See Beck and Eccles (1992; 1998), and Smith (2001) on the Cartesian roots of Eccles’ thinking,
and Clarke (2014) for a critique. For an unheralded earlier model with some similar features,
see Bass (1975).
9 See Ricciardi and Umezawa (1967) and Fr¨ohlich (1968).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

98
Quantum consciousness and life
The Fr¨ohlich tradition
Fr¨ohlich’s contribution was to show that, at least in theory, a particular kind
of quantum coherence, Bose-Einstein condensation, might be possible within
individual cells, and from there perhaps extend to the whole brain. Quantum
coherence refers to a situation in which the wave functions of two or more par-
ticles are entangled, such that they form a superposition that can be described
with one equation. Concretely, this means the properties of the system’s ele-
ments are correlated non-locally, so that a measurement on one instantly tells
us something about the others. Ontologically, it means the elements have lost
some of their identity, such that the system can no longer be disaggregated
(“factorized”) into distinct parts. This loss of unit identity need not be complete,
however; quantum coherence does not require that particles exhibit identical
states, only that they be correlated in superposition.
Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs) exhibit a speciﬁc kind of coherence in
which the particles are in identical states, and stay that way, enabling the wave
function and the information it contains to be sustained through time.10 This
feature has been linked to a uniquely quantum form of emergence,11 which I will
discuss in Chapter 13 as it pertains to social structures. And by the same token
it makes BECs an attractive candidate for the physical basis of consciousness,
which – recalling the binding problem – has a unitary quality that requires
its physical correlates to move in coordinated fashion over time.12 The idea is
that “excitation” of the condensate constitutes a “reservoir of energy” available
for various uses,13 including – by hypothesis – cognition. In this vein Danah
Zohar likens BECs to a “blackboard” to which “writing” (thought) is applied
by excitations of the condensate.14
Is Bose-Einstein condensation possible in the brain? The main reason to be
skeptical is that BECs are normally found only at extremely low temperatures,
far below those in brain cells, which are immersed in a “heat bath” formed
by the rest of the organism. Heat causes molecules to move about randomly,
which leads to decoherence of quantum states, not to coherence. What Fr¨ohlich
showed was that if enough energy were continuously pumped into a cell it
could sustain a BEC even at higher temperatures. Zohar offers a useful classical
analogy.15 Imagine a group of compasses on a table in a room shielded from the
earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. Because of the shielding their needles will point every
which way, and if the table is jiggled they will move about randomly (jiggling
plays the role of the heat bath), so that to describe their motions we have to
10 For overviews of the theory and experiments on BECs see Ketterle (1999), Reimers et al. (2009),
and Healey (2011).
11 See Healey (2011); cf. Humphreys (1997a).
12 See Marshall (1989), Zohar (1990), Ho (1997: 269), and Worden (1999).
13 Fr¨ohlich (1968: 648).
14 Zohar (1990: 86).
15 Zohar (1990: 82).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum brain theory
99
write a separate equation for each compass. However, if we keep the shielding
but pump electromagnetic energy into the compasses they will begin to exert a
pull on each other, and at a certain point when the energy is strong enough their
needles will “condense” and point in the same direction (“coherence”). At this
point we no longer have to write separate equations, but just one for the whole
system.
Tantalizing in theory, evidence for this “Fr¨ohlich effect” has been elusive.
A ﬁrst generation of experimental work in the 1970s and ’80s was suggestive
but inconclusive, and despite a new wave of experiments in recent years, some
again promising, it remains unclear whether the effect can actually exist in
living systems.16 Proponents point out, with some justice, that this may be
because the “biological mechanisms developed to isolate and protect quantum
coherence mechanisms could also make their detection quite difﬁcult,” leaving
only classical properties to see.17 Skeptics of course have a different view,
arguing that the effect has not been shown because it cannot exist. And at ﬁrst
glance a recent critique of the Fr¨ohlich hypothesis by Jeffrey Reimers and his
colleagues looks deﬁnitive – until you notice that its primary target is actually
just one particular version of the hypothesis in a model from the late 1970s.18
The critique might still be deﬁnitive, but writing in the 1960s and ’70s Fr¨ohlich
was necessarily vague about some important details, and today there are several
different models of how the effect might be produced, with perhaps more to
come in the future. Thus, it seems quite possible that proponents will be able to
take the Reimers et al. critique in stride, as helping to rule out certain options
and thus narrowing the parameters for their search, rather than as proof that
their search is misguided. But that remains to be seen.
One research program coming out of Fr¨ohlich’s work and today the dominant
branch on this side of the family tree is the one pioneered by Stuart Hameroff
and Roger Penrose in the early 1990s, focusing on tiny bits of neurons called
microtubules.19 The Neuron Doctrine tells us to look for the physical basis of
consciousness in relations between neurons – neural networks – rather than
inside them. However, neurons themselves are fabulously complex.20 Each is a
single cell made of cytoplasm conﬁned by a membrane, composed of roughly
70 percent water molecules, 20 percent proteins, and 10 percent other elements.
16 See Clark (2010), Craddock and Tuszynski (2010), Lloyd (2011), Igamberdiev (2012), and
Plankar et al. (2013) for sympathetic discussions. The existence of BECs in the non-biological
realm is well established.
17 E.g. Hameroff (2001a: 25); see also Clark (2010: 177).
18 See Reimers et al. (2009). This article is nevertheless very helpful in distinguishing different
kinds of BECs and showing that only the most demanding are at issue.
19 The seminal statements are Hameroff (1994), Penrose (1994), and Hameroff and Penrose (1996).
For a comprehensive recent statement see Hameroff and Penrose (2014a).
20 For good overviews of the internal structure of neurons see Tuszynski et al. (1997) and Satinover
(2001).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

100
Quantum consciousness and life
The proteins are organized in web-like structures making up the “cytoskeleton,”
which gives neurons their form and regulates their connections. Microtubules –
so named because they look like hollow tubes – are the building blocks of
the cytoskeleton, and there are typically thousands in a single neuron. And the
complexity does not stop there: the walls of the microtubules consist of thirteen
columns of protein “dimers,” of which there may be 10 million in a neuron. In
short, each individual neuron has literally billions of parts.
What is all this complexity for? The conventional wisdom used to be that
the cytoskeleton is a mere physical support for the neuron, like bone, and thus
passive and inert.21 However, the more scientists have looked, the less plausible
this has become. Microtubules are dynamical systems performing numerous
functions, including perhaps computation, given that their internal structure
bears a striking resemblance to cellular automata, which are widely thought to
engage in computation. However, there is still the question of whether any com-
putation going on within microtubules is quantum or classical. Here the case
for a quantum answer begins by pointing out that microtubules are at precisely
the right scale to mediate between quantum processes at the sub-atomic level
and classical, neural computation. From there the argument highlights a num-
ber of intriguing features of microtubules that suggest they can amplify those
quantum processes into coherent superpositions at the microtubular level.22
Assuming that to be the case, in turn, to scale the argument up two addi-
tional problems must be solved: (a) how coherent microtubular states avoid
decoherence in the noisy environment within each neuron; and then (b) how
they do so in the even more complex environment outside, and not just sur-
vive but join other coherent microtubular states to form a global superposition
in the whole brain. Addressing (a), several mechanisms have been proposed
by which quantum coherence within microtubules might be shielded from the
intra-neuronal context, among which is a special kind of water – “ordered
water” – that is known to ﬁll and surround microtubules.23 Addressing (b),
along with ordered water a frequently mooted possibility is that quantum “tun-
neling” is involved.24 A well-established phenomenon in quantum physics,
tunneling refers to the ability of electrons to penetrate barriers that in the clas-
sical world should be impenetrable – in this case the “gap junctions” between
neurons.25 There is considerable evidence that neurons connected by gap junc-
tions (versus synapses) ﬁre simultaneously, as if they were a single neuron.
21 Satinover (2001: 163); also see Tuszynski et al. (1997).
22 Hameroff (2001b: 86).
23 Ordered water is water in which the nuclei of its constituent molecules have been put into a
quantum coherent or “ordered” state by an electromagnetic charge; see Marchettini et al. (2010)
and Ho (2012).
24 To my knowledge this was ﬁrst proposed by Evan Harris Walker (1970), an early quantum brain
theorist working independently of both Ricciardi/Umezawa and Fr¨ohlich.
25 See Hameroff (1998: 1881–1882), and Hameroff et al. (2002: 162–164).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum brain theory
101
Quantum tunneling could explain this effect, while providing a mechanism for
scaling up quantum coherence all the way to the top.
The Umezawa tradition
As this discussion shows, quantum brain theory faces explanatory challenges
on multiple levels of analysis at once. Since most of these are below the cellular
level, trying to meet them has fallen largely to scientists working in the bottom-
up spirit of Fr¨ohlich. However, there is also the challenge of understanding the
structure and functioning of the whole brain as a quantum system. This is the
concern of the top-down approach of the Umezawa tradition, which in recent
years has been carried on and further developed in the work of Mari Jibu and
Kunio Yasue, Giuseppe Vitiello, and others.26
Animating Ricciardi and Umezawa’s 1967 paper and much of the later
work in this vein is the puzzle of memory. Two puzzles really: (1) how can
memory recall entrain huge numbers of neurons ﬁring synchronously in highly
structured phase and amplitude (this is an aspect of the binding problem above)?
And (2) how can memories last a lifetime when we know the molecules making
them up live at most a few months? Stuart et al. call these the non-locality and
stability problems of memory.27 Both involve long-range correlations among
the brain’s elements, the one spatial and the other temporal, the explanation of
which is a central concern in this literature and memory science more generally.
The orthodox view is that neural networks are the answer, but after decades of
intensive research this approach still faces a number of hard questions.28 This
is perhaps not surprising given that memory retrieval is by deﬁnition conscious,
and so might not be understood until we understand consciousness.
The central claim of the Umezawa tradition is that the solution to the puzzles
of memory lies in a branch of quantum physics called quantum ﬁeld theory
(QFT). Traditional quantum mechanics (QM) is centered on the Schr¨odinger
equation, which can solve systems involving only individual or at most a small
number of particles, a highly idealized case. Many-particle systems like the
brain cannot be solved by QM and so we need a different mathematics. If
the system in question is one in which the elements do not exhibit quantum
coherence and thus their motions are essentially random, then quantum statis-
tical mechanics (QSM) is called for;29 if on the other hand they are coherent,
26 See especially Jibu and Yasue (1995) and Vitiello (2001); for a good introduction to this stream
of quantum brain theory see Jibu and Yasue (2004).
27 See Stuart, Takahashi and Umezawa (1978); for a recent quantum model of memory see Brainerd
et al. (2013).
28 See, for example, Arshavsky (2006) and Forsdyke (2009).
29 See Vitiello (2001), and Svozil and Wright (2005) for an application of QSM to the social
sciences.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

102
Quantum consciousness and life
then we need QFT. The Umezawa thesis is that non-living matter instantiates
the ﬁrst, disordered case and living matter the second, ordered one. I will say
more about living matter in Chapter 7; for now what matters is that it changes
the physics constraint on memory from a classical to a quantum constraint
at the collective level. More speciﬁcally, the Umezawa proposal is that suffus-
ing the brain’s neural network is a quantum ﬁeld, the dynamics of which drive
its elements into coherent motion (solving the binding problem) and keeping
them there (solving the stability problem).30 As such, it side-steps the problem
of unit-level coherence that bedevils the Fr¨ohlich approach, since the properties
of this quantum ﬁeld are multiply realizable.31
The implications of the Umezawa hypothesis for what memory is and where
it is located are quite interesting in their own right but peripheral in the present
context, which I want to wrap up instead by addressing how its top-down
logic relates to the bottom-up logic of the Fr¨ohlich tradition. The answer is not
clear, for reasons that a social scientiﬁc analogy might clarify. Umezawa cuts
into the quantum brain from what social scientists would call a “sociological”
standpoint that is concerned with the whole almost to the exclusion of its parts,
whereas Fr¨ohlich cuts in from a “psychological” (or “social psychological”)
standpoint that highlights the parts more than the whole. To unify quantum
brain theory the two would ideally meet up seamlessly in the middle – and
interestingly they do ﬁnd common ground in the signiﬁcance both attach to the
role of ordered water in the brain. But as social scientists know, in a complex
system the relationship between micro and macro can be anything but clear –
and we have thought long and hard about the problem, whereas in the quantum
brain literature there has been little explicit discussion of it.32 Where do brain
wide quantum ﬁelds come from, if not from the interaction of their elements
(sic), and if so how? Is the decoherence problem at the microtubular level really
completely irrelevant to a quantum ﬁeld theory of the brain? And so on. The
two traditions share a common conclusion, speak to each other’s silences, and
occasionally invoke each other as supporting arguments in their narratives. But
beyond that the relationship between them has yet to be worked out.
Assessing the current debate
Despite the growing research on quantum brain theory and now two dedicated
journals,33 the idea has been ignored by most neuroscientists and philosophers
30 See Vitiello (2001: 114). Note that in QFT the concept of “element” or “particle” is problematic,
since from this perspective particles appear as properties of the ﬁeld.
31 As Vitiello (2001: 52) puts it, living matter exhibits “plasticity” with respect to its underlying
constituents. For good overviews see Jibu and Yasue (2004) and Vitiello (2006); cf. John’s
(2001) non-quantum approach to ﬁeld theorizing about the brain.
32 Though there has been considerable discussion of part–whole relations in quantum ﬁeld theory
itself; see, for example, Castellani (2002).
33 Neuroquantology and Quantum Biosystems.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum brain theory
103
of mind. One reason may be that in this area theory is well ahead of evidence,
and given Hume’s dictum about miracles, that “extraordinary claims require
extraordinary evidence,” it is easy to see why a claim would be ignored for
which the evidence is anything but. To be fair, studying sub-neural processes
in living tissue is extraordinarily difﬁcult, and there is the further problem
that quantum processes are inherently elusive insofar as measuring them will
itself induce decoherence. But whereas in quantum physics it is common for
predictions to be taken seriously even when the technology to test them does not
exist, quantum brain theory has received no such free pass. Indeed, its reception
by defenders of the Neuron Doctrine has been strikingly hostile, perhaps for
paradigmatic reasons. While the theory, if true, would not invalidate what we
already know about the brain, it would revolutionize how we should think
about the brain in the future, a prospect that is probably no more attractive to
contemporary neuroscientists than it would be to any other group of scholars
who have devoted their careers to a particular paradigm.
Still, if in academic life it is better to be criticized than ignored, then quantum
brain theorists can take heart in the fact that whereas their idea was once
simply dismissed on the grounds that “it can’t be true, therefore it isn’t,” it is
increasingly being subjected to detailed critique.34 It is probably going too far
to say that these critiques have begun a “paradigm war”: from the perspective
of the orthodoxy they are more like skirmishes in a far off colony to quell a
pesky heresy. But the heretics are growing in number and increasingly getting
the Empire’s attention, in part because of the current difﬁculty of testing the
theory empirically. This has enabled advocates to play defense against frontal
assaults by classical neuroscientists trying to prove theoretically that the theory
is false – and thus, like insurgents anywhere, being able to claim victory merely
by staying in the ﬁeld.
As a social scientist, I am in no position to assess the technical debate and
as such cannot hope to persuade you of quantum brain theory on the merits.
However, it may still be useful to convey impressions of my own “anthropo-
logical” encounter with this community of discourse. In that encounter I am
admittedly a biased observer, hoping the critiques are not decisive, but I also
have no interest in writing a book based on an idea that is demonstrably false.
Thus, in reading the debate I have asked myself, do the critiques actually tar-
get what they claim to target? Are they cumulative, with defenders forced to
concede ever more ground? Are there escape routes from the critiques? And
so on. With this dialectical purpose in view, let me brieﬂy report three “case
studies” in the ongoing debate. In doing so I hope to persuade you not that
34 For an exemplary early dismissal see Grush and Churchland (1995). There has also been
increased sparring within the fold, which is productive for the theory’s development but does
not generally address the deeper questions; see Rosa and Faber (2004), Mureika (2007), and
Craddock and Tuszynski (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

104
Quantum consciousness and life
quantum brain theory is true, but that the experts have not yet shown that it is
false.
The ﬁrst is a paper published by physicist Max Tegmark in Physical Review
E in 2000, which got considerable attention in the science press as the deﬁnitive
refutation of the quantum consciousness hypothesis (note the conﬂation with
quantum brain theory), and continues to be widely cited as authoritative today.35
An important virtue of the critique is that it is the ﬁrst to zero in on the key
question of whether quantum coherence can be sustained long enough in the
brain to do computational work. Through detailed calculations of decoherence
rates Tegmark tries to prove that no such coherence is possible. However,
in a spirited rebuttal Hameroff and two co-authors leave the reader with the
strong impression that Tegmark has missed his mark.36 They point out that
half the article is devoted to showing that neurons are incapable of being in
superposition, but Hameroff never suggested they could be – his claim is about
microtubules and then the whole brain, not neurons – so this section may be
correct but is beside the point.37 Then, when Tegmark does turn to microtubules,
rather than critique an existing model in the quantum brain literature he invents
a hybrid that ignores some key mechanisms that have been hypothesized to
substantially lengthen decoherence rates – thereby leaving much of the theory
out of his sights. So while Tegmark’s attack forced Hameroff et al. to clarify
and elaborate their position, it was hardly deﬁnitive.
This is evident from a second critique six years later by Abninder Litt
and colleagues at the University of Waterloo, which appeared in Cognitive
Science.38 The authors make three arguments against the idea that the brain
is a quantum computer. Their ﬁrst, “computational,” argument is that the time
scales on which quantum events can endure are too short to inﬂuence neural
ﬁring. Here they rely on Tegmark, while acknowledging (in a footnote) that
Hameroff’s model is about microtubules, not neurons – to which Litt et al. in
effect respond: see our other arguments below. But that begs the question and
as such dialectically this ﬁrst argument does not advance beyond Tegmark’s
critique.
35 Tegmark (2000a); also see his (2000b). Although Tegmark has become something of a villain for
quantum brain theorists, he himself has recently boarded the panpsychism train (2014), arguing
that consciousness is a state of matter, which some may see as conﬁrming his reputation in the
physics community as “Mad Max” (Turausky, 2014: 233).
36 See Hagan et al. (2002), and for further discussion Rosa and Faber (2004), Davies (2004),
Mavromatos (2011), and Georgiev (2013), who argues that even if Tegmark is right about
decoherence times this would not preclude quantum effects in the brain.
37 Also see Alﬁnito and Vitiello (2000: 219). However, there are those who think that quantum
effects are important for how neurons work; see for example Melkikh (2014).
38 See Litt et al. (2006); for Hameroff’s own response, which emphasizes the scientiﬁc details, see
his (2007).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum brain theory
105
Their second, “biological” argument does better and makes several claims –
(a) that quantum processes are insufﬁciently isolated in the brain to prevent
rapid decoherence (again citing Tegmark); (b) that quantum theories about
microtubules “lack any empirical support”; (c) that microtubules are found
throughout the plant and animal kingdoms and so the theory implies that
“carrots and rutabagas” engage in quantum computation too; and (d) that quan-
tum computation in organisms has no survival value and so would not be
selected for in evolution. Yet, these attacks too can be deﬂected relatively eas-
ily: (a) relies on contested claims about what is possible in theory but no one
knows in fact. If the “any” in (b) is meant literally then Litt et al. overreach –
what they should have said is “lack much empirical support.” (c) Is not an
argument at all, but an assertion of the authors’ belief that plants are incapable
of computation – a belief called into question by the recent discovery that
quantum processes are involved non-trivially in photosynthesis (see Chapter
7). And on (d) too there is debate, with some scientists arguing that there is
survival value in quantum computation, while others that it is not selected for
in evolution because it is constitutive of and thus emerges with life itself.39
We are left then with Litt et al.’s last, “psychological” argument, which
comes down to the explanation of consciousness. Here they use the case of
anesthesia to afﬁrm their belief that consciousness will be explained in clas-
sical neurocomputational terms. However, not only do they assume we now
have a complete understanding of how anesthesia works (ironic, given that
Hameroff is an anesthesiologist!), they hold a belief about the physical basis
of consciousness for which – given the hard problem – there is arguably no
evidence at all.40 So in the end, taking all three arguments together, we have a
critique the conclusion of which might be right, but the basis for which fails to
prove beyond a reasonable doubt.
At ﬁrst glance the subject of my last case study seems more deﬁnitive.41
This is an article published in Physical Review E in 2009 by the same group
that raised questions about the Fr¨ohlich hypothesis above, only this time led by
Laura McKemmish.42 Its authors begin by attacking the heart of the Penrose-
Hameroff model, the claim that tubulin dimers oscillate between two states and
thus could be elementary units (qubits) for quantum computation in the brain.
Importantly, McKemmish et al.’s criticism here is not just theoretical but empir-
ical, based on new evidence about the structure and function of microtubules
which, they argue, points strongly away from the model. They then consider
39 On this discussion see for example McFadden (2001) and Castagnoli (2009; 2010).
40 Moreover, it has been suggested that if computationalism is true then it cannot avoid pan-
psychism; see Bartlett (2012) for an overview of this line of argument.
41 A more recent, somewhat more open-minded critique is offered by Baars and Edelman (2012),
with a response by Hameroff (2012b).
42 See McKemmish et al. (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

106
Quantum consciousness and life
whether the Penrose-Hameroff approach could be salvaged by modifying it in
light of this new evidence. As in other critiques a key issue is whether quantum
coherence can be sustained long enough to do any computational work. Invok-
ing Fr¨ohlich’s hypothesis as the only systematic suggestion for how this might
be done, McKemmish et al. reprise their companion critique. The last sentence
of this article sums up what they think they have accomplished:
[t]he basic physical assumptions upon which the [Penrose-Hameroff] model depends
simply do not hold either from a structural, dynamic or energetic perspective and we
hope that with this work we can ﬁnally put to rest this intriguing but fundamentally
ﬂawed model of cognitive function.
Have McKemmish et al. succeeded where previous imperial generals have
failed, in delivering a death blow to the quantum brain insurgency? Judging from
subsequent publications it does not seem so. Using state-of-the-art technology, a
research group led by Anirban Bandyopadhyay claims to have found for the ﬁrst
time indirect evidence of quantum vibrations within individual microtubules.43
That does not in itself speak to quantum coherence in the brain as a whole,
though the fact that ordered water plays a key role in this ﬁnding is suggestive
to that effect. Invoking this research in a recent updating and elaboration of
their theory, Hameroff and Penrose are untroubled by the McKemmish/Reimers
critique, and go on to offer a lengthy point-by-point rebuttal of it as “largely
uninformed and basically incorrect.”44 In short, it appears that quantum brain
theory is still in the ﬁght, though whether further experimental work will
ultimately conﬁrm the theory is anyone’s guess. In the meantime, for those of
us on the outside there are four reasons to reserve judgment.
The ﬁrst concerns burdens of proof. It is essential to preserving the epistemic
authority of science that, in its advancement over time, whatever is embraced
as new knowledge be thoroughly vetted against the old. The practice of science
is therefore generally focused on trying to avoid “Type I” errors, or accepting a
claim as true that is in fact false. In that dialectical context the burden of proof
is on advocates of a new theory to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that their
claims are substantiated; by analogy to the law, the presumption is that a new
theory is guilty (false) until proven innocent. However, the question today is not
whether quantum brain theory is true and so should be counted as knowledge.
Given current technology, even those who believe it cannot claim to know it
is true. The question is whether it might be true and as such warrant further
investigation. Here the operative worry is not a Type I error but the usually
much less salient Type II, or deciding that a claim is false which is actually
43 See Sahu et al. (2013a; 2013b). See Sahu et al. (2011) for a good overview of the debate about
microtubules over the past half century.
44 See Hameroff and Penrose (2014a: 67–68) and Hameroff and Penrose (2014b: 104) respectively.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum brain theory
107
true.45 In that context the burden of proof is reversed: onto critics to prove
beyond a reasonable doubt that quantum brain theory is wrong. As we know,
“innocent until proven guilty” is a higher bar to meet, and one can admire the
willingness and skill of the critics who take on the challenge; even if the theory
is true, without able prosecutors probing its weaknesses we will never ﬁnd
out. (In that sense the critics are contributing to the development of the theory
themselves). But it remains a higher bar, and as such demands a measure of
skepticism toward claims to have “ﬁnally put this theory to rest.”
Second, even assuming that McKemmish et al. have proven that the Penrose-
Hameroff microtubule-based model is wrong, this is not the only possible
physical realization of quantum brain theory, such that if it fails the theory
is necessarily dead. The most popular and well-speciﬁed model perhaps, but
not the only possibility, even within a bottom-up approach.46 Moreover, in this
respect it is important to note that all of the critiques of quantum brain theory
of which I am aware focus on the Fr¨ohlich tradition; none have engaged the
top-down approach of Umezawa. Researchers in that tradition also sometimes
invoke microtubules, but in doing so they seem more agnostic on whether they
are an essential piece of the story. So even if the Penrose-Hameroff Line is
breached, there are redoubts to which the quantum brain forces can fall back.
Third, there is the rapidly growing evidence from quantum decision theory
for quantum cognition at the behavioral level, which I mentioned in Chapter
1 and will review in detail in Chapter 8. But the evidence is not limited to
humans: algae, plants, birds, and other organisms have been shown to make
use of quantum effects as well, which is spurring the rise of “quantum biology”
(Chapter 7).47 To be sure, behavioral evidence alone does not tell us what
is going on inside organisms, where so far at least it remains theoretically
possible that the mechanisms involved are classical. However, from an aesthetic
standpoint that is decidedly inelegant, since we then have to explain why at
both the sub-atomic and behavioral levels we observe quantum effects, whereas
at the meso-level, within organisms, everything is classical. If these behavioral
ﬁndings hold up, in short, it would open up an entirely new front in the war
over quantum brain theory, one that would outﬂank its skeptics and put them
on the defensive.
Finally, if we reject quantum brain theory now, then we are back to square one
on explaining consciousness. Recall that the attraction of the theory is not just
that the brain might be a quantum computer, marvelous though that would be.
45 On Type I and II errors in science see Lemons et al. (1997).
46 See McFadden (2007), who is critical of the Penrose-Hameroff approach, and Cooper (2009),
who does not even mention it, but nevertheless afﬁrms the possibility of quantum information
processing at the elevated temperatures within the body. Other new directions are represented
by Romero-Isart et al. (2010) and Igamberdiev (2012).
47 For a good overview see Abbott et al., eds. (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

108
Quantum consciousness and life
It is also in offering the possibility of re-founding the mind–body problem on
the radically different physical basis of quantum theory, in which, unlike the
classical worldview, there is a natural place for consciousness. So as long as
the theory is still in the ﬁeld it seems useful to launch a counter-attack of sorts,
by exploring whether assuming it to be true might help solve the mind–body
problem. If it can, then that should increase our conﬁdence that the insurgents
will eventually win.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

6
Panpsychism and neutral monism
Although this book is about the implications for social science of a quantum
approach to the mind, much of that potential stems from its ability to integrate
consciousness – a particular aspect of the mind – into a naturalistic worldview.
And when it comes to the hard problem, quantum brain theory is only a
necessary condition for such integration, not sufﬁcient. Necessary, because it
would enable the body to exploit for macro-level purposes a physical but non-
material space for consciousness at the quantum level – collapse of the wave
function – that does not exist in classical physics. Insufﬁcient, however, because
quantum brain theory embodies an objective, third-person standpoint and as
such can tell us no more than classical brain theory can about why brains have
a subjective, ﬁrst-person point of view in the ﬁrst place. The explanatory gap
is still there, in other words, only now pushed down into quantum theory. To
cross this gap, therefore, in addition to a new physics of the brain we will need
a new meta-physics as well. As I argue in this chapter, it is this metaphysics
that does the real work in solving the mind–body problem.
Most social scientists have an instinctive aversion to ‘metaphysics,’ which
in our world connotes wooly-headed and speculative thinking that has no place
in science. Yet in moving onto this terrain the situation is both worse and better
than that. It is worse because we have no choice. The Neuron Doctrine itself is
based on a metaphysic, materialism, which looks increasingly unlikely to ever
explain consciousness;1 and in thinking about the meaning of quantum theory
metaphysical debate can hardly be avoided, precisely because physics provides
little guidance for choosing among its interpretations.2 So the only question is
whether to change our metaphysics of the brain from classical to quantum. But
the situation is also better than one might think, because even if by deﬁnition
it cannot be scientiﬁc, metaphysics can be rational – in the sense of being
consistent with known facts, logical in argument and coherent in structure.
1 See Bitbol (2008) and Nagel (2012) for excellent overviews of the contemporary case against
materialism.
2 Also see Nakagomi (2003b) on physics and world models.
109
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

110
Quantum consciousness and life
So while I might not convince you that the ontology put forward below is
correct, I do hope to prove that a reasonable argument can be made.
Recalling my epistemological double movement above, the argument here
starts like the one for quantum brain theory, with what is taken to be known.
Only now the gaze is reversed, and what is taken to be known is not the external,
material world of the brain but the interior, subjective world of experience. I
take inspiration here from Schopenhauer, for whose system this strategy was
a deﬁning feature.3 In his view,“we ourselves are the thing-in-itself. Conse-
quently, a way from within stands open to us to that real inner nature of things
to which we cannot penetrate from without.”4 But it also ﬁnds expression in
the work of physicists like Diederik Aerts: “what happens in our macro-world,
i.e. ‘people using concepts and their combinations to communicate,’ already
took place in the micro-realm, i.e. ‘measuring apparatuses, and more generally
entities made of ordinary matter, communicating with each other, where the
words and sentences of their languages are the quantum particles’.”5 Introspec-
tion strongly suggests that consciousness is not just real but that it is a kind of
knowledge. Recall the case of Mary from Chapter 1: living her whole life in a
black and white room until one day she comes out and experiences colors for
the ﬁrst time. These experiences are not knowledge in the “justiﬁed true belief”
sense of realist epistemology (which assumes a subject–object dichotomy), but
on the other hand it seems odd to say that Mary merely has the “belief” of
seeing red. Rather, she now knows red in a way that is impossible from a purely
third-person perspective. This knowing by experience feels so epistemically
secure that most of us would not doubt it even if consciousness ultimately
deﬁed scientiﬁc explanation altogether. When it comes to knowing our own
minds, subjectivity usually trumps objectivity – which is why unlike ghosts,
there is a mind–body problem at all. So if a third-person approach to knowing
consciousness cannot close the explanatory gap, then we should exploit our
unique ﬁrst-person perspective to see whether we can cross from the other
side.
In embracing Schopenhauer’s strategy I am swimming against a strong tide
of anti-subjectivism in twentieth-century social theory. Positivists, interpre-
tivists, critical theorists and post-structuralists alike have seen subjectivity –
and by this I mean its experiential aspect – as a problem to be assumed away,
3 Hall (1995: 85); for good introductions to Schopenhauer’s thought see Jacquette (2005) and
Hannan (2009). Whitehead’s approach to the problem of consciousness (experience in his terms,
since he equates ‘consciousness’ with ‘self-consciousness’) might be invoked here as well; for a
good overview see Weekes (2009), and more generally Grifﬁn (1998).
4 The quote is in Jacquette (2005: 84).
5 Aerts (2010: 2967). I don’t know if Aerts was inﬂuenced by Schopenhauer, but according to
Marcin (2006) and Marin (2009), at least two of the founders of quantum theory who took
consciousness seriously, Wolfgang Pauli and Erwin Schr¨odinger, were.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Panpsychism and neutral monism
111
deconstructed, or worked around. From their perspective an argument that
not just acknowledges but privileges consciousness as a basis for knowledge
acquisition would be problematic, on the grounds that it’s not scientiﬁc, that
subjectivity is just an effect of language, that the subject is dead, and so on.
Since these critiques have been extensively developed in the literature, it is
reasonable to expect a defense of my strategy before we move on. If I were
able to give one here it would be that subjectivity is only a “problem” in social
theory because of the mind–body problem in philosophy: if philosophers knew
how to integrate experience into a naturalistic worldview then social theorists
would know how to deal with subjectivity as well. But to actually show that
would require much exegesis with little return for my argument. So rather than
defend my epistemic base, I am going to leave this ﬂank open and press my
attack, hoping to make the objection moot.
The question, then, is this: what kind of ontology do we get if, complement-
ing and informed by the third-person knowledge of quantum brain theory, we
give full epistemic standing to our ﬁrst-person knowledge of consciousness?
The answer I develop in this chapter joins two doctrines, panpsychism and
neutral monism. Closely related yet sometimes seen as rivals,6 in my view neu-
tral monism presupposes panpsychism but not the reverse. More speciﬁcally,
panpsychists argue that experience is inherent in the deep structure of matter,
so that at the elementary level mind and matter form a duality, but then leave the
issue at that – as simply a brute fact of nature. Not satisﬁed with this solution
neutral monists go one step further, by trying to explain the duality by reference
to an underlying reality which is neither material nor mental, from which the
distinction itself emerges. I shall argue that recent work in quantum theory on
“temporal symmetry-breaking” lends credence to the latter view. In so doing
neutral monism also offers a provocative view about the origin of time, another
“hard problem” for the modern scientiﬁc worldview that is of particular interest
in the social sciences. Thus, if pushing on to neutral monism helps us make
progress on that front then that provides some independent evidence for the
utility of a panpsychist approach.
Panpsychism
The philosophical debate about the mind–body problem has featured almost
every imaginable position, but in the West it has been dominated by two views,
dualism and materialism. Despite deep differences on how the problem should
be solved, dualism and materialism share three, almost completely taken-for-
granted assumptions about the nature of matter: that it is wholly material; that
6 On the differences between neutral monism and panpsychism see Holman (2008) and Silberstein
(2009), though neither category is without internal differentiation as well.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

112
Quantum consciousness and life
it is a substance, hard and tangible; and that it is passive and reactive. Given
these assumptions, which go back to ancient Greece and were supported by
classical physics, both sides have conceived of “the problem” as the mind
rather than the body. For materialists the challenge is to show how mind can
be explained, whether in reductionist or emergentist terms, by an essentially
passive substance that contains no trace of mind within. Dualists think this
can’t be done and therefore that mind is ontologically sui generis, but they
agree that matter per se is a passive and purely material substance. As we have
seen, quantum theory calls these assumptions into question, and in so doing
makes the nature of matter as much a problem as that of mind. While there are
materialist readings of quantum theory, the only thing they have in common
with old-fashioned materialism is that they assume there is no trace of mind
within matter; otherwise the behavior of matter at the quantum level is utterly
unlike its classical counterpart. If quantum matter be “matter” at all, in short,
then it is a thoroughly de-materialized matter, far from what we ordinarily
imagine matter to be.7
Against this classical view, panpsychists have urged for centuries that mind
is intrinsic to matter at the elementary level, for which the bumper sticker might
be “no matter without mind, no mind without matter.”8 In other words, mind
is neither reducible to matter nor emergent from it, but in matter all the way
down – which in turn obviates the need to posit dualism’s two substances in
response to materialism’s failure to explain consciousness. In short, if mind and
matter are continuous, then the traditional framing of the mind–body problem
is “spurious.”9 In a moment I’ll explain what the idea of “minded matter” might
mean, but since panpsychism is probably less familiar to social scientists than
materialism or dualism let me provide some brief background ﬁrst.
Background
One reason panpsychism is not well known is that for much of the twenti-
eth century most philosophers dismissed it as an absurd doctrine. This is a
recent prejudice, however, since as David Skrbina shows in Panpsychism in
the West, it has a distinguished pedigree in philosophy.10 Keeping in mind
that all metaphysical systems take various forms, Skrbina sees panpsychism
7 This is the main reason why classical materialism morphed into the more ambiguous category
of ‘physicalism.’ For recent reconsiderations of matter in a spirit similar to my own but less far
out on the limb, see Fox Keller (2011) on the one hand, and the work of New Materialists on
the other, which I discuss in the next chapter.
8 See Skrbina (2005: 114), paraphrasing Goethe.
9 Sheets-Johnstone (1998: 260); also see Atmanspacher (2003).
10 Or even before if the near universal animism of “primitive” cultures is considered a form of
panpsychism. On animism see Abram (1996) and Harvey (2006); cf. Sheets-Johnstone (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Panpsychism and neutral monism
113
in the work of, among other ancients, the pre-Socratics, Plato, and Plotinus;11
in medieval philosophers like Giordano Bruno (who was burned at the stake
for it); in Spinoza, Leibniz and Goethe in the early modern period; and in the
nineteenth-century philosophies of Schopenhauer, Gustav Fechner, William
James, Charles Peirce and Gabriel Tarde.12 In the early twentieth century,
however, panpsychism’s importance began to decline – ironically just as the
quantum revolution made it more plausible – although Bertrand Russell’s neu-
tral monism has a panpsychist aspect, and Alfred North Whitehead’s Process
and Reality is arguably the greatest panpsychist system ever built. But with
very few exceptions13 after 1940 panpsychism disappeared from the Western
philosophical landscape, so much so that in 1997 John Searle probably spoke
for many in dismissing it as an “absurd” doctrine that “there is not the slightest
reason to adopt.”14
Given this hostile environment just a few years ago, it is therefore strik-
ing how much panpsychism has revived lately, particularly after an important
1995 article by William Seager and then the publication a year later of David
Chalmers’ landmark, The Conscious Mind, which explicitly ﬂirts with the
idea.15 Discussion has since grown rapidly, and although far from supplanting
the materialist orthodoxy, panpsychism is philosophically respectable today in
a way that it has not been for a long time.16
The discussion has emerged in three separate disciplines,17 each with its own
starting point and concerns, so what we have today are really three panpsychist
literatures that typically make little reference to one another. One is in phi-
losophy of physics, where long-standing interest in the role of consciousness
in the measurement process has been elaborated into full-blown panpsychist
ontologies.18 Here the pattern of argument is generally to move straight from
the physics to panpsychism, skipping what is going on inside the brain. This
11 See also Malin (2001).
12 Tarde’s (1895/2012) ontology is more “pan-social” than panpsychist, but as the only sociologist
in this set and his debt to Leibniz’s monadology it seems appropriate to include him here.
13 The only signiﬁcant panpsychist contributions of which I am aware for the period from 1940
to 1990 are Teilhard de Chardin (1959), Globus (1976), Nagel (1979), Berman (1981) (who
speaks of animism rather than panpsychism), and Sprigge (1983), but these were not cumulative
and generated no more than local philosophical interest.
14 The quote is in Skrbina (2005: 236).
15 See Seager (1995) and Chalmers (1996).
16 So much so that in a report on the most recent bi-annual “Toward a Science of Consciousness”
conference in 2014, Keith Turausky (2014: 234) came to the conclusion that “we are all
panpsychists now.”
17 Or four if one counts environmental philosophy, where the question of panpsychism has been on
the table somewhat longer; see for example McDaniel (1983), Zimmerman (1988), and today
especially Mathews (2003).
18 For early statements by physicists see Walker (1970) and Cochran (1971), and more recently
Bohm (1990), Miller (1990), Stapp (1993; 1999; 2001), Penrose (1994), Hiley and Pylkk¨anen
(2001), Malin (2001), Dugiˇc et al. (2002), Atmanspacher (2003), Nakagomi (2003a; 2003b),
Primas (2003), Clarke (2007), Pylkk¨anen (2007), Gao (2008; 2013), and Tegmark (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

114
Quantum consciousness and life
pattern is inverted in a second stream coming out of quantum brain theory,
which some of its advocates have argued implies panpsychism.19 Finally, the
largest cluster of recent work is in philosophy of mind itself.20 There it seems
to be a growing feeling that materialism will never solve the mind–body prob-
lem which is generating interest, epitomized in the title of a recent article on
panpsychism – “It Must Be True – But How Can it Be?”21 Although one hopes
this disciplinary fragmentation will eventually be overcome, consumers beneﬁt
from having several distinct rationales for panpsychism, which give the idea
added force. Since my interest is not in panpsychism per se but in what it might
imply for social life, I will treat this diverse body of work as if it were one,
drawing freely from its streams for my argument.
In doing so, I can take advantage of something earlier panpsychists could
not: the ﬁndings of quantum physics. Historically panpsychists had to argue
on purely philosophical grounds, since classical physics provided no basis
for viewing matter as minded – it was the inability of physics to accommodate
consciousness that motivated panpsychism, not its ability.22 Today the situation
is different: far from opposing physics, from a quantum perspective there is
much to recommend panpsychism.
Deﬁning ‘psyche,’ aka subjectivity
Panpsychism is a claim about the intrinsic nature of matter. As Bertrand Russell
and Kant too observed, physics describes matter only in terms of its properties
and behavior, not in terms of what it is inside.23 Yet we do know what it is like
to be inside at least one bit of matter, our own brains, which we know from
experience. To project this knowing downward we ﬁrst need to distinguish
those aspects of it that might be essential to the phenomenon in general from
those that are merely contingent, features of the human psyche speciﬁcally.
A prominent example of the latter is self-consciousness, an awareness that
we are aware, which is unlikely to go very far down the evolutionary ladder.
19 See Miller (1990), Globus (1998), Miranker (2000; 2002), and Romijn (2002); also see Tononi
(2008), whose “information integration theory of consciousness” develops a kind of panpsy-
chism from a classical standpoint.
20 See Seager (1995; 2009; 2010; 2012), Hut and Shepard (1996), Grifﬁn (1998), Bolender (2001),
Montero (2001), de Quincey (2002), Gabora (2002), Rosenberg (2004), Skrbina (2005), Sch¨affer
(2006), Strawson (2006), Clarke (2007), Franck (2008), Basile (2010), Coleman (2012; 2014),
Robinson (2012), Kawade (2013), and Lewtas (2013a).
21 See Basile (2010). Then again, ‘panpsychism’ does not even appear in the index of Koons and
Bealer’s recent The Waning of Materialism (ed., 2010), and is the focus of only one chapter in
G¨ocke’s After Physicalism (ed., 2012). Both books instead mostly offer new formulations of
dualism.
22 See Seager (2009) for a good overview of the classical arguments for panpsychism.
23 See Chalmers (2010: 133) and Bolender (2001). As Nakagomi (2003b) puts it, in physics matter
has no “inside.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Panpsychism and neutral monism
115
In humans it is easy to conﬂate this capacity with consciousness per se,24 since
our own experience is reﬂective, but to maintain such a conﬂation would in
effect be to deny consciousness to almost all other organisms, which seems
counter-intuitive. (Moreover, the hard problem of consciousness is not about
reﬂexivity, but the more primitive capacity simply to feel.) But then what
kind of consciousness could encompass other organisms, all the way down to
the nature of matter itself? One ﬁnds various answers within the panpsychist
tradition, but a review would take me far aﬁeld, since who said what, why,
and how does not really matter here. Instead, informed by my reading of the
literature, empirical observation, and introspection I will offer my own sense
of what the panpsychist consensus on ‘psyche’ might be.
I will also make a terminological move that some contemporary panpsychists
might not endorse, but which I believe is warranted both on substantive grounds
and given my audience: that what panpsychists mean by ‘psyche’ is equivalent
to what social theorists – in the phenomenological tradition at least – mean
by ‘subjectivity.’ So in advancing panpsychism my claim is that subjectivity
is intrinsic to matter, or more precisely “proto”-subjectivity, which I argue
below, is the antecedent to subjectivity before the latter is organized into living
matter.
The essential features of psyche or subjectivity I take it are Cognition,
Experience, and Will.25 While phenomenologically bound together, they are
analytically distinguishable and, as I argue later, map onto different aspects of
the quantum formalism. Since I will say more about them with reference to
human beings in Part III, here let me just give an intuitive sense of what I mean
by each, before making the case for projecting them downward.
‘Cognition’ refers to all the functions associated with “thinking,” including
information processing, memory storage and retrieval, and learning. Human
beings often associate thinking with self-awareness, but that is anthropocentric:
as will become clear below bats and mice think without (presumably) being self-
aware, and even in humans most thinking is done sub-consciously. Although
cognition is not yet fully understood, cognitive science has shown it to be
computational in character, which means that computers can do it. Thus, unlike
cognition in the brain, which is difﬁcult to observe without killing its owner,
cognition in a computer – or at least a classical one – could at least in principle
be directly observed if the machine were big enough.26 This is partly what
makes explaining cognition an “easy” problem of mind, even if in practice it is
far from that.
24 See Jaynes (1976).
25 Cf. Kawade (2009).
26 Cf. Lodge and Bobro (1998) on Leibniz’s “mill” argument. This would not be true of quantum
computers if they are ever built, since they depend on maintaining an interiority that can’t be
disturbed without destroying it.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

116
Quantum consciousness and life
If Cognition is thinking, then ‘Experience’ (or ‘Consciousness’) is feeling,
a different phenomenon and the core of the mind–body problem. Feeling here
refers not to what social scientists would know as “emotions,” which have a
large discursive and thus speciﬁcally human element, but to “what it is like”
simply to feel, at the most basic level to feel pain. As such, unlike Cognition,
which might be observable, Experience is intrinsically private, something that
can be truly known only from the inside. We get an ersatz knowing of others’
experience by seeing pain in their face, but that is not knowing what it is like
to be in that particular pain right now, yourself. This interiority of experience
constitutes subjects as Leibnizian “monads” with a unique perspective on the
world, and by virtue of which that world has unique meaning for them.
As aspects of subjectivity Cognition and Experience get most of the attention
from philosophers these days, but historically there has also long been interest
in Will, of which Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, and Bergson are prominent modern
exemplars.27 In recent years this continental tradition has been complemented
on the analytical side by scholarship on “mental causation,” which addresses the
question why/how consciousness seems to have causal powers like the ability
to move our bodies.28 Cognition and Experience are passive and reactive in the
sense that they reﬂect rather than create reality; their direction of ﬁt to the world
is one of world to mind. Will, in contrast, is active and purposeful, a drive that
imposes itself upon, and thus changes, the world.29 This power to re-make the
world I take it is a crucial aspect of our sense of agency, though as we will see
below I think agency presupposes Cognition and Experience too.
Projecting subjectivity through the tree of life
Stripped of their speciﬁcally human content and imagined in their most prim-
itive possible form, how far can Cognition, Experience, and Will be projected
downward into forms of matter simpler than our own? Given the private char-
acter at least of Experience, from a third-person standpoint the question cannot
be answered, and indeed in theory the question might be asked even of our
fellow human beings. The Problem of Other Minds is in part that, given the
interiority of experience, none of us can be absolutely sure that other people
are actually conscious, as opposed to just machines or zombies mimicking
conscious behavior.30 I cannot prove that dandelions and dogs are conscious
any more than I can prove you are conscious, but yet beyond a reasonable doubt
27 Though their accounts differed in important ways; see, for example, Janaway (2004), Franc¸ois
(2007), and Khandker (2013). Note that Schopenhauer’s notion of Will includes what I have
separated out as Experience; see Hamlyn (1983) and Hall (1995).
28 See Robb and Heil (2014) for a good introduction to the mental causation literature.
29 Also see Goethe’s concept of “Steigerung” or the “inner drive” of nature (Tantillo, 2002).
30 See Hollis and Smith (1990) for an accessible introduction to the Problem of Other Minds, with
special reference to IR, and also Chapter 12 below.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Panpsychism and neutral monism
117
I know it at least about you. This knowing is not scientiﬁc, but the intuitive
and practical kind one has from the ﬁrst-person perspective, which I assume
we all share. Attributing subjectivity to non-human organisms is much more
difﬁcult, but I will suggest through a combination of empirical evidence and
logical reasoning that we can arrive at a rational answer.
Panpsychists say that in some sense subjectivity goes all the way down, to
the intrinsic structure of matter itself, whether it takes an organic or inorganic
form. Given that it is obviously harder to make the case for the inorganic form,
let me start with living matter.
The easiest step in projecting subjectivity is to organisms close to us in com-
plexity and genetic makeup. It seems difﬁcult to deny that higher mammals
like apes, dogs, and even Nagel’s famous bats31 think, feel, and will; even the
scientiﬁc community seems to be reaching that conclusion, through a variety
of indirect means.32 What about insects and molluscs? At this level the science
of animal subjectivity is thinner, though arguments have been made.33 Con-
temporary intuitions might be gauged by where there are animal cruelty laws,
since if animals cannot feel pain then the idea of “cruelty” seems incoherent.
I do not know where the legal line is drawn (or – an interesting question –
on what grounds), but I doubt there is a law against torturing earthworms, or
many people who would offer moral objections either; so the easy cases end
somewhere in that range.
What then about the hard cases for subjectivity in organic matter? Consider
two of the intuitively hardest, single-celled organisms and plants. Can parame-
cia and bacteria think, deﬁned in the computational sense? It turns out that
this one is relatively easy. A recent scientiﬁc review article entitled “Bacteria
Are Small but not Stupid” reports that in contrast to the old mechanistic view
of cells, today we have “abundant results showing that what a cell does is a
function of the information it has about itself and its surroundings.”34 Infor-
mation has replaced matter as the key to explaining cell behavior, such that
“bacterial cognition” is taken literally rather than as just a metaphor. What
of Will? Again, there seems to be evidence that goal-directedness or “nano-
intentionality” is a fact of life at the cellular level.35 The truly hard question
is, do bacteria feel. Well, why not? If there were a threshold of organismic
31 See Nagel (1979).
32 See for example Baars (2004) and Seth et al. (2005). Note that the intelligibility of this inference
presupposes our own experience of consciousness – i.e., if we were not conscious it would never
occur to us to ask whether other organisms were.
33 See respectively Carruthers (2007) and Mather (2008); for a comprehensive overview of the
literature on animal consciousness see Allen and Trestman (2014).
34 See Shapiro (2007: 808); also see Ben-Jacob et al. (2005), Hellingwerf (2005), Waters and
Bassler (2005), and Tauber (2013) – and Weber (2005) for skepticism that biological information
implies any kind of intentionality.
35 See Fitch (2008), and also Miller (1992), Jonker et al. (2002), Kawade (2009), and Campbell
(2010).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

118
Quantum consciousness and life
complexity above which we could clearly say there is feeling and below which
there is not, then one might conclude that the simplest organisms, at least, do not
feel. Such a threshold might exist, but it is neither empirically nor theoretically
apparent. There would have to be an evolutionary reason for the emergence of
experience at a certain level, but evolutionary theorists have no more idea how
to explain consciousness than anyone else, since it is not clear what survival
function something that (for materialists) is either epiphenomenal or illusory
could serve. Given the lack of such a principled threshold, therefore, it seems
to follow that, as biologist Lynn Margulis argues in “The Conscious Cell,”
single-celled organisms are conscious too.36
A similar slippery slope applies to plants. The idea that plants are conscious
will probably strike most social scientists as silly (it certainly made me laugh
at ﬁrst), more at home in New Age gardening than modern science. But in
a recent review in the Annals of Botany Anthony Trewavas pulls together an
impressive array of evidence to argue that plants are at least “intelligent.”37
Deﬁning ‘intelligence’ in terms of what I am calling Cognition and Will –
capacity for memory and its retrieval, information processing and “adaptively
variable behavior during the lifetime of the individual” – Trewavas relays some
fascinating ways in which plants are intelligent. They process signals from the
environment, sense each other’s presence, compete for light and resources, and
whereas we respond to pressures from the environment by moving our bodies,
plants do so by literally changing theirs (growing new limbs). All this happens
so slowly that it is imperceptible to the naked eye, but it is there nonetheless.
Does this mean plants are conscious too? Trewavas perhaps wisely does not
ask, and I could ﬁnd little work by other scientists that does either.38 But once
again there is the slippery slope of explaining why plants are not conscious,
in their own way, if they have the faculties of Cognition and Will? If they are
indeed intelligent, then it seems to me the burden of proof is on the skeptic to
show that they do not also have Experience.
None of this, of course, is to deny that the content and quality of subjectivity
varies hugely across the spectrum of life. But in their capacity to think, feel,
and impose upon the world, bacteria and plants I claim are just like us, simply
by virtue of being alive. In that light one might say that nature is not an “It” but
a “They,” or with Novalis, even a “You.”39
36 See Margulis (2001).
37 Trewavas (2003; 2008); also see Kull (2000), Barlow (2008), Cvrˇckov´a et al. (2009), and Afﬁﬁ
(2013). Cvrˇckov´a et al. (2009) offers a more qualiﬁed view, albeit one published in the journal
called Plant Signaling and Behavior. See Narby (2005) for a highly readable introduction to
Trewavas’ and others’ work in this vein.
38 Though see Nagel (1997).
39 A German Romantic poet of the late eighteenth century; on Novalis’ conception of nature as a
You see Becker and Manstetten (2004).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Panpsychism and neutral monism
119
. . . And then all the way down
So far I have argued that all organisms are subjects and therefore conscious.
But this is not the speciﬁcally panpsychist claim, which is that consciousness is
intrinsic to the structure of all matter, not just its living form. It is this claim that
does the real work on the mind–body problem, since otherwise we still have to
explain how conscious life emerges from dead matter, which is the very problem
with which we began. So how then to argue that mind and matter are continuous,
all the way down?40 The answer is to exploit the causal gaps in quantum
theory by identifying subjectivity (or more precisely, proto-subjectivity, since
we are not talking here about living matter) with the formalism of quantum
mechanics,41 only viewed now from the inside, as intrinsic to matter, rather
than from the outside. As Chalmers puts it, “[t]his way, we locate experience
inside the causal network that physics describes, rather than outside it as a
dangler . . . And importantly, we do this without violating the causal closure of
the physical.”42
Consider a single sub-atomic particle in a cloud chamber interacting with
an experimenter. Normally physicists think of the formalism as a tool for
describing what the outside observer knows about the particle and its likely
behavior. Now assume that quantum brain theory is true. Although what goes
on inside the brain involves zillions of particles, by virtue of quantum coherence
we experience all that complexity in a unitary way, as “I.” That means that just
as for the particle in the cloud chamber, an outside observer could in principle
write a single equation to describe our behavior. With this homology in mind,
now consider what it means to be on the inside of a human wave function.43
It does not mean that I will necessarily have more knowledge than an outside
observer about what is going on inside my body, except insofar as I can bring
it to awareness by observing my wave function from within44 – but very little
in our bodies is accessible in this way. Rather, what being on the inside of our
wave functions means is to be a subject, a living being who thinks, experiences
and wills. These are all processes that an outside observer cannot know in the
ﬁrst-person way that we know them. Thus, even though Jones and Smith might
write the same equation describing Jones’ wave function in a given context –
and to that extent have similar third-person knowledge about him – Jones has
a privileged form of access to this equation from the inside.
40 Also see Kawade (2013).
41 See for example Clarke (2007) and Jansen (2008).
42 See Chalmers (1997: 29; emphasis in the original), here describing a suggestion of Bertrand
Russell’s that has since been taken up especially by Lockwood (1989).
43 See Mould (1995; 2003).
44 Note, however, that in observing yourself in this way, you would change your wave function
for the next moment in the stream of consciousness. These ideas bear a strong resemblance
to the idea of “internal measurement,” of which Howard Pattee and Koichiro Matsuno are the
principal representatives; see Balazs (2004) for an overview.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

120
Quantum consciousness and life
Now consider how Cognition, Experience, and Will might be mapped onto
a single particle.45 Cognition is perhaps the most difﬁcult case, since the term
calls to mind an image of classical computations being performed with many
different parts, which hardly seems possible in a single particle. Yet, cognition
would not look like that if the mind is a quantum computer rather than a
classical one. Although there are plenty of classical things happening inside
the brain too, these would be supports for what underneath is a quantum process
of thinking inside a wave function – a structure of potentiality which has no
separable parts and, by deﬁnition, cannot be observed. It is thus noteworthy that
most human thinking occurs unconsciously, which makes sense if cognition
takes place inside our wave functions.46 If the brain is a quantum computer
capable of exploring many possibilities at once, it will be able to do that only
as long as none of those possibilities is actualized in consciousness. Similarly
then one might argue that in the case of a single particle: whatever thought
“it” engages in cannot be observed because to do so would collapse its wave
function. So who is to say that when a wave function collapses into a particle,
there is nothing like thinking involved in how that outcome is reached? It
seems to me that the real difference from human beings is that particles are not
alive and thus have no continuity of identity or memory over time; if there is
thinking going on there, therefore, it is immediately lost to the ether when its
wave function collapses.
A particle’s experience, in turn, may be identiﬁed with the collapse of its
wave function. Externally, what is observed in collapse is a reduction of many
possible states to one actual state; internally, what happens is a differentiation
of phenomenal content, with one conscious state realized from among many
possible ones.47 Although some physicists have argued that the role of con-
sciousness in collapse is causal (see Chapter 4), following others, I propose that
experience does not cause but just is the collapse, as observed from the inside.
Importantly, this does not make experience epiphenomenal and thus ontologi-
cally redundant, for two reasons. One has to do with the role of consciousness in
bridging the past, present, and future, to which I will return below.48 The other
is that for X to be epiphenomenal, there must be some Y that fully accounts
for its properties and causal powers. Yet in wave function collapse we have an
X that, when seen from the outside, deﬁes a materialist account altogether. So
proposing that when observed from the inside, the collapse of the wave function
45 While there is overlap there is no agreement in the literature on what precisely this mapping
should look like; compare for example Malin (2001), Pylkk¨anen (2007), Vimal (2009), Baer
(2010), Martin et al. (2010), and Lewtas (2013a). Some of this variation may be down to
semantics, some more substantive. To keep things moving I will only present the view to which
I personally have come, which is closest to Chris Clarke’s (2007).
46 See, for example, Dijksterhuis and Aarts (2010).
47 Mensky (2005: 405).
48 For a non-quantum argument to this effect see Baumeister et al. (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Panpsychism and neutral monism
121
is experienced is not redundant with what we already know, since absent this
assumption we do not actually know anything at all.
With the wave function as Cognition and its collapse as Experience, Will
would then be the force that brings collapse about. Let me unpack this sugges-
tion in a bit more detail.
By the “force” of will I mean that will is a kind of cause, but not the
kind that dominates the modern scientiﬁc worldview, which Aristotle called
efﬁcient causation and social scientists today might call “mechanical.” Given
the classical prohibition on action at a distance, efﬁcient causation requires an
external X to establish physical contact with a separable Y and induce a change
in its state. Yet, while this is a good description of some causes, quantum theory
shows that efﬁcient causation is missing in wave function collapse – which is
precisely why it is so mysterious. It is therefore interesting again that, for
human beings, efﬁcient causation, if not missing, is at least an awkward way to
describe mental causation, the experience of which hardly seems mechanical –
a fact which has sustained a long debate in the philosophy of social science
about whether “reasons are causes” at all.49 Yet such awkwardness is precisely
what we would expect if the kind of force involved in human Will is the same
as in the collapse of the wave function, which is not reducible to a classical
conception of cause.
It might be thought that this does not take us very far, precisely because it
is unclear whether reasons are causes, but from here we can tack back to the
debate in the philosophy of physics, where we ﬁnd several interpretations of
quantum mechanics that support a “will”-discourse. The philosopher most often
invoked in this literature is Aristotle, so how might a broadly “Aristotelian”
view move us forward in thinking about the causation involved in wave function
collapse?
In two ways, depending on whether we approach collapse from the out-
side or inside. From an external perspective, a number of philosophers of
physics including Heisenberg have conceived of wave functions as “disposi-
tions,” “propensities” or “tendencies,” which in their directed quality are not
reducible to probabilities alone.50 However, while it is helpful that human
behavior may also be described in dispositional terms (e.g. the “causal pow-
ers” routinely invoked by scientiﬁc realists), dispositional readings of quantum
theory do not speculate about what is going on inside the wave function to
cause its collapse, and as such do not capture the phenomenology of mental
causation or willing. For that we need to take an internal perspective, for which
49 Among social scientists Davidson (1963) is often thought to have won this argument for the
(efﬁcient) causal side, but the philosophical debate actually has continued. In Chapter 9 I review
this debate and use a quantum framework to argue against Davidson’s view.
50 See, for example, Su´arez (2007), Dorato and Esfeld (2010), and Bigaj (2012); on how propen-
sities differ from probabilities see Humphreys (1985).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

122
Quantum consciousness and life
the early quantum theorist Hermann Weyl provides everything one could ask
for. Taking his cue from Leibniz and Naturphilosophie (and thus derivatively
Aristotle), Weyl thought of matter at the quantum level as an “agent.”51 In
retrospect his word choice is not ideal, since in social science today the word
‘agent’ connotes a substance, which is precisely what Weyl was not talking
about; what he “should” have said, is that matter is an agency or process.52 But
with that qualiﬁcation in mind I shall follow Weyl in arguing that the experience
of human agency provides a plausible understanding of the kind of causation
involved in the collapse of a particle’s wave function.
First, whereas in the classical view matter is inert and passive, only moving
when pushed by other forces, from an agency view at the quantum level matter
is active and spontaneous, moving by virtue of its own internal force. Causa-
tion here comes from within matter rather than from without. As Schopen-
hauer famously put it at the human level, “motives are causes seen from
within.”53 Second, whereas efﬁcient causation is retrospective, with causes pre-
ceding effects, the experience of agency is prospective and purposeful, directed
toward ends in the future. Agency is teleological, in short, like Aristotle’s ﬁnal
causation.54 Finally, whereas classical causation is ontologically deterministic,
our experience of agency is one of freedom. Given the “hard problem” that free
will has long posed for the classical worldview, it is no surprise that from the
dawn of the quantum era efforts have been made to explain it by reference to
indeterminism at the sub-atomic level – efforts in turn rejected on the grounds
that free will must be more than indeterminism to constitute “will.” Yet, what
these dismissals ignore is the possibility of an internal perspective, in which
what appears on the outside to be random could be willed on the inside. As
we saw in Part I, some physicists take seriously the idea that wave function
collapse is a “choice” by particles in response to measurement.55 And in “The
Free Will Theorem,” John Conway and Simon Kochen prove that if “there exist
any experimenters with a modicum of free will then elementary particles must
have their own share of this valuable commodity.”56
That said, individual particles do not have internal structure, are not nec-
essarily organized with other particles, and do not persist once their wave
51 See Sieroka (2007; 2010) for an introduction to Weyl’s philosophy of physics. Also see Bohm’s
early “pilot-wave” model of quantum mechanics, and his subsequent development with Basil
Hiley of the concept of “active information” (Bohm and Hiley, 1993), both of which have
similarly intentional connotations.
52 Compare Miller (1992).
53 The quote is from Hamlyn (1983: 457); cf. Miller (1992: 362).
54 On Aristotle’s view of ﬁnal causation see Gotthelf (1987).
55 See also Miller (1990; 1992), Mensky (2005), and La Mura (2009: 409), as well as Klemm and
Klink’s (2008) reading of quantum mechanics as a “theory of alternatives.”
56 Conway and Kochen (2006: 1441). In 1927 Bertrand Russell was among the ﬁrst to suggest
that in light of quantum theory atoms must have free will; see Basile (2006: 220). See Chapter
9 for further discussion of the free will problem.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Panpsychism and neutral monism
123
functions collapse. In all of these respects particles are quite unlike organisms;
they are processes only, rather than processes that are also substances. This cre-
ates something of a problem, since normally we think of subjectivity as being
experienced by a subject; consciousness is “what it is like” for someone.57 And
Weyl’s loose language notwithstanding, it is difﬁcult to argue that particles
are actual subjects of experience.58 This has led some panpsychists to distin-
guish between mentality (subjectivity in my terms) at the organism level and
“proto”-mentality at the elementary level. However, critics see this distinction
as “empty,” because it leaves us right where we were with materialism, with
having to explain the emergence of consciousness out of matter that is not
really conscious.59 This brings us to the “combination problem,” which advo-
cates and critics alike have long seen as the central challenge facing panpsy-
chism.60
The combination problem and quantum coherence
The combination problem is really two related problems. One is analogous to
the “binding problem” in materialist models of the mind: how do the zillions of
ephemeral proto-subjectivities of sub-atomic particles combine into the stable
and unitary consciousness we experience in everyday life? The other concerns
the speciﬁcity of life: if consciousness is inherent in the deep structure of matter,
what about the difference between macroscopic matter that does not seem to
be conscious and matter that does? Does panpsychism imply that rocks and
glaciers are conscious too?
With respect to the latter, some panpsychists are willing to bite the bullet
and argue that if consciousness is found at the elementary level, then even
inanimate objects must in some sense be conscious too.61 However, in my
view such a “strong” panpsychist position should, if possible, be avoided, not
just because it is counter-intuitive (hardly a strong argument in the present
context!), but because it fails to save the phenomenon, namely the apparent
distinction between conscious and non-conscious matter. So ideally a basis
for a real, as opposed to just an apparent, distinction should be found. To do
that, we need to explain how the experiences immanent in a rock’s elementary
parts get lost in the rock itself – and not in people. Although I will have much
more to say about the nature of life in the next chapter, it turns out that the
57 See Coleman (2014).
58 Though see Lewtas’ (2013a) discussion of “what it is like to be a quark.”
59 McGinn (1999: 99).
60 I believe that Seager (1995) coined the phrase, but the problem goes back to James (1890); for
a recent critique of panpsychism along these lines see Goff (2006; 2009).
61 See for example Chalmers’ (1996: 293–297) discussion of thermostats, and Tononi (2008: 237)
on other artefacts; for a more skeptical view see Velmans (2000: Chapter 5).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

124
Quantum consciousness and life
answer to the ﬁrst combination problem provides an answer to the second as
well.
Panpsychists have devoted much effort recently to dealing with the (ﬁrst)
combination problem, though mostly without reference to quantum theory.62
This is strange, because in light of quantum brain theory the solution seems
clear: what distinguishes conscious matter from its non-conscious counter-
part is the presence of quantum coherence. Recall that individual sub-atomic
particles normally decohere in interaction with other particles, which is why
quantum brain theorists have staked their claim on ﬁnding structures that can
prevent decoherence in the brain. Assuming that experience maps onto wave
function collapse, this means that at the elementary level experiences – whether
disembodied/subjectless or not – are happening all the time throughout mat-
ter, including inside rocks and thermostats, whenever particles interact. In the
case of non-coherent matter, however, these experiences are disorganized and
ﬂeeting, random sub-atomic events with no memory of the past or continuity
of purpose for the future. So while rocks and glaciers have relatively sta-
ble structures at the macro-level, because those structures are classical such
objects do not have experiences, even as their elementary constituents momen-
tarily do.
In contrast, according to quantum brain theory, the brain has an internal
structure that continuously produces quantum coherence, even in the face of its
constant decoherence in its interaction with the environment. In this way the
otherwise ﬂeeting experiences of its parts can be uniﬁed and ampliﬁed into the
experience of a whole and retained as memory. In short, proto-consciousness
is just like ordinary consciousness except that it does not cohere with other
elementary experiences across space or time, instead losing its identity imme-
diately to the vacuum. This would seem to solve the combination problem
by explaining what happens physically when ordinary consciousness emerges,
while also satisfying the intuitive constraint that, even if sub-atomic particles
exhibit traces of consciousness, there is still an essential difference between
rocks and us.
Neutral monism and the origin of time
Projecting psyche or subjectivity all the way down to sub-atomic particles solves
the fundamental problem facing any materialist approach to the mind–body
problem, which is to explain how consciousness emerges from non-conscious
62 See for example Grifﬁn (1998), Basile (2010), Shani (2010), Hunt (2011), Coleman (2012),
and Jaskolla and Buck (2012). Seager (1995) and Coleman (2014: 34–38) are exceptions to the
tendency to neglect quantum theory in this context.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Panpsychism and neutral monism
125
matter. Namely, it doesn’t emerge at all, but has been there all along. The key
to this solution is that, at the quantum level, matter is no longer old-fashioned
“matter” – i.e. clearly devoid of mentality – but an ungrounded potentiality
to which, when actualizing, attributions of mentality make sense. Importantly,
given that they are described by quantum physics, these potentialities are still
physical and thus part of the natural order. But they are physical in a broader
sense of the term that is not co-extensive with material. With this distinction
justiﬁed by quantum theory, we can see that materialism has failed to make
progress on the hard problem of consciousness because it framed the problem
incorrectly from the start.
Still, it might be asked, how does projecting mind all the way down really
solve the mind–body problem? Does it not merely compound it, since in leaving
us with an unexplained distinction between the objective and subjective aspects
of reality it not only fails to close the explanatory gap in epistemology, but
seemingly enshrines it now as ontology as well?
To be sure, the force of this objection comes partly from an implicit mate-
rialist assumption about what constitutes “solving” the mind–body problem,
which is to explain how mind arises from mindless matter. From that standpoint
my argument is no solution at all, but a convenient moving of goal posts that
deﬁnes the problem away. However, that assumes that materialism is true: if it
is not, then the solution to the problem will necessarily look quite different.
Yet the objection also has a separate, aesthetic force: that by itself panpsy-
chism solves the problem in a sense on the cheap, by the expedient of adding
subjectivity to the list of irreducible aspects that are assumed to exist at the
fundamental level, and as such it might be said to be neither elegant nor parsi-
monious. Wouldn’t it be better to have just one aspect down there rather than
two, and if not then two aspects of what?
When the objection is sharpened this way, it seems a response could go
two ways. One, starting with the last issue, would be to argue that the “what”
in question, the fundamental unit of reality, is information rather than mat-
ter/energy (Wheeler’s “it from bit”).63 From there, the idea would be that it is a
brute fact of nature that information has both objective and subjective aspects,
which must simply be accepted. A brute fact is one for which no further expla-
nation is possible, like the existence of matter for classical materialists, which
is simply given.64 In this case the brute fact is not a dualism of substances
but of aspects of information. And while in a perfect world there might be
just material aspects down there and not mental ones too, if there really is no
63 See for example Wheeler (1990), Bohm and Hiley (1993), Zeilinger (1999), and Vedral (2010);
cf. Tononi (2008) and Tegmark (2014).
64 Fahrbach (2005); cf. Searle (1995).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

126
Quantum consciousness and life
explanation for the distinction then what is the alternative? Since the physics
allows it, positing mentality as a fundamental aspect of reality at least tells us
something we did not know before, even if it does not “explain” the distinction
in the usual sense.65
Properly developed, such a dual-aspect, information-theoretic ontology
might be sufﬁcient for social scientiﬁc purposes, although I have my doubts
about that. However, it comes at the price, I take it, of not fully satisfying our
aesthetic sense. Thus, I am intrigued by a second response to the objection,
which pushes beyond panpsychism to neutral monism.
Rather than accept the duality of aspects as a brute fact, neutral monists seek
to explain the emergence of the distinction between the two aspects out of an
underlying sub-stratum that is neither mind nor matter. Historically many of the
thinkers who today are claimed for neutral monism – the term itself was coined
by Bertrand Russell – are also claimed for panpsychism, most notably Spinoza
and Leibniz, attesting to the difﬁculty of disentangling the two doctrines.66
However, with quantum theory providing potential empirical support for the
idea, today we are seeing speciﬁcally neutral monist arguments put forth at an
increasing rate. Some are by philosophers of mind,67 but most are by quantum
theorists themselves, including Wolfgang Pauli, David Bohm, Teruaki Nak-
agomi, David Lockwood, Paavo Pylkk¨anen, Giuseppe Vitiello, and others.68
Here I address just one of these proposals, by Harald Atmanspacher and Hans
Primas, which explains the emergence of the mind–matter distinction as one
of “temporal symmetry-breaking.”69 By providing leverage on the “hard prob-
lem” of time, their approach offers an independent warrant for a panpsychist
perspective, and it may be of interest in its own right to social scientists, who
have also long wrestled with how to think about time.
Time is a hard problem because, as McTaggart made clear in a classic 1908
paper, it seems to have two incompatible natures, one mental and one physical,
which he named the “A-Series” and “B-Series.”70 The A-Series is the tensed
“arrow” of time of subjective experience, which ﬂows from the past to the future
65 See Fahrbach (2005).
66 See especially Skrbina (2005).
67 For a comprehensive review of neutral monism see Stubenberg (2014), and for other
recent work see Holman (2008), Velmans (2008), Silberstein (2009), Alter and Nagasawa
(2012), Robinson (2012), Nunn (2013), and Seager (2013). For a skeptical view see Banks
(2010).
68 Bohm (1990), Nakagomi (2003a; 2003b), Pylkk¨anen (2007), Lockwood (1989), Vitiello (2001);
and for an extension of these ideas into the para-psychological realm see Jahn and Dunne
(2005).
69 See especially Atmanspacher (2003) and Primas (2003; 2007; 2009), who link their ideas
to Pauli’s reﬂections on mind and matter (see their joint 2006). I take Franck (2008) and
Uzan (2012) to be following in this spirit as well. Nunn (2013) provides a particularly clear
introduction to Primas’ approach.
70 McTaggart (1908); for an excellent introduction to McTaggart’s distinction see Gell (1992:
149–174).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Panpsychism and neutral monism
127
through a succession of Nows. This is time as Becoming, in that “what time
it is” continually changes, depending on where you are in its ﬂow; what was
once future will someday be past. From this constant change the Now derives a
privileged ontological status as the only time that actually exists. While it may
leave material or memory traces, the past has already happened and cannot be
changed, while the future has not arrived and so can only be imagined. Neither
the past nor the future is real, in short, even though they were once real or will
become real in time. The B-Series in contrast is the tenseless time of physics.
The only temporal relation there is the symmetrical relation of before/after,
which does not favor one direction of time over the other, nor does it provide
any basis for a privileged Now. This is time as Being, which never changes;
what was before X will always be before X, and similarly with what is after.
The problem in all this is how to reconcile the A-Series, the experience of
which seems impossible to deny, with the B-Series and the causal closure of
physics.71 It is a problem that apparently worried Einstein, not least because it
invites McTaggart’s own conclusion that time is “unreal” – or, as materialists
might say today, yet another illusion of experience.
Atmanspacher and Primas approach the problem of time by exploiting
an important but rarely thematized feature of fundamental physical laws:
when those laws are used to describe closed systems they are “time-reversal
invariant.”72 That means the equations governing their evolution have two
equivalent solutions: a forward-moving or “retarded” solution (so named I
think because one solves for effects from causes), and a backward-moving or
“advanced” solution (solving for causes from effects). The ﬁrst corresponds to
the familiar modern notion of efﬁcient causation, the second to the teleological
concept of ﬁnal causation. Although equally valid in closed-systems, physicists
normally use the ﬁrst and discard the second solution, on the assumption that
ﬁnal causation does not have any physical meaning. Most approaches to quan-
tum theory are accordingly time-asymmetric, in that the state of a quantum
system is assumed to depend only on its past. However, as we saw in Chapter
2’s discussion of Delayed-Choice Experiments, quantum theory permits time-
symmetric approaches as well, in which measurements made in the immediate
future are incorporated into descriptions of the system’s current state.73 In
an important book on the physics of time, Huw Price therefore argues that
our bias toward forward-moving solutions is nothing more than a deep-seated
71 See Primas (2003: 85).
72 On time-reversal invariance, see for example Savitt (1996), and – in case you’re wondering – see
Henderson (2014) on the debate about how to square this with the time-reversal non-invariance
of thermodynamics.
73 See for example Aharonov et al. (1964); Cramer’s (1986; 1988) Transactional Interpretation
of quantum mechanics also belongs in this category. Kastner (1999) is a relatively accessible
guide to these issues.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

128
Quantum consciousness and life
convention, reﬂecting pre-conceived classical ideas about causation.74 In the
quantum realm, where causation of any kind is problematic, there is no good
reason to reject advanced causation a priori.75
This point about time-symmetry at the fundamental level reinforces the claim
that in physics time has no “arrow” – i.e. the sense in which time for us always
seems to ﬂow forward, such that events in the past can cause events in the future
but not vice-versa.76 So where then does this arrow of temporal experience come
from (or, the other one go)? Atmanspacher and Primas argue that a materialist
approach alone will not give us the answer. The arrow of temporal experience is
after all an experience, so if we cannot explain any experience with a materialist
ontology, we will not be able to explain temporal experience either. Thus, they
argue the only way forward is to give up on a materialist interpretation of
physics and bring consciousness into the equation.77
Atmanspacher and Primas make two moves. The ﬁrst is to shift the frame of
reference in physics from standard, time-asymmetric quantum theory, which
describes only the material world, to a generalized quantum theory that
describes an underlying reality in which there is neither time nor a distinc-
tion between mind and matter.78 That such an underlying reality exists is the
main idea of neutral monism. But whereas Spinoza and Leibniz could only
speculate, quantum physics has shown that there really is such a reality, the
“zero-point ﬁeld” or “vacuum,” which, far from being empty, is a foaming sea
or plenum of background energy from which new particles continuously and
spontaneously emerge.79 This holistic reality ﬁgures centrally in several con-
temporary quantum philosophical schemes, as Wheeler’s “pre-space,” Bohm’s
“implicate order,” d’Espagnat’s “Ultimate Reality,” and Jahn and Dunne’s
“Source.” Atmanspacher and Primas themselves relate it to Jung’s concept
of the “unus mundus,” which was inﬂuenced by Pauli, but they also just call
it “X.” However it is described, the key point is that at this level neither the
wave/particle duality (and with it the mind/matter duality on my reading above)
nor the arrow of time exists – everything is symmetric.
From here, Atmanspacher and Primas make a second move, which starts by
seeing the emergence of time as a process of “temporal symmetry-breaking”
from the timeless unity of X. This symmetry-breaking happens as soon as any
74 See Price (1996).
75 On the problem of causation in quantum theory, see Price and Corry, eds. (2007).
76 See Savitt (1996) for a good overview of the problem of the arrow of time (which is actually
several related arrows).
77 Also see Bierman (2006).
78 Cf. Jones (2014) on Whitehead’s “ﬂat ontology,” and also see Price (1996), chapter 5, for what
to my untrained eye looks like a similar argument.
79 See Laszlo (1995), Vitiello (2001), and McTaggart (2002) on the vacuum/ZPF, and Bradley
(2000) for a thought-provoking discussion of how this links up to social life.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Panpsychism and neutral monism
129
system interacts with its environment (i.e. basically all the time everywhere),
and results in two “semi-groups” evolving in opposite temporal directions.80
Unlike in the idealized closed system case, these semi-groups are not equivalent
mathematically, only correlated (entangled), and thus complementary in the
quantum sense.81 One semi-group moves forward in time satisfying the rules
of retarded/efﬁcient causality, which is associated with material states. The
other semi-group moves backward in time satisfying the rules of advanced/ﬁnal
causality, which – and here is the panpsychism part – Atmanspacher and Primas
associate with mental states.82 As such, the emergence of the arrow of time is
the “interface” through which the distinction between mind and matter itself
emerges.83
In light of Schopenhauer, this makes sense too. For if there is one place in
nature where time and causality seem to work backwards it is in human action,
with its strongly teleological quality. Thus, while from an external, material
perspective our behavior seems “pushed” by the interactions of matter in the
past, from an internal, phenomenological perspective it feels more like we are
“pulled” by reasons advanced into – indeed, in a sense from – the future.84 As
Scott Jordan puts it, “the continuously generated template of the [human] body
in space-time is feedforward (anticipatory) in nature.” The feeling of “mental
time travel” is ubiquitous in humans,85 and, although the temporal “distances”
we can travel are vastly greater than other organisms, the capacity to “act from
the future” seems intrinsic to purposiveness and thus on my account to life and
ultimately matter itself.
So where does the other arrow of time go? It goes into mind, which along
with matter/energy is emerging continuously in pervasive processes of tempo-
ral symmetry-breaking from an underlying monistic reality.86 As organisms,
we tap into (and are sustained by) this fundamental process and so we expe-
rience both arrows of time – as material bodies, subject to the mechanical
effects of retarded causality, and as subjects, who will the teleological effects
of our own advanced causality. In short, the other arrow of time has been there
in the physics all along, on the implicit mental side, just not seen for what
it is.
80 Atmanspacher (2003: 24), Primas (2003: 94).
81 Atmanspacher and Primas see this correlation as a naturalistic basis for Leibniz’s idea of the
pre-established harmony of mind and matter; also see Nakagomi (2003a; 2003b) on “quantum
monadology.”
82 Primas (2003: 94).
83 See Uzan (2012).
84 See Jordan (1998: 173). For further discussion of the physical nature of anticipation and its role
in consciousness see King (1997) and Wolf (1998).
85 See Suddendorf and Corballis (2007); I discuss this idea in Chapter 10 below.
86 This seems similar to Whitehead’s view that “mind, at its most rudimentary, is simply the
intrinsic temporality of a physical event” (Weekes, 2012: 40).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

130
Quantum consciousness and life
Much more would need to be said about Atmanspacher and Primas’ proposal,
and related ideas from others, for this to be a proper argument for neutral
monism as a solution to the mind–body problem. I have brought it up just
to show that there are attractive and intriguing ways, coming out of quantum
theory itself, to remove the taint of dualism in panpsychism, and thus to bolster
my argument. Whether neutral monism is consequential for the social sciences
is unclear, but I will return to its ideas about time in Chapter 10.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

7
A quantum vitalism
The thrust of the last two chapters was ever more micro, beginning with quantum
brains and then projecting the essence of their subjectivity all the way down
to the sub-atomic level. While that might seem to have taken us very far from
the world of social science, I am working toward just the opposite conclusion:
that social life is not essentially different from that of sub-atomic particles. To
complete this argument, however, I need to bring matters back to macroscopic
reality, which I shall do in this chapter by considering some implications of
this ontology for the nature of life. That is a big topic in its own right, and
ultimately I am interested here only in one very unusual form of life, our own.
Still, there are two reasons to bring up the subject.
One is that from a quantum perspective human life is essentially continuous
with, rather than qualitatively different from, other organisms. Apart from its
potential ethical implications,1 this means that in speaking of life in general I
will be laying a foundation for the quantum model of man discussed in Part
III. The other reason to bring up the nature of life is that the view of it which
follows from the ontology above is a kind of vitalism, according to which life
is constituted by an unobservable, non-material life force or ´elan vital. Since
vitalism today is almost universally rejected as unscientiﬁc, and the threat of
which I used to motivate my proposal to give intentional explanations a quantum
basis, it seems important to follow quantum consciousness theory through to
its logical conclusion, and then from there, try to turn the threat of vitalism into
a willing embrace.
The key to this strategy is the phenomenon of quantum coherence. Address-
ing the combination problem for panpsychism, in Chapter 6 I argued that
coherence in the brain explains the unity of consciousness at the human level.
In this chapter I extend that argument to a broader claim, that quantum coher-
ence is ultimately what distinguishes life from non-life. As Chris Clarke puts
it, following Mae-Wan Ho, “coherent states are the essence of organisms.”2 I
develop this thesis in relation both to more mainstream notions of life and to
1 See R. Jones (2013) for a recent introduction.
2 Clarke (2007: 58); also see Ho (1998: 213–214) and today especially Igamberdiev (2012).
131
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

132
Quantum consciousness and life
the New Materialism, and show that quantum coherence has everything one
could ask for as a physical (vs. material!) basis for the ´elan vital.
I will begin with a brief overview of the classical materialist–vitalist contro-
versy, which resulted in the decisive defeat of the vitalists, and then summarize
today’s standard materialist view of life and its problems. Then, isms aside, I
discuss what all organisms might have in common from a quantum perspective,
and will end by reconsidering vitalism in this light.
The materialist–vitalist controversy
The question “what is life?” has probably occupied human beings for as long as
they have asked “what is mind?” My argument is that quantum coherence is the
physical basis of both, but connecting the two problems is not the norm within
philosophy, despite what appear to be similar debates. Thus, in philosophy of
mind we ﬁnd materialists who argue that mind can be reduced to mindless
matter ranged against dualists, panpsychists, and idealists who argue for more
mind-centric ontologies instead. Similarly, in philosophy of biology we again
ﬁnd materialists (often called “mechanists” in this context) who argue that
life can be explained by reference to lifeless matter pitted against animists,
vitalists, and others who argue that life will never be explained that way and
invoke non-material vital forces instead.
Such is the hegemony of materialism today that the idea of “non-material
vital forces” might strike most readers as occult and completely unscientiﬁc.
By the end I hope to have changed your mind about that, but ﬁrst it is useful
to recall that just a century ago vitalism was taken quite seriously.3 Vitalists
like Hans Driesch and Henri Bergson drew on a rich philosophical tradition
dating to the ancient Greeks, which re-emerged in the seventeenth century in
opposition to Descartes’ view of animals as machines.4 Although today often
associated with the counter-Enlightenment – the Naturphilosophie of Goethe
and Schelling, and later Lebensphilosophie of Schopenhauer and Nietzsche –
vitalism was an important inﬂuence in the Enlightenment as well, on thinkers
like David Hume and Adam Smith.5
Today vitalism is essentially dead. The scientiﬁc literature amounts to a
lone Hameroff article on “quantum vitalism,” a piece on “molecular vitalism”
from 2000, the authors of which invoke the term in a “millennial” spirit, and
3 See Normandin and Wolfe, eds. (2013) for a comprehensive overview of the history of vitalism
in relation to changing images of science.
4 Different aspects of this controversy are covered in Lenoir (1982), Burwick and Douglass,
eds. (1992), Harrington (1996), Reill (2005), and Normandin and Wolfe, eds. (2013). On the
continuing dominance of the machine model of organisms see Nicholson (2013).
5 See especially Reill (2005); and for subsequent developments also Huneman (2006). On the
vitalism of Hume and Smith see respectively Cunningham (2007) and Packham (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A quantum vitalism
133
research by psychologists on the “causal placeholder function” that vitalist
reasoning plays in the development of young children.6 In social science and
the humanities vitalism arguably maintains more of a hold, implicitly, insofar
as social theory cannot dispense with intentional explanations, and explicitly in
the work of “neo-vitalists” (aka New Materialists) like Jane Bennett and Bruno
Latour.7 Even so, the disrepute of vitalism runs so deep that, with the partial
exception of Bennett, even the neo-vitalists are at pains to disavow its scientiﬁc
claims, which Monica Greco for one calls “inadequate and philosophically
na¨ıve.”8 For them the theory’s value is polemical rather than positive – a way,
with Bergson, to remind ourselves of our ignorance and thus, a tool for critique.
What changed everything for vitalism was the genetic revolution and subse-
quent advances in biology. Before 1900 biological knowledge was so rudimen-
tary that neither side had any real warrant for its claims about the nature and
explanation of life. However, subsequent scientiﬁc progress began to ﬁll in the
materialist picture, and that in turn challenged the key contention of the vital-
ists, that materialism will never explain life. Given that vitalism is ultimately an
inference to the best explanation – it is only if materialism fails that we would
be justiﬁed in positing a non-material vital force – scientiﬁc progress seemed
to eliminate the need for vitalism, and simultaneously highlighted two of its
own weaknesses as a theory. First, the vitalists offered no alternative research
program for furthering our knowledge of life, or at least one recognized as such
by most biologists.9 Second, whereas materialist claims about the nature of life
can at least in principle be tested, vitalism seemed un-testable and thus non-
falsiﬁable.10 For both external and internal reasons, then, vitalism essentially
vanished by mid-century, such that an idea that just decades earlier was the talk
of the Parisian salons is almost taboo today.
Importantly, however, the collapse of classical vitalism did not mean that
materialists had solved the puzzle of life, or even necessarily that they are
getting closer to solving it today – it may be that the vitalists were right in their
critique, even if wrong in other ways. For despite all the progress in biology,
a materialist explanation of life has been notoriously elusive.11 The difﬁculty
goes down to the very deﬁnition of life, on which there is no consensus. NASA’s
6 Hameroff (1997); on molecular vitalism see Kirschner et al. (2000: 79); on child/na¨ıve vitalism
see Morris et al. (2000).
7 See Bennett (2010) and Latour (2005).
8 Greco (2005: 18).
9 See Garrett (2006). The recognition point here is crucial, since as I suggest below in contem-
porary “biosemiotics” we do see what such a research program might look like.
10 For a re-statement of this critique see Mayr (1982). Papineau (2001) also reiterates long-standing
questions about whether vitalism is consistent with the principle of the conservation of energy.
11 For a classic statement of the problem see Polanyi (1968). As Bedau (1998: 125) put it thirty
years later, “The fact today is that we know of no set of individually necessary and jointly
sufﬁcient conditions for life,” and if Cleland (2013) and Denton et al. (2013) are right the
situation is no different today.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

134
Quantum consciousness and life
widely used deﬁnition – “a sustained chemical system capable of undergoing
Darwinian evolution” – is subject to various counter-examples, some simple
(mules), others technical.12 Other efforts have fared no better. The problem
is that because we lack an explanation of life we are forced to deﬁne it in
terms of its observable features, like earlier scientists who tried to deﬁne water
before they knew about H2O – with equally confusing results.13 The issue is so
muddled that, despite its new-found practical importance in astrobiology, most
biologists have given up on trying to deﬁne the subject of their discipline.14
They can do that because biologists do have a strong practical grasp on life,
from which a rough but sophisticated consensus has emerged on its “observable
features” at least.15 Summarizing brutally, organisms are widely understood to
be: (1) individuals, in the sense of “spatio-temporally bounded and unique”
systems with “a particular history of interactions”; (2) organized, structured
totalities in which parts and whole are dynamically interdependent and mutually
constitutive; (3) autopoietic, feeding on energy to sustain their self-production
in the face of thermodynamic decay; (4) autonomous, in that their behavior
is determined not just by the external environment, but also by their internal
constitution; and (5) capable of genetic reproduction or something equivalent.
Exactly how these properties are instantiated is a matter of debate within biology
between reductionists and organicists, but judging from the absence of vitalists
in the debate all sides agree that whatever the details they must be consistent
with a materialist ontology.
So, with this practical description of life in place, even if it is not a formal
scientiﬁc deﬁnition, is there any reason to bring vitalism back? That depends
on whether the gap between description and deﬁnition is likely to be closed
by future scientiﬁc progress, without an intervention from new metaphysics.
If we think it will be closed, then vitalism has no role to play and materialism
carries the day. Conversely, to argue the gap will remain is to say there is
a “hard problem” of life for materialism, analogous to the hard problem of
consciousness, in which case there is an opening for vitalism analogous to
panpsychism in the mind–body problem. Yet, in contrast to philosophers of
mind, of whom many accept the existence of a hard problem (if not the need
for a non-materialist solution), philosophers of biology generally view life as
an “easy” problem, one that will eventually be solved without abandoning
materialism – much less reviving vitalism.16
12 Luisi (1998: 617).
13 Cleland and Chyba (2002: 391); also see Cleland (2012).
14 Machery (2012) goes even further, arguing that while it might eventually be possible to deﬁne
life, it is “pointless.”
15 The following discussion draws especially on Ruiz-Mirazo et al. (2000); also see Robinson and
Southgate (2010).
16 For good measure, Chalmers himself (1997: 5) does not think there is a hard problem of life
(see Garrett, 2006).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A quantum vitalism
135
Such a preponderance of expert opinion obviously needs to be taken seri-
ously; however, it is also important to acknowledge that, despite all our scientiﬁc
advances, when it comes to life itself we still do not know what we do not know.
As Donald Rumsfeld might say, the nature of life is an unknown unknown, not a
known unknown. Now, that does not mean it will not have a materialist answer
in the end. But given the uncertainty, the case for accepting a materialist view
today has to be more than just an extrapolation of the past: it also requires a
judgment that scientiﬁc progress will not itself undermine a materialist view of
life. And in this light, two contemporary movements are of particular interest,
one scientiﬁc and the other more philosophical.
The ﬁrst, as recently reported in Nature, is the “dawn of quantum biology.”17
That there is a connection between quantum mechanics and life is something
physicists have speculated about since the 1930s. Niels Bohr thought the princi-
ple of complementarity extended into the biological (and psychological) realm;
in a quest for free will, Pascual Jordan developed a theory of organisms as
“ampliﬁers of micro-physical indeterminacy;” and most importantly there was
Erwin Schr¨odinger’s 1944 classic, What Is Life?, which had a lasting impact
on the development of biology itself.18 Still, it is only in the past decade that
technology has permitted us to move from theoretical speculation to empirical
probes below the cellular level. And what has been found is quite striking:
among other things, that birds exploit non-local connections with the earth’s
magnetic ﬁeld to help them navigate, that plants exploit quantum effects in
photosynthesis, that fruit ﬂies’ sense of smell relies on the ability to detect
quantum vibrations in smelly molecules, and that quantum processes might
even facilitate social learning by protozoa.19 Importantly, all of these effects
involve quantum coherence – which skeptics of quantum brain theory tell us
cannot exist in the warm and wet environment of living organisms. So this
research raises the question that if birds, plants, fruit ﬂies and even protozoa
can do it (the quantum thing), then why couldn’t people?
17 See Ball (2011); for overviews see Mesquita et al. (2005), Abbott et al. (2008), Igamberdiev
(2012), Bordonaro and Ogryzko (2013), Kitto and Kortschak (2013), and Al-Khalili and Mc-
Fadden (2015). That an editorially conservative journal like Nature would publish Ball’s article
represents quite a change, given that just a few years ago the distinguished neuroscientist John
Hopﬁeld (1994: 53) could claim that “there is absolutely no indication that quantum mechanics
plays any signiﬁcant role in biology.”
18 See Bohr (1933); ˇCapek (1992) and Beyler (1996) on Jordan; and Schr¨odinger (1944). Some-
what later Max Delbruck is another important crossover ﬁgure (see Domondon [2006] on
differences among these physicists on life), as well as Andrew Cochran (1971) and Walter
Elsasser (1987). Working from the other direction, Hans Jonas (1984) and Dale Miller (1992)
have also explored the potential for a quantum mechanical solution to the problem of subjec-
tivity.
19 See respectively see Dellis and Kominis (2012), Hildner et al. (2013), Lloyd (2011), and Clark
(2010). For an early discussion of the hypothesized use of non-locality by organisms see
Josephson and Pallikari-Viras (1991).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

136
Quantum consciousness and life
The growth of quantum biology does not in itself mean that the nature of
life is a hard problem for materialism. As we have seen there are materialist
interpretations of quantum theory, so materialists about life could look forward
to quantum biology actually vindicating their view. What the penetration of
quantum mechanics into biology does mean, however, is that all those weird
quantum effects – entanglement, non-locality, tunneling, and the rest – are
being introduced into what had previously been purely classical models of life.
And as we have also seen, the meaning of quantum theory is itself a hard
problem for materialists and as such idealist ontologies have long ﬂourished in
that context. As biology goes quantum, will a similar challenge emerge there
too? Future biologists may conclude that the quantum effects within organisms
do not cross the threshold of “non-trivial” with respect to life. But that remains
to be seen, and in the meantime quantum biology is certainly not making the
problem of life any easier, and it may actually be making it harder.
The other development is the small but growing number of philosophers
of biology who argue that mind and life are co-constitutive, such that where
there is one there is the other. To put this in context, note that mind is absent
from the consensus deﬁnition of life that I summarized above; while evidently
supportive of human minds, none of those properties is necessarily mental. This
is not surprising given the still widely held Cartesian view in biology that mind is
either exclusive to humans or at least does not go very far down the evolutionary
ladder. Yet, as we saw in Chapter 6, empirical evidence is accumulating which
suggests that mind might go all the way down to bacteria, and this work is
now being followed by philosophical arguments, that life and mind are actually
continuous. Of particular importance here is Evan Thompson’s Mind in Life
(2007), which makes a sophisticated case for such continuity, seeking thereby
to recast, and hopefully eventually eliminate, the explanatory gap between
biology and phenomenology.20
But what is this mind with which life is continuous, and will seeing the two
this way vindicate a materialist ontology of life? If we consider the faculties
of Cognition, Experience, and Will, then Thompson projects only Cognition
and Will down to bacteria, not Experience.21 As we have seen, these are the
“easy” problems of mind, so positing their continuity with life seems relatively
unproblematic for materialism.22 Moreover, Thompson is no old-fashioned
materialist, since he rejects mechanical conceptions of life that see only its
externally observable functioning in favor of the theory of autopoiesis, which
highlights the self-organization of interiority within organisms – but which in
20 Other work in this vein would include Hoffmeyer (1996), Stewart (1996); Bitbol and Luisi
(2004), and Kawade (2009; 2013); and, farther back, especially Jonas (1966).
21 Thompson (2007: 159–162); also see Hoffmeyer (1996) and Swenson (1999); cf. Margulis and
Sagan (1995) and Sheets-Johnstone (1998).
22 Though see Robinson and Southgate (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A quantum vitalism
137
his view is only a precursor to consciousness, not conscious itself.23 Yet, even
with the self-organization focus, and even if we take his further “enactivist”
view of mind, which shifts attention from what is happening inside the brain to
how mind is enacted in embodied encounters with the world, at the end of the
day I suspect Thompson would insist that – lest he be accused of vitalism! – life
can be explained by the organization of otherwise lifeless and thus mindless
material elements.24 And in that case the old question is still there: if matter
is intrinsically mindless then what accounts for the emergence of experience,
whether with life itself or only at higher levels of complexity? Given the
materialist view of matter, in short, how could any life be conscious, rather
than none?
Not that I am unsympathetic to Thompson’s argument; while I think even
the simplest organisms are conscious, that only underscores his view that the
problem of life and the problem of mind are essentially the same. The point
is that, given the failure of materialists to explain consciousness, making mind
constitutive of life has the perverse effect of multiplying hard problems: if
there is a hard problem of consciousness then there is also one of life. Given
this subversive ramiﬁcation, one could understand Thompson’s less radical
colleagues wanting to keep the problem of life simple, by keeping mind out of
the picture altogether.
So is there a case for reviving vitalism? The quantization of biology and
the life–mind continuity thesis at most constitute negative arguments, as signs
that despite (or because of) the progress of science, the problem of life might
actually get harder for materialists in the future, not easier. Yet there is also
the question of vitalism’s own problems, which contributed to its demise a
century ago. If life cannot be reduced to material processes, then what is this
mysterious life force, and how can it be reconciled with modern science? Since
the argument for vitalism will have to answer these questions ﬁrst, let me take
up what I see as the implications of quantum panpsychism for the nature of
life, and then return to vitalism per se.
Life in quantum perspective
My claim is that life is a macroscopic instantiation of quantum coherence. As
Mae-Wan Ho puts it,
[W]hat is it that constitutes a whole or an individual? It is a domain of coherent,
autonomous activity. The coherence of organisms entails a quantum superposition of
coherent activities over all space-time domains, each correlated with one another and
23 See Thompson (2007: 222–225).
24 It is perhaps instructive that Thompson does not discuss quantum theory, although a brief
mention on p. 439 suggests openness to a move in this direction.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

138
Quantum consciousness and life
with the whole, and yet independent of the whole. In other words, the quantum coherent
state, being [non-]factorizable, maximizes both global cohesion and local freedom. It is
that which underlies the sensitivity of living systems to weak signals, and their ability
to intercommunicate and respond with great rapidity.25
Such a view does not make the classical consensus about life “wrong” any more
than quantum physics made classical physics wrong. Indeed, from the above
list of life’s properties – individualized, organized, autopoietic, autonomous,
and capable of reproduction – it seems that all but the last could play central
roles in maintaining an “internal quantum state” at life’s core.26 Far from being
opposed, then, when it comes to the physics of life the bumper sticker might
be “classical outside, quantum in.”
This approach has clear implications for how we conceive of the boundaries
of life. Internally, it means there are no essential differences among life forms,
of the kind that would allow us to say that some are just machines and others
are more than that. Life is life, and so the variation it exhibits is quantitative
rather than qualitative. Externally, and conversely, the idea that life equals
quantum coherence means there is a clear difference between life and non-life.
Given the otherwise inevitable fact of decoherence, quantum coherence can
only be maintained in very special, highly protected physical conditions – the
conditions of life. To be sure, the panpsychist aspect of my argument sees wisps
of subjectivity in sub-atomic particles, which means that matter is “pregnant”
with life.27 But as long as matter is not coherent, life is not actually “born.” I
will return to some implications of this sharp life/non-life boundary below.
All quantum systems have two, complementary descriptions, and the same
goes for life, where I have argued that the “wave” description and its collapse
are the physical correlates of subjectivity. This correlation gives social scien-
tists an epistemic advantage over physicists, since whereas the latter have no
access to what is going on inside sub-atomic particles, we do know what it is
like to be on the inside of human wave functions. So while we wait for more
detailed quantum physiologies to arrive, we can use the rich vocabulary human
beings have developed to talk about our wavy insides – folk psychology –
as a complementary but equally valid road to knowledge about life. In the
rest of this section I expand on my earlier discussion about Cognition, Expe-
rience and Will, with special reference this time to their potential quantum
bases.
25 See Ho (1998: 213–214). The actual text says “factorizable,” but my assumption is that this is
a misprint.
26 The phrase is Igamberdiev’s (2012), whose book is a must (if difﬁcult) read in this context.
27 A view known as “hylozoism;” also see Bennett (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A quantum vitalism
139
Cognition
Three implications stand out if quantum cognition is a deﬁning feature of life.
First, and most obviously, whatever computation (thinking) is going on inside
organisms will be quantum mechanical. That would give to even the simplest
organisms vastly more on-board computing power than would classical models
of cognition, and allow for a correspondingly greater ability to navigate their
environment.
Second, an interesting duality emerges in the organism’s interaction with
the environment. On the one hand, quantum coherence requires shielding from
the environment to prevent its permanent collapse. To that extent a boundary
between subject and object follows necessarily from the theory. On the other
hand, to survive in the face of thermodynamic decay organisms also need energy
from the outside world, which requires an open system able to perceive and
interact with its environment. The interface where this duality is sustained is
consciousness, which is the subjective manifestation of wave function collapse
in the moment, but which is also reconstituted as a stream of such moments
by the protective shielding of the organism’s body. As such, the organism’s
coherent state may be seen as an “attractor, or end state towards which the
system tends to return on being perturbed.”28
Third, and most concretely, if organisms are quantum mechanical then the
senses connecting them to the external world should have a non-local aspect.
That is the upshot of the quantum biological ﬁndings about birds, plants, and
fruit ﬂies noted above, and in Chapter 12 I take up the case of vision in humans
at greater length.
Will
Earlier I equated Will with the force that collapses wave functions into particles.
In living matter this force is given identity through time by the structures that
protect quantum coherence – and which is, in turn, directed toward the end of
reproducing those structures itself. This is to say: all organisms share a will
to survive.29 Of course, we don’t need quantum theory to tell us that, but a
quantum perspective puts two questions about the will to live in a new light.
First, historically there has been much debate about whether life’s apparent
purposefulness is irreducibly purposive – i.e. whether it can be reduced to mate-
rialist ideas about causation, which leads to the machine view of organisms;
or whether the Aristotelian idea of ﬁnal causation or teleology is also neces-
sary to make sense of Will, which leads to a view of organisms as “natural
28 See Ho (1998: 214).
29 See Kawade (2009: 211).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

140
Quantum consciousness and life
purposes.”30 Modern scientists generally regard teleological explanations as
being unscientiﬁc. At the same time, most biologists would probably also
agree that organisms are purposeful in some interesting sense, and perhaps
even that teleological language is a practical necessity in their discipline.31 But
following Ernst Mayr’s inﬂuential argument, they would argue that what looks
like teleology in organisms is actually “teleonomy,” a process fully in accord
with materialism requiring no mysterious causes to explain.32
I will not address whether the concept of teleonomy can make sense of
organic purposefulness; instead, I want to highlight Mayr’s premise: that for
biology to be a science, the appearance of teleology in organisms must be ren-
dered just an appearance, with no ontological signiﬁcance. This is “politically”
necessary only under a classical physics constraint, since quantum theory is
open to teleological reasoning. Although most of its interpretations do not
invoke ideas of ﬁnal causation, as we will see in Chapter 9, some do.33 So
while a quantum perspective does not entail a teleological view of organisms’
will, it allows for it, within what is still a scientiﬁc approach to life.
Second, there is a related question about how Will is constituted internally,
whether through the bottom-up aggregation of the organism’s parts (“reduc-
tionism”), or top-down through “downward causation” exerted by the whole on
the parts (“holism” or “organicism”).34 For most of the twentieth century the
reductionists had much the better of the debate, partly because technological
advances allowed for ever deeper probing down to the micro-level, culminating
in the recent triumph of sequencing the human genome. But the debate has
also been inﬂuenced by the (classical) philosophical assumption that there is
something intrinsically dubious metaphysically about holism, which puts the
burden of proof on its advocates to explain why reductionism should not be the
default option.
In recent years the debate has evolved in ways that seem to give both sides
more ammunition – or might bring them together. Thus, on the one hand, sci-
entists are now learning that the expression of genes depends not only on genes
themselves but also on their larger context, which favors the top-down approach;
on the other hand, as a result of the development of self-organization and com-
plexity theories, bottom-up approaches have become much more sophisticated
30 On the classical debate, see especially Lenoir (1982). For recent discussion of organisms as
natural purposes see Weber and Varela (2002), di Paolo (2005), Walsh (2006; 2012), and
Zammito (2006), and for a critique see Teufel (2011).
31 See Barham (2008) and Toepfer (2012) on the constitutive role of teleological reasoning for
biology, and Birch (2012) on its pervasiveness throughout the sciences.
32 See Mayr (1982; 1992).
33 On the question of teleology in early quantum approaches to biology see Sloan (2012).
34 For recent organicist critiques of reductionism see Gilbert and Sarkar (2000) and Denton et al.
(2013).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A quantum vitalism
141
in handling the emergence of macro-structure and its effects, including pos-
sibly even downward causation.35 Yet, the metaphysical suspicion of holism
is still there, suggesting a continued acceptance that the problem should be
conceived in classical terms, with parts given some kind of ontological priority
over wholes.
A quantum approach to Will would change this burden of proof. In systems
characterized by quantum coherence parts lose their individuality as fully inde-
pendent “parts,” which is the basis for their privileged ontological status in
the classical worldview. Quantum coherence is irreducibly holistic, in short,
yet unlike classical holism does not raise metaphysical worries about wholes
existing independent of their parts. This is because in quantum coherence the
whole exists merely as a potentiality (a wave function), and as such is not
“real” in the usual sense. It only becomes real in its expression (collapse),
which actualizes it into something classical. That would give a quantum basis
for Schopenhauer’s claim that Will “objectiﬁes” itself in the world, and in so
doing put the reductionism/organicism debate about purpose in an entirely new
light.36
Experience
In Chapter 6 I argued that experiences are the inside manifestation of what on
the outside appears as the collapse of wave functions into particles. From here
I would like to highlight three implications for life.
First, experience is the origin of meaning, understood as “information for
someone.”37 In quantum terms, if experience is one side of a process of tempo-
ral symmetry-breaking, then its role in collapse is to encompass non-locally the
future actuality that Will creates, and project it backward to conform mathemat-
ically to the past potentialities of the system.38 Or, in plainer terms: experience
confers meaning by anticipating future information in relation to an organism’s
evolving purposes through time. The effect of this appropriation of the future
is to transform objective information into subjective meaning – and it is on the
basis of the latter that people act. This transformation is the essence of semiosis,
and as such perception and action are fundamentally semiotic processes.
Probably few social scientists would disagree that human beings act on the
meaning information has for them, rather than on information per se; what
is of more interest is the claim that this is true of all organisms. While per-
haps not widely shared by biologists, this is the foundation of the small but
35 On downward causation see P. Andersen et al., eds. (2000), and Bitbol (2012) for a quantum
approach; I take up downward causation at more length in Chapter 13.
36 Also see Schr¨odinger (1959) on “objectivation.”
37 See Mingers (1995) and Markoˇs and Cvrˇckov´a (2013: 62).
38 See especially Cramer (1986; 1988), King (1997), and Wolf (1998).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

142
Quantum consciousness and life
long-standing discipline of “biosemiotics.” Tracing their roots in biology to
Jakob von Uexk¨ull (a contemporary of Driesch, also associated with vital-
ism), and to Thomas Sebeok in semiotics, Claus Emmeche, Jesper Hoffmeyer,
Kalevi Kull and others have pursued research based on the idea that processes
of signiﬁcation – of creating and communicating meanings or “signs” – are per-
vasive in organisms, including plants.39 Interestingly, while emphasizing the
subjective quality of signiﬁcation, biosemioticians have not much engaged the
mind–body problem (or quantum theory for that matter). Mostly just taking it
as given that organisms are conscious, their focus has been on what this tells us
about organisms’ behavior and functioning. So whether biosemioticians would
want to be associated with my argument is unclear, but for better or worse I
think it points toward their view of life as essentially semiotic. And that matters
in the present context because if meaning is on the table in all the life sciences,
then the human sciences are really just a subset of a much larger domain.
A second implication is that every organism’s experience, “what it is like”
to be them, is intrinsically private – not necessarily without a public sign
(e.g. pain), but inaccessible as such to an observer. This privacy of experience
follows directly from the claim that quantum coherence is the physical basis of
life.40 Coherence can only be sustained if it is shielded from the environment
by a wall; breach that wall in an effort to get inside an organism’s experience
and you will kill the organism. So while we can know that an organism is in
pain, and, if it is sufﬁciently like ourselves, even know vicariously what that
might feel like, to be in a particular organism’s pain is something that only it
itself can truly understand. We on the outside can have only an ersatz, objective
knowing of its experience.
Finally, the world of private experience in and through which each organism
lives – what von Uexk¨ull called its “umwelt” – is unique.41 Putting this together
with the previous discussion, this suggests a picture of organisms reminiscent
of Leibniz’s monads, each living in, and making choices based on, its own,
inaccessible bubble of experience – though unlike in his model, organisms here
have “windows” that allow them to interact with the world.42 Nevertheless, the
uniqueness of umwelten gives this ontology an irreducibly subjectivist aspect.
That might raise a question about how life’s bubbles of experience are
coordinated and made stable enough for organisms to make choices, since
without some predictability in the environment it will be impossible for them
to relate will (ends) to behavior (means). Leibniz solved an analogous problem
for his philosophy with his doctrine of “pre-established harmony” provided
39 The classic contemporary text is Hoffmeyer (1996), and for a recent overview of the ﬁeld see
Hoffmeyer (2010), as well as the journal Biosemiotics.
40 See Georgiev (2013).
41 See von Uexk¨ull (1982).
42 For a “quantum monadological” approach to cognition and life see Nakagomi (2003a; b);
cf. Tarde (1895/2012).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A quantum vitalism
143
by God. From a naturalistic perspective one would look instead to the material
constitution of organisms, which creates cognitive stability in two ways. First,
their perceptual apparatus provides organisms with access to only a tiny cross-
section of the information available in their environment – presumably the kind
most relevant to their survival. These cross-sections vary across species (dogs
hear things we can’t, we see colors they can’t), but within species they are
quite uniform, and as such confer some cognitive order on the world. Second,
organisms also have the ability to exchange signs with other organisms, most
obviously with con-speciﬁcs – a big help in reproduction one would suppose! –
but even to some extent with other species, like dogs and people. While semiotic
exchanges always contain the potential for misunderstanding, as we know from
human experience they can be made predictable enough for communication
to occur. If biosemioticians are right that all life involves semiosis, then the
exchange of signs serves to structure the information environment such that all
organisms can generally realize their purposes.43
To sum up, to mainstream biology’s list of life’s ﬁve observable properties
I have added a sixth, partly unobservable, property: subjectivity, deﬁned as
Cognition, Will, and Experience.44 The quantum contribution to this proposal
is twofold: quantum brain theory (and now biology) provides a naturalistic
reason for thinking that quantum coherence is the physical basis of life; and
the fact that quantum theory is open to a panpsychist interpretation makes it
possible to link that coherence to subjectivity. I have also brieﬂy suggested
some implications of this view for thinking about organisms in general, some
of which I will develop at greater length below with reference to the special
case of human beings.
Why call it vitalism?
Among biologists today the term ‘vitalism’ is anathema, used solely as an
epithet to dismiss work that does not sit comfortably in the mainstream as
unscientiﬁc.45 For social scientists, in contrast, the problem is probably not that
we think vitalism is pseudo-science (which makes sense if it is latent in any
theory that appeals to intentionality as an explanatory force). The problem is
that we tend to associate vitalism with fascism and other forms of irrational
politics. I will address this political question in Chapter 14, but the short answer
is that while fascists used vitalist ideas, so did almost everyone else, and so
the unique contribution, if there is one, of vitalism to politics lies elsewhere.
43 Even at the cellular level; see for example Fels (2012).
44 Though since my deﬁnition of subjectivity encompasses some of the other ﬁve the ultimate list
would be shorter.
45 For a good illustration of this tactic in play see Oyama (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

144
Quantum consciousness and life
However, since these worries might affect the reception of my argument, and
since I might avoid the trouble simply by not using the term ‘vitalism,’ let me
explain why I think it is necessary.
Principally, because my argument is vitalist, though the issue is complicated
by the variety of forms vitalism has taken historically, some of which overlap
with other doctrines.46 Of particular relevance here is organicism, a form of
biological holism which is the main contender to reductionism in the biological
sciences today.47 Organicism has taken both materialist and vitalist forms over
the years, which has forced its materialist advocates to work hard to distance
themselves from vitalism to avoid its fate. As it happens, thinking that life
is a function of quantum coherence is as holistic as holistic can be, so there
is a close connection in my argument to organicism here as well. In social
science that term has its own fascist connotations, but for now the question is
whether the ontology here is vitalist in the thinnest possible sense, which I take
to involve two claims: negatively, that life cannot be explained by reference to
lifeless matter; and positively, that life can be explained by an unobservable
and non-material life force.
Quantum coherence is just such a force. It may sound strange to call coher-
ence “non-material,” since it is a physical phenomenon and as such a far cry
from metaphysical speculations about entelechies and an ´elan vital. But that is
precisely the point: coherence is physical but not material. Moreover, it cannot
be observed because doing so would by deﬁnition collapse its wave function
and thus render only its particle manifestations visible. As I see it this is the
ultimate contribution of quantum theory to solving the problems of conscious-
ness and life, since it provides an opening within the causal closure of physics
(CCP) for the naturalistic but non-materialist doctrines of panpsychism and
vitalism.
Having bitten the vitalist bullet, then, what kind of vitalism is this (beyond
being quantum), and can it avoid the pitfalls of classical vitalism? Since there is
no space here to review the varieties of vitalism, let me just highlight two fea-
tures of my proposal that I think distinguish it from classical and contemporary
neo-vitalism alike.
The ﬁrst is that, unlike classical vitalism, which was primarily a negative
doctrine and non-falsiﬁable, and also unlike neo-vitalism, which sees itself as
a critical rather than positive theory, quantum vitalism is based on a physical
hypothesis that can in principle be tested. Not easily, to be sure, since quantum
coherence cannot be observed directly. But we can imagine at least two indirect
tests. One is the current debate about quantum brain theory, which although
46 See Benton (1974) on the historical varieties of vitalism.
47 See Elsasser (1987), Allen (2005), and Denton et al. (2013), and also Garrett (2013) on
“emergent materialism.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A quantum vitalism
145
focused on humans is centrally concerned with whether quantum coherence is
possible in living tissue. If for theoretical and/or empirical reasons it were
shown that quantum coherence cannot be sustained in the brain then that
would falsify not only quantum consciousness theory, but quantum vitalism
as well. Conversely, if such a possibility can be demonstrated, then given the
additional ﬁndings of quantum biology and quantum decision theory, we would
have grounds to argue that the factor explaining all these ﬁndings is quantum
coherence. The other indirect test is more prosaic. An interesting implication
of the idea that life is constituted by quantum coherence is that if one could
build a machine with such coherence – i.e. a quantum computer – then it should
be alive.48 How then could we tell if it is actually alive and not just alive by
deﬁnition? Since adults might be biased by their preconceptions, my slightly
tongue-in-cheek suggestion would be to give the computers to four-year olds,
the age at which kids are known to be able to reliably spot the difference
between life and non-life. If the kids say they are alive, then that should count
for the theory. Neither of these tests will be available soon, but they do point to
a scientiﬁc rather than purely metaphysical proposal.
The second distinctive feature of this quantum vitalism is that it takes the
essence of life to be subjectivity, understood not only as Cognition and Will but
as Experience. With some exceptions like Bergson and von Uexk¨ull, classical
vitalists emphasized Will to the neglect particularly of consciousness. The kind
of vitalism I am proposing also emphasizes Will, but sees it as intrinsically
connected to Experience. Recall that I have conceived of the collapse of the
wave function as a process of temporal symmetry-breaking in which Will cor-
responds to the “advanced” semi-group, in which time moves in a teleological
fashion backward from the future, and Experience corresponds to the “retarded”
semi-group in which time moves in the traditional way forward from the past.
As such, it is only through the symmetry-restoring process of Experience that
the potentiality of Will can be actualized.
Although for this aspect of my argument I ﬁnd less afﬁrmation in the vitalist
tradition than I do in the phenomenological one, it is precisely due to its focus
on Experience that I think the term ‘vitalism’ is apt. For what distinguishes the
view of life on offer here most clearly from a materialist one is its emphasis
on consciousness. The mistake of the classical vitalists was to focus mostly
on the “easy” problems of life, which, as in the case of mind, became increas-
ingly tractable as materialist science progressed.49 But consciousness has been
impervious to that progress, which suggests that if there is anything uniquely
48 Or at least have subjectivity, since the requirement of reproductive capacity would presumably
not be met. Insofar as we have already made extremely simple quantum computers, therefore,
we have already created life.
49 See Garrett (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

146
Quantum consciousness and life
“vital” in life, then it is experience. From the standpoint of conceptual clarity it
therefore seems important to re-cast vitalism in this way, as a doctrine clearly
distinct from materialism, both physically and metaphysically.
This ontology has both afﬁnities with and differences from an important
new movement in critical social theory, associated with Jane Bennett, Gilles
Deleuze, Graham Harman, Bruno Latour and others, known variously as New
Materialism and/or Neo-Vitalism.50 A common starting point for this otherwise
heterogeneous body of scholarship is a re-thinking of the nature of matter, from
the inert and passive substance of classical physics to a productive and active
force in nature. A provocative effect of this move is to reveal the essential
continuity, not of living matter with dead (as in Old Materialism), but of
dead matter with living, such that, in varying degrees, we can attribute to
inanimate objects (sic) many of the intentional qualities we normally associate
just with human beings. Thus, Latour conceives of material things as agents
or “actants,” with varying capacities to resist and mess with human projects.51
Similarly, Bennett argues that “thing-power” is an “impersonal agency” on a
continuum of agency that cuts across the usual life/non-life divide. While not
explicitly panpsychist, this is at least interestingly reminiscent of the strong
panpsychism of David Chalmers or Giulio Tononi discussed in Chapter 6,
according to which artefacts like thermostats and computers are to some degree
conscious.
My proposal for a quantum vitalism has important elements in common
with New Materialism. It too aims to re-think matter into a less “material” and
more active force. In its panpsychist basis it also sees an essential continuity
between living and dead matter. And in its claim that all organisms are subjects
it shares a non-anthropocentric, post-humanist view of reality, which would
deny to human beings a privileged ontological position from which to justify
abusing nature.52
However, there are also at least three important differences.53 First, my
proposal foregrounds consciousness and sees it as a deﬁning feature of life.
In contrast, New Materialists hardly mention consciousness, like older critical
theorists apparently seeing in a concern with it a Cartesian anxiety that ontology
can do without. In her “vital materialism,” for example, Jane Bennett explicitly
brackets subjectivity (consciousness in my terms), the search for the physical
50 For a good introduction see Coole and Frost (2010b).
51 See Latour (2005); for a good discussion of what precisely this claim amounts to see Sayes
(2014).
52 Also see Wendt and Duvall (2008).
53 A proper engagement with New Materialism would require a much more elaborate discussion
(and homework on my part) than I can offer here, so what follows is only a set of signposts for
how I might respond to this very interesting line of argument.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A quantum vitalism
147
basis of which she says is normatively problematic and “quixotic.”54 Second,
my proposal draws much more explicitly and extensively on quantum theory.
Although New Materialists have invoked “post-classical” physics to justify
their re-thinking of matter,55 by this they also mean complexity theory and
non-linear dynamics (which ultimately embody a classical ontology), and to
my knowledge their engagement with quantum theory itself has only been
ﬂeeting.56 Finally, my proposal implies a sharp distinction between life and non-
life, both substantively and normatively. While in my panpsychist view matter
at the quantum level is latent with life, it only becomes life when organized
into quantum coherent wholes. When there is no quantum coherence, as in
thermostats or computers, matter is dead, and as such does not have agency or
other intentional properties – causal powers yes, but not agency.57 Normatively,
in turn, I worry that an ontology which elides the distinction between life and
non-life, while usefully denying humans a ground for abusing nature, could also
have the opposite effect: if rocks are on a continuum of agency with people,
then why not treat people like rocks, as if they were merely objects rather than
also subjects?
The ultimate problem here is that by failing to come to grips with the hard
problem of consciousness, the New Materialists/Neo-Vitalists remain caught
up in the limits of the classical worldview – in short, by the Old Materialism.
Making a quantum panpsychist turn enables us to abandon materialism once
and for all in favor of a broader, vitalist physicalism that can accommodate that
which is most distinctive about life, namely its subjective aspect.
54 Bennett (2010: ix).
55 See for example Coole and Frost (2010a: 10–14).
56 The big exception here is Barad (2007), whose quantum worldview shares much with New
Materialism, but to date has not ﬁgured in most of this literature.
57 See Vandenberghe (2002) and Cole (2013) for non-quantum critiques of New Materialism that
point in a similar direction.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Part III
A quantum model of man
Introduction
The central claim of this book is that all intentional phenomena are quantum
mechanical. That goes both for the private thoughts inside our heads and for
public or collective intentions like norms, culture, and language, which we
might generically call institutions. I suggested in Chapter 1 that by virtue of
their dependence on consciousness, a classical, materialist ontology cannot
explain these phenomena, and as such from that perspective they must be
epiphenomenal or illusions. In the rest of this book I show that a quantum,
panpsychist ontology can provide a physical basis for what we all know to be
true, which is that both private and collective intentions are part of the natural
order.
The elementary parts of social ontology are human beings in their biological
individuality,1 which in this Part I consider in abstraction from their lived social
contexts. By taking humans out of their natural habitat I aim to focus attention
on what we bring to the social table simply by virtue of being organisms of
a certain kind. The abstract individual is a common enough starting point in
classical social theory (think Hobbes and the state of nature). However, it might
seem an odd place to begin a quantum social theory, given the holism of quantum
phenomena, both “all the way down” in having no elementary parts, and “all
the way across” in universal non-locality. What look like separate organisms
are just local decoherence effects of quantum ﬁelds; everything really is related
to everything else. In that light the abstract individual appears not just as an
abstraction, but as positively occluding what “the individual” really is.
Today one might prefer ‘Person’ to ‘Man,’ who in models of man discourse feminist theorists
have argued really was a man in the past and thus not representative of human beings. However,
‘Person’ is clumsier, and I also don’t think the model that emerges below is vulnerable to
the feminist critique, since in his essentially relational character Quantum Man is if anything
a Woman. Either way, for the sake of balance, I will refer to Classical Man as ‘he’ and his
Quantum partner as ‘she.’
1 Though see the discussion of collective consciousness in Chapter 14.
149
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

150
A quantum model of man
However, there is a difference between what is true of a universal ontol-
ogy and what is practically relevant to speciﬁcally social ontologies, which
are constrained by the properties of their constituent organisms.2 Unlike some
organisms, humans live in highly interdependent societies, and most of what
is interesting about us is socially constituted as well. While that might amplify
worries about abstract individualism, it does not change a basic material fact.
By virtue of processes at the biological level and below, every organism is given
to the world as a free standing subject. As we will see in Part IV, the quantum
nature of language creates non-local connections that far transcend these sub-
jects. Nevertheless, to be a human or any other subject is to be individuated as
an organism with quantum coherence, the physical integrity of which is con-
stitutionally independent not just of society, but in a sense of the universe as a
whole. Unlike the physicist’s particles, which literally do come from nowhere,
our elementary units are given at birth by nature, and as such impose a “rump
individualist” limit on a holist argument.
With the human body as our starting point, the ﬁrst question to ask is of its
nature: what essential properties and dispositions do we have that might enable
and constrain social possibilities? Some may doubt whether a human nature
exists, but in my view, there is no less reason to think that humans have a nature
than horses or honeybees do. We all come from the same evolutionary process
and in each case our behavior is differentially empowered by its material and
mental gifts. Horses and honeybees can’t talk because it is not in their nature,
and we can because it is in ours. In addressing this essential nature, what
follows may be seen as an exercise in “philosophical anthropology” in the
broad sense, understood as an inquiry into “the unchanging preconditions of
human changeableness.”3
Still, it is one thing to talk about the content of human nature and another to
discuss what I will call its form, and I hope to avoid at least some controversy
by focusing on the latter. By the content of human nature I mean what most
of the debate is about, namely fundamental behavioral dispositions: the extent
to which, compared to animals or each other (men vs. women), people are
naturally selﬁsh, altruistic, aggressive, sociable, and so on. These are mostly
empirical issues and much has been learned about them by cognitive scientists,
evolutionary psychologists, and others. Since this work has been carried out
within a classical framework, it would be interesting to speculate how a quantum
2 Cf. Fodor (1974) on the “special sciences.”
3 Honneth and Joas (1988: 7). I say “in the broad sense” because philosophical anthropology
also refers to a particular school of continental social theory associated with Arnold Gehlen,
Helmuth Plessner and Max Scheler (for introductions to this tradition see Honneth and Joas
[1988], Fischer [2009], and Rehberg [2009]). Although I will not take up these thinkers here,
my sense is that there is considerable resonance below to their ideas, for which Schopenhauer
was also an important inﬂuence (Honneth and Joas, 1988: 42).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A quantum model of man
151
approach might advance it further, but I will not do that here.4 Instead, my
interest is in how a physicist might think about human nature, which, I take it,
would concern its form – how the expression of our dispositions is constrained
and enabled by the physics of our bodies. In the past there was no reason to ask
this question,5 since it was assumed the body was classical. And regarding the
body speciﬁcally I partly agree. The physics of the mind, however, is quantum,
which I show could resolve some long-standing controversies that surround
human subjectivity.
In the following three chapters I take up some implications of quantum con-
sciousness theory for human Cognition, Will, and Experience respectively. In
each chapter I start with current debates and their implicit classical assumptions;
then review theory and evidence favoring a quantum approach; and conclude
by showing how this would move the debates forward. However, I ﬁrst want to
situate my argument in relation to an over-arching classical alternative, different
elements of which will be in question at various points below.
If the goal here is to think the form of human nature through the quantum,
then what would it mean to think it through classical physics instead? Given
the origins of the social sciences in the classical worldview one might think a
clear answer would exist, but it does not. Having lost interest in physics long
ago, contemporary social theory is little help, since it has integrated intentional
phenomena into its ontologies that have no place in the classical worldview. A
pure classical foil might be found in the work of the nineteenth-century social
scientists who ﬁrst “thought through physics.”6 However, their discourse is
obscure today and lacks our hindsight advantage to put it in perspective. So I
will start from scratch instead, though with a low level of ambition. Rather than
propose a full model of Classical Man, I identify ﬁve constraints that such a
model should satisfy if it is to be consistent with a strict, classical ontology. I’ll
be brief, since we will see these constraints at work in various contexts below.
First, Classical Man is completely material, in the sense that, ontologically
speaking, mental states are nothing but brain states. This does not necessarily
mean that people cannot have consciousness, but if they do then it must be
epiphenomenal, with no mysterious powers that cannot be explained by move-
ments of classical matter and energy. That may seem a high bar, but it is the
bar that materialists themselves have set for solving the mind–body problem,
and as such seems right in this context.
4 Quantum models of evolutionary processes would provide a starting point; see for example
McFadden (2001) and Gabora et al. (2013). Fry (2012) offers a thoughtful reﬂection on whether
evolutionary theory is based on an implicit materialist ontology.
5 Ecological psychology is the big exception here (see Gibson [1979]), and interestingly is also
the site of some early reﬂections on quantum cognition; see Shaw et al. (1994).
6 For good overviews see Mirowski (1988), Cohen (1994), and Redman (1997).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

152
A quantum model of man
Second, Classical Man is completely separable, in the sense that nothing
about his physical identity as an organism – whether as a body or a mind –
depends constitutively on other people. That is not to deny that we depend
hugely on each other in a causal sense for survival, but in the classical view
we do so as independent beings, with properties wholly contained within our
skins. Intuitively that makes sense, since where else would our properties be if
not inside our skins?7 But whereas in the classical case biological separability
implies mental separability, in the quantum case mental states can depend
non-locally on other minds.
Third, the properties of Classical Man are real and well-deﬁned at the micro-
level. At the macro-level people often experience ambivalence, doubt, and other
states of mind which feel indeﬁnite, as if we were not fully “in” one state rather
than another. Classical Man might have such feelings, but deep down inside
he is always in a fully speciﬁed state. Classical logic tells us that a material
state cannot be both A and not-A, so if ambivalence is a material state, at any
moment in time we must be actually in one state or the other, even if it does
not feel that way.8
Fourth, Classical Man responds to local causal forces only, whether external
forces from the environment entering his body or perceptual ﬁeld, or internal
forces set in motion by these stimuli that eventually culminate in reasons and
behavior. Since there is no non-local causation in classical physics, if reasons
matter in explanations of human behavior then it must be through local causes,
just like everything else.
Finally, Classical Man’s behavior is determined by the conjunction of internal
and external causes operating on his body, which I understand to mean that he
does not have free will.9 Note that this does not necessarily mean we could ever
know all those causes; the point here is ontological rather than epistemological.
In the classical worldview free will would be like thermodynamics, unknowable
in its details but ultimately deterministic when it comes to ontology.
Pulling these ﬁve requirements together, the ﬁrst thing to notice is that they
omit experience, meaning, and purpose in a teleological sense. That is because
they are not consistent with a strictly classical ontology – experience because
materialism cannot explain consciousness; meaning because it cannot exist
without experience; and purpose because teleology is incompatible with a
mechanistic worldview. So given these constraints, what is Classical Man like
overall? Two answers suggest themselves: a machine or a zombie.
7 On the skin as a boundary relevant to social science see Farr (1997).
8 This is a realist view of psychological attributes, which is arguably presupposed by efforts to
measure them; see Michell (2005) and Maul (2013).
9 This requirement is more debatable, since some philosophers think that free will is compatible
with classical determinism. I address this literature in Chapter 9.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A quantum model of man
153
The idea that people are just very complicated machines has a long pedigree,
and became dominant in cognitive science and beyond with the advent of the
computational theory of mind in the mid-twentieth century.10 In this picture
we are walking computers, constantly crunching data from the environment to
realize pre-programmed objectives. It is not hard to see this image in rational
choice theory, which is praised and condemned alike for its “mechanical”
view of man. The zombie is less familiar in social theory, but it seems an apt
characterization of homo sociologicus, in his purest form an unreﬂexive dope
habitually re-enacting social norms.11 Compared to the machine the zombie
seems less inspired by classical physics, since he is at least animated (if not
“alive”!), but the two share a lack of subjectivity and free will.
Many social scientists might be uncomfortable fully embracing man as a
machine, much less his zombie friend, and as such see Classical Man as a
straw man. But recall my purpose here: it is not to describe models of man in
contemporary social theory, which routinely incorporate intentional phenomena
that have no place in the classical worldview. Rather, it is to think the human
being from scratch through classical physics. The result I submit is deeply
counter-intuitive, for what we get is a very complex but essentially lifeless
object. Indeed, if the feminist objection to models of man discourse is that
it is about men, then the objection to Classical Man is that he is dead. And
why shouldn’t he be, given that classical physics was invented to study lifeless
objects?12 In a materialist worldview, whatever constitutes the speciﬁcity of
subjectivity will necessarily be absent. Quantum Man, in contrast, is very
much alive.
10 On the machine metaphor in the social sciences see Menard (1988), Mirowski (1988), and Maas
(1999), and for its continuing importance in biology see Nicholson (2013).
11 The classic critique of this “over-socialized” model of man is Wrong (1961); for a good discus-
sion within IR see Sending (2002). Zombies, however, do feature prominently in philosophy of
mind; e.g. Chalmers (1996).
12 See Wigner (1970).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

8
Quantum cognition and rational choice
Of the three faculties of subjectivity, the empirical case for quantum cognition
is the strongest. In the past decade a rapidly growing body of scholarship has
emerged at the intersection of mathematical psychology and physics that not
only models cognition in explicitly quantum terms, but has rigorously tested
these models as well. While it remains to be seen how mainstream psychologists
will respond, “quantum decision theory” has clearly come of age.1 Moreover,
at the same time an almost completely independent literature has emerged on
quantum game theory as well. This work is more in a purely formal vein and
thus less well tested against real data, although its predictions about how people
should behave in quantum games appear to conform to what experimental game
theorists have found. I brieﬂy take up quantum game theory at the end of this
chapter, but my main focus will be on its decision-theoretic cousin.
Quantum consciousness theory suggests that human beings are literally walk-
ing wave functions. Most quantum decision theorists would not go that far, and
indeed – perhaps wary of controversy – they generally barely mention quantum
consciousness, and then only to emphasize that they are making no claims
about what is going on deep inside the brain (much less about consciousness),
but are only interested in behavior.2 Instead, they have motivated their work in
two other ways.3 First, they have highlighted the intuitive ﬁt between quantum
theory’s indeterminism and the probabilistic character of human behavior.4 If
we were founding the social sciences today and started – without metaphysical
prejudice–bylookingfor useful models inphysics, thenquantummodels would
1 The oldest precursors to quantum decision theory of which I am aware are Bohm (1951: 168–172)
and Dobbs (1951), though the latter to my knowledge has never been cited in the contemporary
literature. More recent but still early contributions would include Orlov (1982) (written while he
was a prisoner in the Gulag), Shaw et al. (1994), Aerts and Aerts (1995/6), Bordley and Kadane
(1999), and Deutsch (1999).
2 This disclaimer is almost de rigueur in the literature; for examples see Aerts et al. (2011: 137),
Yukalov and Sornette (2009b: 1075), Busemeyer and Bruza (2012: 24; and 349–357 for further
discussion), and Wang et al. (2013: 673).
3 Busemeyer and Bruza (2012: 1–8) actually give six reasons, but they seem to be of two basic
varieties.
4 See Glimcher (2005) on indeterminism at various scales of human functioning.
154
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum cognition and rational choice
155
be a much more obvious import than classical ones. Second, quantum decision
theorists have argued that their model can explain long-standing anomalies in
human behavior under uncertainty. Beyond that they have remained agnostic
about quantum consciousness, which makes quantum decision theory a form
of what is called “weak” or “generalized” quantum theory, in which the for-
malism is detached from its physical basis and used simply as a tool to describe
phenomena.5 It should be emphasized, therefore, that by pressing quantum
decision theory into the service of my ontological thesis I am taking it much
further than most of its advocates are currently willing to go.
Still, while separable in principle, it is clear that quantum brain theory (at
least) and quantum decision theory are related. If the former is true at the micro-
level, then at the macro-level we should expect to see the behavior predicted
by the latter. So if experiments do not support quantum decision theory, then
that is a serious problem for quantum brain theory too. The connection is not
as tight in the other direction but still there. If experiments do support quantum
decision theory, then, at this stage of our understanding, it is still possible
that classical mechanisms in the brain might explain this result.6 However, as
noted at the end of Chapter 5, this would open up an entirely new front in
the quantum brain theory debate, by putting a burden of proof on skeptics to
explain why, despite its claimed impossibility at the micro-level, we observe
precisely what the theory would predict at the macro-level? It could be that
reality is quantum at the sub-atomic level, classical at the brain level, and then
quantum again at the behavioral level – but how likely is that? Nobody knows,
but it is certainly less elegant than a uniform quantum picture from top to
bottom.
Quantum decision theorists frame their work in relation to expected utility
theory (EUT), the axiomatic version of what is more broadly known as rational
choice theory.7 EUT is the most widely accepted formal model of man in the
social sciences today, the foundation not only of neo-classical economics but
increasingly political science and sociology as well. It is actually an amalgam
of two theories: utility theory, used to model actors’ preferences, and (classical)
probability theory, used to model expectations under uncertainty. (In this basic
structure EUT replicates the more general “Desire × Belief = Action” model
of behavior, the dominant meta-psychological framework in philosophy and
discussed below.) Given an actor’s preferences and probabilities, the rational
choice is deﬁned as that which maximizes expected utility. Note that as a
5 See Atmanspacher et al. (2002).
6 See for example Glimcher (2005: 35), beim Graben and Atmanspacher (2006), de Barros and
Suppes (2009), Khrennikov (2011), and de Barros (2012); on the other hand, Hameroff (2013)
argues that quantum consciousness theory will ultimately be necessary to explain these results.
7 Savage (1954) is the locus classicus of EUT; for an excellent discussion of rational choice theory
in philosophical context see Hollis and Sugden (1993).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

156
A quantum model of man
theory of choice EUT encompasses not just Cognition but also what I am
calling Will, in the form of a (mostly implicit) assumption that the combination
of preferences and expectations (“reasons”) are causes. I argue in the next
chapter that this assumption is problematic, but since the literature treats the
probability and utility elements together, I will do so here as well.
Although often used in a descriptive and/or explanatory capacity, EUT is
in the ﬁrst instance a normative theory of what it means to behave rationally
in a given situation. To that end, it deﬁnes a set of axioms that impose log-
ical constraints on how actors may calculate probabilities and organize their
preferences (the familiar requirements of commutativity, transitivity, indepen-
dence, and so on). Crucially, in EUT it is assumed – to my knowledge without
ever explicit justiﬁcation – that ‘logical’ means classical logical, even though
(coincidentally) classical and quantum logic were formalized in the same year
(1933).8 Classical logic is the familiar “either-or” logic of our schooling and
the material world, in which things have deﬁnite properties that cannot be
incompatible. Not just the axioms of EUT, but the whole interpretive ediﬁce of
rational choice theory takes this logic for granted, which quantum theory puts
into question.
But before quantum decision theory came along, there were decades of
experimental research by psychologists, showing that human decision-making
was subject to systematic “biases” relative to EUT predictions. The pioneering
work was done by Daniel Kahneman, Amos Tversky, and others in the 1970s on
the non-rational “heuristics” that people appear to use in judging probabilities,
for which Kahneman received the Nobel Prize. But the empirical problems
for EUT appeared at the start with the Allais and Ellsberg Paradoxes and
today encompass a number of anomalies.9 These ﬁndings have spurred many
creative attempts to account for them, whether by dropping or modifying an
axiom from EUT or working outside the theory altogether, and are the basis
for many contemporary research programs. However, these efforts all have
three things in common: they continue to operate within a classical frame of
reference; they are partial, addressing certain anomalies only; and they are ad
hoc, in not being derived from an alternative axiomatic foundation. Hence, the
interest in quantum decision theory, which not only offers such a foundation,
but looks likely to explain all the anomalies of classical decision theory in one
fell swoop.
8 The latter by no less than John von Neumann, who later co-authored the foundational text of
(classical) game theory (1944) – one wonders if he ever considered applying the one to the other!
See Primas (2007: 9–15) for a good comparison of classical (Boolean) and quantum logic in the
context of the mind–body problem.
9 See Shoemaker (1982) for an early but still useful overview, and more recently Rieskamp et al.
(2006).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum cognition and rational choice
157
Quantum decision theory
The quantum decision theory literature is highly technical, already too large to
summarize here, and complicated further by the fact that authors do not always
agree on mathematical details.10 So, to convey just a sense of the approach, I
will brieﬂy characterize three prominent lines of research – on order effects,
probability judgment, and preference reversals – and then turn to what all this
means for the nature of rationality.
Order effects in quantum perspective
One of the key differences between classical and quantum physics is that in
the former interactions between objects and measurement devices are “weak”
whereas in the latter they are “strong.”11 The distinction turns on whether the
act of measurement is linked to changes in the state of the system in question,
which can be discerned by measuring it again. If there is no change then the
two measurements are said to commute, and if there is a change they are non-
commutative. Commutativity is a basic principle of logic and mathematics that
holds when the order in which operations are done does not affect the outcome,
so addition is commutative (8+5 = 5+8) while subtraction is not (8–5 ࣔ5–8).
Applied to a sequence of physical measurements, if commutativity holds then
the state of the world is independent of the observer, who is therefore just
registering a pre-existing fact (the classical case); if non-commutativity holds
then the subject–object distinction has broken down, and so the observer is
somehow participating in establishing what the facts are (the quantum case).
The exemplar of the latter is what happens when you measure the momentum or
position of a particle; change the order of measurements and you get different
results.
“Order effects,” where the order in which information is presented leads to
inconsistent results, are well known and widespread in the social sciences.12
They are pervasive in public opinion surveys, and often affect the updating
of beliefs over time and as such can play a signiﬁcant role in medical and
jury decision-making. From a practical standpoint they are therefore a problem
that needs to be managed, and because they violate the commutative axiom
of classical probability theory they are also irrational and thus an anomaly
that needs to be explained. Within the mainstream literature this has been
10 For short introductions to quantum decision theory see Pothos and Busemeyer (2013) and Wang
et al. (2013); Busemeyer and Bruza (2012) is currently the most comprehensive text.
11 This paragraph paraphrases Atmanspacher and R¨omer (2012: 274).
12 The literature is enormous; see Hogarth and Einhorn (1992) and Moore (2002) for illustrative
discussions.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

158
A quantum model of man
attempted entirely from a classical perspective.13 Bayesians have dealt with
order effects by making presentation order just another piece of information
that subjects need to assimilate, but that is ad hoc and merely re-describes the
phenomenon with no explanatory insight.14 “Adding,” “belief-adjustment,” and
Markov models are more substantive but still ad hoc, since they never question
the classical assumption that observations should commute. But why take this
for granted? On intuitive grounds alone, Atmanspacher and R¨omer suggest that
in psychology, “where virtually every interaction of a ‘measuring’ device with
a ‘measured’ mental state changes the state uncontrollably and where mental
states are often literally established by measurements, it is highly plausible to
argue that non-commutativity should be the ubiquitous rule.”15 In this light it
is curious that the possibility that “the problem” with order effects may lie in
the commutativity assumption itself has to my knowledge never come up in the
mainstream literature, which may attest to how deeply ingrained is the classical
model of man within psychology.
Unlike classical physics, quantum mechanics makes no ex ante stipulation
about whether commutativity holds, treating it instead as contingent on whether,
in a given empirical context, “basis vectors” are thought to be “compatible” (see
below).16 If they are compatible, then the quantum model reduces to the clas-
sical model and no order effects will be observed, whereas if basis vectors are
incompatible then non-commutative results – a signature of quantum phenom-
ena – are expected. Since order effects are deﬁned by their non-commutativity,
it is therefore not surprising that in accounting for them quantum decision
theory performs very well. It predicts both extant and new experimental data
at least as well and usually better than classical models.17 Zheng Wang and
Jerome Busemeyer have also tested an a priori prediction, derived from quan-
tum probability theory, and found that it too was born out in existing data.18
Atmanspacher and R¨omer have predicted further order effects that are common
in physics but have not yet been observed empirically in psychology, which
if found would be the strongest evidence to date that the approach is sound.19
And to cap it all off, in contrast to the ad hoc and partial nature of the classi-
cal models that try to explain order effects, quantum decision theory offers a
uniﬁed, axiomatically well-founded account. It strongly suggests, in short, that
in cognition “non-commutativity is no exotic special case but the rule, from
which commuting operations . . . are the exception.”20
13 Atmanspacher and R¨omer (2012: 275).
14 Trueblood and Busemeyer (2011: 1522).
15 Atmanspacher and R¨omer (2012: 275); emphasis added.
16 See Trueblood and Busemeyer (2011).
17 See Trueblood and Busemeyer (2011) and Wang and Busemeyer (2013).
18 See Wang and Busemeyer (2013); though see Yukalov and Sornette (2014: 89) for doubts that
their results necessitate a quantum interpretation.
19 Atmanspacher and R¨omer (2012: 277).
20 Atmanspacher and Filk (2014: 34).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum cognition and rational choice
159
Paradoxes of probability judgment
A different stream of evidence for the importance of non-commutativity in
cognition comes from research on how people assign probabilities to uncertain
events. Classical probability theory requires that people do so in particular
ways. Among these rules is that in considering the conjunction of two events,
one of which is a subset of the other, the probability of the less inclusive event
cannot be greater than that of the more inclusive one. Intuitively that makes
sense; indeed, one might wonder how it could be otherwise? Yet psychologists
have shown that people routinely commit the “conjunction fallacy” of violating
this rule.
The paradigmatic case is “Linda,” a ﬁctional subject about whom test sub-
jects (judges) are asked some questions.21 Linda is ﬁrst described as having
been a philosophy major in college, bright, and concerned with discrimination
and social justice. Then, the judges are asked whether it is more likely that
Linda is (a) a feminist bank teller or (b) a bank teller. Classical probability
theory tells us that B is more probable, since it encompasses A, but includes
other possibilities as well. Yet, judges tend to pick A, that it is more likely
Linda is a feminist bank teller than just a bank teller. Further research showed
that the effect only occurred when the two options were an unfamiliar pairing
(as opposed to woman and teacher for example), which suggested that uncer-
tainty about how to relate such pairs plays a role. This led Kahneman and
Tversky to the “representativeness” heuristic, which assumes judges reason
on the assumption that Linda is more representative of feminists than of bank
tellers. As a description it was brilliant and helped generate an entire research
program on cognitive heuristics,22 but it was also ad hoc, and since there is no
consensus on the origin of the fallacy, as an explanation it only goes so far.
In contrast, the conjunction fallacy is readily explained by quantum decision
theory, which uses quantum probabilities instead of classical. The details are
formidable, but there is an excellent narrative discussion in an article by Jerome
Busemeyer and his co-authors upon which I shall rely.23
Begin by representing a subject’s beliefs and knowledge in an n-dimensional
vector (Hilbert) space. Different “basis vectors” in this space correspond to
combinations associated with different concepts, events, and situations in social
life, which all co-exist in superposition as potentialities within the mind. Con-
cepts or events that are inconsistent or not typically experienced together will
have basis vectors that are “incompatible.” In quantum mechanics ‘incompati-
ble’ refers to observables that cannot be measured at the same time, such as the
21 For a classic statement see Tversky and Kahneman (1983).
22 See Gigerenzer and Gaissmaier (2011) for a recent overview.
23 Busemeyer et al. (2011: 196–197); there are also useful narrative fragments in Franco (2009)
and Yukalov and Sornette (2009b).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

160
A quantum model of man
position and momentum of a particle.24 However, since the ﬁrst measurement
will affect the outcome of the second this means that their joint probability
cannot be deﬁned – in violation of the commutative rule of classical probability
theory. Now consider the judges, who have been asked to decide which of the
two descriptions of Linda is more likely to be true. When answering the bank
teller question alone, the details of the story make it very difﬁcult to think of
Linda as a bank teller. When answering the conjunctive question, the judge has
to consider both feminist and bank teller features, which are represented by
incompatible basis vectors. Since they therefore have to be addressed sequen-
tially, the mind projects itself ﬁrst into the feminist sub-space (say), assessing
the likelihoods, then “rotates” to consider the alternative – bank teller – sub-
space (these rotations correspond to adopting different basis vectors or points
of view on the question). From the feminist projection, the mind turns to the
bank teller question, the consideration of which will include the judgment that
Linda is a feminist, which eliminates some of the story details and thus makes
it easier than before to imagine that she happens to have a career as a bank
teller than that she was a bank teller alone.
Phenomenologically this is plausible, and quantum decision theory also
supplies a mechanism that explains the observed bias: interference arising
from the mind’s internal measurements on incompatible states.25 Quantum
interference always has a characteristic effect, in clear violation of classical
probability theory, which is that “the probability of the union of two possible
paths can be smaller than each individual path alone”26 – which is precisely
what we observe in the Linda studies. Indeed, based on this mechanism quantum
decision theorists can even predict the size of the bias using parameters supplied
by existing studies of the effect. This has allowed them to rigorously test their
model of probabilistic fallacies such as this, and the result is a very close ﬁt
with the data.
Other anomalies in probability judgment follow a similar pattern. Con-
sider the “disjunction effect,” in which subjects violate Savage’s “Sure Thing
Principle.”27 Since an excellent accessible summary of this effect and its
quantum interpretation is provided by Jerome Busemeyer and Peter Bruza,
let me quote their discussion almost in full.28
24 ‘Compatible,’ therefore, means that “the answer to any set of questions can be known concur-
rently;” in classical probability theory all questions are assumed to be compatible. See Pothos
and Busemeyer (2014: 2).
25 See Franco (2009), Yukalov and Sornette (2009b: 1088–1093), and Busemeyer et al. (2011);
for a comprehensive overview of interference effects in psychology see Haven and Khrennikov
(2013: 124–154).
26 Busemeyer et al. (2006: 220).
27 See Savage (1954: 21–23).
28 See Busemeyer and Bruza (2012: 8–10). For other quantum treatments of the disjunction effect,
see Khrennikov and Haven (2009), Yukalov and Sornette (2009a; 2009b; 2011), and Asano
et al. (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum cognition and rational choice
161
[The disjunction effect] was discovered in the process of testing a rational axiom of
decision theory called the sure thing principle (Savage, 1954). According to the sure
thing principle, if under state of the world X you prefer action A over B, and if under
the complementary state of the world not-X you also prefer A over B, then you should
prefer A over B even when you do not know the state of the world . . . Tversky and
Shaﬁr (1992) experimentally tested this principle by presenting students with a two-
stage gamble; that is, a gamble which can be played twice. At each stage the decision
was whether or not to play a gamble that has an equal chance of winning $200 or losing
$100 (the real amount won or lost was actually $2.00 and $1.00 respectively). The key
result is based on the decision for the second play, after ﬁnishing the ﬁrst play. The
experiment included three conditions: one in which the students were informed that
they already won the ﬁrst gamble, a second condition in which they were informed that
they lost the ﬁrst gamble, and a third in which they did not know the outcome of the
ﬁrst gamble. If they knew they won the ﬁrst gamble, the majority (69%) chose to play
again; if they knew they lost the ﬁrst gamble, then again the majority (59%) chose to
play again; but if they did not know whether they won or lost, then the majority chose
not to play (only 36% wanted to play again).
. . .
Researchers working with quantum models see this ﬁnding as an example of an inter-
ference effect similar to that found in the double-slit type of experiments conducted
in particle physics . . . Both cases involve two possible paths: in the disjunction exper-
iment, the two paths are inferring the outcome of either a win or a loss with the ﬁrst
gamble; for the double-slit experiment, the two paths are splitting the photon off into the
upper and lower channel by a beam splitter. In both experiments, the path taken can be
known (observed) or unknown (unobserved). Finally, in both cases, under the unknown
(unobserved) condition, the probability (of gambling for the disjunction experiment, of
detection at D1 for the double-slit experiment) falls far below each of the probabilities
for the known (observed) cases . . . One cannot help but wonder whether the mathemat-
ical model that succeeds so well to explain interference statistics in physics could also
explain interference statistics in psychology.
Quantizing preference reversals
In decision theory, people can be irrational in at least two distinct ways: in how
they judge probabilities and in how they form preferences. On the preference
side, rationality is deﬁned by the assumptions of utility theory, three of which
ﬁgure most prominently in the present context.29 First, rational actors must
have complete, fully determined preferences over all outcomes prior to choice.
(Note that this does not mean that others know an actor’s preferences, just the
actor herself.) Second, preferences must follow the rules of classical logic and
thus be transitive, such that if actors prefer A to B and B to C then they must
also prefer A to C. Third, because they can’t be observed, if preferences are
determinate and thus really there, then they must be “invariant” over different
29 See especially Slovic (1995), Lambert-Mogiliansky et al. (2009), and Alfano (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

162
A quantum model of man
procedures that might be used to elicit them. As with the probability side of
EUT, utility theory is clearly consistent with the constraints we identiﬁed above
on classical models of man.
The phenomenon of “preference reversals” challenges all three assumptions,
suggesting that preferences are not “revealed” at all, but “constructed” in the
process of choice and as such highly sensitive to framing and context effects.30
The key issue at stake in this literature is procedure invariance – preferences
should not depend on how they are elicited, since that could violate transitivity.31
The classic experiments testing this assumption compared two procedures:
(1) asking subjects to choose between two gambles, one with a good chance
of winning a small amount and the other with a smaller chance of winning
more; and then (2) asking them how much they would pay to play each bet.
The experiments are set up so that these procedures – choices vs. expected cash
values – are formally equivalent, so rational actors should pay more for the bet
they prefer. Yet, in practice, it was found that “choices between pairs of gambles
were inﬂuenced primarily by the probabilities of winning and losing, whereas
buying and selling prices were primarily determined by the dollar amounts
that could be won or lost,”32 which leads to violations of transitivity. These
experiments have been repeated many times, and subjected to intense scrutiny
especially from neo-classical economists, who, not surprisingly, saw them as a
serious threat to their theories.33 If Jones’ preferences over X depend on how
we measure them, then not only is his rationality in question, but who’s to say
Jones even has preferences over X – and then where would utility theory be?
While the mainstream preference reversal literature has not considered a
quantum interpretation of the phenomenon, it has generated useful (if ad hoc)
classical theories to account for it.34 However, in quantum decision theory we
now have an alternative axiomatic framework that not only explains preference
reversals but can predict them as well.
An excellent overview is provided by Ariane Lambert-Mogiliansky and her
co-authors in an article suggestively entitled “Type Indeterminacy: A Model
of the KT (Kahneman-Tversky) Man.”35 Playing off “Harsanyi Man,” whose
“types” (preference orderings) are fully determined and mutually exclusive
(even if unknown to others), Lambert-Mogiliansky et al. start with a represen-
tation of a person’s “state” as a superposition of all the possible types relevant to
30 See Tversky et al. (1990) and Slovic (1995: 365), and Smith (2012) for a recent review.
31 Also see Michel (2005) and Maul (2013).
32 Slovic (1995: 365).
33 See Guala (2000) on economists’ resistance to and eventual acceptance of the preference
reversal phenomenon.
34 See for example Alfano (2012).
35 Lambert-Mogiliansky et al. (2009); see Pothos and Busemeyer (2009), Yukalov and Sornette
(2009a: 543–545), Khrennikov (2010), and Khrennikova et al. (2014) for other quantum treat-
ments of preference reversals.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum cognition and rational choice
163
a situation. Whether these types are compatible is then the key question. If they
are, then EUT takes over; if they are not, then, like the position and momen-
tum of a particle, types cannot have well-deﬁned values simultaneously.36 The
superposition state does not reduce to an actual or “eigen” type until a mea-
surement is made. Then, depending on the context, one basis vector becomes
preferred, and a single type emerges in wave function collapse. Note that this
is the exact opposite of the standard view. Rather than being an expression of
underlying pre-existing preferences, “[d]ecision-making is modeled as the mea-
surement of the preferences.”37 Whereas Harsanyi Man’s problem is merely
uncertainty about others’ types, KT Man does not even know her own type until
she makes a choice.
Interestingly, this conclusion is strongly reminiscent of the “performative”
model of agency due to Judith Butler, a post-structural feminist theorist.38 In
developing this model she draws on language philosopher J. L. Austin’s concept
of performative utterances, which in contrast to descriptive speech acts, like
“this tie is red,” are statements that themselves do something, like “I pronounce
you husband and wife” at a wedding. Butler’s interest is less in language
than in gender, which she argues people have only insofar as they perform it.
However, although her foil is identity theory rather than rational choice, her
critique of the former applies to the latter, which is that gendered performances
are not enacted by a preexisting subject/rational actor with a set of gendered
preferences. Rather, gendered performances actualize gendered preferences
and in that moment make someone a gendered subject in the ﬁrst place.
In suggesting that performativity is a “quantum” theory of agency, I do not
want to implicate Butler in other aspects of my approach, which she might
reject on epistemological grounds because it is naturalistic, and on ontological
grounds because my concern with consciousness reﬂects a humanist conception
of subjectivity of which Butler is highly critical.39 However, on the speciﬁc issue
of how she conceives the relationship between agents and agency, there is a
strong parallel to the quantum reading of the preference reversal phenomenon.
Moreover, one of the issues Butler struggles with in response to critics is the
age-old tension between voluntarism and determinism, both of which she wants
to avoid.40 As we will see in the next chapter on free will, a quantum model
of agency provides a way to thread this needle, and as such could contribute to
the further development of her approach.
36 Lambert-Mogiliansky et al. (2009: 353).
37 See Lambert-Mogiliansky and Busemeyer (2012: 103), emphasis added.
38 See Butler (1990; 1993). A distinct but related tradition of performativity theorizing has been
developed in the sociology of economics by Donald MacKenzie (2006) and others.
39 By not thematizing consciousness, Karen Barad (2007: 59–65 and passim) provides an alterna-
tive quantum reading of performativity more in keeping with Butler’s theory.
40 See Allen (1998) for a particularly useful discussion.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

164
A quantum model of man
Lambert-Mogiliansky et al. contrast their model to classical Markov and
random utility models, but they do not test any predictions, nor am I aware
of such tests by others.41 But one interesting factoid is that in “back to back”
measurements people are known to reveal the same preferences again, which is
contrary to the prediction of random utility models, where choices are assumed
to be discrete and probabilistic. In contrast, due to the “Quantum Zeno Effect,”
in which repeated rapid measurements can slow or even halt the evolution of a
wave function, this repetitive pattern is actually predicted by quantum decision
theory.42 That’s just one case, but given what quantum decision theorists have
found in probability judgment, there seems every reason to expect further
success here.
In sum, the situation in cognitive science today seems similar to physics in the
early 1900s. In both domains rigorous testing of classical theories had produced
a string of anomalies; efforts to explain them with new classical models were
ad hoc and partial; and then a quantum theory emerged that predicted them all
with great precision. From a Lakatosian perspective one could hardly want more
evidence of a progressive problem shift, which in physics was consolidated at
Solvay in 1927. Whether that will happen in psychology remains to be seen,
but perhaps a Bloomington Conference will one day do the same for quantum
decision theory.43
Rationality unbound?
The Kahneman-Tversky results led to a large wave of pessimism about human
rationality. If people did not behave rationally even in simple laboratory tasks,
what hope was there for us being rational in the far more complex problems
we face in everyday life? However, this skepticism soon met with substantial
pushback, though less from defenders of rational choice than from scholars
arguing that the latter’s deﬁnition of rationality – which the psychologists had
taken as their standard – was too narrow and therefore itself the problem. In
what have become known as the “rationality wars” two competing views of
what it means to be rational have emerged.
The “coherence” view44 is the EUT orthodoxy, and despite its empirical
problems, it remains dominant not only in its economics birthplace but prob-
ably most of the social sciences. On this deﬁnition, being rational is about
having properly organized beliefs and preferences, and then following the rules
41 On the non-Markovian nature of quantum decision theory also see Asano et al. (2012).
42 See Atmanspacher et al. (2004) and Franck (2008: 135–137).
43 Bloomington, Indiana, that is, which has been an epicenter of this research; Diederik Aerts’
program on quantum cognition at the Free University of Brussels is another.
44 Note that coherence here has nothing to do with coherence in the quantum mechanical sense
(see Chapter 5).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum cognition and rational choice
165
of expected utility maximization in making choices.45 If people’s minds are
incoherent or they don’t follow the rules, then so much the worse for them:
it just means they are irrational, and vulnerable to exploitation and/or other-
wise likely to incur unnecessary costs. In contrast, the “correspondence” view,
which is due especially to the work of Gerd Gigerenzer and his colleagues, is
success-oriented.46 On this deﬁnition, being rational is about whether one suc-
ceeds in achieving goals, which depends on the correspondence or ﬁt between
one’s mind and the environment. Rationality on this view should be deﬁned in
adaptive and ecological terms, not a priori and intrinsic ones.47
Both sides have a point, as Andrea Polonioli makes clear in an excellent
review.48 On the one hand, there are good theoretical reasons to think that fol-
lowing coherence criteria will not always be adaptive: in both evolutionary and
social contexts being inconsistent may sometimes be better. And empirically,
heuristics are better predictors of actual behavior. These considerations argue
for not making coherence the sole standard of rationality. On the other hand,
it is not clear that correspondence criteria can simply replace coherence ones
either, since they face substantial difﬁculties of implementation. Identifying the
goals against which success should be judged is not always easy; sometimes
criteria of correspondence to the world may conﬂict; and even if goals are
identiﬁable, it may be hard to assess performance if information is unavailable
or hard to interpret. In short, giving up on a universal standard of rationality
seems, in practice, to mean giving up on any normative standard at all. That
argues for retaining the orthodox criterion even if people do not always abide
by it.49
To date this debate has played out entirely within a classical frame of refer-
ence. This privileges the coherence view, because if correspondence is unwork-
able in practice then defenders of the orthodoxy can maintain that it should
remain at least a normative aspiration. If people are classical decision-makers
dealing with a classical world, then having a well-ordered mind is simply the
optimal way “to harness the uncertainty in our environment and make accurate
predictions regarding future events and relevant hypotheses.”50
Quantum decision theorists have not yet waded directly into the rationality
wars. While recognizing that their work bears on the meaning of rationality,
they have not engaged the philosophical literature and mostly reserve their
reﬂections to a concluding paragraph or two, and then, like quantum theorists
45 On rationality as utility maximization see Cudd (1993: 103–110).
46 See for example Gigerenzer and Gaissmaier (2011).
47 This seems resonant with the Aristotelian notion of “practical” rationality, though to my knowl-
edge this connection is not made by advocates of the correspondence view.
48 See Polonioli (2014), whose discussion I rely on in this paragraph; also see Wallin (2013).
49 See Wallin (2013: 474).
50 Pothos and Busemeyer (2013: 270).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

166
A quantum model of man
everywhere, in moving from theory to interpretation they do not always agree.51
Still, it seems clear that their work strengthens the case for the correspondence
view, not only by providing a physical basis for the Kahneman-Tversky effects
as I showed above, but by undermining the privileged dialectical position of
the coherence view.
First, quantum decision theory calls into question the whole idea of utility-
maximization as a criterion of rationality, which presupposes that a normal
human mind has well-deﬁned beliefs and preferences which can then be max-
imized in choice behavior. If we are quantum systems, then a normal human
mind will be in a superposition rather than well-deﬁned state, and as such “there
exists nothing to be maximized.”52 Rationality cannot mean relating means to
ends if ends do not even exist prior to the choice of means. To be sure, classical
beliefs and preferences may emerge from time to time, but only when there is no
uncertainty or no incompatible basis vectors affecting an uncertain decision –
which in real life is likely to be the exception rather than the norm.
Second, quantum decision theory challenges the coherence view’s assump-
tion that having a well-ordered mind is the optimal basis for harnessing envi-
ronmental uncertainty and making accurate predictions. That might be true if
subjects are fully separable from the objects of their perception, as in the clas-
sical worldview, but in the quantum world this is not the case. Recall that when
physicists measure particles they become entangled with them, such that while
we cannot say measurement “causes” the result, it creates a non-local corre-
lation between subject and object that “inﬂuences” it. This non-separability is
the basis for the holism of quantum processes, and if human beings are quan-
tum systems too then this holism would carry over into our dealings with the
macroscopic world.
So consider again that KT Man is highly sensitive to the context of her
environment. Viewed from a quantum perspective, this means not just that
context affects her behavior (that is true in EUT as well), or even that over time
it might change her beliefs or desires (as in Bayesian updating or endogenous
preference formation), since as long as separability is assumed these processes
would be causal. Rather, KT Man’s context sensitivity means that there is an
entanglement between the two, such that her mind is in effect extended beyond
her brain and communing with her context. As I will argue later in my discussion
of visual perception and language, this gives her insight into her environment
not by the causal transmission of information into a previously well-ordered
51 See for example Lambert-Mogiliansky et al. (2009: 356), Yukalov and Sornette (2009a: 537).
The longest discussions of rationality I have found in the literature are by Pothos and Busemeyer
(2013: 270–271; 2014), though even these are quite abbreviated.
52 Slovic (1995: 369), quoting D. Krantz on the preference reversal phenomenon; emphasis added.
Also see Whitford’s (2002) critique of means–ends rationality from a Deweyian perspective.
An explicitly quantum version of this point is made by Yukalov and Sornette (2009a: 537).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum cognition and rational choice
167
mind, but non-locally by collapsing her superposed potential states of mind into
an actual state of mind. Not only, I submit, does non-local or “direct” perception
provide a better correspondence between mind and uncertain environments than
the “optimal” approach of the classical view of rationality, it positively depends
on the mind not being coherent – except in the quantum sense.53
Third, quantum decision-making is holistic in another way, which is that it
encompasses the whole brain including the emotions and the sub-conscious.54
Emotions do not follow classical logic and so in EUT not only are they differ-
entiated from reason, but treated as essentially “un-model-able.” That might be
ﬁne if each kept to its own domain, but when faced with KT Man’s behavior we
are forced in EUT to conclude that emotion is colonizing a domain of reason
from which properly it should be excluded. Neuroscientists have conﬁrmed
that reason and emotion are indeed deeply intertwined in decision making
under uncertainty,55 making the classical deﬁnition of rationality increasingly
moot – but they offer no physical basis as a substitute. Quantum decision the-
ory provides that alternative, enabling us to model the emotional aspect of
choice in an integrated way. While from a classical standpoint this may seem to
weaken the concept of rationality,56 to my mind it makes rationality stronger,
by incorporating the emotions as a decision-making resource.
The coherence view of rationality only makes sense as a normative standard
if our brains are separable from their environment and limited to classical
computations. Quantum brains are non-separable and orders of magnitude more
powerful, and capable of feats that for classical brains are inconceivable. Thus,
whereas classical rationality is mechanical and forces us to purge our every
inconsistency, the quantum model allows us to think incompatible thoughts
simultaneously and to exploit non-local connections to our environment. This
seems a vastly more ﬂexible and supple kind of rationality that would be
of particular beneﬁt in an uncertain world. So why base the deﬁnition of
rationality – our highest standard for behavior – on what our brains do only
in the classical limit? From this perspective, “bounded” rationality is a more
apt characterization of classical decision theory, while the ostensibly irrational
processes explained by quantum decision theory constitute a kind of super- or
“unbounded” rationality.57
If the coherence view of rationality is denied its privileged normative position
by virtue of its classical underpinnings, does this then mean that we should
embrace the correspondence view? With no expertise in this area I hesitate to
53 Also see Pothos and Busemeyer (2013: 271).
54 See especially Yukalov and Sornette (2009a; 2009b). Other quantum decision theorists have
not thematized this connection, so I do not know if they would agree.
55 In IR scholarship see especially Mercer (2010) and the citations therein.
56 See La Mura (2009).
57 Cf. Rieskamp et al. (2006) and Pothos and Busemeyer (2014: 2).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

168
A quantum model of man
venture a conclusion, but my gut feeling is a quantum one so to speak, or both
yes and no. Yes, we should as a better description of how people actually behave,
but not as a new normative standard. In part this is because of the questions
raised by Polonioli about its workability in practice, which when given a
quantum reading point to a deeper problem. Quantum physics teaches us that
the behavior of sub-atomic particles is extremely sensitive to the experimental
context; measure them in one way and you get one result, in another way you
get another. The implication is that we cannot speak of a stable, objective reality
at that level. Quantum decision theory suggests that the same is true of human
beings: who we are at a given moment cannot be separated from our context.
And given that our contexts are vastly more complex, subtle and varied than
those in physics, that means that compared to sub-atomic particles our behavior
will be vastly more complex, subtle and varied as well.
Moreover, keep in mind that even if heuristics and quantum decision theory
make more accurate predictions overall than EUT, these predictions are about
how a sampled population will behave, not particular individuals. As such they
are necessarily statistical predictions, with variation around the mean. So does
that mean that individuals who are not at the mean are behaving irrationally?58
That doesn’t seem right; it seems more appropriate to say that each actor is doing
the best they can under their own unique personal and contextual constraints. In
other words, perhaps the reason correspondence is problematic as a normative
standard is that it cannot be a normative standard at all, because in most cases
it has no objective basis.
That in turn suggests a broader conclusion given the quantum critique of the
coherence view: when questions are incompatible and thus classical rationality
is impossible there simply is no normative standard of rationality. All rationality
in such situations is contextual and particular.59 The parties to the rationality
wars are ﬁghting over something that, most of the time at least, does not exist.
Thus, in real-world decision-making, rather than deﬁning rationality objec-
tively perhaps it should be done subjectively, by reference to how people
themselves deﬁne success as they try to solve problems in their lives. This
is not to say that cognitive scientists should not continue to do research on
how successful people are, in some sense “objectively,” in solving problems,
from which generalizations might emerge that could be useful in public policy.
However, we should resist the urge to turn such generalizations into normative
standards. For what is their point, if not to discipline people into conformity
with society’s deﬁnition of success, which as an intersubjective phenomenon
is just as contextual and particular as an individual’s? It may be that from
58 Also see Martinez-Martinez (2014: 43).
59 Cf. Pothos and Busemeyer (2014), who seem to hold out hope for a new normative standard,
but in the end, fall back on the descriptive superiority of the quantum approach.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum cognition and rational choice
169
society’s point of view some behaviors – illicit drug use say, or joining a gang –
are counter-productive, but does that make them irrational?60 Even if someone
later regrets his decisions, to the charge of irrationality it is always open to him
to reply that “it seemed like a good idea at the time.” And who are you or I to
say, if we had their brains and were situated in their context, that we would not
have had the same good idea?
Quantum game theory: the next frontier
Given the preceding discussion it is natural to ask what would happen if quan-
tum decision-makers are placed in a strategic setting, where they are playing
against each other rather than nature. This is the focus of quantum game theory,
which originated in 1999 in papers by David Meyer and Jens Eisert, Martin
Wilkens, and Maciej Lewenstein.61 The literature has since exploded, with a
review article in 2008 listing 177 references, the growth of which shows no
signs of tapering off.62 Interestingly, the theory has evolved completely inde-
pendently of quantum decision theory, due to its distinct roots in the ﬁelds of
quantum computation and cryptography, where the intellectual concerns are
quite different than those of cognitive science.63 As a result, very little of this
work has been experimentally tested or even makes reference to behavioral
game theory; almost all of it is formal, exploring the mathematical proper-
ties of different games and assumptions.64 And also unlike quantum decision
theory, its practitioners have made little effort to give its ideas substantive
meaning relevant to social science, which makes it much less accessible to
outsiders.65
However, quantum game theorists do share at least one sensibility with their
decision-theoretic cousins, which is that they want nothing to do with quantum
consciousness theory. Indeed, they are reluctant to claim even that quantum
brains are involved in quantum games, on the grounds that quantum deco-
herence “forbids” such a possibility.66 Instead, in the literature it is generally
assumed that quantum games are populated by classical decision-makers who
possess a special device that enables them to play quantum strategies. While
that might make sense in cryptography, it obviously doesn’t in social science.
60 Cf. Wallin (2013: 472).
61 See Meyer (1999) and Eisert et al. (1999); Edward Piotrowski and Jan Sladkowski were also
early contributors and provide a useful introduction in their (2003).
62 See Guo et al. (2008).
63 Martinez-Martinez (2014) is the ﬁrst explicit attempt I know of to bridge the gap, though see
Pothos and Busemeyer (2009), who apply quantum decision theory to strategic interaction.
64 For a rare exception see Chen and Hogg (2006), and on behavioral game theory see Camerer
(2003).
65 For exceptions see Arﬁ(2005) and Hanauske et al. (2010).
66 See Hanauske et al. (2010: 5092) and Chapter 5 above.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

170
A quantum model of man
Thus, I shall follow F. M. C. Witte in his unorthodox view of quantum game
theory, which assumes quantum rather than classical players.67 He does this in
order to respond to some critiques of quantum game theory, whereas I do so in
light of my larger ontological argument and also to help make the theory more
relevant to social science. Either way, it should be emphasized that, as in my
treatment of quantum decision theory, I am going beyond the standard reading.
The concept from quantum theory that plays the most important role in
quantum game theory is entanglement, speciﬁcally of strategies. Take a classical
game with two players – Emma and Otto – each of whom has two strategies,
Cooperate and Defect. These strategies are independent or fully separable in
two senses. First, they are binary choices, in that Emma and Otto can only play
one in a given round; even if they decide to play a mixed strategy of randomizing
their choice, only one strategy will actually be played each time. In information
theoretic terms each strategy set may therefore be seen as one “bit,” which can
take one or the other value but not both simultaneously. Second, Emma and
Otto have no control over each other’s bits. Although if they are rational they
will try to anticipate the other’s move, each retains complete sovereignty over
their own choice.
To quantize this game we now replace Emma and Otto’s bits with qubits,
which are linear superpositions of their strategies. This means, ﬁrst, that for each
of them considered individually, their two strategies are now entangled, such
that each can – in a sense – play both at once.68 Note that this is not equivalent
to playing a mixed strategy: “in a quantum superposition the decision maker is
not randomizing in the sense of mixed strategies. Rather, all pure strategies not
only equally contribute to shape the decision-making process, but also either
sub-additively or super-additively interfere with each other’s contribution to
weaken/enhance each other’s contribution.”69 The “in a sense” qualiﬁer refers to
the fact that the result of playing both strategies at once is still either Cooperate
or Defect, just as in physics the result of wave function collapse is one actual
particle. But because Emma and Otto’s minds are in superposition states, that
result can only be known – even by them – through the result, not ex ante.70
(Recall the performative model of agency: it is only in the performance itself
that preference, in this case for a strategy, is actualized.) Until then, because of
entanglement with the actual choice, the choice(s) not made also play a role in
the process.
Second, thinking about strategy sets as qubits means that entanglement is
not limited to what is going on inside Emma and Otto’s minds, but may extend
67 See Witte (2005). Khrennikov (2011) and Asano et al. (2011) take an intermediate position in
suggesting that a quantum-“like” process in the brain is involved, but one that in their view has
a classical basis.
68 See Goff (2006) on “quantum tic-tac-toe” for a very clear illustration.
69 Arﬁ(2007: 795).
70 Also see the discussion of the Transactional Interpretation of quantum theory in Chapter 6.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum cognition and rational choice
171
to their minds considered jointly,71 constituting them as a single quantum
system. This doesn’t mean they lose their individuality altogether, any more
than entangled sub-atomic particles do: in neither case do the units of the
system become literally the same. But nor are they fully separable either, as in
the classical case, and that has an important implication: each now has access
to a shared entangled state with which both of their strategy sets are correlated,
which gives them some control over each other’s decisions.72 Moreover, this
control exists without beneﬁt of communication, whether in the form of a pre-
game agreement, costly signaling, third-party mediation, or cheap talk – all of
which involve the transmission of information by local causal means.73 The
joint control in quantum game theory works through the manipulation of non-
local correlations, in much the same way that when the spin of one particle in
an entangled pair is measured it induces a state change in the other. This gives
strategy in quantum games an irreducibly collective aspect, such that players
are at least partly in “We-mode” rather than just “I-mode.”74
It is one thing to imagine strategic entanglement in quantum cryptography,
but what does it look like, concretely, in social life? The literature is frustrat-
ingly vague on this, but Matthias Hanauske and his co-authors provide some
useful hints.75 In an evolutionary quantum game-theoretic analysis of the 2008
ﬁnancial crisis they are concerned with how traders might be induced in future
to play more “Dove” strategies rather than the aggressive “Hawk” strategies
which helped cause the crisis. They interpret the difference between the two as
one of degrees of entanglement: Hawks exhibit low entanglement with others
and thus behave classically, whereas Doves exhibit higher, leading to more
quantum behavior. Hanauske et al.’s solution is therefore to look for ways to
increase traders’ entanglement with each other and with the general public.
They argue that this could come, on the one hand, from improving moral stan-
dards, shared experiences in training, legal reforms, and above all education,
and on the other, from reducing the material incentives for classical trading
behavior that existed before.76 Importantly, these changes would move behav-
ior in the desired direction without communication between traders. In short,
entanglement in quantum games corresponds to what sociologists would call
the shared normative order that constitutes us as members of a society rather
than as animals in a state of nature.
There are of course also ways to build norms into classical game theory,
but with notable differences. First, the “mechanism” by which norms work
71 I say “may” because the degree of entanglement can vary, in principle down to zero.
72 See Chen and Hogg (2006: 52); cf. Rovane (2004). Note that this is not the same thing as
a “correlated equilibrium” in classical game theory; see Arﬁ(2007: 795) and Brandenburger
(2010).
73 Arﬁ(2007: 795).
74 Ibid: 795.
75 See Hanauske et al. (2010).
76 Ibid: 5099–5100.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

172
A quantum model of man
is different: instead of an external constraint that changes the cost-beneﬁt
calculus for independent individuals, in quantum game theory norms are not
only internal but also connect individuals in a non-local, holistic way, making
them no longer fully separable. Second, instead of an ad hoc addition bolted
onto classical game theoretic models, norms as entanglement are an integral
part of quantum game theory. And third, as a result of both of these differences
the formalization will differ as well.
There is also an important consequence for “rational” strategic choice: in
general quantum game theory predicts more cooperation in a given type of game
than its classical counterpart, and as such players can achieve more efﬁcient
or Pareto-optimal outcomes. In the classical one-shot Prisoner’s Dilemma, for
example, players should always defect. In quantum PD the formal expectation
varies with the level of entanglement assumed, but in experiments behavioral
game theorists have found that people cooperate in one-shot PD “about half the
time,” which is consistent with a relatively high degree of entanglement.77 This
suggests that, even though these experiments are ostensibly designed to assess
behavior in classical games, what subjects are actually playing are quantum
games, if, as members of society, they bring a shared normative background
with them into the lab. Indeed, from this perspective it would seem difﬁcult to
assess human behavior in truly classical games at all, since test subjects are
presumably members of society and thus inherently entangled!
Or perhaps we should say that classical games are the result of playing
quantum ones, which I take to be one lesson of Barad’s intriguing concept of
“intra-action.”78 As is well known, classical game theory is about inter-action.
Although social scientists tend to take the idea of interaction for granted,79 it
only makes sense if agents are fully separable; in that case, social relationships
will indeed be properly seen as exchanges between pre-existing independent
actors. Drawing on her quantum reading of Butler’s theory of performativity,
Barad ﬁrst argues that human beings only become who they are through the
collapse of our wave functions into well-deﬁned states, which happens as a
result of continuous measurements on and by our environments. She then
points out that as quantum systems we are entangled with the social world and
thus not fully separable from each other. This vitiates the premise of “inter”-
action and by the same token motivates the neologism of intra-action, since
who we become through measurements on each other is internal to our shared
relationships – our entanglement – rather than something that happens outside
77 See Camerer (2003: 46), and for further discussion of results in quantum PD and other games
see Chen and Hogg (2006) and Guo et al. (2008).
78 See Barad (2003; 2007 passim).
79 An exception is the “transactional” approach developed by John Dewey and Arthur Bentley in
their (1949), which similarly conceives of action as something that spans more than one actor;
see Khalil (2003) for a useful overview.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum cognition and rational choice
173
them. However, the effect of those measurements is, if only for a moment,
to constitute us as independent agents. In short, “intra-actions enact agential
separability.”80 Barad does not mention quantum game theory, but her argument
suggests that the effect of playing a quantum game is to create the separability
requirement of a classical game – even though that game can never actually be
played.
I have called quantum game theory the “next frontier” in quantum cognition
because much more work needs to be done relating it both to the empirical
ﬁndings of behavioral game theory and to rival hypotheses put forward by
classical game theorists. But by way of conclusion I want to point out that the
picture of human sociability that emerges from quantum game theory illustrates
in microcosm a larger point about the nature of reality itself. As Frederick
Zaman puts it,
[classical] forces are fundamentally non-cooperative because they are blind and mecha-
nistic, and everything that happens . . . occurs through the external imposition of forces
that are unwilled and without purpose. [Quantum] forces, on the other hand, are poten-
tially and often truly cooperative because everything that happens occurs through the
mutual dissemination of information amongst the forces involved.81
The “cooperative” nature of quantum processes is due to entanglement, which
gives reality a holistic dimension that is completely foreign to the atomistic
classical worldview.82 As long as social scientists are captured by the latter we
will expect competition and conﬂict to be the default human condition – and
continue to be surprised when real people confound our pessimism. In contrast,
were social scientists to embrace the quantum worldview, then “instead of
seeing human beings as separate elements in causal interaction, we ought to
see them too as correlated projections of a common ground.”83 From such a
standpoint the human proclivity to cooperate is not an irrational mistake or
anomaly, but precisely what we should expect.84
80 See Barad (2007: 140); emphasis in the original.
81 Zaman (2002: 368); also see Brandt (1973: 67).
82 And indeed, over the years this has frequently led physicists to invoke social metaphors to
interpret their ﬁndings; see Kojevnikov (1999).
83 Pylkk¨anen (2007: 145).
84 See Martinez-Martinez (2014: 43–44).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

9
Agency and quantum will
Quantum decision theory is a theory of choice behavior, and as such deals not
just with Cognition but also with what I have separated out as Will. However,
its advocates have concentrated on demonstrating that quantum preferences
and beliefs, conceived as a kind of input, can predict observed behavioral
outputs. As a result, they have not thematized what is going on in-between, the
mechanism (sic) by which the quantum mind makes choices in the ﬁrst place.
In this way the theory, like its classical forerunner, selects a “basis vector” for
thinking about people that is more on the terrain of Cognition than of Will.
That makes sense as a ﬁrst step, given that if the theory can’t predict behavior
then the rest is moot, but to get a more rounded quantum person we need to
“rotate” to the basis of Will.
Will is the essence of agency, a power to animate and move the body –
and the mind, in the form of attention1 – from the essentially passive stance
of Cognition to active, purposeful engagement with the world. In Chapter 6,
I equated this power with an aspect of wave function collapse, viewed as a
process of temporal symmetry-breaking, in which advanced action moves
through Will and retarded action through Experience. (Note that this means
Will is not straightforwardly conscious, to which I return below.) If that is
right, then Will and Experience are complementary in the quantum sense –
incompatible, yet jointly necessary for a complete description of the collapse
process – and so it will only be after reading the next chapter that the meaning
of this one will be fully realized.
If Will is an aspect of wave function collapse – one of the most incompre-
hensible features of quantum mechanics – then that may help explain why,
compared to Cognition and even Experience, its standing among philosophers
seems more tentative. After nineteenth-century high points in Schopenhauer
and Nietzsche, the concept fell into disrepute by the mid-twentieth, with Gilbert
Ryle famously denying the existence of Will as another metaphysical “ghost
1 See Vermersch (2004) and Stazicker (2011) on the role of attention in psychology, and Stapp
(1999) for a speciﬁcally quantum perspective.
174
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Agency and quantum will
175
in the machine.”2 Since then philosophical interest in Will – now more often
termed ‘volition’ – has recovered,3 though doubts remain about what it refers to
and whether the concept is needed at all. In particular, the recent emergence in
the philosophy of action of the concept of ‘intention,’ understood as a commit-
ment to act, seems to capture some of the sense of ‘volition’ as well, suggesting
that the latter might be reducible to the former. Others disagree,4 to which I will
add a quantum point. No matter how ﬁrm, an intention remains a superposed
state of mind, and as such does no causal work until the body is set in motion
by acting (willing) on the intention. So, while related, the two concepts do not
refer to the same thing. And whereas in the classical worldview the force of
Will may appear mysterious and/or eliminable, from a quantum perspective it
has a natural place in wave function collapse.
The contemporary literature pertaining to volition/Will addresses a number
of issues, of which I will discuss just two of particular importance to social
ontology. One is whether will is free, which has long captured both the philo-
sophical and popular imagination. However, in focusing on the “free part,”
much of this work seems to take the “will part” for granted, as if the nature of
willing were unproblematic.5 Since that is by no means clear and bears on the
question of freedom, I will start with the second question, of what kind of force
will actually is. In short, what is agency?
Reasons, teleology, and advanced action
How do we get from states of mind to actions in the world? In philosophy
this is known as the problem of mental causation, which in a nutshell is how
to reconcile our apparent ability to use our minds to move our bodies with
the causal closure of physics.6 Within the classical frame that he takes as
given, Michael Esfeld argues that there are two basic ways to try to solve this
problem.7 On the one hand, we can assume that mental states are irreducible
to brain states (in an epistemic sense anyway, as in supervenience), and then
argue that behavior is “systematically over-determined” by mental and physical
causes, with each contributing to the result. But this is problematic because
according to the CCP every physical event has a sufﬁcient physical cause, so
what additional explanatory work is left for mental causes to do? Alternatively,
we can assume that mental states are literally identical to brain states, and then
argue that mental and physical discourses are simply epistemically different
ways of describing the same (physical) process. But why then do we need the
2 See Ryle (1949).
3 See Burns (1999) and Zhu (2004a) for good overviews.
4 See Zhu (2004b) for a sense of the debate.
5 An important exception is Robert Kane’s (1996) work, which deﬁnes will in terms of “trying.”
6 For a comprehensive introduction to the literature see Robb and Heil (2014).
7 See Esfeld (2007: 207–208).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

176
A quantum model of man
mental discourse at all? In different ways both approaches seem to make our
experience of mental causation epiphenomenal.
The mental causation literature has come a long way since 1963, but in the
philosophy of the social sciences the dominant solution to the problem is still
that of Donald Davidson, who in that year published a classic article argu-
ing that “reasons are causes.”8 Importantly, although Davidson does not dis-
tinguish explicitly between the two approaches above, he understands ‘cause’
in the physical sense as efﬁcient causation, making his a variant of the second
approach above. Davidson was challenging the then widely held Wittgen-
steinian view that reasons do not cause actions but constitute them, by giving
meaning to what is otherwise mere behavior. The paradigmatic case is the dif-
ference between a wink and a twitch, where having an appropriate reason is
what constitutes the one out of the other. Davidson did not deny that actions are
constituted by reasons, but pointed out that this does not explain why people
act in the ﬁrst place. And when we look in the structure of reason-giving for
why John did Y, the answer is because he had reason X.9 Since according
to Davidson this relationship satisﬁes the criteria for a causal explanation he
concluded that reasons must indeed be (efﬁcient) causes. His argument was
highly inﬂuential in the social sciences, where it helped consolidate the emerg-
ing positivist view that social science is not essentially different from physical
science.10 Even though social scientists’ reliance on unobservable mental states
and folk psychology might make our work seem less than scientiﬁc, through
Davidson we can claim to be making causal explanations too.
Yet despite its long dominance, the idea that reasons are causes remains con-
troversial. Interpretivists still argue that making sense of action is different than
explaining the behavior of objects.11 Others more in the philosophy of social
science mainstream have challenged Davidson’s framing and/or analysis of the
issue, with various implications for his conclusion.12 And then, of particular
interest to me, there are some who agree that reasons are causes, but not the
efﬁcient causes assumed by Davidson, but ﬁnal causes.13 By emphasizing the
irreducibly purposive nature of action these “New Teleologists” in my view best
capture the causal force of Will, and I propose to build on their ideas here. How-
ever, whereas they see their approach as justifying anti-naturalism in the social
sciences, I will give it a physical, naturalistic basis through quantum theory.
8 Davidson (1963); for an excellent history of the debate see D’Oro and Sandis (2013).
9 Davidson (1963: 691).
10 See Gantt and Williams (2014) on the inﬂuence of Newtonian thinking on the debate about
reasons as causes in psychology.
11 See for example Schroeder (2001) and Brinkmann (2006).
12 See Tanney (1995) and Risjord (2004).
13 See Stout (1996), Schueler (2003), Sehon (2005), and Portmore (2011), and for an earlier
defense of teleological explanation in social science see von Wright (1971).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Agency and quantum will
177
Let me ﬁrst unpack Davidson’s conclusion in relation to an Aristotelian view
of causation, which is more pluralistic than what is generally assumed today.
Aristotle held that there are four kinds of causes in the world: formal, material,
efﬁcient and ﬁnal.14 Formal causation refers to the way in which the structure
of an object or process gives it form and identity (much as reasons do on the
constitutive account), whereas material causation refers to the sense in which
an entity or process exists by virtue of having a certain composition. While
relevant to my discussion later, formal and material causes do not describe
changes of state and as such cannot explain how or why the body moves; they
account for Being, not for Becoming.15
Aristotle’s other two causes are all about change. Efﬁcient causation refers
to a local transmission of energy or force from X propagating forward in time
to Y, which has the effect of changing Y’s properties or behavior. The classical
worldview reduces all causation to this type, and it is how most philoso-
phers and scientists today instinctively think about “cause.” Although calling
it ‘mechanical’ does not do justice to its possible forms,16 efﬁcient causation
clearly drives the machine model of man, as well as the search for “causal
mechanisms” that has gripped wide areas of social science. In contrast, ﬁnal
or teleological causation, the most distinctive element of Aristotle’s scheme, is
anathema to advocates of the classical worldview and widely dismissed today
as unscientiﬁc.17 It refers to the way in which the ends or purposes of a system,
which refer to its future, relate to its behavior or development in the present.18
So while efﬁcient causation explains in a temporally forward manner, ﬁnal cau-
sation “explains backward.”19 Making that suggestion intelligible is the hard
part for advocates of ﬁnal causation, since they agree that the future does not
cause the past in anything like the way that the past causes the future. But if not
literal backwards causation, then what precisely is the causal role of ﬁnality,
such that it cannot be reduced to efﬁcient causation?
Before addressing that question, however, it should be noted that there is
also a hard question for critics of ﬁnal causation, which is that purposive-
ness – in the form of organisms’ goal-directed behavior – seems to be all
around. Thus, despite the defeat of vitalism, which one might think would
have also vanquished teleology, philosophers of biology continue to struggle
to explain organismic purposiveness in efﬁcient causal terms. A particularly
14 See Hennig (2009) for an extended discussion of Aristotle’s four causes.
15 See Short (2007: 136).
16 See ibid: 94–98 on the evolving meaning of ‘mechanical’ and its relationship to teleology.
17 Cf. Nagel’s (2012) defense of teleology in the natural world, for an open-minded review of
which that engages the physics of ﬁnal causation see Bishop (2013).
18 See Gotthelf (1987) on Aristotle’s approach to ﬁnal causation. Final causation was an important
part of Leibniz’s metaphysics as well; see Carlin (2006).
19 See Jenkins and Nolan (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

178
A quantum model of man
inﬂuential analysis is due to Ernst Mayr, who argued that what appear to be
teleological processes in organisms are really “teleonomic,” a benign kind of
end-directedness that is reducible to efﬁcient causation.20 However, many are
not convinced that such reductions are possible, and thus continue to defend the
earlier, teleological view of organisms as “natural purposes,” so the biological
debate goes on.21
Within the philosophy of action and social science the debate about teleolog-
ical reasoning seems even more intractable, since intuitions there are stronger
in its favor (at least at the individual level). While we have no inside experience
of animal behavior and thus might plausibly argue that its causes are purely
mechanical, we do have experience of the causes of human behavior (reasons)
which certainly do not feel mechanical. Indeed, probably most social scientists
today would agree that human behavior is fundamentally goal-directed, and that
“intentional explanations” are not only valid but practically speaking distinct
from causal explanations.22 Despite this apparent acceptance of purposiveness
in human behavior, however, most naturalists in social science would probably
also disavow any connection to ﬁnal causation. That is because naturalists take
for granted that materialism is true, which means that ultimately, reasons must
be efﬁcient causes just like everything else.23 Here they can follow Davidson,
who notes that reason explanations often take a teleological form, but then
argues that such accounts are surrogates for causes in the standard physical
sense.24
The New Teleologists in the philosophy of action argue that such reduc-
tions are impossible to make, and that teleological explanations of human
action are therefore epistemically necessary. But surprisingly, when it comes
to ontology they too assume materialism is true (or at least I have not seen
them advocate anything else). They simply draw the opposite conclusion from
naturalists, which is that the irreducibility of teleological explanations vindi-
cates the autonomy of the human sciences from the physical ones. In my view,
this conclusion is problematic and premature – problematic because it seems
inconsistent with the CCP; and premature because the New Teleologists have
not framed their approach against a quantum backdrop, only a classical one.
20 See Mayr (1982), and Perlman (2004) for a good overview of contemporary efforts to make
sense of teleological reasoning without embracing Aristotelian ﬁnal causality.
21 See Weber and Varela (2002), Short (2007), Grifﬁths (2009), and Toepfer (2012).
22 On intentional explanations see Elster (1983), Dennett (1987), and Searle (1991).
23 See Rosenblueth, Wiener, and Bigelow (1943) for an early reductive attempt, and Jenkins and
Nolan (2008) for an argument that any such effort is doomed to fail.
24 See Davidson (1963). Despite the appearance since of sophisticated teleological approaches to
reasons, scholarship in a Davidsonian vein still tends to take the standard view of causation
for granted, and thus sees no threat to naturalism from goal-directed behavior; see for example
Mantzavinos (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Agency and quantum will
179
As this brief review suggests, the debate about reasons as causes has been
conducted almost wholly in folk psychological terms, without explicit reference
to how reasons are instantiated in the brain.25 That makes sense, given how
little we know about the brain, yet in characterizing this “black box” everyone
has assumed that it is classical, which makes it hard to imagine reasons as
anything other than efﬁcient causes. But what if quantum theory provides a
physical basis for ﬁnal causation?26 Assuming that quantum brain theory is
true, that would change the discussion entirely, by allowing us to have it both
ways – naturalism with teleology.27
Although I have already identiﬁed will with an aspect of wave function
collapse, in developing this further it should be noted that most interpretations
of quantum theory have no more truck with teleology than does the classical
worldview – so it is not obvious the theory does provide a physical basis for ﬁnal
causation.28 However, there is one interpretive strain in which ﬁnal causation
does play an at least implicit role, namely the time-symmetric approach that
includes Atmanspacher and Primas’ neutral monism (see Chapter 6), John
Cramer’s Transactional Interpretation, and others.29 Of particular interest in
this tradition is the concept of “advanced action.”30 Although time-symmetric
quantum theorists do not always link this to ﬁnal causation – some actually seem
more comfortable with the idea of “retro-” or “backwards” causation31 – I will
argue that advanced action has everything one could want from a teleological
force and thus must be what Aristotle “had in mind.”
Recall the starting point for time-symmetric interpretations of quantum the-
ory: that all fundamental physical principles are symmetric under time-reversal,
meaning that in closed systems their equations can be solved forwards or back-
wards. However, the backwards solutions are normally discarded because they
are not thought to have any physical meaning. This leaves us with a temporal
asymmetry that, on the one hand, has the virtue of corresponding to our expe-
rience of time moving only forward, but which, on the other, cannot explain
25 Though see Gustafson (2007), who emphasizes the irony that whereas causalists about reasons
presented themselves as defenders of naturalism, recent neuroscientiﬁc ﬁndings reviewed below
seem to call causalism into question, and suggest that the constitutivists were right after all.
26 Whether the language of ‘causation’ is appropriate at all in quantum contexts is an issue in itself
(see Price and Corry, eds. 2007), but I will set aside this larger question here and focus just on
ﬁnal causation.
27 See especially Barham (2008; 2012).
28 Though see Bohm (1980: 12–15), Primas (1992: 27–29), Costa de Beauregard (2000), Helrich
(2007), and Castagnoli (2010: 313), who argues that “[q]uantum algorithms, being partly driven
by their future outcome, provide well formalized examples of teleological evolution.” Within
biology several eminent physicists have wrestled with the possibilities for grounding teleology
in a quantum view of the organism; see Sloan (2012).
29 See Cramer (1986; 1988), Price (1996), Atmanspacher (2003), and Primas (2003; 2007).
30 For a comprehensive discussion see Price (1996: 231–260).
31 See for example Price (1996; 2012), Dowe (1997), and Berkovitz (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

180
A quantum model of man
that experience and is aesthetically unappealing. Yet, while most of quantum
physics is time-symmetric, this is not the case in wave function collapse. There
temporal symmetry breaks down, such that we cannot work the equations in
either direction. In effect, it is in collapse that “Now” emerges, and with it the
distinction between past and future. Advocates see this temporal symmetry-
breaking as the key to interpreting quantum theory.
Cramer’s approach to wave function collapse is particularly helpful here. In
his view, quantum events may be described as a “transaction” between two state
vectors or waves, a retarded wave proceeding in the normal, forward direction,
and an advanced wave proceeding backwards from the measuring apparatus or
“destiny state.” These waves are not symmetric but they are correlated – and
not just in the obvious sense that one might expect the future to be correlated
with the past, but also in the sense that what will become the future enforces
correlations with the past.32 Measurement induces a “two-way contract between
future and the past,” such that the collapse is not complete until the future
“conﬁrms” the past. Note that because this conﬁrmation process only involves
enforcing correlations it cannot be used to transmit information to the past, and
so does not conﬂict with causation in the efﬁcient sense. Rather, what we are
dealing with here is a temporal non-locality like that observed in Wheeler’s
Delayed-Choice Experiments, which Cramer argues we can see every night:
When we stand in the dark and look at a star 100 light-years away, not only have the
retarded light waves from the star been traveling for 100 years to reach our eyes, but
the advanced waves generated by absorption processes within our eyes have reached
100 years into the past, completing the transaction that permitted the star to shine in our
direction.33
In this temporally non-local sense we may say that “the present is literally
created out of inﬂuences both from the past and from the future.”34
Time-symmetric arguments like these were originally advanced to explain
the behavior of sub-atomic particles, and later contributions have been mostly
on the terrain of fundamental physics as well.35 In my view, this may be one rea-
son why they have remained marginal in the debate over quantum theory. Even
if the concept of advanced action restores an aesthetically pleasing temporal
symmetry to our picture of the world, in physics it is hard to see concretely what
it could refer to, which is why it is usually discarded as meaningless. The difﬁ-
culty here may stem in part from the lingering materialism that most physicists
32 See Cramer (1988), Price (1996: 242–243), and Castagnoli (2009; 2010); and Kastner (2008)
for a good overview of this literature.
33 Cramer (1988: 229).
34 See Tollaksen (1996: 559); emphasis in the original. On temporal non-locality see Price (1996)
and Filk (2013).
35 Tollaksen (1996) and Wolf (1998) are exceptions that I draw upon below.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Agency and quantum will
181
bring to the table, and especially the belief that matter at the fundamental level
is dead. Despite the fact that after quantum theory old-fashioned materialism
is no longer an option, in the interpretive debate most philosophers seem more
willing to accept the utterly bizarre, but at least materialist, conclusions of the
Many Worlds Interpretation than to admit that mind or purpose is a brute fact of
nature. With that possibility closed off by ﬁat, whatever advanced action might
be ﬁnal causation can’t be it, leaving us with ideas like retro- and backwards
causation that are even more counter-intuitive.
Consider then how differently things look if we approach advanced action
instead from the standpoint of a quantum biology and speciﬁcally psychol-
ogy, and thus on the assumption that human beings have direct experience of
quantum effects like advanced action. Psychology deals with organisms whose
behavior feels as much pulled by a future they intend as it is pushed by a past
they inherit. In everyday life we usually explain such behavior in terms of
actors’ reasons, and the causal force of those reasons is typically narrated in
teleological terms. Materialists assume that despite this appearance of ﬁnal cau-
sation, what is really going on here just efﬁcient causation. However, they have
produced little evidence for this view, either from the brain or philosophically,
and if people are actually walking wave functions then it is clearly problematic.
For one thing that is not debated in quantum theory is that, when it comes to
wave function collapse, nothing like efﬁcient causation is involved – which
is precisely why collapse is so hard to explain. This suggests the following
syllogism: if, (1) ﬁnal causes cannot be eliminated from folk psychological
accounts of human behavior, (2) human beings are walking wave functions
with direct experience of advanced action, and (3) advanced action has a pecu-
liar backward working quality that seems counter-intuitive in physics, then (4)
advanced action in physics just is ﬁnal causation in people. In short, reasons
are causes, but quantum ﬁnal causes rather than Davidson’s efﬁcient ones.
What then can we conclude about the opening question of this section, of
how human beings get from states of mind to behavior? As I see it, quantum
will plays two key roles in agency. First, Will makes decisions, understood
in quantum terms as the reduction of indeterminate reasons to determinate
choices. As such, the actual reason for why an agent does X does not exist
before doing X, but emerges with the latter. Note that Will is important in
this sense even when all of an agent’s reasons are compatible in the quantum
sense and thus choice reduces to a classical problem, since an act of will is
still necessary to collapse her wave function. In bridging the gap between our
superposed insides and the classical world outside,36 decisions create for a
moment order out of chaos, and combined with the experience with which it
36 On “gaps” in practical reasoning to which different aspects of Will respond see Searle (2001:
14–15) and Zhu (2004b: 177–180).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

182
A quantum model of man
is correlated, therefore meaning for the subject. This may be seen as a form
of “downward causation,” since decisions are made at the level of the whole,
to which the body’s parts respond. But it is downward causation “without
foundations,” since, as a superposition, the state from which decisions emerge
is a potentiality rather than actuality.37
Second, Will controls the direction of the body’s movement over time by har-
nessing temporal non-locality, potentially over long “distances.” As advanced
action, Will projects itself into what will become the future and creates a destiny
state there that, through the enforcement of correlations with what will become
the past, steers us purposefully toward that end.38 Note that this projection is not
necessarily conscious; what we experience in consciousness is retarded action
not advanced, with time moving forward in the usual way. However, will can
become conscious, in the form of an explicit intention, in organisms that can
project themselves self-consciously into alternative futures, which is essential
to planning behavior and known as “mental time travel.”39 Although the litera-
ture treats this idea only metaphorically, in the next chapter I suggest it be taken
literally, but in a non-local sense. By maintaining a conscious intention through
repeated acts of will, agents enforce correlations backwards on their behavior
over time, which gives it coherence not just in the sense that it is consistent
with the past, but in the teleological sense that the future gives meaning to and
completes the past. In human beings such correlations can reach very deeply
into “the future,” and be shared by many individuals as well, which will make
temporal non-locality an important theme below.
Free will and quantum theory
But is the power of Will “free”? Free will is another “hard problem” that seems
impervious to resolution, and the literature is correspondingly enormous, about
the only thing common to which is a classical frame of reference.40 Even
its deﬁnition is contested, contaminated by debatable assumptions and/or the
conclusions that protagonists want to reach. So let me begin with some widely
accepted common sense: your will is free if in doing something you in principle
could have done otherwise. Precisely how to unpack this suggestion is what
sets philosophers to work, but most at least agree that the freedom here should
be understood in an existential rather than practical sense.41 In the latter, “could
have done otherwise” implies an absence of external constraints on one’s scope
37 See Bitbol (2012).
38 See Tollaksen (1996: 562).
39 On mental time travel see Suddendorf and Corballis (2007).
40 Kane, ed. (2011) provides an excellent and comprehensive introduction. While quantum argu-
ments for free will sometimes now receive their own chapter ( e.g. Hodgson, 2011), they are
generally ignored in the literature as a whole.
41 See O’Connor (2014: 1–2).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Agency and quantum will
183
for action, which does not speak to free will per se. A prisoner has no freedom of
action, but still (perhaps) the existential freedom to face his fate as he chooses.
This distinction matters for social science, where ‘agency’ is often deﬁned in
terms of how much control or power actors have over events or structures, which
is clearly about freedom of action.42 Reams have been written on agency in
this sense, but as for free will, while psychologists have shown some interest43
among social scientists there is surprisingly little44 – even though many of us
talk about agency as if it presupposes free will. The disconnect for some may
be that if the goal of social science is to ﬁnd law-like generalizations, then
a phenomenon like free will that does not vary and cannot be measured will
inevitably fall in the “error term.”45 So insofar as the job of the social scientist
is to reduce her error terms as much as possible, the attitude seems to be – best
leave free will to philosophers. Yet the question is of obvious importance in real
life, given that modern law and morality assume that people actually have free
will in the existential sense.46 And of obvious importance for social theorists
too, since agency without free will hardly seems like agency at all.
The philosophical literature
So what precisely is the problem? Well, not everyone agrees that there is a
problem, but intuitively it is this: we mostly experience our actions as freely
willed, as if we could have done otherwise, but it is not clear how to reconcile
this feeling with the ontology of modern science. Of course it would help
if science could explain any experience, but whereas consciousness overall
poses a problem for the orthodoxy’s materialism, the speciﬁc experience of
free will challenges its (ontological) determinism, the assumption that – at the
macro-level of the brain at least – every event has an efﬁcient physical cause.
When I entered into this literature I expected the dominant view to be that free
will is inconsistent with determinism, and so our experience of free will is an
illusion. That is indeed the prevailing discourse of neuroscientists (see below),
but to my surprise it is much more contested by philosophers. Many, perhaps
the majority, of the latter are “compatibilists,” who, while conceding that the
brain operates deterministically, argue that the details of brain function are
simply not relevant to whatever, practically speaking, we might want a concept
of free will for – like justifying the idea of moral or legal responsibility for
42 See Ortner (2001) for a good discussion of agency as power, which she distinguishes from
agency as intention.
43 See, for example, Sappington (1990), Baer et al. (2008), and Bertelsen (2011).
44 For exceptions see Dray (1960) and de Uriarte (1990).
45 Though see Sappington (1990) for a more subtle analysis.
46 See Habermas (2007) (with rejoinder by John Searle), Bertelsen (2011), and Hodgson (2012)
for some recent, particularly thoughtful discussions of this issue.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

184
A quantum model of man
our actions. In other words, for compatibilists there is no real problem of free
will, since it is “compatible” with determinism.47 “Incompatibilists” disagree,
claiming that this sets the bar too low for a naturalistic theory of free will, and
that the details of brain function are crucial to the issue.48 Since quantum brain
theory challenges the shared premise of this debate – that brain function is
deterministic – compatibilism in particular seems moot in the present context,
and so I will set it aside in the remaining discussion. But that hardly settles the
issue in favor of incompatibilism.
By deﬁnition there are two ways to be an incompatibilist: reject free will or
reject determinism. Most incompatibilists do the latter,49 such that ‘incompat-
ibilism’ is often equated with anti-determinism. Since that can be confusing
I will use ‘libertarianism,’ a synonym for anti-determinist incompatibilism,
instead. The key challenge for libertarians is again a question of “compatibil-
ism,” but now of free will with indeterminism. Namely, free will implies the
ability to control one’s actions, whereas indeterminism implies randomness –
which seems more like a basis for madness than willing. In response to this
problem, libertarians have focused on making sense of a kind of causation –
which is what free will must be if it is to move the body – that is not deter-
ministic, such as “agent-causation” or “event-causation.”50 Some have invoked
quantum theory to justify these ideas (though to my knowledge never quantum
brain theory), but, with a few exceptions, only in passing.51 Like most philo-
sophical work on free will, libertarian discourse remains on a folk psychological
level.
In contrast, quantum theorists have from the start wondered about the rele-
vance of their work to the free will problem.52 In recent years their discussion
has become more systematic and even produced a formal result, the “Free Will
Theorem” – though the name is a bit misleading.53 Rather than proving that
human beings have free will, the theorem proves that if human beings have free
will in some degree, then sub-atomic particles must have it in the same degree
as well. That result scores a point for panpsychism, and also for my larger
argument that what is going on at the sub-atomic level and the human level are
47 Frankfurt (1971) is a classic compatibilist treatment of free will; for a quantum critique of
Frankfurt see Georgiev (2013). Note that this literature is highly anthropocentric and thus it is
hard to see its arguments going far down the evolutionary ladder.
48 Kane (1996) is perhaps the most prominent incompatibilist today, with O’Connor (2000) another
important contributor. See Warﬁeld (2003) for a good overview of the debate.
49 Though see Honderich (1988) and Balaguer (2009) for a critique of his approach.
50 See Clarke and Capes (2014) for an excellent survey of these accounts.
51 The main exceptions of which I am aware are Kane (1996) and Hodgson (2012); cf. O’Connor
(2000), Balaguer (2004: 402–403).
52 For early treatments see Eddington (1928), Compton (1935), and Margenau (1967); and most
recently Suarez and Adams, eds. (2013).
53 Conway and Kochen (2006); for non-technical introductions see Valenza (2008) and Hodgson
(2012: 121–128).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Agency and quantum will
185
connected, but it does not prove the reality of free will. That inconclusiveness
captures my sense of the philosophical debate among physicists overall, which
is that some think quantum mechanics does not help with the free will problem,
and others think it does.54 While disappointing, this is not surprising given
how contested the interpretation of quantum theory is; even associating it with
something as mystical-sounding as “Will” at all would be problematic to some.
So rather than summarize the physicists’ debate, let me turn to neuroscience,
where an important experimental ﬁnding, due to Benjamin Libet, is widely
taken to disprove the existence of free will, period. I then take up a quantum
re-interpretation of the Libet research that supports the existence of free will
and as a plus, uses the idea of advanced action to make its case.
The Libet experiments
Libet’s experiments, dating from the 1970s and ’80s, produced among the most
well-known neuroscientiﬁc results of recent decades. Yet, while the results
themselves are broadly accepted, and an interpretive orthodoxy has developed,
their meaning has been contested from the start.55 Libet sought to pin down the
timing of the relationship between conscious awareness, on the one hand, and
electrical activity in the brain called the “readiness potential” (RP), which had
been previously observed and known to correlate with awareness. He looked at
the question both for voluntary actions, like lifting a ﬁnger, and for involuntary
experiences like a pinprick on the skin. The former have garnered most of the
attention because they seem to bear more on the issue of free will, but the latter
also yielded a striking result that I will come back to below.
For the voluntary case, Libet asked his subjects to lift their ﬁnger whenever
they chose, and then measured three quantities with very precise clocks: when
the RP built up, when the subjects reported ﬁrst being aware of their intention
to lift a ﬁnger, and when their ﬁnger actually moved. What he found is that the
RP begins to build up 350–400 milliseconds before awareness of the intention,
and fully 550 ms before the act itself. At least among neuroscientists and
biologists,56 this is widely seen as evidence against the reality of free will
because consciousness only enters the picture after most of the action is over,
making it epiphenomenal. Libet offers a more nuanced interpretation, arguing
54 For quantum skepticism about free will see Loewer (1996) and Esfeld (2000), and on the other
side, see Ho (1996), Pestana (2001), and Hodgson (2012).
55 See Libet (1985) for an early statement of his work, with peer commentary, and Sinnott-
Armstrong and Nadel, eds. (2011) for the contemporary state of the art.
56 Biologist Anthony Cashmore probably speaks for many in thinking that belief in free will is
“nothing less than a continuing belief in vitalism” (quoted by Walter, 2014a: 2216). Philosophers
are more divided about whether Libet’s work speaks to the free will problem at all, given how he
operationalizes the concept; see Schlosser (2014) for a diagnosis of these contrasting reactions.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

186
A quantum model of man
that, while free will per se does not exist, the gap between awareness and act
enables consciousness to “veto” action, giving us “free won’t.”57 Skeptics have
in turn countered that a conscious intention to veto would itself have to be
preceded by an RP, starting an inﬁnite regress that fails to save free will. Thus,
scholars today seem increasingly inclined toward Daniel Wegner’s important
argument, using Libet’s results and others, that the experience of free will is
ultimately an illusion.58
Still, the deterministic interpretation of the Libet results has been challenged
in at least three ways. One questions the implicit assumption that to count as
free, decisions must be initiated by (and thus temporally co-extensive with)
consciousness. The idea here is that ultimately free will is not about conscious-
ness but about control, and so we should allow for a “pre-conscious free will,”
which would render the temporal discrepancy moot.59 A second response is
that the orthodoxy neglects the role of the experimental context in producing
the Libet results, in particular the prior conscious choice by each subject to
be tested in the ﬁrst place, and then to follow experimental instructions to pay
attention to bodily signals that are normally sub-conscious.60 Finally, no one
really knows what the RP is for, or how it causes behavior. It might, for exam-
ple, only serve to bring about the occurrence of a choice rather than the choice
itself, leaving space for free will.61
These responses would gain further traction from a quantum perspective, but
the idea has almost never come up in the Libet debate, where it has simply
been assumed that the brain is classical and therefore deterministic. Outside
the literature, however, I am aware of four critiques of this assumption, three
by physicists.62 Roger Penrose thinks the results point to inadequacies in the
classical conception of time, and hints that they might be explainable through
the kind of retro-causation or advanced action that is permitted by quantum
theory, though he does not develop the suggestion at length.63 Henry Stapp
draws a connection between the Libet results and the EPR paper in quantum
theory, which ﬁrst put the issue of non-locality on the table.64 However, while
he concludes in favor of free will, most of his article deals with other issues,
57 See Libet (2004) for the book-length version of his research and views.
58 See Wegner (2002). For a broad ranging early discussion see Wegner et al. (2004), and for
skeptical treatments of “willusionism” see van Duijn and Bem (2005), McClure (2011), and
Walter (2014a). Ironically, Libet (2004: 152–156) himself rejects Wegner’s interpretation of his
work.
59 See Velmans (2003), Levy (2005), and Pacherie (2014), and Sheperd (2013) on the contem-
porary state of play on this issue; on unconscious goal-directed behavior more generally see
Dijksterhuis and Aarts (2010).
60 See Zhu (2003) and Schlosser (2014: 258), and for a further critique focusing on issues of
experimental design see Radder and Meynen (2012).
61 See Balaguer (2009; 2010).
62 None to my knowledge has ever elicited a response from within the Libet community.
63 See Penrose (1994: 383–390).
64 See Stapp (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Agency and quantum will
187
and the Libet discussion is not extensive. Stuart Hameroff brings his quan-
tum brain theory to bear on the issue, on the basis of which he concludes
that “temporal non-locality and backward time referral of quantum informa-
tion [advanced action] can provide real-time conscious control of voluntary
action.”65 Hameroff’s article makes a useful connection to Delayed-Choice
Experiments (Chapter 2), but most of it is devoted to summarizing his other
work and so the discussion of free will per se is again relatively short. So let
me rely here on the most systematic quantum response to Libet, by Fred Alan
Wolf, which also highlights temporal non-locality.66 Wolf deals with the other
aspect of Libet’s research I mentioned above, on sensory awareness rather than
free will, but he proposes a general quantum model of mind that I believe could
be applied to the voluntary case as well.
Libet found that, upon stimulation with a pinprick it takes about 500 ms for
an RP to build up that is of sufﬁcient strength for conscious awareness of the
stimulus. Yet, paradoxically – and as we might expect from our own experi-
ence – his subjects reported awareness of the prick almost immediately.67 Libet
explains this temporal discrepancy by arguing that people subjectively “ante-
date” the timing of a sensory event, even though they only actually experience it
later. He likens this process of “backward referral” to the “spatial referral” that
happens in our perception of external objects, which we experience as being
“out there” even though what we are actually seeing (in his view) is light on the
back of our retinas. The analogy is suggestive (see below), but Libet does not
propose a neural mechanism through which antedating might occur, and the
idea has been anathema to critics, who dismiss it as physically impossible.68
Libet held his ground, however, and at least to some the question is still alive.69
Wolf shows that Libet’s otherwise anomalous ﬁnding of subjective ante-
dating can be explained by Cramer’s Transactional Interpretation of quantum
theory, and speciﬁcally by advanced action and temporal non-locality. Since I
just discussed these I will not repeat Wolf’s treatment here, but note three spe-
ciﬁc contributions of it instead. First, Wolf adds an evolutionary consideration
to the issue, arguing that being able to feel out what will become future experi-
ences would have obvious survival value over waiting a full half-second before
becoming conscious of a dangerous stimulus.70 Second, he offers a suggestive
image of the brain as a giant “delayed choice machine,” which I will pick up in
the next chapter. Finally, and most importantly here, Wolf shows that a time-
symmetric quantum perspective can account for a key anomaly in the Libet
results – subjective antedating – and, not just account for but predict it, much
65 See Hameroff (2012a: 14).
66 Wolf (1998); see also Wolf (1989).
67 See Libet (2004), passim, and Chiereghin (2011).
68 See for example Churchland (1981) and Pockett (2002).
69 See Libet (2004) and Chiereghin (2011).
70 On this point also see Castagnoli (2009; 2010).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

188
A quantum model of man
like quantum decision theory predicts anomalies of irrational behavior that we
observe. This stands in sharp contrast to the orthodox, classical approach, which
is so puzzled by subjective antedating that it thinks the phenomenon must be an
illusion.71 Like the supposed illusion of consciousness itself, the appeal of such
an argument depends heavily on there being no possible physical explanation
that saves the appearances – since otherwise there would be no need to explain
them away. Quantum theory offers such an explanation, which therefore needs
to be considered before we embrace “willusionism.”
All that being said, it seems fair to conclude that a fully developed quantum
theory of free will does not yet exist. However, the elements of a theory are
clearly there, and could answer the fundamental question for libertarianism of
how indeterminacy could be willed. Namely, in wave function collapse, what
is indeterminate when viewed from the outside is, on the inside, purposeful
determination in the ﬁnal causal sense.72
This suggests a distinct perspective on the conundrum of agency in social
science, for which free will seems at once essential yet consigned to the error
term. Normally we think of the latter as non-systematic variance in observed
behavior, and therefore as not playing a causal role (making free will not just an
error term but epiphenomenal as well). The causes of behavior are assumed to lie
instead in whatever is non-random, both in the external situation and within the
agent himself. While such an assumption makes sense in a classical context, it
need not be made in a quantum one. Conceived as collapsing wave functions, the
choices we make, our actual agency is not generated by an underlying (efﬁcient)
causal order at all, but is precisely a rupture or “perforation” of that order.73 In
this light, the error term in social scientiﬁc explanations is less a measure of our
outsider’s ignorance than a sign of what makes causal explanations of action
possible in the ﬁrst place – the force of free will. Indeed, this is true even when
behavior is quite predictable, as in a deeply ingrained habit, since even then
agents retain the quantum freedom to frame the choice problem differently.74
So my point is not that human behavior cannot be made more predictable –
more “classical” – through coercion, discipline, or incentives, but rather that
no matter how successful such schemes are there is a spontaneous vital force
in the human being that fundamentally eludes causal determination.
71 See especially Wegner (2002).
72 Cf. Kane (1996: 151) and also Hodgson (2012).
73 I believe the term ‘perforation’ is due to Michel Bitbol, but I cannot ﬁnd the reference.
74 See Holton (2006) on how even habitual or non-conscious choices can still be free; cf. Balaguer
(2009: 2).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

10
Non-local experience in time
No model of human beings is complete that does not have room for the experi-
ence of being human, of what it is like to be you or me. This feeling, conscious-
ness, is such an essential feature of the human condition that a life without it
would be hardly worth living at all.1 Yet as suggested in Chapter 1, for fear
of Cartesian dualism the main currents of twentieth-century social theory, both
mainstream and critical, have run away from experience, seeking to reduce,
displace or otherwise marginalize it in their models of man. Human beings are
rendered instead into machines or zombies, both ultimately material systems
which are able to think and behave but not to feel – transformed, in short, from
subjects into objects.
Recently there has been more pushback against these materialist tendencies,
in the form of sustained efforts to “bring the subject back in.”2 Scholars in
the continental tradition have drawn on insights from German idealism and
phenomenology to critique critical theory, for failing to place the experiencing
subject at the center of its ontologies. Feminist theorists have brought experi-
ence to the fore by arguing that women’s experiences differ from men’s. And
in the analytic tradition the founding of Journal of Consciousness Studies and
the work of David Chalmers and many others has given subjective experience
a mainstream philosophical standing that it has not had in a long time. If there
is still no consensus on what to do positively with experience, the taboo on
subjectivity has at least ﬁnally been broken. This book seeks to contribute to
this subjectivist revival by giving consciousness a quantum basis in wave func-
tion collapse, understood as a process of temporal symmetry-breaking driven
by will. As such, “part of what it is like to be a thinking human being is to have
direct experience of the effects of quantum theory.”3 In Chapter 6 I argued that
this is true of not only human beings but all organisms and, for an instant, even
sub-atomic particles too; however, here I will consider only the human case.
1 On the value of consciousness see Siewert (1998).
2 Here in the narrow sense of subjective experience, rather than the broad sense encompassing all
three faculties of mind.
3 See Pylkk¨anen (2004: 183).
189
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

190
A quantum model of man
This effort is complicated in two ways. First, experience is inherently partic-
ular and as such by deﬁnition hard to generalize about, which is what a model
of man is supposed to do. However, there are at least two kinds of experience
that are universal, the experience of time and the experience of space. By this
I do not mean that we all experience time and space in the same way,4 but that
by virtue of sharing the same physics of the body our experience of time and
space has a universal aspect. In the case of time, what is universal is that we
feel it moving forward, from the past through Now to the future; with space it
is that we experience objects as being “out there” in the world rather than on
our retinas where the photons land. Since these two kinds of experiences are
constitutive of social life at a very deep level, I propose to focus on them as a
way of saying something general about Experience. It turns out that both are
problematic when viewed classically, and that a quantum approach not only
resolves these problems, but helps us see them in a new way, as intrinsically
non-local phenomena. In this chapter I take up the experience of time, reserving
the experience of space for my discussion of language in Part IV.
A second difﬁculty in bringing quantum theory to bear on Experience is
that the content of human experience is in part constituted by language and in
particular by narratives, which give a succession of ﬂeeting Nows meaning and
coherence. This centrality of narrative may seem to pose a problem for my effort
to thematize experiences per se, since it is precisely because of the constitutive
role of language that followers of the linguistic turn think we can dispense with
the category of experience altogether.5 However, acknowledging the role of
language does not mean experience is reducible to language. Whether or not it
is accepted that all organisms have experiences, it seems clear that at least some
non-linguistic animals do; and in the case of human beings, without experience
language would have no meaning and thus not really be “language” at all. So
there is a gap between temporal narrative and experience, and by focusing on
the latter I hope to suggest a new perspective on the former.
More speciﬁcally, I argue that – in certain important respects – it is possible to
literally change the past. My starting point will be a debate among philosophers
about some peculiarities of temporal narrative that, on the surface at least, seem
to suggest that the past is indeterminate and can be changed. Most of the parties
to this debate favor an epistemological reading of this claim, arguing that it is
only our descriptions of the past that can change, not the past itself. I suggest
that this tendency in the literature stems from a failure to consider the physics
of the past, and especially from an implicit assumption of temporal locality,
which is part of the classical CCP. Drawing on the quantum concept of delayed
4 See Gell (1992) on the variability of time consciousness across cultures.
5 See Grethlein (2010) for a thoughtful discussion of how experience and narrative relate that
avoids reducing either one to the other.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Non-local experience in time
191
choice, I argue that experience is temporally non-local, and that this supports a
stronger, ontological interpretation of changing the past.
Finally, it should be noted that most of the philosophical literature on chang-
ing the past is about collective narratives (“history”), which differ from individ-
ual ones in two important respects: (1) we have ﬁrst-person access to memories
of our own pasts that we lack to the impersonal, historical past; and (2) collec-
tive narratives of the past are social facts upheld by thousands if not millions of
people, which gives them an added source of staying power relative to personal
narratives. Nevertheless, the speciﬁc issues with which I will be concerned
below are present in both cases, and since there is more material to work with
on the collective side, I shall draw freely on the latter even as my primary
concern here is with personal experience.
The qualitative debate on changing the past
Time is normally thought to have a clear direction, from past to future, and
while most social scientists probably consider the future to be open,6 the past
is routinely assumed to be closed, over and done with. Yet at least among
philosophers there has been considerable debate in recent years about the ﬁxity
of the past – and not just among philosophers of physics, for whom “retro-
causality” is just one more weird possibility that quantum mechanics puts on
the table, but among philosophers of history. On one level what are at stake in
this debate are purely academic questions like the nature of history, causality,
and events. However, on a practical level these issues are intimately bound
up with questions of identity – of who we are – at both the collective and
individual levels, and as such our answers may have far-reaching social and
political consequences.
The philosophical debate about changing the past is three-cornered. In one
corner stands “realism” about the past, the common-sense view that all state-
ments about the past are either true or false, and so the task of the historian – or
for that matter, trial juries – is to determine “what really happened.”7 However,
judging from journals like History and Theory and Journal of the Philosophy
of History, realism about the past is not where the philosophical action is these
days. The real debate is about how far we can push a “constructivist” view
of the past. On this there is a spectrum of opinion clustered into two main
camps, which I will call the Epistemological and Ontological views. Since the
former is the commonsense and by far majority position, I will focus most of
my attention on the intuitions that motivate the latter.
6 It is unclear, however, how this could be true under a classical physics constraint, given its
deterministic ontology.
7 See Roth (2012: 324).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

192
A quantum model of man
One thing all sides in this debate share is that almost no one has invoked
physics. I will remain faithful to that neglect in my review of the literature, but
keep in mind that my agenda here is to lay the groundwork for arguing in the next
section that the Epistemological view makes an implicit classical assumption of
temporal locality (to be deﬁned below). In contrast, the Ontological view I take
it is assuming temporal non-locality, for which I intend to provide a quantum
rationale.
The Epistemological view
The epistemological view on changing the past is that only our descriptions
of the past change, not the past itself. Most of the scholarship in this vein has
been in response to the work of two scholars, Arthur Danto and Ian Hacking,
although because it is separated by almost twenty years the result has been
essentially independent literatures.8
In Analytical Philosophy of History Danto gives a number of examples of
statements that are now true about the past but which could not have been
known at the time by even an “ideal chronicler,” someone who knew and
transcribed everything that happened anywhere at each moment.9 “The Thirty
Years’ War began in 1618”; “Aristarchus anticipated in 270 B.C. the theory
which Copernicus published in 1543”; “Petrarch opened the Renaissance”; and
so on. In each of these instances, which Danto notes are typical of historical
inquiry, descriptions of what happened in the past only became true after the
fact. Although Danto ﬂirts with an ontological reading of these cases, suggesting
that “[t]here is a sense in which we may speak of the Past as changing,”10 he
ultimately takes an epistemological line, arguing that what changes are only
our descriptions of the past today, not what really happened at the time.
Ian Hacking’s widely discussed examples refer to what he calls the “inde-
terminacy” of the past.11 This occurs when new concepts emerge and are then
applied retroactively to people who lacked them, like ‘child abuse,’ ‘sexual
harassment,’ ‘PTSD,’ and so on. He considers the case of Alexander Mac-
Kenzie, a celebrated explorer who in 1802 at the age of forty-eight married a
girl of fourteen. Was MacKenzie a child abuser? Hacking’s own initial answer
was a somewhat convoluted yes, although in response to critics he clariﬁed his
8 Though with Roth’s (2012) recent synthesis, this may be beginning to change. There is however
yet another island in this archipelago that seems to be completely undiscovered, which is the
literature on “temporal externalism”; see for example Jackman (1999; 2005) and Tanesini (2006;
2014). Since I will be discussing externalism in its more generic form in Part V I will set this
interesting work mostly aside here.
9 See Danto (1965).
10 See ibid: 155.
11 See Hacking (1995), and also Tanesini (2006: 199) on how the “open texture” of legal, epistemic,
and linguistic practices enables the future to “contribute to the determination of what the past
has always been.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Non-local experience in time
193
position, arguing that a clear answer to the question simply does not exist.12
Or take sexual harassment, the concept of which was invented around 1950.
On the one hand, it seems doubtful that the coercive and degrading behavior
that we call sexual harassment today was any less prevalent before 1950. Yet,
absent the concept both its perpetrators and victims might have thought it was
perfectly normal. So what “actually happened” before 1950? Again, it seems
indeterminate, in the sense that there is no true or false answer to the question,
at least relative to our discourse today.
Still, like Danto, Hacking and those responding to his work take the only
plausible interpretation of past indeterminacy to be epistemological. As such,
Hacking retains an implicit assumption that the past itself is over and done with.
Indeed, the idea that the past itself could change is barely mentioned in this
literature, except as a reductio that constructivism about the past must clearly
avoid.13 As one critic puts it, the ontological claim is just too “mind-boggling”
to be taken seriously.14
The Ontological view
Yet there are a few brave souls who do just that. I will draw in particular on
an unheralded article by David Weberman to develop the intuition,15 and then
turn brieﬂy to a piece by Jeanne Peijnenburg, who is also the only person in
this literature of whom I am aware to bring in physics. In both cases, what is at
issue is the ontology of events.
Taking Danto’s analysis as his foil, Weberman argues that events in the
historical (or human) past can acquire new properties in response to subsequent
events – not just new meanings for us today, but properties of the events
themselves. His ﬁrst move is to distinguish two ways in which events can be
individuated as “events.”16 One is in physicalist terms: a trigger is pulled, a
gun ﬁres, and a man dies. Events constituted in this way are ontologically
discrete and as such make no intrinsic reference to other events – so in this
case there are three distinct events surrounding the man’s death. Although
only implicit in Weberman’s discussion, his emphasis on discreteness suggests
that by ‘physical’ he means classical (or material) physical. Classical physics
is atomistic, so that events in such a world are connected at most in causal
12 See Gustafsson (2010) and Roth (2012) for excellent syntheses of the debate.
13 However, I read Roth’s (2012) pragmatist analysis as coming close to an ontological interpre-
tation.
14 See Gustafsson (2010: 312).
15 See Weberman (1997), and also Ni (1992); I say “unheralded” because to my knowledge it has
only been cited once, in a footnote by Roth (2012).
16 See Weberman (1997: 753). Weberman’s distinction parallels that made by others between
“hard” and “soft” facts; see Hoffman and Rosenkrantz (1984) and Todd (2013). Unlike hard
facts, soft facts “depend on or hold in virtue of the future” (Todd, 2013: 830).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

194
A quantum model of man
terms, not intrinsically. The second way to individuate events is “in terms
not restricted to basic physical states and movements.”17 While this subsumes
material happenings, what he is really getting at here are events constituted
in intentional and/or relational terms: “the Senate ratiﬁed the arms-limitation
agreement,” “striking workers forced the plant shutdown,” and so on.
Based on this distinction we get two descriptions of the past, what Weber-
man calls the “skeletal” past and the “thick” past. From here two important
implications follow. The ﬁrst is that, from the standpoint of the purely physical,
skeletal past, most of the events of interest to historians – the Renaissance,
World War II, or Cuban Missile Crisis – were not “events” at all. This is not to
say the latter have no material basis, since of course part of what constituted
WWII as an event is that many people met violent deaths. But by themselves,
those deaths were just that, separate deaths, which in no way add up to “WWII.”
The only way to constitute the latter as a single event is to give those countless
physical events a unitary meaning. This leads to the second implication, which
is that meanings are internal relations among intentional states. It is how peo-
ple think about physical happenings which constitutes them as events, not their
physicality per se.18 Such thinking is inherently relational, in the sense that,
for both individuals and groups, it is how physical events are situated within a
web of meaning that matters for what those events are.
Weberman next invites us to consider now how this perspective on the con-
stitution of events might inform our thinking about change, ﬁrst synchronically
and then retroactively with respect to the past. A widely discussed example
of the former is what happened to Xantippe when her husband, Socrates, was
forced to commit suicide: she became a widow.19 Described in the material
terms of the skeletal past the only one of them to whom anything happened
at that precise moment was Socrates, since Xantippe herself was not there.
Moreover, Socrates’ death did not cause Xantippe’s widowhood either (at least
in the efﬁcient sense of causation), since no force was transmitted that changed
her properties. To be sure, after his death other people treated her differently,
grieved with her, brought goods to her home, and so on, but that is not what
made her a widow. Rather, what made her a widow can only be described in
the relational terms of the thick past: if your husband dies then you become a
widow by deﬁnition, in virtue of the shared intentions that constitute the mean-
ing of the physical happenings we call “marriage.” On this view, the change
in Xantippe’s status is a relational property attached to the skeletal fact of
Socrates’ death, just as being part of WWII is a relational property attached
17 Weberman (1997: 754).
18 On the constitutive conception of events see T. Jones (2013), and for an interesting discussion
of the discursive work that went into constituting ‘WWII’ see Reynolds (2003).
19 See Kim (1974).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Non-local experience in time
195
to the deaths of millions between 1939 and 1945. Philosophers disagree about
whether such non-causal changes – known as “Cambridge Changes” – are real
changes. Hard-core materialists might think they are not, but many philoso-
phers accept their reality – and I suspect few social scientists would dispute
that WWII was a real event.
With this framework in place, we are now in a position to consider the idea
that events can change after the fact, not just in an epistemological but ontolog-
ical sense. Importantly, Weberman limits his claim to the thick, relational past;
the skeletal past he agrees (as do I) cannot be changed. That obviously imposes
limits on how much the past can be changed: we cannot raise the dead, go back
in time to kill Hitler’s grandparents, and so on. However, as we have seen the
skeletal past tells us so little about what happened in the human past that most
historical events would not be events at all, so there is still plenty of room for
a provocative argument. So the question becomes: can events in the thick or
historical past acquire new, relational properties in virtue of later events?
Consider some of Weberman’s examples. Amir shot Rabin at 10 a.m. and as
a result Rabin dies at 1 p.m.: the later event changed the properties of the earlier
one from a shooting to an assassination.20 “Smith submitted the winning entry
in the poetry competition:” the event of submitting the poem acquires a new
property by the judges’ subsequent decision. “A man unknowingly becomes
a father:” although no physical properties of the man have changed, our legal
system recognizes that he is a different man than he was before. (From Danto),
“The Thirty Years’ War began in 1618:” the localized ﬁghting in that year
becomes part of a much larger event after 1648.21 And so on. Weberman argues
that in all of these cases, while the material properties of the original happenings
remain unchanged, the latter gained new social or relational properties – what
he calls “delayed relational properties” – due to later events. Moreover, he
notes that these changes need not be only the addition of new properties, but
can erase the past as well, as when “a man’s life may go from successful to
unsuccessful as a result of later actions and events. Or an event may go from
forgotten to remembered as well.”22
Are these changes merely in our description of earlier events, or changes in
the events themselves? Weberman spends much of his article rebutting various
formulations of the Epistemological view, the bottom line of which I take to
be the following. Most of the properties that make people who and what they
are, are intentional and relational rather than material and intrinsic. Husbands,
wives, masters, slaves, citizens, soldiers, and almost all other social roles are
20 Cf. T. Jones (2013: 79–81).
21 On the retrospective constitution of the Thirty Years’ War see Steinberg (1947) and Mortimer
(2001) for an opposing view.
22 Weberman (1997: note 34).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

196
A quantum model of man
deﬁned by convention, by individuals’ positions in a shared web of meaning.
Of course, in one sense these are “descriptions” of people, but they are not
just that. While describing a ﬂower as beautiful does not affect its actual
properties, role descriptions constitute us as kinds of people, as who we are.
If that does not count as ontological then nothing in social life has ontological
status except the purely material properties of individuals and their interactions.
The same goes for most social events. When people get married they acquire
new properties that change not just how we describe them, but who they are
in society. Similarly for soldiers who served in the Gulf War, who are now
veterans of the war, entitling them to beneﬁts they otherwise would not have
received. And then there are concatenations of events like the Gulf War itself,
which would not be “an event” at all but for all the relationally constituted
individuals and actions that went into it. In short, given that historical events
are constituted relationally by shared intentional states, it hardly seems a stretch
to say that they could literally become events after the material facts by which
they are also constituted are long gone.
Where this leaves us is with a kind of temporal holism: the idea that when
it comes to the thick past, history is not a succession of completely separable
events, but a succession of events that are internally or logically related to one
another. What happened yesterday depends in part on what happens today, and
by implication (though I have not emphasized it here), also on what will happen
tomorrow.23 This dependence is not causal but constitutive, in the same way –
only now in a temporal sense – that the master depends constitutively on the
slave to be a master.24 Note that this is perfectly consistent with saying that
what happens in the past helps cause events in the present and future, just
as the internal relation between master and slave is sustained over time by
causal processes of coercion and resistance. Indeed, for events to be related
constitutively across time they must be connected by a causal chain, which
means that not every event in history is internally related to every other later
event. But what the concept of temporal holism adds is that because events
in the thick past are constituted by the meanings attached to them, and because
those meanings are internally related to subsequent meanings, what comes
after those events plays a role not just in how we describe them today but in
making them what they actually were.
Weberman’s examples are mostly at the collective level, and he does not use
physics to support his argument; in both respects Peijnenburg’s article provides
a helpful way to complete this review.25 Her interest is in how the character
23 For arguments in a similar spirit that emphasize the role of the future see Parsons (1991),
Jackman (1999), and McSweeney (2000).
24 Weberman (1997: 760–762) emphasizes that his claim is not one of backwards causation.
25 See Peijnenburg (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Non-local experience in time
197
of an action can be determined by actions that a person takes after it has
been performed. Most of her examples involve pairs of dispositions for which
behavioral manifestations overlap and thus are hard to distinguish, like bravery
and recklessness, miserliness and prudence, and self-consciousness and vanity.
In these cases she argues it is only through the repetition of behaviors that past
actions become constitutive of one disposition or another. Moreover, she points
out that to some extent this is a matter of choice, and not just in the obvious
sense that actions today affect who we will be tomorrow. Rather, by choosing
to repeat (or not) certain behaviors we also affect our past, not in a causal but
a constitutive sense.26 This is made clearer in another Peijnenburg example,
which is not about dispositions.27 Consider a happily married woman who goes
to a party, drinks too much, and wakes up in the morning in bed next to a stranger.
Although she cannot change the material fact that she slept with a stranger
the night before, by her subsequent actions she can change its character –
by continuing to see him, “what happened” was the start of a love affair, by
not doing so it was a one night stand. Finally, drawing on Huw Price’s time-
symmetric view of quantum theory, Peijnenburg argues that these cases involve
not just re-descriptions of the past, but implicate ontologically the nature of the
original actions themselves: “there are actions that are better accounted for by
saying that their character is determined by later actions than by saying that their
character acquires a new description later on, or by claiming that their character
is revealed through, or discovered by, the observations of later actions.”28 This
is a bold claim, and in a response to Peijnenburg, Cornelis van Putten challenges
it in a way that is instructive for my argument.29 Like Weberman, van Putten
argues that the past can be understood in two different ways: (1) in material
terms, as “a constellation of physical events, things that actually happened”;
and (2) in psychological terms, as subjective understanding of what happened,
which he links to personal narratives. He does not dispute that narratives of the
past can change; indeed, he thinks it is commonplace, citing the example of a
war veteran who later becomes a peace activist, and now views actions he once
deemed heroic as crimes against humanity. However, van Putten claims that
this change in narrative has nothing to do with what actually happened, much
less with exotic quantum physical notions of retrocausality, and therefore it can
take place only in the present.
Van Putten’s argument is commonsensical, but it begs a crucial question in
its distinction between material and psychological facts. He does not comment
on this dualism, but like most social scientists I suspect he would argue it is
26 Cf. Varga (2011: 72)
27 Her ﬁnal example is from improvisational music, the succession of notes which give previous
notes their key retroactively. Bohm (1980: 198–200) also invokes the example of music to
illustrate the holism of quantum theory.
28 See Peijnenburg (2006: 248), emphasis in the original.
29 See van Putten (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

198
A quantum model of man
only epistemological. In other words, just because we do not yet know how
to explain psychological facts by reference to brain states, they must still be
ultimately material in an ontological sense. So let us assume that he would
accept a classical physical constraint on what psychological facts are possible.
However, in that case, given that the veteran’s re-thinking was conscious, and
given the hard problem of consciousness for the classical worldview, what is the
physical basis of his new mental state? If the physics constraint on human beings
is classical, then it seems that the veteran’s new state could have no physical
basis at all, and thus is either epiphenomenal or an outright illusion. In short,
van Putten’s easy appeal to a common-sense dualism to defeat Peijnenburg’s
argument does not go through, because it brings in its wake a fundamental
problem of how new psychological facts could be “facts” at all.
In this philosophical debate the burden of proof has been heavily on advocates
of the Ontological view, so much so it seems that they can barely get a hearing.
That’s understandable, since the idea of changing the past is “mind-boggling.”
Yet, it is not obvious that Weberman and Peijnenburg’s analyses of the ontology
of events are wrong either. In turning now to the physics of time and memory,
I propose to give their intuitions a quantum basis. In doing so I hope, if not
to convince you that the Ontological view is right, then at least to raise the
Epistemological view’s burden of proof.
The physics of changing the past
Implicit in the epistemic view of changing the past is an assumption of time as
a linear succession of points moving through Now. Although I have not seen
it characterized this way in the literature, this assumption is one of temporal
locality. Recall that locality in space is a foundation of the classical worldview,
one that critics of quantum theory like Einstein fought hard to save in the face of
the theory’s apparent non-locality. However, thanks to experiments conﬁrming
Bell’s Theorem, we now know that non-locality in space is part of quantum
reality. The key assumption at stake in those experiments was “separability”:
that events located in different places cannot be connected by faster-than-
light inﬂuences, and as such are intrinsically separate.30 By the same token,
locality in time assumes that events at different times are separable points in a
temporal sequence and as such have no intrinsic connection either; yesterday
was yesterday, today is today. Temporal non-locality refers to a loss of such
separability, to an entanglement or “superposition of states at different times.”31
30 See Healey (1991; 1994).
31 Filk (2013: 535). Filk’s article is an excellent overview of various aspects of temporal non-
locality, although unfortunately it does not make a connection to Wheeler’s Delayed-Choice
Experiments, which I try to do below on my own.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Non-local experience in time
199
Moreover, just as non-locality in space makes quantum theory holistic spatially,
non-locality in time makes it holistic temporally.
Now consider McTaggart’s distinction, discussed in Chapter 6, between the
“A-series” and the “B-series” views of time: the tensed time of past/present/
future and the tenseless time of earlier/later. The A-series is the familiar sub-
jective time we all experience, which moves forward like an arrow toward the
future through a succession of Nows. On this view “what time it is” is relative to
Now and constantly changing (though it is always “Now”); what was once the
future will eventually become the past. This is the conception of time implicit
in the epistemological view of the past. The B-series is the tenseless objective
time of physics, which does not recognize a privileged moment called Now,
and as such has no concept of a future or a past. On this view what time it is
never changes; what was once earlier than X will always be earlier, but that’s
all there is to say.
Importantly, according to the B-series – the time of physics – the past, even
the skeletal past, does not exist. Although that might seem like a radical claim, it
is actually common sense. If you asked the proverbial man in the street whether
the past really exists, chances are he would say no. The Thirty Years’ War does
not exist, any more than the future exists; only Now exists.32 So the past has
ontological status only in the A-series, which is to say subjectively, as a matter
of interpretation. Note that this does not mean the past is purely subjective, in
the sense that one can just make something up and call it the past. Most of the
intentional states that constitute interpretations of the past are shared and thus
intersubjective, and even personal memories depend in part on social context,
all of which helps stabilize the A-series past. Moreover, what the past can be
is further constrained by the material traces – like a piece of paper called the
Magna Carta – of what happened before. But the fact that only the A-series even
has a concept of the past means that the question of whether it can be changed
is one that can be posed only in the subjective register. Having said that, if
the A-series is coupled with the classical assumption of temporal locality, as
it usually is, then like the B-series it means the past cannot be changed, since
even though it once existed as a now, it does not exist right now. All that can be
changed is our interpretations of the past. It is that assumption which quantum
theory calls into question.
The “hard problem” of time is how to reconcile these two conceptions of
time, and especially how to interpret the A-series, for which the CCCP provides
32 In the philosophy of time this view is called “presentism” (vs. “eternalism”). Although intuitive,
presentism faces powerful objections, mostly centering on its supposed inability to justify truth
claims about the past like “Germany lost WWII”; for a sense of the debate see Markosian (2004)
and Mozersky (2011). While much concerned with the special theory of relativity, which poses
a challenge to presentism, this debate to my knowledge makes no reference to quantum physics.
My argument below I take it is a non-local presentism.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

200
A quantum model of man
no place in nature. As we have seen, Atmanspacher and Primas’ solution to this
problem is to argue that the distinction between objective and subjective time
emerges from a process of temporal symmetry-breaking from an underlying
timeless reality.33 The Schr¨odinger equation, which is used to describe wave
functions, is deterministic and time-symmetric, meaning it can be solved either
backwards or forwards. The Projection Postulate, in contrast, which is used to
describe the transition from wave function to particle, is non-deterministic and
time-asymmetric. It is in the collapse of the wave function, therefore, which
I have associated with the emergence of consciousness, that the A-series is
created.
So far that might appear just to give a quantum explanation for the Epistemo-
logical view of the past as something that cannot be changed, but this is where
memory comes in. For the A-series to be a “series” and thus able to constitute a
past, meanings must be remembered. A society that did not hand its collective
memories down through the generations would have no past and so in effect
have to reconstitute itself at every moment (if it could be called a “society” at
all). Similarly, a person with advanced Alzheimer’s has no past either, at least
personally. Without memory there is no history.
Memory is built up out of experiences, which as the subjective aspect of
wave function collapse take place in the classical (i.e. actual) world. As they
occur experiences are automatically imprinted into memory, which over time
builds up a classical history of our lives. The physical basis of memory is
not well understood, but it has been known for some time that the storage
of memories is not localized to speciﬁc neurons or even groups of neurons,
but spread out across the brain. Quantum brain theory takes this ﬁnding to its
logical conclusion, which is that memories are non-local in a quantum sense.34
More speciﬁcally, “memory is printed to vacuum, i.e. minimum energy states
of quantum ﬁelds that extend over macroscopic distances in the brain.”35 There
memories exist in entangled states in the superposition that is our unconscious,
from where they are available for subsequent recall.36
This mixed classical/quantum situation makes sense when you think about
it. Take driving to the store. The drive consists of many choices – turning left
at the ﬁrst light, right at the second, left at the third, plus all the little choices
in-between. As a quantum, free agent, what will become my past at each point
is indeterminate (since I could choose an alternate route), but with each choice
my wave function collapses into an experience which is recorded in memory
as part of my history. However, those various memories gather meaning from
33 See Atmanspacher (2003) and Primas (2003; 2007).
34 See Stuart et al. (1978), Jibu and Yasue (1995), and Vitiello (2001); cf. Brainerd et al. (2013),
who apply quantum probability theory to episodic memory, but take no position on quantum
brain theory per se.
35 See Franck (2004: 52).
36 See Carminati and Martin (2008: 563).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Non-local experience in time
201
their entanglement in the longer event of driving to the store – and so it is with
that event in relation to every other event in my life to which it is connected.
If we are walking wave functions, then even though our experiences at each
moment are actualities, at the quantum level of the unconscious, “there are
many histories that are there as potentialities.”37
A crucial implication follows from this conception of memory: experiences
of the past are present in the Now.38 Not in the ﬁgurative sense that memory
is about experiences in the past, as if the latter were now mere pictures or
representations of what happened, but in the literal sense that past experiences
continue to exist today. This is because the entanglement of past experiences
with the wave function of unconscious memory implies a temporal non-locality,
in which past and present are not fully separable. By virtue of this non-local
aspect of memory, experience is preserved in time, enabling us to “re-live”
it – and in so doing I shall argue also potentially to reconstitute it. Note that
this non-separability does not mean the past is identical to the present, since
recalling memories requires a new collapse of the wave function, i.e. a new
experience of past experience.39 However, it is only in virtue of the temporal
non-locality of memory that we are able to recall past experiences at all. On this
view, therefore, memory understood in quantum terms embodies a conception
of time that is neither A-series nor B-series, since both series assume that the
past no longer exists. If memory embodies temporal non-locality, then in some
sense the past still exists, and as such might be changed.
More speciﬁcally, my idea for how the past can be changed begins by
interpreting memory recall as a process of delayed choice. Recall Wheeler’s
Delayed-Choice Experiment, a variation on the Two-Slit Experiment, which is
designed to capture temporally non-local effects (Chapter 2). In the Two-Slit
case, a measuring apparatus is set up in which a photon can take two different
paths to the recording device. If no effort is made to determine which path
is taken, then a succession of photons entering the apparatus will build up
an interference pattern on the recording device, indicating that each photon
took both paths, which is to say remained in its wave form. However, if we
try to measure which path is taken, then the photon’s wave function will
collapse and it will show up as having taken either one or the other path. In
the delayed-choice variant this set-up is modiﬁed so that the determination of
which path the photon follows takes place after it passes the two slits (but
before hitting the recording device). Yet paradoxically the result is the same:
37 Carminati and Martin (2008: 564). As Grove (2002: 577) puts it, “the past of our world may
contain a great deal that did not happen, but in principle could have.”
38 Or more precisely “sub”-present, as Franck (2004) puts it, since past experiences remain in
superposition as long as they are not recalled to present consciousness.
39 For example, we can mentally re-enact what a past pain must have felt like, but we cannot have
that particular pain again.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

202
A quantum model of man
if we do not try to obtain which-path information then we get an interference
pattern indicating both paths were taken, but if we do ask which path, then
we ﬁnd that just one was taken – even though we asked our question after
the photon passed both slits. What this shows is that wave functions are non-
local not only in space but in time, such that “there is a collapse of the wave
function on all the temporal duration bounded by the moment the photon has
been emitted by the source and the moment it has been detected.”40 In short,
measurement creates a particular past that was indeterminate or “open” until that
moment.41
So how might a delayed choice framework help us understand the possibility
of changing our past? A recent paper by G. Galli Carminati and F. Martin
addresses the question explicitly.42 In their model the choice of what to observe
is governed by free will; consciousness plays the role of the particle detector,
registering what is observed; and “phenomena recorded by our unconscious
[memories] persist as coherent superpositions of quantum states.”43 Now con-
sider what happens when we recall a memory, making it present in conscious-
ness. Just as the past of a photon can be created in different ways depending on
where we put the mirror, as a superposition memory can be made to appear (col-
lapse as a new experience) in different ways depending on the angle and context
in which we look at it. The possibilities are not inﬁnite, since superpositions
are structured and as such make some outcomes more probable than others –
my memory of driving to the store cannot be recalled as ﬂying to Chicago. But
within those constraints more than one past is possible. More speciﬁcally, there
are two ways that the past can be inﬂuenced by delayed choices, which I will
call the “Addition” and “Replacement” Effects.44
The Addition Effect is more intuitive, although still hard to make sense of
from a classical standpoint. Sticking with the store example, now assume that
because of an accident the next day playing football, I am never able to drive
a car again. Because it was causally connected to the state vector we may
call “my ability to drive,” my choice to play football retroactively, non-locally,
constitutes my experience of that drive to the store as my last drive, adding
new content to the event which it did not have before. The Addition Effect ﬁlls
the past in, making it more ﬁne-grained, and so to that extent the “past is not
ﬁnished.”45
40 Carminati and Martin (2008: 564); emphasis added.
41 On the idea of an open past see Markosian (1995).
42 See Carminati and Martin (2008); also see Yearsley and Pothos (2014), which appeared too late
for me to incorporate into this text.
43 See Carminati and Martin (2008: 563), and also Franck (2004: 55); cf. Brainerd et al. (2013).
44 These terms are adapted from Bernecker (2004), though he does not consider the idea of
changing the past.
45 Sieroka (2007: 92), referring to Weyl’s view.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Non-local experience in time
203
The Replacement Effect goes further, suggesting that some aspects of the
past can be literally changed. Recall Van Putten’s war veteran turned peace
activist.46 Unlike the purely material happenings in his past, which are forever
over and done with, his experiences in the past are preserved non-locally in
the wave function of memory and as such still exist, not as representations
of the past but as the past itself. There, in the present, they are available for
reconstitution upon recall to consciousness. That will not change the veteran’s
past as he experienced it back in the war, but because that experience “lives
on” it can in principle be changed by a new measurement in the present.
Moreover, we do not have to rely just on hypotheticals here, for consider
the well-documented phenomenon in psychoanalysis called an “apr`es-coup.”47
The apr`es-coup refers to a situation in which people have experiences that at the
time they either repressed or did not view as troublesome, and then later came
to see as problematic as a result of therapy, new information, or the introduction
of new categories. An example is what happened to several thousand Jewish
children who survived the Nazi occupation of Belgium by hiding with non-
Jewish families.48 Although many of these children understood something of
their situation, most did not experience it as traumatic, and – in part because
others did not constitute them as such – did not come to see themselves as
survivors of the Holocaust. Decades later, however, after changes in collective
understandings about the Holocaust, they became traumatized, in a “deferred
retroactive effect” of their experience.
One might argue that this is just a re-interpretation of something that hap-
pened long ago and so is only an epistemological change. But that belies the
very nature of the apr`es-coup, which is to question just what did happen long
ago. To be sure, the material aspects of the survivors’ past did not change,
nor could the experiences they had at that time. However, from a delayed
choice perspective, memories are not separable from experiences in the past,
but connected to them non-locally. So in recalling experiences in light of the
“mirror” of new understandings, what those experiences were was changed –
not causally but constitutively – which is an ontological change.49 This gives
new meaning to the idea of “mental time travel,” which has recently been
developed as a way of thinking about memory (and foresight).50 Although its
advocates treat the idea as only a metaphor, from a quantum perspective, there is
46 Carminati and Martin’s own example is one of mourning a father’s death (2008: 569–572).
47 See Birksted-Breen (2003) and Fohn and Heenen-Wolff (2011). The experience of being “born
again” might have similar, though less traumatic, characteristics.
48 For discussion of this case see Fohn and Heenen-Wolff (2011).
49 The idea of a “quantum eraser” seems related to this effect, but I do not understand it well
enough to discuss it here; for those who would like to follow up see Egg (2013).
50 See Suddendorf and Corballis (2007), Suddendorf et al. (2009), and Gerrans and Sander
(2014).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

204
A quantum model of man
a sense in which people actually can travel to the past. Not by transporting their
bodies, but by entangling their thoughts with past experiences that survive in
memory.
Finally, taking the Addition and Replacement Effects together, we are led also
to a broader conclusion. These effects operate not only on speciﬁc experiences,
but on one’s life as a whole, such that life itself may be seen as a delayed choice.
It is only at the end of our lives that who we were, and what we did, is fully
determined. Someone who did bad things when they were young can, within
limits, change that past by good deeds when they are old. In short, quantum
consciousness provides a physical basis for redemption, something which we
all take for granted as a possibility, but which seems hard to explain if we are
nothing but classical machines.
I have focused in this chapter on the experience of time by individuals and
how it can enable changes in their past; by way of transition to the discussion
of social structure in the rest of this book let me conclude by returning to
the debate about changing the collective past, or history in a broader sense.
Although I think the argument carries over, there is admittedly an important
difference between the two cases, at least if we are talking about reconstituting
events from which there are today no survivors. Individuals who were really
there had direct experience and thus personal memories of events, whereas later
generations have neither. So even if my argument is granted that individuals
can change their past by reliving past experiences stored in memory, how could
this be possible for future generations?51
In approaching this question let me ﬁrst point out that even the access to
historical events of individuals “who were there” is not as privileged as it may
seem. First, no one who fought in WWII could have experienced “WWII,”
since they could not have been everywhere at once. They could not have even
experienced the Battle of Stalingrad, but at most a small slice of it, such as
the ﬁght over the Tractor Factory – and even then, their experiences of that
ﬁght were all somewhat different. Second, WWII was not over until 1945,
and so what individuals experienced before that depended in part on how it
ended; had the Axis won, the nature of those experiences would have differed –
for Germans, noble sacriﬁces for a thousand-year Reich instead of immoral
ﬁghting for a lost cause. (Or consider the Kiev Pocket in 1941, which was
a major German victory at the time, but which turned out to have been such
a strategic blunder that some historians think it cost Germany the war.) So,
on both synchronic and diachronic counts even those who fought did not, as
individuals, “own” the events that constitute WWII. The war was what it was
only in virtue of the shared meanings that constituted their experiences.
51 This question warrants a much more extensive treatment than I can give it here, so what follows
is intended only as a suggestion.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Non-local experience in time
205
Now extend this point to the case of World War I. Individual experiences of
the war can no longer be relived directly, but the shared meanings that made
those experiences what they were at the time have survived in the form of
collective memory or history. That memory exists only in virtue of language,
which I argue in Part IV establishes a semantic non-locality between individu-
als’ minds. This non-locality does not enable us to literally have each other’s
experiences (language is not telepathy), but it does enable us to directly per-
ceive as opposed to merely infer each other’s experiences. A key implication of
this analysis will be that minds are not fully separable, even though we inhabit
separate bodies. By implication, given our semantic connection through col-
lective memory to those who fought in WWI, we today are not fully separable
from them either – their minds are in a sense part of ours. Thus, while we
cannot personally relive their experiences, we can “re-enact” them, in R. G.
Collingwood’s terms.52 To be sure, the greater the temporal distance from an
event, and therefore the more minds involved in settling its meaning, the more
difﬁcult it may be to change. But while those who were there at the time might
be said to have initialized the constitution of a past event, it then lives on non-
locally in the memories of those who came after. As such, and as the lively
debate today about WWI historiography attests, the Great War is also “our”
event, and to that extent available to us for reconstitution.
52 There is a large literature on the idea of re-enactment. See Stueber (2002) and Dharamsi (2011)
for two accounts that seem particularly relevant to my argument here.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Part IV
Language, light, and other minds
Introduction
I began Part III by describing what human beings are if we imagine them
under a strict classical physics constraint, which is to say without reference to
consciousness and therefore intentional properties. The resulting image is one
of a machine or zombie – material, well-deﬁned, subject only to local causation,
deterministic, and, in effect, dead.
I argued that a very different picture emerges if we imagine ourselves under a
quantum constraint with a panpsychist ontology. Quantum Man is physical but
not wholly material, conscious, in superposed rather than well-deﬁned states,
subject to and also a source of non-local causation, free, purposeful, and very
much alive. In short, she is a subject rather than an object, and less an agent
than an agency, someone always in a state of Becoming. Moreover, this agency
is a process in and through which she is sovereign. She decides her present
by how she collapses her wave function (Chapter 8); she decides her future
by projecting herself forward in time and enforcing correlations backwards
(Chapter 9), and to some extent she even decides her past, by adding to or
replacing it in her practices (Chapter 10). Of course, these decisions are not
unconstrained, both internally and externally, but within those constraints the
quantum model of man posits an irreducible freedom to create who we are. It
is what I take to be an existentialist picture, in which our lives are like works
of art.1
I turn now in this and the next Part to the structural side of the agent–structure
problem, which highlights not only the constraints but also the affordances in
which human agencies are embedded. Some of these, like mountains and rivers,
are purely material objects and as such external to human beings. To be sure,
what those objects mean is interpreted and therefore can vary. To one person
a mountain might be a sacred place to be revered, to another an obstacle to be
blown up.2 These different meanings implicate consciousness and as such could
1 See Varga (2011) for reﬂections on this old theme.
2 See Freudenburg et al. (1995).
207
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

208
Language, light, and other minds
proﬁtably be analyzed from a quantum perspective. However, the mountain is
also a brute fact independent of anyone’s consciousness, which limits what
people can do with it.3 Social structures or institutional facts are different;
while external to the individual, they are internal to human beings collectively.
Although in practice many social structures mix brute and institutional facts –
like states with river boundaries – in what follows I will bracket brute facts
and focus on our relationships to each other that constitute institutional facts,
or social structures in their elementary form.
Although a number of quantum concepts will ﬁgure in what follows, per-
haps the most central one is the idea that, when entangled, quantum systems
are not fully separable. A foundational assumption of the classical worldview,4
separability means that “[t]he complete physical state of the world is deter-
mined by (supervenes on) the intrinsic physical states of each spacetime point
(or each pointlike object) and the spatio-temporal relations between those
points.”5
It is this assumption that underwrites the reductionism of modern science,
since it implies that everything can be decomposed into ever smaller parts that
do not presuppose each other’s existence.
In classical social science the separable, “pointlike objects” are individual
human beings, whose intrinsic properties are constituted by our material states.
This is a complicated way of saying something most people would ﬁnd com-
pletely intuitive: that our skins form an impenetrable boundary between us,
making us utterly distinct individuals.6 Indeed, so intuitive is this idea that
even if sub-atomic particles violate separability it is hard to see what this could
mean at the social level – that you and I are the same person? Of course, human
beings often experience “We-feelings,” identiﬁcations that can be so strong
that one may even sacriﬁce their life for another. But these feelings are states
of mind that – as brain states – seem to be encased within our skins, and thus
hardly make us numerically the same. If anything, separability seems to be
their pre-condition, for what is a “We” if not a “you and I”? Given that, it is
easy to see why for most social scientists an analysis of social structure must
be based on an individualist ontology, which takes separability as its starting
point.
It is the burden of my argument to show that despite its strong intuitive appeal,
the separability assumption does not hold in social life. The burden only extends
3 On brute facts see Searle (1995: 2 and passim); cf. the “rump materialism” of Wendt (1999:
109–113).
4 As Kronz and Tiehen (2002: 332) put it, “there are no non-separable states in classical mecha-
nics.”
5 Maudlin (2007: 51).
6 See Farr (1997) on the signiﬁcance of the skin as a boundary of identity, and Bentley (1941) for
a critique.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Language, light, and other minds
209
so far, since I am not going to defend the opposite assumption, that human
beings are completely inseparable. This is not true even at the sub-atomic level,
where entangled particles retain some individuality.7 Rather, what characterizes
people entangled in social structures is that they are not fully separable. As we
will see that is still a radical claim, but at least it is not manifestly crazy,
and where it leads is to a holist social ontology. Within social theory there
are long-standing holist perspectives already on offer, but their arguments are
qualitative rather than physical, appealing to features of intentional phenomena
that seem inconsistent with human separability. Given the reductionism of
modern science, that has kept social holism at the margins of contemporary
thinking. By giving social holism a basis in quantum entanglement I hope not
only to lend it legitimacy but also to shift the burden of proof onto advocates
of the classical, individualist orthodoxy.
I develop this argument in two parts. Here in Part IV I examine the special
case of language, which mediates all other social structures. Using recent schol-
arship on quantum semantics, in Chapter 11 I argue that linguistic meaning is
irreducibly contextual and non-local. Then, building on an analysis of the nature
of light, in Chapter 12 I address the Problem of Other Minds, making the case
that, when understood quantum mechanically, language enables us to directly
perceive each other’s minds. In Part V I turn to the agent–structure problem
itself, with a view toward showing how a quantum theory of consciousness
and language provides a physical basis for an emergentist, holist, and vitalist
conception of society.
7 Though how much is a matter of debate; see for example Castellani, ed. (1998).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

11
Quantum semantics and meaning holism
Language is the most fundamental institution of human society. It sets us apart
from all other species,1 and our other institutions would be impossible without
it. However, to call language an “institution” is already to take sides in a debate
about what language is, one which implicates the agent–structure problem. In
recent years the dominant view in linguistics has been to think of language as
being in the heads of individuals, whether as a “mental organ,” “computational
device,” or even “instinct.”2 On this view linguistics is essentially a branch of
cognitive science. A very different view is taken by those who emphasize the
supra-individual character of language. Saussure, Wittgenstein, Davidson, and
Searle – to drop just a few names – have all highlighted the ways in which our
use of language is constituted and regulated by norms shared by a community
of speakers. From this perspective language is less a cognitive than institutional
fact.3 Of course, institutions cannot exist apart from people, so “top-downers”
would agree that what is in people’s heads matters too, just as “bottom-uppers”
would agree that language must be shared for communication to be possible.
But, as in the agent–structure problem more generally, it is not obvious how to
combine parts and whole.
Importantly, the interdependence between speakers and language commu-
nities means that an implicit subjective–objective polarity structures both
perspectives.4 For social scientists the most familiar example of this polarity is
probably Saussure’s distinction between langue and parole, the former refer-
ring to the structure of a language considered as an abstract system of signs, the
I am grateful to Karin Fierke, Ted Hopf, and Jennifer Mitzen for detailed comments on a draft
of this chapter.
1 Language in the broad sense is not unique to humans, but animal languages are obviously quite
rudimentary in comparison.
2 See Zlatev (2008: 37), who is summarizing the views of Noam Chomsky, Ray Jackendoff, and
Steven Pinker respectively.
3 See especially Harder (2003), who draws primarily on Searle (1995); for Davidsonian and
Wittgensteinian approaches to the sociality of language see for example Williams (2000) and
Verheggen (2006).
4 See especially Cornejo (2004).
210
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum semantics and meaning holism
211
latter to actual speech. As an institutionalist Saussure neglects speech, whereas
as a cognitivist Chomsky neglects institutions, but his distinction between
“competence” and “performance” reﬂects the same polarity. A speaker is com-
petent if she can use a language’s generative grammar (a kind of “langue in
the head”5) to communicate, while her performances actualize this potential
in speech. These polarities map onto the difference within linguistics between
semantics and pragmatics – the one concerned with how meaning is assigned
by a language’s grammar, or “meaning-in-itself,” the other with how meaning
is assigned in real-world situations, or “meaning-in-use.” Semantics transcends
particular agents and thus has an objective quality, whereas by virtue of being
tied to speakers, pragmatics is (or tends toward the) subjective.6 Moreover, and
recalling my discussion in Chapter 1 about social structure, semantics is unob-
servable; what is observable is only utterances.7 As we will see, an important
problem in the philosophy of language is how to integrate these two poles under
the same roof.
The pragmatic aspect of language raises another issue, however, which is
that for interpretivists language is a fundamental barrier to a naturalistic social
science. This is because the way language works has little in common with
how things work in the material world. In the latter things happen through
causal processes, in which a transmission of force or energy induces changes in
material objects. These processes are fully objective, since their effects do not
depend on how they are interpreted. In contrast, language makes things happen
through performative processes that constitute phenomena with meaning. These
processes are not fully objective, since their content depends on how they
are understood. To be sure, social scientists can abstract away from these
understandings, enabling them to do their work “as if ” it were chemistry.8 But
they are a key source of the controversy between positivists and interpretivists
that has bedeviled social science from the beginning. In this controversy I
am with interpretivists in thinking that language is essentially different from
chemistry, and that abstracting away from this difference is therefore to miss
something essential about social life.
But what is language? According to the CCP everything in nature is ulti-
mately physical, and so language must be physical too.9 If it were not, then
what (or where) else could it be? The alternative is either that it is a supernatural
phenomenon, but that doesn’t seem very plausible; or, as in substance dualism,
5 Cornejo (2004: 9). See Chomsky (1995) for an overview of his views as they pertain to this
chapter and Jackendoff (2002) for a magisterial synthesis of the generative tradition.
6 I say “tends toward” because many philosophers deny that consciousness has any interesting
role to play in linguistics; see below.
7 See Itkonen (2008: 21–23).
8 See Padgett et al. (2003) for a refreshingly explicit discussion to this effect.
9 See Benioff (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

212
Language, light, and other minds
that it is a mental phenomenon with no connection to nature, which also seems
problematic. So if language is part of the social world it must have some kind
of physical basis. But what kind: classical (i.e. material) physical or quantum
physical?
Until recently this question had not been asked, since all sides have implicitly
assumed a classical answer. While a materialist explanation for consciousness –
which the latter I argued is presupposed by intentional phenomena – has not yet
been found, positivists are conﬁdent it will be, and that it will not undermine
the unity of science. For their part, while interpretivists have not doubted that
‘physical’ means ‘material,’10 they seem conﬁdent that even if a materialist
explanation for consciousness is found, it would not threaten at least the epis-
temological autonomy of the human sciences. Yet, in light of the mind–body
problem there is no evidence a materialist explanation for consciousness will
ever be found. While that might seem to pose the greater threat to positivists, it
brings with it a threat of vitalism that even most interpretivists would probably
be eager to avoid.
In this chapter I challenge the shared premise of this controversy: that lan-
guage is a classical phenomenon. My discussion draws on the work of physicists
who have begun applying quantum theory to concepts and linguistic meaning.
Their analysis speaks to a long debate within linguistics about whether meaning
is built up out of smaller semantic units with intrinsic content (the Composi-
tional view) or depends irreducibly on local context (the Contextualist view).
This is essentially a debate about the relative importance of semantics and prag-
matics, and as we will see the quantum approach to language clearly favors
Contextualism. In so doing, it justiﬁes the interpretivist insight that, when it
comes to epistemology, language is different from chemistry, and simultane-
ously the positivist insight that, when it comes to ontology, language is part of
nature.
Composition versus context in meaning
The mainstream view about how linguistic meaning is created has long been
Compositionalism, which social scientists would recognize as a species of
reductionism: the meaning of a whole – a sentence, paragraph, or text – is a
function of the meanings of its constituent parts (words) and the way in which
they are combined. As Jerry Fodor puts it
It is extremely plausible that the productivity and systematicity of language and thought
are both to be explained by appeal to the productivity and systematicity of mental
representations, and that mental representations are systematic and productive because
10 Though see Apel (1984) for an exception.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum semantics and meaning holism
213
they are compositional. The idea is that mental representations are constructed by the
application of a ﬁnite number of combinatorial principles to a ﬁnite basis of (relatively
or absolutely) primitive concepts.11
By virtue of its reductionism and emphasis on primitive, separable parts this is
clearly a classical theory of meaning. Such an approach puts a lot of pressure on
our ability to deﬁne the elementary parts in which meaning bottoms out, namely
words and especially concepts, which play a key role in helping people to inter-
pret situations. This has proven difﬁcult. It was originally thought that concepts
could be deﬁned in terms of necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for their appli-
cation, but it has become clear this is impossible. More ﬂexible criteria have
since been proposed, which invoke ideas like “prototypes,” “exemplars,” and
“graded structure” to capture similarities in statistical evidence of how people
actually use concepts.12 The debate over the merits of these different models
continues, though it remains unclear whether any can handle similarities that
are not literal but ﬁgurative, as in metaphors and analogies.13 But one way or
the other, concepts need stable and well-deﬁned properties if they are going to
compose larger meanings.
Yet it turns out that deﬁning concepts is the easy part; matters get quickly
more difﬁcult once concept-combinations and then whole sentences are taken
into account. Some concept combinations are compositional, like “black cat,”14
but consider “pet ﬁsh.”15 If you cue test subjects in a word association experi-
ment with the concept ‘pet’ then ‘guppy’ is only rarely activated, and similarly
with ‘ﬁsh.’ However, if you cue them with ‘pet ﬁsh’ then ‘guppy’ is activated
with high frequency. If meaning is compositional, then why would a word that
appears with low probability in association with two words considered sepa-
rately suddenly become very salient when they are combined? This is not to
say that the compositional approach has no resources for trying to explain the
“guppy effect,” though it is unclear whether any of them is up to the task.16
But now take the even harder – though still quite elementary – case of
whether the meaning of a sentence can be decomposed into the meaning of its
parts and how they are combined. An example much discussed in the literature
is the story of “Pia and the Painted Leaves:”
Pia’s Japanese maple has russet leaves; she paints them green. Addressing her neighbor,
a photographer looking for a green subject, she says, apparently truly:
11 The quote is from Busemeyer and Bruza (2012: 145).
12 See Gabora et al. (2008) for a brief overview of the history of concepts research.
13 See Thomas et al. (2012: 596), who argue that a connectionist variant of Compositionalism can
deal with such cases.
14 Busemeyer and Bruza (2012: 145).
15 For a thorough discussion, albeit from a quantum point of view, see Gabora and Aerts (2002:
344–346).
16 See Mitchell and Lapata (2010) for a sympathetic overview of such efforts.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

214
Language, light, and other minds
(1) The[se] leaves are green.
Imagine now that Pia’s botanist friend is interested in green leaves for her
dissertation and that, in reply, Pia utters (1) again. This time, her utterance seems
intuitively false.17
So, exact same sentence, yet completely different meaning, because the context
of Pia’s statement has changed.
The notion that context affects linguistic meaning goes back at least to
Wittgenstein, but whereas in the past it was seen in the mainstream as being of
only marginal interest, fueled by thought experiments like Pia’s story, Contex-
tualism has recently emerged as an important challenge to the compositional
orthodoxy.18 It comes in many forms, from moderate ones that might be syn-
thesized with Compositionalism to Radical Contextualism, according to which
there are no literal categories in cognition at all, just “temporary coalescences
of dimensions of similarity, which are brought together by context.”19 But
their common denominator is the view that pragmatics plays a crucial role,
irreducible to semantics, in determining linguistic meaning. Pragmatic con-
siderations can be almost anything, from the macroscopic structure behind a
verbal exchange, to the interactional level of the intentions and/or knowledge
of the interlocutors, to the way in which speech is inﬂected or sentences are
organized, to the micro-level of concept combination (‘pet’ and ‘ﬁsh’ each
forms a context for the other) – and all of which operate simultaneously.
Intuitively it seems obvious that context affects the meaning of what is
said, and indeed this is recognized by Compositionalists, who alongside their
primary emphasis on semantics accord a limited role to pragmatics as well.20
However, the way in which they have deﬁned and operationalized context – by
identifying the values of ﬁxed parameters like who is speaking, when, where,
and so on – have not satisﬁed critics, who argue that at most this constitutes a
“narrow” context, not the “wide” context in which speech actually takes place,
where almost anything can affect meaning.21 The complexity and potential
subtlety of wide context is challenging in at least two respects. First, it creates
doubt about the very possibility of a systematic semantics (read: science) of
natural language. If the meaning of an utterance can change based on any
number of contextual differences, then what hope is there of generalizing about
17 Predelli (2005: 351). Hansen (2011) provides a good discussion of this and similar examples.
18 See DeRose (2009) for a comprehensive statement of Contextualism. Semantic Contextualism
is related to but not the same as Epistemic Contextualism, which I will not be discussing here;
for a good survey of this literature see Rysiew (2011).
19 Thomas et al. (2012: 595). See Recanati (2005) on the diversity of Contextualisms, which he
juxtaposes to “Literalism.”
20 See Lasersohn (2012) for a good discussion of how the two traditions deal with contextual
effects on meaning.
21 See for example Recanati (2002: 110–112).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum semantics and meaning holism
215
meaning?22 Judging from recent efforts to show that Compositionalism can
deal with a fuller range of contextual effects, this threat seems to be taken
seriously.23 Second, Fodor has argued that computational models of the mind
cannot cope with context-sensitivity even in principle, because they assume
that the mind is a computer with a ﬁxed representational and causal structure
that processes information bit by bit.24 Fodor’s claim has been disputed,25 but it
raises a question for Contextualists as well, which is how can their wide theory
of context be reconciled with cognitive science? What, in short, is the physical
basis of contextual effects on meaning?
Quantum contextualism
I have neither the ability nor desire to adjudicate this debate on its own terms;
rather, what I want to do is problematize its classical frame of reference. This
is entirely implicit, since physics almost never comes up in the literature,26 and
even when a classical view of the mind is invoked, as by Fodor, this is not done
in contrast to a quantum view. Thus, outside the quantum semantics literature
I know of no references to quantum theory in the philosophy of language, and
only one in experimental semantics, where Jeff Mitchell and Mirella Lapata
quickly reject a quantum modeling option because its mathematical features
“undermine not only [its] tractability in an artiﬁcial computational setting but
also [its] plausibility as [a] model of human concept combination.”27 These
complaints make sense if we assume the mind is classical, but that is precisely
what is in question here.
Why make a quantum turn in linguistics? Well, ﬁrst, languages are rooted
in the brain, and so if the brain is a quantum computer, then that would be a
compelling reason to think that language is quantum as well. Second, quan-
tum theory is a contextual theory par excellence, in which precisely how a
measurement is prepared makes all the difference to the outcome. As such,
there is a “quite strong” analogy between quantum theory and language, such
that the “exact same” modeling operations can be used in both.28 One of the
main contributors to quantum semantics, physicist Diederik Aerts, thinks the
analogy is so robust that he has even used it in the other direction to propound
22 See Lasersohn (2012).
23 See for example Pagin (1997), Predelli (2005), Hansen (2011), Lasersohn (2012), and Thomas
et al. (2012).
24 See Fodor (2000).
25 See Thomas et al. (2012).
26 The only exception of which I am aware is Chomsky (1995), who argues that we should
approach the study of language in the same way we would any other physical system – by
which he clearly means classical physical.
27 See Mitchell and Lapata (2010: 1399–1400); quantum theorists Dalla Chiara et al. (2011: 85)
are not impressed, calling the intractability charge a “common prejudice.”
28 Widdows (2004: 217); also see Neuman (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

216
Language, light, and other minds
a new interpretation of quantum theory. His argument is that whereas quantum
processes are thought to be mysterious because they behave unlike anything we
encounter in our daily lives, they actually behave just like concepts, with which
we are all very familiar.29 Aerts stops short of saying that concepts really are
quantum mechanical, but his many examples are compelling, and suggest that
it is a small leap to my stronger, realist claim.
Finally, like quantum mechanics, Contextualism is a holistic theory, in which
“the meaning of the whole determines the meanings of its parts, but generally
not the other way around.”30 Meaning (or semantic) holism comes in degrees,
from radical – “[t]he meaning of an expression depends constitutively on its
relations to all other expressions in the language . . . ” – to moderate – “what
a linguistic expression means depends on its relations to many or all other
expressions within the same totality” – to almost benign – “all of the inferen-
tial properties of an expression constitute its meaning.”31 It is unclear to me
which of these holisms quantum semantics implies, since the literature has not
addressed the question directly. On the one hand, quantum theory is as holistic
as holistic can be; on the other, as we saw in Chapter 8, the Hilbert space of
the mind is partitioned into state vectors of regularly associated concepts, only
some of which will be activated in a given context. So rather than try to sort
this out here, let me just introduce quantum semantics, and then you can judge
for yourself.
The starting point for the argument is that concepts typically have many
meanings and as such lack deﬁnite properties in the abstract. Take ‘suit,’ which
among other things can describe an item of clothing, a legal proceeding, or an
aspect of a playing card – meanings that have little to do with each other.32 This
suggests that the “ground state” of a concept may be represented as a superpo-
sition of potential meanings, with each of the latter a distinct “vector” within its
wave function. Being in superposition means these vectors are entangled quan-
tum mechanically.33 However, they will have different “weights,” which can
be identiﬁed experimentally through surveys asking respondents to rate how
“typical” a meaning is of a given concept (a common practice in linguistics).
These weights give the wave function structure, telling us how likely it is to
collapse onto one actual meaning or “eigen-state”34 vs. another, other things
being equal. Since a concept cannot be potential/abstract and actual/concrete at
the same time, Aerts argues the relationship between the two is one of Heisen-
berg uncertainty, just like our inability to know simultaneously the momentum
29 See Aerts (2009; 2010).
30 See Dalla Chiara et al. (2011: 85), and also their (2006).
31 See Jorgensen (2009: 133–134), quoting Christopher Peacocke, Peter Pagin, and Michael Devitt
respectively; emphases added. See Malpas (2002) and Pagin (2006) for good introductions to
meaning holism.
32 The example is from Bruza and Cole (2006: 12).
33 Busemeyer and Bruza (2012: 151).
34 ‘Eigen’ is German for actual or real.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum semantics and meaning holism
217
and position of a particle.35 Thus, “words could no more be said to ‘possess’
an intrinsic meaning that is independent of their use than, in Bohr’s view,
could an electron be said to ‘possess’ an intrinsic position or spin.”36
In quantum mechanics measurement is what brings about a wave function’s
collapse, which is an inherently contextual process that involves ﬁrst deciding
what particular question to ask of nature and then preparing the experiment
in such a way that it can be answered; if these steps are done differently,
then a different result will be obtained. Similarly, in language what brings
about a concept’s collapse from potential meanings into an actual one is a
speech act, which may be seen as a measurement that puts it into a context,
with both other words and particular listeners.37 This starts with a speaker’s
decision to try to communicate one meaning rather than another. But while
communicative intent (analogous to the physicist’s question and experimental
design) structures outcomes in a certain way, the meaning that is actually
produced (where the “particle” lands) depends also on the listener, whose
understanding will depend on how what is said interacts with her memory of
words and their associations (which may differ from the speaker’s). So the
guiding idea is that memory structures relate to concepts in the same way
that measurement devices in physics relate to particles.38 If that’s right, then
we should see quantum entanglement and interference manifested in actual
language use, which is what quantum linguists seek to demonstrate. This is
done primarily through the study of concept-combinations, such as “pet ﬁsh,”
in which the introduction of a new concept changes the context of the original
one and thus the probability that a particular instance of the concept will be
manifested.
Consider ﬁrst the case of concept interference, for which Aerts develops
a lengthy example drawing on experimental data about how people classify
fruits and vegetables.39 Subjects were asked to complete three tasks: (A) choose
one item from a list of foods that they think is a good exemplar of “Fruits”;
(B) choose one from the same list for “Vegetables”; and (C) again for “Fruits or
Vegetables.” The list contained twenty-four items, some of which were obvi-
ous (apples and broccoli), but most were not (mushrooms and mustard). The
responses to (A) and (B) measure the “typicality” of each item as an instance
of the concept, or in quantum terms, the weights for the different vectors in
the superposition of Fruits and Vegetables. Regarding (C), when the two con-
cepts are combined, if meaning is classical, then the expectation of someone
35 See Aerts (2009: 388–389).
36 Ford and Peat (1988: 1239).
37 See Schneider (2005), who like Aerts actually makes the connection in the opposite direction,
arguing that measurement in physics is a speech act.
38 Aerts (2009: 371).
39 Aerts (2009; 2010: 2954–2959); also see Busemeyer and Bruza (2012: 144–146), and the
discussion in Chapter 8 of the “Linda” case.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

218
Language, light, and other minds
choosing a given exemplar as an instance of “Fruits or Vegetables” would be the
average of the answers to (A) and (B). However, this is not what the data from
(C) show, which for each term deviate from expected values to varying degrees.
After doing the math, Aerts shows that the deviation can be explained by inter-
ference, suggesting that the logic of concept combination is actually quantum.
Furthermore, Aerts shows that this experiment can be represented graph-
ically as a direct analog of the Two-Slit Experiment in physics. Answers to
(A) correspond to particles going through an open slit while the other slit is
closed, while answers to (B) correspond to the reverse. The result in both the
conceptual and physics experiments is a normal distribution, of choices and
hits respectively, opposite the open slit. (C) corresponds to both slits being
open, and instead of an average of the two distributions, we get the wavy
line characteristic of an interference effect, just as in the Two-Slit Experiment.
Although Aerts’ purpose is to show that particles behave just like concepts, his
mapping shows that the reverse is true as well. Moreover, in both cases we see
a difference with classical material objects. This becomes clear if we consider
that for any two concepts, say Furniture and Bird, their disjunction, “Furniture
or Bird,” will itself be a concept (even if one for which it might be hard to
ﬁnd exemplars); whereas the disjunction of two actual material objects, as this
example shows, will not typically be an object.40
Now let’s look at whether entanglement is found among concepts, which
is tested for by deriving Bell inequalities and then seeing if they are violated
experimentally; if they are then entanglement is present. To derive the inequal-
ities Aerts considers the sentence “The Animal Acts” with its two concepts.
He then considers “two couples of exemplars or states of the concept Animal,
namely Horse, Bear and Tiger, Cat, and also two couples of exemplars or states
of the concept Acts, namely Growls, Whinnies and Snorts, Meows.”41 In a
series of four experiments subjects were asked which term in the ﬁrst pair is
a good exemplar of ‘Animal’ and again for the second pair, and then simi-
larly for the latter two pairs for ‘Acts.’ These experiments provide weights for
each exemplar of the concept that it instantiates, when considered in isolation
from the other concept. Aerts then designed four more experiments in which
the exemplars are paired in different combinations, like “The Tiger Meows,”
“The Cat Whinnies,” and so on, and subjects are asked whether each is a good
example of “The Animal Acts.” In each experiment the expectation was that
one combination, such as “The Cat Meows” would clearly dominate the others,
40 Aerts (2010: 2965). Also see Sozzo (2014), which deals with borderline cases and also repro-
duces existing experimental results.
41 See Aerts (2010: 2960), and for another example Aerts, Czachor and D’Hooghe (2006: 466–
469).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum semantics and meaning holism
219
which after assigning numerical values to different answers allowed Aerts to
derive Bell inequalities for the entire set.
Although this research design lends itself to standard psychological testing,
for data Aerts turned instead to an analysis of thousands of pages from the Web,
which he argues can shed additional light on his quantum interpretation. The
details are too much to go into here, but Aerts’ results clearly show a violation
of Bell inequalities – i.e. entanglement.
This is because “The Animal Acts” is not only a combination of concepts, but a new
concept on its own account. It is this new concept that determines the values attributed
to weights of couples of exemplars, which will therefore be different from the values
attributed if we consider only the products of weights determined by the constituent
concepts . . . This shows that combining concepts in a natural and understandable way
gives rise to entanglement, and it does this structurally in a completely analogous way
as entanglement appears in quantum mechanics, namely by allowing all functions of
joint variables of two entities to play a role as wave functions describing states of the
joint entity consisting of those two entities.42
Relating this back to the debate in the philosophy of language, what this shows
is that even for very simple combinations of concepts meaning is inherently
contextual rather than compositional.
Further evidence of the entanglement of concepts is provided by word asso-
ciation experiments, in which subjects are cued with words and asked to list all
the terms they associate with it. The idea here is that words vary in their implicit
associations with other words – ‘planet’ is associated with ‘Earth’ and ‘moon,’
but not ‘tiger’ or ‘chair’ – so by mapping the number and connectivity of asso-
ciations we can gain insight into the structure of a language. These experiments
have established that words are stored in memory not as isolated entities, but as
nodes in a network of related words. Note that this in itself does not imply entan-
glement, since networks can be classical (as in network theory, which is widely
used in the social sciences). What points toward entanglement is how words
are activated. The ﬁrst hint was provided in a 2003 paper by Douglas Nelson,
Cathy McEvoy, and Lisa Pointer, who tested two models of word activation.43
According to the “Spreading Activation” model, “activation travels from the
target to and among its associates and back to the target in a continuous chain”
(p. 42). This is a classical picture, relying on local causal connections from
each word to the next. In contrast, according to the “Activation at a Distance”
model “the target activates its representation and the associates that comprise
its network in parallel” (p. 42), or synchronously, without necessarily returning
back to the target at all. After reviewing existing evidence and conducting two
experiments, Nelson et al. concluded that the latter is the better predictor, and
42 Aerts (2010: 2964).
43 See Nelson, McEvoy, and Pointer (2003).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

220
Language, light, and other minds
therefore that “the principle underlying memory activation is the synchrony of
activation, not its spread” (p. 49).
This is not what they expected, perhaps in part because they did not theorize
the Activation at a Distance model in explicitly quantum terms and so their
ﬁndings were “counter-intuitive” and difﬁcult to explain. However, Nelson et
al. then teamed up with some quantum theorists, who were able to formalize the
Activation at a Distance model in quantum terms, and thus provide an explana-
tion for the observed results.44 Whereas synchronous activation is an anomaly
from a classical perspective, it is what we would expect if words are stored in
memory as entangled superpositions and as such are not fully separable.45 This
means that in contrast to classical and speciﬁcally compositional approaches
to our mental lexicon, the words that constitute the nodes of our semantic net-
works do not have distinct identities prior to their actualization. It is only with
the introduction of context – in this case, the way in which associations are
measured – that words take on speciﬁc identities, as a result of the network’s
“collapse.” Concepts, in short, are not “objects” as in the orthodox view, but
processes that unfold in time.46
Applications of quantum theory to language are still young, and as yet there
has been no pushback from scholars invested in classical views of language.
So it is not clear whether these arguments will carry the day. However, given
that Compositionalists have struggled to give concepts precise deﬁnitions and
also to explain the pervasive effects of context on meaning, the fact that quan-
tum semantics predicts these difﬁculties is strongly suggestive. If the physical
basis of the mind and therefore language really is quantum mechanical, then
pragmatics is much more important in the production of meaning than is often
thought, and the debate between Compositionalists and Contextualists should
end with a clear victory for the latter.
By way of transition to the next chapter, I want to point to a curious lacuna
throughout the philosophy of language: the role of consciousness. It makes
sense that institutionalists would neglect consciousness, since they are unin-
terested in what is inside speakers’ heads. Yet cognitivists too ignore it, con-
ceiving of the mind instead in computational terms.47 Indeed, the biggest role
that consciousness seems to play in the literature is as an “illusion” produced
by language.48 Symptomatically, the The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of
44 See Bruza et al. (2009); for further discussion and examples of this formalization see Kitto
et al. (2011) and Busemeyer and Bruza (2012: Chapter 7).
45 Busemeyer and Bruza (2012: 200).
46 This conception of concepts goes back to William James; see Larrain and Haye (2014).
47 See for example Jackendoff (2002), who, when he ﬁnally does discuss consciousness (sic)
(pp. 309–314), deﬁnes it in functional rather than experiential terms.
48 See Dennett (1991).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Quantum semantics and meaning holism
221
Language (2006), a comprehensive, over-1000-page survey of the ﬁeld, has no
index entry for ‘consciousness.’49
Quantum theorists of language have not thematized consciousness either, but
my larger argument points to an important role for it in their approach. To recall,
consciousness is produced in wave function collapse, conceived as a process
of temporal symmetry-breaking initiated by free will (see Chapter 6). Will
works through advanced action, enforcing correlations between the future and
the present; experience complements that backward movement with retarded
action, moving forward in time and in so doing restores temporal symmetry.
This suggests two things about language. First, the production of linguistic
meaning is willful in the sense that it requires ongoing decisions to collapse
the potential meanings of words into actual ones.50 This means that although
language as a whole is in a quantum coherent state, it is in decoherence that
meaning is actually created.51 Second, as an aspect of decoherence, it is only
in the experience of language that meanings are realized.52 Far from being an
illusion produced by language, linguistic meaning presupposes consciousness.
That points to a phenomenological view of language, which “counterposes
the idea that speaking and listening, writing and reading, are unconscious,
automatic roll-outs of thoughts and feelings formulated anterior to and outside
of enactments of language.”53 Moreover, since consciousness originates in
wave functions that are inherently non-local, insofar as these are shared – as
they must be for language to be social – through experiences of language we
might gain access to other minds.
49 See Itkonen (2008), Zlatev (2008), and Ochs (2012) for critiques of this bias in the literature.
50 On the purposeful character of language use see Zlatev (2008: 48–49) and Aerts (2009: 401).
51 Cf. Aerts (2009: 371–372), who sees meaning rather as the analogue to coherence.
52 See Itkonen (2008: 19) and Ochs (2012).
53 Ochs (2012: 152); also see Robbins (2002) and Zlatev (2008: 49).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

12
Direct perception and other minds
The quantum semantics literature has focused on individuals in isolation; I
want now to extend it to the more realistic case of dialogue. Here it is not only
neighboring words and sentences that form the context of speech acts, but the
presence of other people with their own intentions. In shifting to interaction we
run up against the Problem of Other Minds. Philosophers actually distinguish
two such problems: an epistemological or “mind-reading” problem of knowing
what others are thinking; and a deeper problem of knowing whether others have
minds at all.1 However, for social scientists the main issue is mind-reading, on
which there is a substantial literature in psychology, and I shall limit my focus
accordingly below.2
It is widely agreed that people are quite good at mind-reading; the question
is how we do it, given the apparent privacy of consciousness. The dominant
answer is that the mechanism is representational, inferential, and therefore
“indirect.” On this view, each of us has a “Theory of Mind” in our heads, which
by analogy to a scientiﬁc theory represents others’ minds well enough that we
can infer their thoughts. Advocates of “direct perception” have challenged this
picture, arguing that what we see in encounters with others is not representations
of their minds in our heads, but their minds themselves in action. Both sides,
however, assume that our minds are classical and therefore separable systems.
This is particularly problematic for the direct perception account because it
means that our contact with others’ minds is subject to the constraints of local
causality and as such cannot literally be direct.
I shall approach this problem indirectly, by way of how we visually perceive
material objects. I do so for two reasons. First, the literature itself is preoccupied
with the visual aspects of mind-reading, and as such curiously has not made
language a central theme. There has been work on how learning language
is important for developing children’s mind-reading abilities,3 and of course
1 See Smith (2010a) and Gomes (2011).
2 See Leudar and Costall (2004) for an historical but also skeptical view of psychology’s concern
with the problem of other minds.
3 See for example Astington and Fillipova (2005).
222
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Direct perception and other minds
223
much on expressive behavior, most of which is linguistic. But the speciﬁcity of
dialogue as a route into other minds has been mostly neglected.4 Second, “there
are strong parallels to be drawn between the way in which the visual world is
created and the way in which language is used to create our mental spaces.”5
In particular, I argue that by virtue of the non-locality of light, in vision we
directly perceive objects in our environment. From there it will be easier to see
that the semantic non-locality of language enables us to do the same with other
minds. Language, in short, is like light.
The problem of perception
In a nutshell, the “problem” of perception is to explain how our senses hook
onto external reality in such a way that we are usually able to navigate the
world successfully. Most of the scholarship on this question focuses on visual
perception. Vision is the primary sense through which humans interact with
the world, and there seems to be a consensus that, notwithstanding the unique
ways in which the other senses operate, the philosophical problems they pose
are not essentially different.6 The literature on vision addresses many issues,7
but for my purposes the key question is whether perception is direct or indirect.
My claim will be that the way this distinction is usually understood embod-
ies a classical perspective that biases the discussion in favor of the indirect
view.
Direct perception is generally considered the intuitive view of those untainted
by philosophical training. Although there is no consensus on what precisely
‘direct’ means,8 the basic idea is that in visual perception what we see are
literally objects themselves rather than representations of them in our brains.
This view, sometimes called “na¨ıve realism,” has at least three things going
for it. First, it accords with what we experience. Objects do appear to be out
there, in the world, not in our heads. Second, when we open our eyes objects
are immediately present to consciousness, with no hint of concept mediation
or mental inference. Finally, it extends naturally to lower organisms, for which
talk of mental “representations” seems strained.
Despite the intuitive appeal of direct perception, most philosophers and
vision scientists today think perception is indirect, or inferential. On this view,
which is closely tied to the computational model of the mind, in perception
4 For exceptions see Gallese (2008), Iacoboni (2008: Chapter 3), and Fusaroli et al. (2014).
5 Ford and Peat (1988: 1235).
6 See for example Velmans (2000: Chapter 6), Matthiessen (2010), and Crane (2014: 14–15).
7 Crane (2014) provides an excellent overview of contemporary philosophy of perception, though
addressing only its mainstream varieties; James Gibson’s ecological view does not appear, for
example, much less any quantum perspectives.
8 McDermid (2001) identiﬁes ﬁve primary meanings. My own usage below is closest to Warren
(2005).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

224
Language, light, and other minds
we are in contact with representations9 of objects, not objects per se – “no
perception without representation.”10 In part this is driven by philosophical
arguments about hallucinations and illusions, but the crux of the matter is that
vision science has shown there is a large gap between the information in the
light striking our eyes and what we actually see – a gap ﬁlled in by uncon-
scious inferences made in the brain. This makes theories of indirect perception
“constructivist,” since the brain must integrate or “construct” the output of its
retinal sensors into perceptions.11 And while many might eschew that term,
most social scientists also think that perception is indirect. The belief that
all observation is “theory-laden” is a rare point of agreement among posi-
tivists and interpretivists, and post-structuralists might go even further, arguing
that perception is theory-determined.
Yet despite the claim that efforts to explain perception without positing
representations have “failed in systematic and massive ways,”12 the debate
goes on, largely because the phenomenology of perception is hard to square
with the idea that what we actually see in vision are representations of objects,
not objects themselves.13 This has kept “ecological” theories in the ﬁeld, which
take visual perception at least partly out of the head and try to embed or situate
it in relation to the environment.14 Moreover, a relatively neglected feature of
the phenomenology of vision that will be important to my own argument is
its projected quality. Given that one way or another, information processing is
clearly involved, how does the brain project its internal “inferences” into an
experience of objects out in the world? Or for that matter, why is a pain in your
foot experienced in your foot, rather than in your brain, where the information
is being processed?15 Given the mind–body problem, it is not surprising that
this would be puzzling. If we can’t explain any experience, then we won’t be
able to explain visual projection either. But the difﬁculty is also empirical in
that the information present on the retina is two-dimensional, whereas what is
perceived is three-dimensional, and as we will see it is not clear how a classical
computational brain could convert the one into the other.
As usual quantum theory almost never comes up in this debate, which sug-
gests that both sides implicitly share a classical worldview. This manifests itself
in various ways, but in particular in an assumption that the brain/mind is fully
9 What used to be called “sense-data,” but this is just one version of representational theorizing,
most of which today disavows the term.
10 Warren (2005: 337).
11 See Paternoster (2007). The canonical text here is Marr (1982); also see Palmer (1999).
12 See Burge (2005: 20).
13 Though for a defense of the representational view on this score see Millar (2014).
14 See Gibson (1979) and Orlandi (2013) for a recent example; cf. Hudson (2000) and Brewer
(2007). Although critical of indirect perception, Orlandi’s article is particularly good on why it
initially seems so plausible.
15 See Velmans (2000: 116).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Direct perception and other minds
225
separable from the world around it. A classical approach to perception is a kind
of dualism, therefore, though one of subject vs. object rather than the traditional
one of brain vs. mind.
Separability has a crucial implication that stacks the deck against direct
perception, which is that the relationship of world to mind must be causal
and local. Causality is implicit in the view that light is something that travels
through space and initiates the perceptual process only when it makes contact
with our retinal sensors.16 As Michael Sollberger puts it, “entering into causal
chains seems to be the sole way for entities to become epistemically salient to
us perceivers.”17 Causality implies locality, or the classical assumption that no
inﬂuence can propagate faster than the speed of light. From this Tyler Burge
derives a “Proximality Principle,” according to which “the effects of distal
causes are entirely exhausted by their effects on proximal causes”18 – which
is to say, in the end what matters is what is going on inside our heads. Burge
goes too far in claiming this principle is basic to science, since it does not hold
in quantum physics. But he could still note, with Sollberger, that “empirical
researchers and philosophers of perception alike agree that direct action at a
distance has to be banned from the macrophysical realm of perception.”19 This
leads to a seemingly decisive “Time-Lag Argument” against direct perception:
what we can directly perceive is happening right now, and since even at light
speed it takes time for visual information to reach our retinas, what we directly
perceive must therefore be “mind-dependent proxies” of the world rather than
the world itself.20
Although they bias the debate in favor of indirect perception, the classical
assumptions of separability, locality, and causality are so taken for granted in
the literature that even advocates of direct perception have not called them
into question. In a recent defense of direct perception, for example, Julie Zahle
divides perception into two stages:
In the ﬁrst stage, the environment causes, via the light it reﬂects and emits, the activation
of the retinal cells. In the following, I do not go further into this stage of the process.
Instead, I concentrate on the second stage. It begins when the retinal cells are stimulated,
and it ends with the formation of a perceptual belief. I refer to this second stage as the
perceptual process.21
However, this reduces the Great Perception Debate to what is going on inside
the brain, which is the home turf of the inferential view and begs the ques-
tion against the Time-Lag Argument. Some ecological psychologists sense the
16 This idea goes back to Galileo; see Reed (1983: 88).
17 See Sollberger (2012: 590); emphasis in the original.
18 See Burge (2005: 22).
19 See Sollberger (2012: 587), emphasis added, and Burge (2005: 24–25); also see Sollberger
(2008).
20 The quote is from Warren (2005: 337), but I am drawing primarily here on Power (2010).
21 Zahle (2014: 506).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

226
Language, light, and other minds
danger here, that the “crucial problem [for their direct perception view] is
action-at-a-distance.”22 But while gesturing in a quantum direction they have
not yet developed a full-blown solution.
To my knowledge no one has studied empirically whether there are quantum
effects in human vision.23 However, as we saw in Chapter 7, plants, birds,
and several other organisms are known to use quantum processes in perceiving
their environments; and as we saw in Chapter 8, there is also considerable
evidence that human beings perceive probabilities in quantum terms. These
ﬁndings point toward a deﬁnition of direct perception genuinely distinct from
indirect perception – i.e. as an intrinsically non-local phenomenon rather than
as a different view about what happens in the brain. Problematizing the taken-
for-granted classical bias in the literature would level the playing ﬁeld and
thereby give advocates of direct perception a much stronger hand.
However, in order to show that human perception really is non-local it is
not enough that our “receivers” (brains) be quantum mechanical; we also need
a change of perspective on the sending side. The reason is the standard view
of light as something that travels from objects to our retinas, which justiﬁes
the separability assumption and motivates the Time-Lag Argument. So ﬁrst we
need to see that this is only half the story of light.
The dual nature of light
In the standard view, light consists of tiny particles (photons) traveling through
space at a speed of 186,000 miles per second. Although relativity theory tells
us that nothing can travel faster than light, according to the orthodoxy light is
not special in any further, metaphysical sense.
Yet philosophers and physicists who have thought about the nature of light
are not so sure. The physics of light have been puzzling ever since Michelson
and Morley discovered in 1887 that light always has the same speed, regardless
of one’s perspective, and thus is never at rest. In this respect light is unlike
everything else in nature, the measured speed of which can vary and is always
relative to an observer. Relative to someone on the Earth’s surface a car might
be traveling at 60 mph, but relative to an observer in space, where the car is
riding on Earth as it hurtles through the heavens, it would appear to be traveling
at thousands of miles per hour. And likewise for every other moving object: its
speed all depends on your distance from it and the angle and velocity of your
own motion. Light is fundamentally different. No matter from what frame of
reference it is measured, its speed is always the same. This “puzzle of light
22 Kadar and Effken (1994: 322); also see Kadar and Shaw (2000: 167).
23 Though there has been work on the theory side; see Woolf and Hameroff (2001), Flanagan
(2001; 2007), Rahnama et al. (2009), and Khoshbin-e-Khoshnazar and Pizzi (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Direct perception and other minds
227
speed constancy” was one of the key factors that led to Einstein’s theory of
relativity, and still provokes discussion among physicists today.24
Beyond its physics, it has long been noted that light is also unique in at least
three, more philosophical respects, which David Grandy has ably summarized
in a thought-provoking series of articles and books.25 First, we never see light
itself, only lighted surfaces or things. Grandy provides the example of a movie
projector in a theater. Although we take it for granted that there is a beam of
light from projector to the screen, unless there are dust particles in the air the
beam itself will be invisible.26 Or consider why outer space is dark despite
the billions of stars around: as a vacuum, there is nothing in space for light
radiating from stars to reﬂect off of and thereby reveal itself. The fact that light
is only seen in conjunction with other objects means that it is impossible to
objectify it, suggesting that light is not an object at all, but a principle by which
we see, an “unframed window” within which the rest of the world is situated.27
Second, “time does not exist in the world of light.”28 We all know from Star
Trek that as one accelerates toward the speed of light time slows down. What
tends not to be noted, however, is that if we could actually travel at light speed,
time would stand still. This calls into question our usual way of speaking about
inter-stellar distances in terms of “light years,” the years it takes light to get
from a star to Earth. Relative to our frame of reference that is how it appears,
but from the point of view of light itself – and in a panpsychist universe photons
have such a thing! – it takes no time at all to travel from point A to point B, no
matter how far apart they are.
Finally, if time has no meaning for light then in what sense could space? It
seems strange to say that a phenomenon that, from its point of view, can get
from Andromeda to Earth instantaneously is “moving” at all. And indeed, light
moving is not something that can literally be seen at all, but an inference from
what we can see.29 To be sure, light has a “speed,” but this is in its particle
aspect from our perspective and thus only a partial truth; in its wave aspect light
is inherently non-local.30 In effect, the speed of light is not a normal part of our
space-time regime at all, but, as Einstein thought, an exogenously given value
that regulates the space-time properties of material bodies in that regime.31
It is considerations like these that have led some to think of light as not
“just another kind of particle,”32 but as metaphysically special, even if the
24 See Grandy (2012) for an overview.
25 See Grandy (2001; 2002; 2009; 2012); Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty are the two philosophers
who appear most frequently in contemporary philosophical reﬂection on light.
26 Grandy (2012: 542).
27 The quote is from Grandy (2001: 11); also see Young (1976: 11) and Rosen (2008: 164).
28 Young (1976: 24); also see Germine (2008: 153).
29 Grandy (2012: 544).
30 See Healey (2013: 50–53) for discussion of physicists’ views on light as wave vs. particle.
31 Grandy (2012: 542).
32 Young (1976: 11).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

228
Language, light, and other minds
idea is counter-intuitive. Grandy locates the intuitive difﬁculty in the modern –
and one might add, classical and materialist – tendency to think of light as a
“free standing” phenomenon, as something that exists on its own like any other
material object. Yet as physicist Mendel Sachs has asked, “[w]hat is ‘it’ that
propagates from an emitter of light, such as the sun, to an absorber of light,
such as one’s eye? Is ‘it’ truly a thing on its own, or is it a manifestation of the
coupling of an emitter to an absorber?”33 In other words, light breaks down the
separability of subject and object. To develop the implications of this holistic
view for vision and ultimately dialogue let me now turn back to the receiver
side of the equation.
Holographic projection and visual perception
As we saw above, a key problem in making sense of visual perception is
explaining its projection into the world, that we experience objects as out there
rather than on our retinas. The difﬁculty here lies in understanding how two-
dimensional information on the retina is transformed into three-dimensional
perceptions of objects.
A promising analogy for thinking about this process has been suggested
by Max Velmans, who argues that perceptual projection is holographic.34 To
produce a holographic image in the lab, laser light is split into two beams or
waves. The “reference wave” proceeds from the origin of the split to a holo-
graphic ﬁlm; the “object wave” proceeds to an object, envelops it, and then
proceeds to the ﬁlm, where it is reunited with the reference wave. Together
they record an interference pattern on the ﬁlm, like crossing ripples from stones
dropped in a pond. Looking at the ﬁlm, one would see just ripples. But if a
third wave of the same frequency but reverse phase as the reference wave –
a “reconstructive” or “phase-conjugate” wave – is directed at the ﬁlm then a
ghostly three-dimensional object will appear. Apart from the striking visual
effect, holograms have three other features that distinguish them from tradi-
tional photographs.
First, they are holistic in the sense that all of the information about the object
is recorded on each pixel of the ﬁlm (‘hologram’ = “to write the whole”). In
a photograph there is a 1:1 correspondence between points in the image and
on the object itself, so that cutting the ﬁlm in half cuts the picture in half. In
contrast, cutting holographic ﬁlm merely makes the overall image slightly less
clear; with a hologram it is possible to reproduce the whole image even from
33 The quote is in Rosen (2008: 164). Also see Flanagan (2007), who identiﬁes perceptual ﬁelds
with photon ﬁelds.
34 See Velmans (2000: 114–127; 2008); on holographic perception also see Gillett (1989), and see
Talbot (1991) for a popular introduction to holographic thinking more generally.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Direct perception and other minds
229
small pieces of ﬁlm. This suggests a participatory rather than compositional
relationship between parts and whole: the whole is present in the parts, not
made up of them.35 Second, by changing the frequency of the reference wave a
single holographic ﬁlm can record multiple images. This enables holographic
ﬁlm to store vastly more information than can simple photographs. Finally,
holography is all about projecting a virtual, or simulated, image to a place
where the real image (which is on the ﬁlm) is not located. By analogy to
perception, the “real” image is two-dimensional information on our retinas, but
what we see is a three-dimensional object out in the world.
As a philosopher Velmans suggests only that there is an interesting analogy
here; however, several scientists have gone further and speculated that the
brain is actually a holographic projector. The ﬁrst to make this claim was Karl
Pribram in the 1960s,36 and his work was later taken in an explicitly quan-
tum direction by Peter Marcer and Walter Schempp.37 In their model, neural
surfaces function as holographic planes (the ﬁlm), and the brain as a holo-
graphic projector continually emitting reference waves (millions per second).
Object waves pour in from light reﬂected off material objects in the world. The
resulting interference pattern is encoded on the neural surfaces and then decoded
through a reverse process of “phase conjugate adaptive resonance” or “pcar,”
the brain’s reconstructive wave. Marcer and Schempp argue that it is the on-
going process of phase conjugation which enables us to perceive objects as out
in the world.
A further element has recently been added to this model that I believe
completes the picture and also ties in nicely with my discussion in previous
chapters. Mitja Perus and Rajat Pradhan have independently suggested that the
pcar approach is best understood in conjunction with Cramer’s Transactional
Interpretation of quantum theory.38 Recall that Cramer’s is a time-symmetric
framework that uses two kinds of waves, retarded waves moving forward in
time and advanced waves propagating backwards; wave function collapse (and
thus on my account, consciousness) occurs when the two waves meet and their
“transaction” is completed. Applying this to vision, the idea is that the holo-
graphic reconstructive waves emanating from the brain are in fact advanced
waves. This responds directly to the Time-Lag Argument, which assumes per-
ception is a local, causal process. Local causation is still present in the trans-
actional approach, in the form of retarded waves, but “advanced waves are the
vehicles of mental perception through backward ray-tracing along a straight
35 See Bortoft (1985: 282–283).
36 See Pribram (1971; 1986); however, Robbins (2006) argues that the truly ﬁrst holographic view
of the mind was due to Bergson, albeit avant la lettre.
37 See Marcer (1995) and Marcer and Schempp (1997; 1998).
38 See Perus (2001: 583–584) and Pradhan (2012: 635–637).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

230
Language, light, and other minds
line of the signals received by the brain through the knowledge sequence.”39
In short, by virtue of their backward propagation in time, advanced waves
exploit light’s non-locality, enabling us to directly “touch” objects quantum
mechanically.40
This model is admittedly speculative but three considerations argue for it.
First, it assumes that the brain is a quantum rather than classical computational
device, for which I have argued earlier there is considerable evidence. Second,
it provides a coherent account of how 2-D information on the retina is projected
into 3-D experiences of the world. Advocates of indirect perception have sug-
gested that this is accomplished by “heuristics” and “biasing principles” stored
in the brain,41 but absent a materialist basis for consciousness this amounts to
hand waving. Pradhan thinks that projection is “impossible to comprehend”
without advanced waves, and for Perus, “neural networks . . . without having
electro-magnetic or quantum embedding, can deﬁnitely not back-project their
images into the external space on their own.”42 Finally, recent work in cos-
mology suggests that holographic processes are not limited to the brain, but
are universal.43 If the “universe is a system of holographic surfaces within
surfaces,”44 then it would be surprising if organisms did not embody this prin-
ciple as well.
Semantic non-locality and intersubjectivity
I return now to the debate about mind-reading, all sides in which I will argue at
least implicitly buy into the classical worldview. As I note in passing, because
the debate has been preoccupied with visual perception, the quantum account of
vision developed above offers a distinct perspective in its own right. However,
my main purpose is to leverage that account for thinking about the connection
between quantum semantics and mind-reading, and speciﬁcally the role of
semantic non-locality.
The theory of mind debate
Recall the “problem” in the Problem of Other Minds. On the one hand, it is
widely assumed that mental states are exclusively intra-cranial phenomena and
39 Pradhan (2012: 635); also see Perus (2001: 583).
40 Perus (2001: 584); also see Manzotti (2006: 27–28).
41 See Burge (2005: 10–18).
42 See Pradhan (2012: 636) and Perus (2001: 583); also see Mitchell and Staretz (2011: 939).
43 See for example Bousso (2002) and Bekenstein (2003). Long before these discoveries, David
Bohm (1980) used holographic reasoning in a more qualitative way to conceptualize the rela-
tionship between the implicate order and explicate order.
44 Germine (2008: 152).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Direct perception and other minds
231
as such intrinsically unobservable.45 Thus, all we have to go on in dealing with
others is their verbal and non-verbal behavior, which could be deceptive or
admit various interpretations. On the other hand, in real world dialogue people
generally know what others are thinking, since we communicate and coordinate
our activities effortlessly most of the time. So how do we manage to read minds
so well despite their unobservability?
A widely held answer is that human beings carry around a “theory of mind”
in their heads which, when applied to others’ behavior, enables us to know
their mental states. Within this orthodoxy however there has been a long-
running debate about two different views of how this theory of mind works.
According to the “Theory-Theory,” mind-reading is like scientiﬁc theorizing,
in which others’ behavior serves as observational data, and then from these
our minds draw an inference to the best explanation about the mental states
that cause them. According to the “Simulation Theory,” in contrast, mind-
reading is more akin to empathy, in which we interpret others’ behavior by
reference to what we would be thinking if we were behaving that way, and
then project that simulation onto their mental states. The debate continues,46
but whereas the two theories used to be seen as opposed, today there is more
recognition of their respective limits, and a corresponding growth of hybrid
arguments. This is possible because ultimately they agree on fundamentals:
(1) minds reside entirely within brains; (2) perception is therefore indirect,
mediated by representations in our minds; (3) in perceiving each other we
are in a third-person, “spectator” mode;47 and (4) communication therefore
follows a signaling model, in which a sender emits signals to a receiver, who
processes them in light of her own representations, and then sends signals in
return. While never stated explicitly, this is clearly a classical picture premised
on the separability of minds.
While the two theory of mind perspectives remain dominant in the literature,
recently they have come under attack from a theoretically diverse group of
scholars who reject its foundational assumption that mental states are actually
unobservable. On this alternative view our perception of other minds is direct
and thus does not require a “theory” at all.48 That might seem counter-intuitive
45 Krueger (2012: 149) calls this the “unobservability principle” underlying social cognition
research; Gallagher and Varga (2014: 185) call it the “imperceptibility principle.” For an
argument that this principle is actually more nuanced than is usually assumed see Bohl and
Gangopadhyay (2014).
46 In part this is due to the discovery of “mirror neurons” in the brain, which have given a boost
to Simulation Theory; see for example Gallese and Goldman (1998) and Iacoboni (2009). For
more skeptical, Theory Theory perspectives on mirror neurons see Jacob (2008) and Spaulding
(2012).
47 See Hutto (2004).
48 See for example Hutto (2004), Zahavi (2005), Gallagher (2008a; 2008b), and De Jaegher (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

232
Language, light, and other minds
given our lack of telepathic powers, but its advocates point to intuitions of their
own to make their case.
First, in real life we are always dealing with concrete Others in particular
contexts for particular purposes, which sits uneasily with the idea that we
are “spectators” to each other’s behavior, watching abstractly from afar. Social
cognition is a participatory, “I-You” relationship, in other words, not a detached,
“I-She” one,49 which suggests that the second person rather than the third
is the appropriate stance from which to think about mind-reading.50 Such a
perspective accords a special role to the space in-between us as a locus of
intersubjectivity, as thinkers as diverse as Martin Buber, Georg Simmel, and
Hannah Arendt have emphasized.51
Second, within these situated encounters there is little evidence at the con-
scious level that, to understand each other, human beings routinely engage in
either inference or simulation. As Wittgenstein puts it:
In general I do not surmise fear in him – I see it. I do not feel that I am deducing the
probable existence of something inside from something outside; rather it is as if the
human face were in a way translucent and that I were seeing it not in reﬂected light but
rather its own.
“We see emotion.” – As opposed to what? – We do not see facial contortions and
make the inference that he is feeling joy, grief, boredom. We describe a face immediately
as sad, radiant, bored, even when we are unable to give any other description of the
features. Grief, one would like to say, is personiﬁed in the face.52
The claim here is that mental states are expressed in behavior, not hidden away
inside our brains causing it. So when we see other people behaving what we are
experiencing is literally their minds in action.53 In unusual circumstances yes,
when we have no clue what others are thinking, we may be forced to theorize
consciously about their minds, but most of the time perception is “smart” and
so we are able to see their intentions directly.54
The battle between these rival approaches has now deﬁnitely been joined.
Defenders of indirect perception have largely conceded that mind-reading is
rarely conscious, but mostly operates on a sub-personal level. There the critics
have continued to press their attack, arguing that events deep inside the brain
49 See Reddy and Morris (2004) and Stawarska (2008).
50 See Schilbach et al. (2013) for a discussion of what this would mean for neuroscience and
Pauen (2012) for an interpretation more centered on intersubjectivity.
51 See Fuchs and De Jaegher (2009: 476–477) and Bertau (2014a); on the “in-between” in Buber
and Simmel see Stawarska (2009) and Pyyhtinen (2009) respectively.
52 Quoted in Gallagher (2008b: 538); emphases in the original.
53 See Zahavi (2008) and Krueger (2012); cf. Smith (2010b).
54 On “smart” perception see Gallagher (2008a; 2008b).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Direct perception and other minds
233
hardly qualify as “theorizing” or “simulation.”55 Yet the orthodoxy has also
launched attacks of its own. In particular, if mental states are enacted in behav-
ior, then they cannot be perceived independent of the physical and cultural
context in which they appear, which suggests a need for the kind of perceptual
mechanisms postulated especially by the Theory-Theory – and that direct
perception therefore cannot truly be a rival to a theory of mind approach.56
However, rather than weigh in on this debate on its own terms, I want to high-
light two absences from it, which motivate an alternative, quantum approach.
One is that neither side has considered that mind-reading could involve any-
thing but the causal transmission of information from one actor to another.
Since there is a time lag in any such process, this means that actors’ separabil-
ity – and thus a classical frame of reference – has not been problematized. That
makes sense for theory of mind advocates, who think perception is indirect,
but not for the other side. Gallagher recognizes that his view stands or falls
on the deﬁnition of ‘direct,’ and distances himself somewhat from Gibson’s
view,57 but he does not question that there is a local causal process underlying
“smart” perception. So despite breaking with the Cartesian orthodoxy in think-
ing that minds spill out of brains into behavior, advocates of direct perception
remain Cartesians with respect to the separability of minds. There is a lingering
individualism here, in other words, which undermines the holistic thrust of
their approach.58 This is where a quantum theory of vision could help, since it
suggests there is a non-local connection between minds-in-action, and as such
that in mind-reading our minds are not fully separable in the ﬁrst place.
To really make that point, however, we need to attend to a second absence
in the mind-reading literature, which is the role of language.59 What we see
obviously matters, but communication depends at least as much on what we
hear. That involves unique processes of sharing and comprehending linguistic
meanings which cannot be reduced to visual perception, and when understood
in quantum terms support the direct perception view of other minds.
Semantic non-locality and other minds
Two features of language stand out as the basis for its unique contribution
to mind-reading. First, unlike visual perception, language use is intrinsically
55 See Herschbach (2008) for a defense of theory of mind at this level, and Zahavi and Gallagher
(2008) for a response.
56 See for example Jacob (2011) and Lavelle (2012).
57 See Gallagher (2008b: 537 footnote 2).
58 See De Jaegher (2009), and also Chapter 13 below.
59 The most signiﬁcant exception of which I am aware is Hutto (2008), who argues that direct
perception of other minds depends on constructing narratives about them.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

234
Language, light, and other minds
dialogical, performative, and dynamic. Its main purpose is to do things together,
and it does this over time, not typically by one-off perceptions of others’ states
of mind. Second, to be dialogical language must be shared. The effect of an
actor’s speech on how someone else perceives them will depend on whether or
not they speak the same tongue; what is meaningful behavior if they do will be
gobbledygook if they don’t. In what follows I take up the sharing point ﬁrst,
and then turn to dynamics.
The classical assumption that our minds are fully separable means that
sharing a language amounts to nothing more than that Emma’s brain is wired
to speak English and Otto’s brain is too. In a material sense – and given the
CCCP, ultimately that’s all there is – nothing about these two facts presupposes
the other, or exists in-between. It is as if Emma and Otto both had blue eyes.
From a quantum perspective sharing a language is something more than
that. Recall ﬁrst that in contrast to the classical view of language as a set of
well-deﬁned meanings and rules of combination, in the quantum view the lan-
guage in each of our heads is a superposition of potential meanings that are
actualized only by its collapse in speech acts. So what happens if we put two
quantum minds together and they start trying to communicate? Well, if one is
from Vietnam on holiday in Denmark and the other is a local merchant, neither
of whom speaks the other’s native tongue, then initially their linguistic compe-
tencies will be separable, and their dialogue limited to gestures and other visual
cues. However, if one ventures to say “English?” and the other says “yes,” then
suddenly a new superposition will be created in which the meaning of their
potential English speech acts will be entangled with their meaning in the other’s
mind. Their linguistic competencies are now no longer fully separable, but cor-
related non-locally through an over-arching system of meaning between them.
And insofar as language is constitutive of mind, this means not just that shared
languages are not fully separable, but their associated minds are not either.60
Now consider what happens when we move from non-locality at the semantic
level, which is static, to the pragmatics of actual dialogue. In the classical
view, dialogue is a causal signaling process, in which Emma tries to convey
meanings in her head by moving her vocal chords, the vibrations from which
travel through the air, strike Otto’s ears and are then processed by his brain into
meanings in his head, on the basis of which he responds in turn. Call this the
“transport” or “conduit” model of how meanings are communicated,61 which
posits a chain reaction of local triggers. Truly direct perception of linguistic
60 Cf. “distributed language theory” (e.g. Steffensen, 2009), which especially in Steffensen and
Cowley (2010) ﬂirts explicitly with the idea that language is non-local. However, they make
no reference to quantum semantics and in the end seem ambivalent about how far to push the
quantum connection (see Linell, 2013: 170).
61 See respectively Ford and Peat (1988: 1235) and Lipari (2014: 506).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Direct perception and other minds
235
meaning, by which I mean perception that does not reduce to a causal, time-
lagged process, is therefore impossible. Moreover, the meanings that senders
and receivers of linguistic signals produce together cannot be shared in any
deeper sense than sharing blue eyes. The meanings each assigns to sound
waves remain locked inside their heads.
The starting point for a quantum alternative would be speakers’ co-presence
in a concrete situation, which means that each forms part of the context for the
other’s speech. As we have seen contextuality is intrinsic to quantum theory,
which is why quantum semantics handles the contextual features of individual
word meanings so naturally. Putting that analysis into a dialogical setting
expands the context in two ways. One, at least in the case of a face-to-face
encounter, is to bring on board the non-local properties of visual perception
that I described above. The other, which I shall focus on here, follows Jean
Schneider in likening a measurement in quantum physics to a speech act.62 An
important consequence of this will be that communication through speech is
not primarily causal, at least not in the classical, efﬁcient sense.
Measurement in quantum physics can be broken down into two steps. In Step
One, the experimental design selects a “preferred basis” for the wave function
that determines the probabilities associated with its collapse. This selection
does not cause a change in the wave function’s structure, because there has not
yet been an interaction with “it”; if there had then it would have already col-
lapsed. Rather, what Step One does is create an entanglement with the observer
that constitutes a speciﬁc context for the measurement. In Step Two, the physi-
cist does the measurement and the particle’s wave function collapses into an
observed outcome. Two aspects of this process are important to emphasize.
First, in actually performing the measurement (vs. taking a lunch break) she
is also collapsing her own wave function through a teleological act of will.63
Second, her action does not cause the observed outcome, since wave functions
are not material objects upon which one can exert force. Rather, triggered by
the decoherence inducing measurement the particle’s wave function causes
itself to collapse, though – like the experimenter – in a teleological sense of
causation. With these two steps in mind we can now see why measurement is
like a speech act. ‘I now pronounce you husband and wife’ “does not describe a
situation independent of itself, it creates what at the same time it describes.”64
Schneider is careful to make clear that in physics, the ‘create’ here does not
mean the experimenter’s consciousness causes the outcome. Her point is that
what is being registered is not a state of the world independent of the observer,
62 See Schneider (2005).
63 Also see Chapter 8, p. 163, where decision-making is treated as measuring one’s own prefer-
ences.
64 Schneider (2005: 349).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

236
Language, light, and other minds
but a state of consciousness in relation to a world with which it is entangled.
In that sense “the measurement act . . . is an act of attribution, a declarative
act,”65 as if to say, “this is what has happened.”
Now consider Emma and Otto’s conversation, with their quantum minds.
The initial “preferred basis” is constituted by (a) the fact that each knows the
other speaks English and so their linguistic repertoires are already entangled at a
general level, and (b) the immediate context that prompts them to start talking –
such as their parents bringing home a set of Lego building blocks to play
with. That event reduces their superposed minds to the particular state vector
associated with “Legos,” and thus changes the probabilities that the ﬁrst words
out of their mouths (ideally after “thank you, Mom and Dad”) will concern
Legos rather than, say, what to watch on TV. Note that the appearance of the
Legos did not cause this change in probabilities, because the kids’ minds are
still in superposition with respect to the Legos; what has happened so far is
merely that, through visual contact, their minds have adjusted non-locally to
the new context.
Emma now opens the dialogue. Assuming she prefers to play with Legos,
within that state vector she still has various (free) choices to make, from “let’s
build something together” to “let’s build separately” to “let’s make a mess
by throwing the Legos around the room.” Say she opts for “build together.” In
willing this speech act she makes two measurements: one on herself, collapsing
her previously superposed preferences into one preference, and the other on
Otto – though for the latter with a twist. For unlike measurements in physics,
where the decision to actually run an experiment or break for lunch does not
affect the context for the particle’s eventual choice (which has been ﬁxed by
the research design), in this case Emma’s statement has precisely that effect.
It changes the preferred basis for Otto’s response rather than immediately
inducing a collapse of his wave function in a speech act of his own, which is
to say it happens in Step One above, not Step Two. So while Emma’s words
affect the context and thus probabilities for Otto’s reply, this is a non-local
change made possible by their entanglement, not a causal one. And similarly
then when Otto starts an argument by collapsing his own wave function with
“no, I want to build my own structure,” which changes the preferred basis for
Emma’s next statement, but the actual choice of which is still up to her. In
short, in dialogue there is no Step Two, because whereas the particle is trapped
in a stable context, every time people speak it changes the context for those
who are listening. Put in different terms, as the literature on order effects shows
(Chapter 8), speech acts interfere with trying to measure the true state of our
interlocutors. The only unmediated measurements we can take in social life are
on ourselves, not each other.
65 Ibid.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Direct perception and other minds
237
In sum, the classical model of dialogue assumes that our minds are separable
information-processing machines in well-deﬁned states. Given that assumption,
the process of understanding someone’s meaning will be necessarily inferential
and indirect: verbal signals come in from Sender and then Receiver’s brain
crunches the data to infer their meaning. The quantum model assumes that our
minds are entangled through language and context and thus not fully separable,
and that our brains are quantum computers in superposed states. On this view,
there is normally no need to infer a speaker’s meaning, since it is contained
right there in her words and their context, which are picked up non-locally, i.e.
directly, rather than “transported” to the listener’s mind. This is not to say that
the meaning communicated will always match the intended meaning, since
a speaker may have expressed himself poorly, and the actual associations a
listener makes will also reﬂect the state of her own quantum mind. And nor is it
to say that inferences to meaning never take place. Sometimes it is unclear what
someone is trying to say, in which case conscious reﬂection may be needed to
ﬁgure it out. But given how effortless everyday communication is, such cases
are likely to be the exception rather than the norm.66
Three objections considered
In concluding this discussion of dialogue and semantic non-locality I want
to address three potential objections. The three are related, but each offers a
distinct window on what I am trying to say, and as such my hope is that even
if it creates some redundancy, responding separately to them will help pull my
argument together.
The ﬁrst is that what my Lego example portrays is more like the “parallel
play” of toddlers than genuine dialogue, since there is no real interaction
between Emma and Otto, just a series of speech acts that have no direct impact
on each other’s minds. This might seem problematic on the grounds both that it
is an unrealistic description of adult conversation, and that after my complaints
about the classical view of shared meanings reducing to sharing blue eyes, it
appears that shared meanings are not possible at all.
If by ‘interaction’ we mean causal interaction, then my claim is indeed that
when we are talking with each other adults are actually not interacting. It is
a measure of how deeply the classical worldview has affected contemporary
social theory that most readers will probably ﬁnd this idea counter-intuitive,
but it follows directly from quantum theory, which is acausal.67 In experi-
ments physicists do not “interact” with particles, since until they perform their
66 Although he does not mention quantum theory, Recanati (2002) makes a strong case for an
anti-inferential view of linguistic communication that resonates with my argument here.
67 It is also a salient feature of Leibniz’s metaphysics, in which monads do not interact causally;
see Bobro and Clatterbaugh (1996), Piro (1997), and Puryear (2010), and see Nakagomi (2003a:
16) for a quantum rendition of Leibniz’s conception here.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

238
Language, light, and other minds
measurements there are no particles there to be interacted with, just wave func-
tions, and as such no prospect of causally affecting their behavior. And if not
just particles but people are quantum systems, then the same is true in dialogue,
on both sides of the “measurement”: when it is my turn to speak others will
be in a superposition rather than well-deﬁned states, and I will be so myself
prior to collapsing my wave function in a speech act. The concept of interaction
presupposes entities with well-deﬁned states, in other words, which does not
hold in the quantum world. “Intra-action” is more like it,68 according to which
it is in entangled speech acts that we actualize ourselves as separable beings.
However, this is not to say that we cannot inﬂuence each other through
speech acts, which clearly we do. The issue is how this inﬂuence comes about.
In my account, it occurs indirectly, through the effects our speech acts have
on the shared context of our conversation. These are not causal effects, since
a dialogical context is an intentional object rather than a material one. But
by adding words to the context and thereby changing the preferred basis for
subsequent speech acts we can inﬂuence the probabilities of what others will
say, even if the actual cause (in the teleological sense) of what they do say
comes entirely from them. The difference between dialogue and parallel play,
therefore, is not that we are interacting and the toddlers are not, but that they are
not attending to the same context and as such have less opportunity to inﬂuence
each other’s actions, whereas we typically do and therefore can.
What about the worry that if through dialogue we cannot have any causal
effect on each other’s minds, then the prospects for creating shared meanings –
and thus social cooperation – look rather grim? The answer depends on what
is meant by ‘shared.’ If it means exact same, then yes, my argument suggests
such meanings will be difﬁcult if not impossible to create. In my panpsychist
reading of quantum theory, every quantum system from human beings on down
is its own coherent, impenetrable monad, situated in a distinct time and place,
and as such will have a unique subjective perspective on the world around
it.69 However, if “shared” language refers to a superposition state with which
participants are entangled and thus is available non-locally to all, then as long
as that state does not admit too many conﬂicting meanings, cooperation will be
possible. And indeed, narrowing down potential meanings – not to just one, but
to something like an overlapping consensus – is one of the primary functions
of dialogue. We do not all have to agree in the privacy of our own minds on
what “the US Constitution” means, for example, for us to work together to
uphold it.
68 See Barad (2003; 2007 passim), as well as my discussion of quantum game theory in
Chapter 8.
69 See Jorgensen (2009) on the challenge this poses to holism and communication about meaning,
and a non-quantum attempt to meet it.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Direct perception and other minds
239
The second objection is that it is a well-established principle of quantum
theory that non-locality cannot be exploited to communicate between entangled
entities; meaningful signals can only be exchanged classically. Given my claim
that shared language entangles people through semantic non-locality, this ban
on super-luminal signaling might seem to preclude us from communicating
at all!
However, dialogue has not only a quantum dimension, but also a classical
one, in two respects. One is the words that are actually said. Like the particles
that emerge from collapsing wave functions, speech acts are actualizations of
potentials, and once “out there” in consciousness remain in memory and cannot
be erased (though their meaning may change after the fact; see Chapter 10).
These words constitute classical events, and it is to them that a listener ulti-
mately responds. But that does not reduce the quantum theory of dialogue to a
classical one, because the meaning of words does not stand alone, but is given
only in context. What semantic non-locality adds is a physically grounded,
holistic notion of that context, which predisposes the listener to interpret spo-
ken words in certain ways rather than others. In that way semantic non-locality
makes classical signaling possible.
The other classical aspect of dialogue is what the participants are talking
about. The “minimal communicative situation” always involves three elements,
not just the two on which I have focused so far: Emma, Otto, and Legos, the
shared object of their conversation.70 In my example this was an actual material
object, but often it will be an intentional object, like the state or what to watch
on TV. Intentional objects are not material and as such in my view cannot be
explained by the classical worldview. However, when we are thinking or talking
about them they are objects of which we are conscious, and consciousness takes
place in the classical world of actuality rather the quantum world of potentiality.
This means that intentional objects are real, but not in the usual sense. Real
in what sense, then? Building on my account of visual perception above, in
Part V I argue that shared intentional objects are holographic – projections of
conscious minds of “virtual” objects into the space between individuals, which
exist only as long as people are conscious of them. That argument will take
some time to unfold, so sufﬁce it to say here that the presence of such virtual
objects in dialogue makes communication possible by giving participants a
common referent, beyond their semantic entanglement, to which their speech
acts are directed.
The last objection I want to address goes to the heart of my thesis that in
dialogue people can directly perceive other minds. Recall that an important
criticism of all theories of direct perception is the Time-Lag Argument: that
even if information about objects or others’ behavior is picked up directly from
70 See Cornejo (2008: 174).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

240
Language, light, and other minds
the light striking our eyes, the light itself still takes time to travel from there
to here, and therefore perception must necessarily be indirect. In the case of
dialogue, the problem is compounded by the fact that sound waves travel much
more slowly than light, and so unlike my non-local theorization of light above,
there is no sense in which one could argue that, from sound’s “point of view,”
time stands still. Interestingly, the direct perception model is today one of the
leading accounts of speech comprehension, according to which what we hear
in speech are not acoustic cues per se but the vocal gestures that produced those
cues.71 Yet this is explicitly understood as a causal process,72 which challenges
my argument because causation is local and classical – and therefore in my
view not really direct.
My response to this objection is two-part. The ﬁrst is to point out that speech
perception is not an additive and linear process but a holistic and dynamic
one. We do not grasp the meaning of someone’s speech word-by-word or
even sentence-by-sentence, only achieving comprehension at the end of their
soliloquy. Rather, we do so through gestalts, which sub-consciously relate what
is being said backwards to what they have already said in the past and also by
anticipating what they are going to say in the future. As Francesco Ferretti and
Erica Cosentino put it,
understanding each sentence is not enough to understand the sense of what is said; the
comprehension of speech ﬂux implies that the listener is actively listening for a ﬂux
of speech and continuously checking for coherence in what is being said as well as
predicting what the speaker is about to say.73
This makes sense in light of the importance of context in determining meaning.
The context of speech comprehension is not only synchronic, with words sitting
side-by-side in one moment of time, but also diachronic, with words gaining
their speciﬁc meaning in virtue of how they ﬁt into a moving, temporal whole.
The boundaries of this whole are set not only by the speaker’s decision to
start and stop talking at certain points, but also by the listener’s recognition of
what they are trying to do together through dialogue.74 If semantic context is a
non-local, quantum phenomenon, then the dynamics of speech comprehension
suggest that this non-locality can be temporal as well as spatial.
The second part of my response builds on this point by invoking the idea of
“mental time travel,” “the faculty that allows us to mentally project into the past
71 This is due especially to Carol Fowler’s work (e.g. 1986; 1996), which also highlights that
speech perception is not intrinsically different than other forms of perception; also see Worgan
and Moore (2010). For a recent overview of this ﬁeld see Samuel (2011).
72 Fowler (1996: 1732).
73 Ferretti and Cosentino (2013: 28); also see Cornejo (2008), Pickering and Garrod (2013), and
Bertau (2014b).
74 See Togeby (2000).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Direct perception and other minds
241
and the future in order to relive or anticipate events.”75 A key aspect of “MTT”
is “temporal perspective taking,” or projecting oneself into different temporal
contexts, which enables “individuals to extend their consciousness beyond the
‘here and now’.”76 In Chapter 10 I used this idea to argue that it is possible in
certain respects to change one’s past. In the case of dialogue MTT means being
able to project oneself into the temporal perspective of someone else, whose
communicative intention is expressed in her words taken all together, which are
spread out both backwards and forwards in time. Advocates of the concept of
MTT have not so far linked it to quantum theory, but given everything that has
been said above, making such a link would be quite natural. On this view, what
listeners are doing in projecting themselves temporally into others’ speech is
taking advantage of semantic and now also temporal non-locality to gain access
to their minds.77 Because it is non-local this projection is not subject to the
time-lag involved in the causal transmission of sound waves from speaker to
listener, and as such it supports a truly direct account of speech perception. At
the same time, because it is sub-conscious, this projection also means that there
is still a role for that causal process, which takes place in the classical world
where conscious speech takes place.78
In sum, I have tried to do three things in Part IV. The ﬁrst was simply to
review the emerging literature on quantum semantics, which not only shows
that quantum theory provides a compelling way to model the production of
linguistic meaning, but in doing so provides leverage on the debate between
compositional and contextual approaches to language. The second was to weigh
in on the visual aspect of the Problem of Other Minds, where I argued that the
non-local quality of light not only sets up a much more demanding test for
theories of direct perception (i.e. that it be non-causal), but also helps them
meet that test. Finally, I suggested that the idea of semantic non-locality allows
much the same reasoning to be applied to dialogue, which has been relatively
neglected in the mind-reading debate. Far from being locked away inside our
brains, in dialogue our minds spill out into the world, where they can be directly
perceived by others. From this standpoint the default question is less “how can
we ever know what others are thinking?” than “how is it that sometimes we
make mistakes?”
75 See Ferretti and Cosentino (2013: 24–25), and more generally Suddendorf and Corballis (2007)
and Suddendorf et al. (2009).
76 Ferretti and Cosentino (2013: 39); also see Gerrans and Sander (2014).
77 See Velmans’ (2000: 118–119) discussion of projected auditory sensations, although he does
not make the point in quantum terms.
78 It would be interesting to extend this argument from speech perception to the case of writ-
ing/reading, which would allow for non-local communication over longer temporal distances,
including with the unborn (from an author’s point of view traveling forward in time) and with
the dead (from a reader’s traveling backward), but I won’t try to do so here. See Togeby (2000)
and Tyl´en et al. (2010: 5–8), however, for good places to start.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

242
Language, light, and other minds
In developing these arguments Part IV is the ﬁrst of two installments on my
larger, holistic claim that human beings are not fully separable. Indeed, what
I aim to suggest with my quantum account of direct perception is that in our
“intra-actions,” there is a literal sense in which – in Daniel Kolak’s enigmatic
formulation – “I am You.”79 I am You insofar as we are entangled in a linguistic
wave function, which is to say at the unconscious level. And I am You when
we collapse our wave functions together in intra-action, which is to say even in
consciousness. To be sure, this does not mean we are numerically identical, any
more than entangled particles are. By virtue of being organisms constituted and
sustained by quantum coherence you and I must also live our own lives, which
will end separately. Thus, I am You only in potentia, as a shared superposition,
and even though this potential is actualized in intra-action, that is only for
the moment, as long as we are co-present. But the non-locality of vision and
language still affords a deeper conception of “We” than the classical I and You.
It is I think captured well by Kolak’s idea of “Open Individualism,” according
to which the boundaries between individuals are blurred in much the way as
the boundaries between oceans. The North Paciﬁc is not the same as the South
Atlantic, but at the level of the shared unconscious we are all part of the (one)
ocean, and in intra-action we form temporary unities of consciousness, even if
experienced from separate points of view.
79 See Kolak (2004); for a useful introduction to this very difﬁcult text see Zovko (2008).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Part V
The agent–structure problem redux
Introduction
The problem of how to understand language and its relationship to speakers is
an instance of the more general problem of how to understand the relationship
between social structures and agents. Languages per se do not constitute social
structures – one needs particular forms of language, such as discourses about
“capitalism” or “marriage,” to do that – but they make such social structures
possible in the ﬁrst place.1 In this Part, I push closer to such discourses by
re-considering, from a quantum perspective, the ontology of social structures
and their relationship to agents in general.
The agent–structure problem is concerned with understanding the relation-
ship between intentional agents and the structured social systems or societies
in which they are embedded. Typically the agents in question are assumed
to be individuals, but in some disciplines, notably IR, they are corporate or
group-level phenomena like the state, to which scholars often attribute agen-
tic properties. Since I have already discussed at length how individual agents
should be conceptualized in quantum terms (Part III), it makes sense to retain
that focus on individuals as I attend to the concept of social structure here,
although in Chapter 14 I take up the question of state agency as a way of
illustrating the potential purchase of my approach for my own ﬁeld of IR.
In the social sciences the concept of social structure is deﬁned in a bewilder-
ing variety of ways.2 What precisely a quantum view of structure entails will
become clearer below; ﬁrst, following Anthony Giddens, I want to distinguish
it from the concept of social system (or society).3 The latter refers to behavioral
regularities that our ET friends might discover simply by looking through their
surveillance cameras. Social ‘structure,’ in contrast, refers to mind-dependent,
relatively enduring relationships that explain those regularities. As such, to
speak of the agent–structure rather than –system (or –society) problem is to
1 See Elder-Vass (2010b) for a good discussion of this distinction.
2 See Porpora (1989) for a useful taxonomy, and Wight (2006: Chapter 4) for a further elaboration
and extended discussion with reference to IR scholarship.
3 See Giddens (1979: 61–66).
243
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press

244
The agent–structure problem redux
highlight (unobservable) cause (sic) rather than (observable) effect. That makes
sense in the present context, since identifying the physical location of social
structures was one of the puzzles with which I motivated this book. However,
although my focus will be on the ontology of social structure, it should be clear
that this cannot be completely divorced from the ontology of social systems.
Without enduring relationships there can be no system, and without behavioral
regularities to instantiate those regularities there can be no structure.
The “problem” of agents and social structures is that although all sides agree
that they are related, it is not clear how this relationship should be understood.
Following Philip Pettit, I shall distinguish two questions in the debate, which he
calls vertical and horizontal.4 These are often conﬂated, but given my eventual
argument in this chapter, it is important to separate them. To each question
Pettit identiﬁes two main answers, which yields a 2×2 matrix of positions.
The vertical question is whether social structures are reducible to agents
and their interactions or emergent from them – or, put another way, whether
social reality is stratiﬁed into distinct “levels,” the macro-level of structure and
the micro-level of agents.5 The debate here pits what Pettit calls collectivists
against individualists. Going back at least to Durkheim, the former advocate
hierarchical ontologies, in which structures are seen as emergent phenomena
that cannot be reduced to agents. Durkheim’s own view of structure is widely
seen as suffering from intractable problems of reiﬁcation and as such is not a
signiﬁcant position today. However, more sophisticated forms of collectivism
have enjoyed considerable attention of late: in sociology, where emergence
is a central theme of critical realism and neo-Durkheimian views; in analyti-
cal philosophy, where the idea of irreducible collective intentions has gained
widespread currency; and in IR, where “levels-talk” is routine.6 Individual-
ists in contrast defend “ﬂat” ontologies in which social structures are seen
as nothing over and above the properties and interactions of agents.7 This is
the ontology behind the push for micro-foundations in economics, political
science, and elsewhere, with game theory leading the way.
The horizontal question has been less widely thematized. Rather than ask
whether social structures are reducible to individuals, it concerns the rela-
tionship among individuals themselves, in particular what makes them as
4 See Pettit (1993a: 111 and passim).
5 Pettit sees the question somewhat differently, as one of whether social regularities can undermine
our picture of human beings as intentional agents, which is more about social systems than
structures.
6 Though in IR it is often meant in only an analytical rather than ontological sense; see Temby
(2013) on the state of this art.
7 The term “ﬂat” ontology has been popularized by post-structuralists like Deleuze and Latour,
whose work differs in many ways from those who would describe themselves as individualists.
However, the two groups share an opposition to hierarchical ontologies, and “ﬂat” certainly
seems an apt description of the ontology of mainstream individualism.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The agent–structure problem redux
245
“individuals” in the ﬁrst place. The debate here is between what Pettit calls
atomists and holists. Atomists take the view that it is our material properties
as organisms that constitute us as individuals, which are completely encased
within our skins.8 Note that this is not to deny that our mental states are causally
shaped by interaction with other people; it is to claim that, constitutionally,
those mental states are what they are solely in virtue of the material states of
our brains. The upshot is that individuals are ontologically prior to society.9 For
their part, holists of course do not deny that our bodies have skins, but argue
that the content of our minds presupposes relationships to other individuals.
Again, the claim here is not the causal one that mental states are formed through
interaction with other people, but a constitutive one – that our thoughts cannot
even be deﬁned except in relation to others.10 On this view the body may be
atomistic but the mind is not, which means that, considered in their totality,
agents are not ontologically prior to social structure. While that might seem
counter-intuitive, as we will see it is a widely held view in philosophy and I
will argue follows from a quantum perspective as well.
When combined, these dimensions and distinctions generate four types of
social ontology.11 However, judging from the complete absence of engage-
ment with quantum theory, all sides in the debate implicitly assume a classical
worldview.12 To be sure, this judgment is complicated by the fact that, unlike
part–whole debates in chemistry or biology, here the parts are intentional agents,
and the wholes are collective intentions. If my claim in Chapter 1 is correct
that the classical worldview can never make room for intentional phenomena,
then since all sides in the debate appeal to such phenomena one might equally
well argue they implicitly assume a quantum worldview instead. Nonetheless,
as we will see classical thinking still plays a key role in structuring the debate,
particularly in assigning burdens of proof, which have made it difﬁcult espe-
cially for emergentism and holism to gain traction and thereby kept them at the
margins of social theory.
The following chapter is organized into four sections. I begin with the
emergentist-reductionist debate in philosophy – the vertical axis of the prob-
lem – and show that a classical worldview has privileged individualism as a
8 See Farr (1997) on the signiﬁcance of the skin as a boundary of identity, and Bentley (1941)
for a critique.
9 Note that the issue here is not whether people are considered individuals or actors in a social
sense, which is arguably a modern invention (see Meyer and Jepperson [2000]).
10 On the distinction between causation and constitution see for example Wendt (1998) and
Ylikoski (2013).
11 Pettit (1993a: 172–173) does a nice job showing that the two “mixed” positions – atomist
collectivism and individualist holism – are intellectually coherent.
12 The only exceptions of which I am aware are Kessler (2007), who is responding to my (2006);
Lawson (2012: 355–356), who brieﬂy invokes quantum ﬁeld theory; and Pratten (2013), who
develops a process-theoretic ontology of social life.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press

246
The agent–structure problem redux
starting point for the corresponding debate in social theory. In the second sec-
tion I focus on efforts to articulate an emergentist conception of social structure
based on the concept of supervenience. After arguing that such efforts are
doomed to failure, I bring in the horizontal axis to critique the supervenience
approach from a holist, and speciﬁcally “externalist” perspective. While that
dislodges supervenience thinking from its privileged position, I argue that exter-
nalism is itself incompatible with the classical worldview. In the third section
I show how the unique nature of emergence in quantum systems enables us to
recast the entire debate. The result is a social ontology that is at once holistic
and emergentist, yet ﬂat. With this framework in place, I illustrate its ability
to help us solve a key problem for all forms of emergentism, which is how to
understand the “downward” causal powers of social structure. As we will see
in Chapter 14, the result is a holographic or monadological model of society
in which each of us is a “pixel,” entangled in social structures that both enable
our agency and give it potentially far-reaching, non-local effects.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press

13
An emergent, holistic but ﬂat ontology
The heyday of emergentist thinking was in the 1920s, when it was seen as
a middle position in the reductionist–vitalist debate.1 However, as a result of
ambiguities in its original formulation and the rise on the larger philosophical
scene of logical positivism, with its strong reductionist impulse, emergentism
fell rapidly out of favor. However, since the 1970s it has undergone a revival,
due on the one hand to the failure of reductionism to solve the problems of
life and mind, and on the other to the invention of dynamical systems and
complexity theories, which seem to cry out for an emergentist interpretation.
Emergentism is by no means now orthodoxy, especially in the practice of
science, where reductionism is still the default method, but in philosophy it is
again taken quite seriously.2
The situation for emergentism is if anything even better in the social sci-
ences, where the issue (if not the term itself) was ﬁrst taken up in the debate
about methodological individualism in the 1950s. Although that debate was
inconclusive, the importation of positivist philosophy of science in the 1960s
and then the spread of rational choice theory from economics to the other social
sciences gave the momentum to reductionism. Yet, in sociology macro-level
theorizing never lost its premier position, and critical realists there like Roy
Bhaskar and Margaret Archer were among the ﬁrst to develop explicitly emer-
gentist social theories;3 in economics it has become apparent that macro-theory
cannot be reduced to micro; and in political science the rise of rational choice
theory has been balanced by historical institutionalism, constructivism, and
other non-reductionist social theories. So in the social sciences emergentism
has always been a live option.
Emergentism and reductionism share at least one key assumption: a material-
ist ontology.4 This is not surprising for reductionism, which is all about showing
1 See McLaughlin (1992) for a good overview of this work.
2 See Kim (2006), Corradini and O’Connor, eds. (2010) and O’Connor and Wong (2012) for good
overviews of the philosophical debate.
3 See Bhaskar (1979; 1982), Archer (1995), Wight (2006), and Elder-Vass (2010a) for the con-
temporary state of the critical realist art.
4 See for example El-Hani and Emmeche (2000: 241) and Kim (2006: 549–550).
247
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

248
The agent–structure problem redux
how, not just macroscopic physical objects, but seemingly non-material phe-
nomena such as life, consciousness, and social structures are all ultimately
made of the material stuff ostensibly described by physics. In emergentism
the materialist premise is less obvious but no less important. By deﬁnition, an
emergent phenomenon emerges from something else, and does so not capri-
ciously, but necessarily as a result of the organization of its elements, which
emergentists have also assumed are material. If there were no such connection
to a material base, as in Cartesian dualism, then the higher level would not
be “emergent” at all, but just there, untethered to physical reality. So while
emergentists tend not to privilege physics in the way that reductionists do, they
too accept the CCP.
Despite this common starting point, however, the two theories differ funda-
mentally on whether anything is truly emergent, which comes down to three
main emergentist theses. The ﬁrst is irreducibility. Although there is debate
about what reductionism actually requires,5 the intuitive idea of irreducibility
is straightforward: “the whole is more than the sum of its parts.” The second
thesis is that emergent phenomena have novel properties not possessed by their
parts. Again there is debate,6 but it is widely agreed that the novelty must
appear to be qualitative (e.g. life or mind relative to matter) rather than merely
quantitative (a ten-pound bag of sugar vs. ten one-pound bags). This makes
emergentists property-dualists even as they reject substance dualism. The third
thesis is that emergent phenomena exhibit “downward causation,” in which
the whole affects the properties and/or behavior of the parts. This is the most
controversial claim of emergentism, since it raises a question of circularity,
or how a whole can cause its own parts, which critics think is incoherent and
inconsistent with the CCP.7 Even some emergentists are wary of downward
causation, but in the view of many it is an essential part of the doctrine, since if
emergent properties lack causal powers then they are epiphenomenal and thus
redundant. A key question here is whether emergence is taken to be diachronic
or synchronic. The former is much the easier argument for emergentists to
make because it allows for causal interaction between parts and whole, but for
that reason it is also less interesting philosophically.8
How the debate about emergence plays out depends crucially on whether
one is talking about ontology or epistemology, or what sometimes is called
“strong” vs. “weak” emergence.9 Both address the relationship between levels,
but the things being related are different – in the former it is entities, events,
5 See for example Silberstein (2002: 82–89) and Wimsatt (2006).
6 For discussion see Francescotti (2007).
7 See for example Kim (2006). I discuss this issue at length below.
8 E.g. Humphreys (2008), and see Elder-Vass (2007) for a good discussion of how this distinction
relates to emergentism in critical realism.
9 See, for example, Clayton (2006), McIntyre (2007), and O’Connor and Wong (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

An emergent, holistic but ﬂat ontology
249
and properties (i.e. elements of reality), in the latter it is theories, concepts, and
models (elements of descriptions or explanations).10 Importantly, positions on
the two issues need not be the same: one can be a reductionist about ontology
but an emergentist about epistemology (but not vice-versa).11 Although in the
social sciences the distinction is often blurred, most of the discussion has
been about epistemological emergence. This is not surprising, since unlike
chemistry or biology, where different levels of material reality are manifest, in
social science all we can literally see are people. From a materialist perspective,
what appear to be inter-level relationships are actually intra-level ones, among
individuals.12
To be sure, some social scientists, notably critical realists, think that, even
though invisible, emergent social structures are real. However, as I argued in
Chapter 1, in the classical worldview everything is ultimately material, so if
social structures are real then why can’t we see them? The realist reply is that
we can infer them from their effects, but (a) this is unlike other classical phe-
nomena, and (b) it assumes the reality of the intentional states that ostensibly
generate those effects. Because those states imply consciousness, the existence
of which materialism puts in question, this puts realists on shaky ground: if con-
sciousness is an illusion, then why aren’t social structures too?13 And indeed,
as avowed materialists, realists too are wary of reifying social structures. So
realists are caught on the horns of a dilemma: they either can accept that social
structures are ultimately material and therefore not really emergent; or accept
a non-materialist, dualist ontology.14 In short, if one accepts the constraints
of the classical worldview, it seems impossible to defend social emergentism
in an ontological sense. This may explain why, unlike the long debate about
epistemological and methodological individualism,15 there has been almost
none about ontological individualism, which outside critical realism seems to
be taken for granted on all sides.16 Nonetheless, if the latter were to fail, then
epistemological individualism would fail with it.
With this dialectical situation in mind, and since this is a book about ontology,
I am going to focus on the ontological sense of emergence, which is the hard
10 Silberstein (2002: 90).
11 Though see H¨uttemann (2005), who argues that the reverse is true in quantum physics.
12 Le Boutillier (2013: 214).
13 Although his starting point is different, see Harr´e (2002) for a provocative argument to this
effect.
14 This may help explain the ambiguities of Bhaskar’s emergentism, on which see Kaidesoja
(2009). Sawyer (2005: 80–85) reads Bhaskar as committed to a supervenience (and thus
ontologically individualist) view of social structure, whereas Le Boutillier (2013) thinks he
ultimately reiﬁes structure.
15 See for example O’Neill, ed. (1973), Pettit (1993a), Sawyer (2005), and Greve (2012).
16 Within the analytical tradition Epstein (2009) is the only explicit critique of ontological indi-
vidualism of which I am aware. Even Durkheim, who is routinely criticized for reifying social
structure, conceded that only individuals are real; see Sawyer (2002: 241–242).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

250
The agent–structure problem redux
case for the social sciences. (So, unless otherwise noted, when I use the term
‘individualism’ below I mean its ontological form.) In doing so, I will not
challenge the view that only individuals are really – i.e. classically – real, and
as such what follows is not a defense of ontological collectivism. Rather, what
I will be defending is social holism. Holism is compatible with a ﬂat ontology
that on the surface might look individualist.17 However, I argue that the only
way to justify holism metaphysically is in quantum terms, and that the result is
incompatible with individualism. This will pave the way for a new solution to
the agent–structure problem in which both sides of the equation are emergent,
but only in a quantum sense.
Supervenience meets externalism
These days, attempts to defend epistemological emergence are almost always
based on the ontologically individualist concept of supervenience.18 Super-
venience is an asymmetric relationship of non-causal dependency between a
lower-order “subvening” base and a higher-order “supervening” structure, in
which once all the properties of the base are ﬁxed then so are the properties
of the structure. It comes in various forms – weak, strong, local, global, even
“super-duper”(!) – which vary in the strength and scope of their dependency
relations.19 But they are all synchronic rather than diachronic, which is another
way of saying that supervenience is a constitutive rather than causal relation-
ship between levels (sic). The concept is highly general and has found uses
in many domains, from aesthetics (where the beauty of a painting supervenes
on how its colors are arranged on the canvas) to philosophy of mind (where
“non-reductive materialists” have used it to try to explain consciousness). And
whatever its attractions elsewhere, it seems particularly apt in social science.
As Pettit puts it with respect to the latter, “Individualism insists on the superve-
nience claim that if we replicate how things are with and between individuals,
then we will replicate all the social realities that obtain in their midst: there are
no social properties or powers that will be left out.”20 This in turn suggests a
straight-forward deﬁnition of ontological emergentism: “The individual-level
facts do not fully determine the social facts; i.e. there can be possible worlds
that are identical with respect to all individual-level facts but different with
17 My approach bears a closer relation to the non-individualist ﬂat ontologies of Manuel DeLanda
(2002) and Bruno Latour (2005), although as materialists of a sort they neither thematize
consciousness nor make an explicit link to quantum physics (cf. Jones [2014] on Whitehead’s
ﬂat ontology). It would be instructive to compare the argument that follows to theirs, but given
that my target in this chapter is individualism, I shall not undertake that formidable task here.
18 See for example Currie (1984), Pettit (1993a), Sawyer (2005), and List and Spiekermann (2013).
19 For an overview of different forms of supervenience see Kim (1990).
20 The quote is in Epstein (2009: 188).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

An emergent, holistic but ﬂat ontology
251
respect to some social facts.”21 My guess is that most social scientists today
would ﬁnd such a view implausible.22
Although hardly ever mentioned in social theory, the ontology of super-
venience is physicalist in the classical sense.23 As we saw in Chapter 1, the
“physical” in ‘physicalism’ is doubly ambiguous: whether it refers to classical
or quantum physics, and regarding the latter whether it implies No Funda-
mental Mentality (materialist interpretations of quantum theory) or Mentality
All the Way Down (panpsychist ones). However, in the case of supervenience
it is clear that physicalism means classical materialism, since in physics it is
widely agreed that quantum systems entail a failure of supervenience.24 This
is because at the heart of all forms of supervenience is the assumption that the
elements of the subvening base are separable.25 That means the properties of
the subvening parts must be intrinsic and non-relational (which is violated by
entanglement), and also compatible or non-disjunctive (which is violated by the
Uncertainty Principle). In short, supervenience assumes that the supervening
structure is ultimately a function of “local matters of particular fact.”26 As such,
it is not surprising that materialist philosophers of mind were the ﬁrst to make
widespread use of the concept of supervenience, and due especially to Keith
Sawyer some of the debate about individualism has been in explicit analogy to
their work.27 The classical nature of supervenience theory will play a crucial
role below.
One of the key attractions of the concept of supervenience for social theorists
is that it creates space for epistemological emergence within an individualist
ontology, which can be seen if we consider its implications for change. Onto-
logically, changes in the supervening structure imply changes in the subvening
base, but because the relation is asymmetric, the converse does not hold: it
may be possible for various conﬁgurations of elements to realize the same
macro-level structure. If the number of possibilities is low this might not pre-
clude explanatory reduction, but if the degree of multiple realizability is high –
what Sawyer calls a “wild disjunction” between base and superstructure –
then even though social structure is not ontologically autonomous from agents,
21 List and Spiekermann (2013: 633). Note that List and Spiekermann think that they are here
deﬁning holism rather than emergence, but as will become clear below this conﬂates one with
the other.
22 Though see Wight (2006: 116), who rejects the supervenience approach. My argument below
is that the only way to ground this naturalistically is through quantum theory.
23 See List and Spiekermann (2013) for a particularly clear illustration to this effect.
24 Teller (1986) was the ﬁrst to make this point, which to my knowledge has never been directly
challenged; see Esfeld (2001: 245–256), Belousek (2003), Karakostas (2009), and Darby (2012)
for further discussion of the quantum challenge to supervenience.
25 On the deﬁnition of separability see the Introduction to Part IV, p. 208.
26 See Esfeld (2001: 247–248).
27 See Sawyer (2005), Greve (2012), and List and Spiekermann (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

252
The agent–structure problem redux
epistemologically it will be impossible to reduce it to its base.28 This justiﬁes a
separation of macro- from micro-theory and with it the autonomy of the social
sciences from psychology.
There is considerable controversy about whether the concept of superve-
nience can bear the weight even of epistemological or weak emergentism.29
Of particular interest are doubts about its ability to accommodate downward
causation. However, rather than get into that right now, I want to focus on an
aspect of the ontology of supervenience that, in the social sciences at least, is
widely believed to be unproblematic. Namely, how to specify the properties of
the base – individuals – in a way that respects a classical physics constraint?
Unlike structures in the physical and biological sciences, most of the prop-
erties that subvene social structures are intentional states rather than material
ones: norms and institutions, identities, beliefs and so on. To be sure, people
must act on these states for social structures to be actualized, and those practices
have a material aspect, but without intentionality there would be no practices,
just behavior. This dependency of social structure on intentional states creates
two problems. Since I have already discussed the ﬁrst – that intentional states
have no place in the materialist worldview – let me focus on the second, which
is a widely held view in the philosophy of mind known as externalism.30 Unlike
supervenience, externalism justiﬁes an emergentist view of social structure in
an ontological sense. However, this is true only if it is quantized; in its current,
implicitly classical form I argue externalism lacks a physical basis and as such
is inconsistent with the CCP.
If the ontology of the agent–structure relationship is to be conceived in terms
of supervenience, then in specifying the intentional properties of agents it is
essential that they not presuppose the very structures they are supposed to con-
stitute, which would be circular and violate the asymmetry of the supervenience
relation. The key to satisfying this requirement, and to individualism more gen-
erally, is that the states attributed to individuals be intrinsic, which means people
could have them all by themselves.31 Note that this is a synchronic, constitu-
tive condition; intrinsic properties are perfectly consistent with having been
acquired through a diachronic, causal process like socialization. The point is
only that, once acquired, their existence at any given moment is independent
of other individuals.
So how are intentional states constituted, or, in philosophers’ jargon, “indi-
viduated”? Intuitively it might be thought the answer is obvious: by brain
28 See Sawyer (2005: 67–69), and also Wendt (1999: 152–156).
29 See for example Humphreys (1997b), Heil (1998), and Greve (2012).
30 Brian Epstein (2009: 188) argues that even on the purely material side ontological individualism
is not true, since “social properties are often determined by physical ones that cannot plausibly be
taken to be individualistic properties of persons.” Although very interesting, Epstein’s argument
is orthogonal to my purposes and so I set it aside here.
31 See Esfeld (2004: 626).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

An emergent, holistic but ﬂat ontology
253
states. Common sense suggests that our thoughts do not depend intrinsically
on anything beyond our skins, and materialist philosophy of mind reinforces
that belief with its view that mental states are constituted by brain states. This
view of intentional states is known as “internalism,” and it clearly supports
an individualist, supervenience-based ontology of social structure, since on it
“[t]hought is logically prior to society.”32
Given its intuitive force, it may therefore surprise social scientists (or at
least it did me the ﬁrst time I heard it) that internalism is a minority view
in the philosophy of mind.33 Externalism holds that the content of at least
some mental states is constituted by conditions external to the mind/body. On
this view, thinking is dependent upon society, not in the causal sense that we
wouldn’t have the thoughts we do if we had not learned a language and been
socialized to a culture (though that is of course also true), but in the constitutive
sense that our thoughts depend for their very content on external context.34
More surprising still, this view dominates not just in continental scholarship
inﬂuenced by Hegel or Wittgenstein, but in analytic philosophy, where it gained
traction as a result of so-called “Twin Earth” thought experiments in the 1970s
by Hilary Putnam and Tyler Burge.35
Consider an example of Burge’s.36 Jones1 has various correct beliefs about
arthritis – that he has it in his ankle, that his father had it, that it is painful, and
so on – as well as the incorrect belief that it can afﬂict the thigh. Concerned
about recent pains, Jones1 tells his doctor that he fears his arthritis has spread to
his thigh. His doctor says that is impossible because arthritis is an inﬂammation
of the joints. Relieved, Jones changes his belief. Now imagine a counterfactual
(“twin”) world in which Jones2 is in every way identical – same beliefs, same
physical history – but in this world the term ‘arthritis’ is applied to thigh
pain. Hence, upon complaint, Jones2’ doctor treats him for “arthritis.” Burge
concludes that the content or meaning of Jones2’ belief is different than in the
ﬁrst case, even though his mental state is the same. The difference is due to his
social context.
What this example and others like it purport to show is that the content of
mental states is individuated by what “conceptual grid” is used,37 and those
grids, which correspond to the social norms and rules pertaining to the mental
32 Gilbert (1989: 58).
33 According to a recent survey of philosophers, 20 percent are internalists about mental content,
51 percent are externalists, and the rest are various types of “other”; see Bourget and Chalmers
(2014: 495). For an excellent overview of externalism see Lau and Deutsch (2014).
34 Currie (1984: 354), Burge (1986: 16), Pettit (1993a: 170), Esfeld (1998: 367) and others all
emphasize that the point here is constitutive rather than causal.
35 See Putnam (1975) and Burge (1979). Esfeld (2001) provides an excellent overview of an
alternative path to externalism through Wittgenstein’s problem of rule-following.
36 This paragraph is reproduced from Wendt (1999: 174); for further examples from IR see ibid:
176–178.
37 Bhargava (1992: 223).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

254
The agent–structure problem redux
states in question, are not the possession of the individual but of the community.
Note that this is not to say people don’t have private thoughts in their heads.
The point rather is that the conditions that make those thoughts what they are
are not up to the individual. If I think I saw a Bigfoot and the community in
which I live denies Bigfoot’s existence, then my thought is a “hallucination” or
“crazy”; in an otherwise identical society that recognized Bigfoot’s existence
the same thought would have a different content. In this way thinking depends
intrinsically on social relations. And since the latter are linguistic phenomena,
this means that language does not merely mediate thought, but makes it possible
in the ﬁrst place.38 In short, as Putnam summarizes externalism, “meanings ain’t
in the head.”39
Externalism is an explicitly holistic doctrine and as such widely seen as
inconsistent with a narrow or “local” form of supervenience, according to
which an individual’s mental states supervene on just her brain states.40 How-
ever, what about global supervenience, in which the subvening base includes
all individuals, their interactions, and the physical environment? Here the con-
sensus seems to be the opposite, that externalism is no threat to individualism.
Pettit for example argues that the external constitution of intentional states
implicates only the relationships of individuals to each other, not emergent
social structures. Once the properties of the (socially constituted) minds of all
individuals are set, the supervenience argument can proceed from there – a
perspective he calls “holistic individualism.”41 Similarly, in response to Burge,
Gregory Currie argues that even if Jones1 and Jones2 are in identical mental
states, their communities are different because other individuals behave differ-
ently in the face of ‘arthritis,’ which he claims secures the ontological priority
of the subvening base.42
However, to my knowledge no advocate of externalism has considered the
possibility that materialism cannot explain consciousness or that the mind is a
quantum system. Thus, they are at least implicitly assuming that the ontology
of the supervenience base for social life is classical and materialist. This is
problematic in several respects for the compatibility of externalism and super-
venience.
First, classical materialism requires that the parts of the subvening base –
individuals’ mental states – are constituted by intrinsic properties, such that
ontologically, the supervening structure is nothing but “local matters of partic-
ular fact.” Even globally formulated, it is unclear how this is consistent with
38 See Pettit (1993a: 169) and Searle (1995: 59–78). This applies only to higher-order, human
thought; in my view animals also have thoughts, just not linguistically constituted ones.
39 See Putnam (1975).
40 See for example Currie (1984), Bhargava (1992), Esfeld (2001: 157), and Howell (2009: 84).
41 See Pettit (1993a).
42 See Currie (1984: 354–355).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

An emergent, holistic but ﬂat ontology
255
externalism. After all, the content of other individuals’ mental states are them-
selves socially constituted, so at what point does supervenience bottom out in
the intrinsic, non-relational properties of separable individuals per se? “Holistic
individualism” seems circular in this regard. Second, the social constitution of
mental states is non-local and non-causal. How does this square with a classical
physics constraint? It is telling that Currie reduces the differences between the
two communities ﬁrst to what is said or written by individuals and then from
there to “bodily movements.”43 This preserves the materialist basis of super-
venience theory, but at the cost of stripping mental states of any genuine role.
Finally, as I argued in Chapter 1, if materialism cannot explain consciousness,
social scientists are forced either to treat mental states on an “as if” basis and
accept a tacit vitalism, or abandon them as illusions and thus also the structures
they subvene. If these criticisms have force, then the classical worldview is not
compatible with externalism, and as such Pettit’s holistic individualism lacks a
naturalistic basis.
In the face of this problem one could embrace internalism instead, which
is more clearly compatible with individualism and not vulnerable to at least
some of the objections above. However, such a retreat is both unattractive
and unnecessary: unattractive because the externalist critique of internalism
still stands, and unnecessary because there is an alternative. If the mind and
language are quantum systems, then externalism is the logical consequence. Its
basis is semantic non-locality: by participating in a shared language, the content
of individuals’ thoughts is entangled with other minds and thus irreducibly
contextual. However, this means we have to give up supervenience as the
ontology of social life, since supervenience fails in quantum systems. The
resulting ontology is holistic and ﬂat, but one in which emergence plays a
central role.
Agents, structures, and quantum emergence
So far I have tried to establish that (1) an ontologically emergentist conception
of social structure is incompatible with the classical worldview, which leads to
a supervenience ontology that treats individuals and their properties as constitu-
tionally exogenous to social life; (2) this individualist ontology is incompatible
with the holism of externalist philosophy of mind; and (3) the latter is itself
incompatible with the classical worldview. These contradictions set the stage
for a quantum intervention. When quantized, externalism in my view satisﬁes
all three of the criteria laid down above for ontological emergence: the social
constitution of intentional states is not reducible to the intrinsic properties of
43 Also see Esfeld’s (2001: 157) emphasis on practices as the source of meaning, which likewise
are either nothing but bodily movements or presuppose collective intentions.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

256
The agent–structure problem redux
individuals; it introduces qualitative novelty; and it can make sense of down-
ward causation. In this section I ﬁrst review the literature on emergence in
quantum mechanics and then recast the agent–structure problem in that light.
While there is considerable debate about the status of ontological emergence
within the classical worldview, there is little disagreement that it exists in the
quantum world. Michael Silberstein and John McGeever argue that quantum
mechanics “provides the most conclusive evidence for the existence of onto-
logical emergence,”44 and starting with a seminal article by Paul Humphreys,
a small but coherent body of scholarship has grown up exploring how best to
understand it.45 Humphreys sees quantum entanglement as the source of emer-
gence, which subsequent scholarship follows and I address in this section. This
is a synchronic view of emergence, which is the truly hard case for ontological
emergentism. In the next section I take up a more diachronic form of quan-
tum emergence, the collapse of the wave function, which speaks to downward
causation.
Humphreys’ argument is motivated by what is known as the “exclusion
argument” against mental causation.46 Namely if, as non-reductive materialists
would have it, mental states supervene ontologically on brain states, then it
would seem that all the causal work in the mind is done by brain states. This
leaves no room for mental states to have causal powers, and since phenomena
without causal powers are usually excluded from scientiﬁc ontologies this
raises the specter of epiphenomenalism with respect to the mind. In response
Humphreys ﬁrst develops an abstract argument that if there were a “fusion”
of basal properties, such that they no longer had separate identities, then the
effects of their fusion “[could] not be correctly represented in terms of the
separate causal effects of its constituents.”47 He then argues that quantum
entanglement ﬁts this bill. In entanglement, only the composite system is in
a “pure state,” while the components lose their identity as fully separable
elements with intrinsic properties. In this situation “the state of the whole
determines the parts rather than the other way around.”48 Crucially, this is
the exact opposite of supervenience. Although Humphreys does not return to
the issue of mental causation, his argument seems an apt description of quantum
coherence, the breakdown of which quantum brain theory sees as the physical
basis of consciousness.
44 Silberstein and McGeever (1999: 187).
45 See Humphreys (1997a), Kronz and Tiehen (2002), H¨uttemann (2005), Wong (2006), Bitbol
(2007; 2012) and Prosser (2012). Bitbol is the skeptic in this group, although his approach
if anything pushes beyond ontological emergence in the sense that it rejects the notion of an
emergence “base” altogether.
46 On this argument see Kim (1998: 150).
47 Wong (2006: 352).
48 Bitbol (2007: 299); Humphreys (1997a: 15).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

An emergent, holistic but ﬂat ontology
257
Subsequent work has challenged an important detail of Humphreys’ argu-
ment, that in fusion the parts lose their identity completely.49 This “basal loss”
is seen as unmotivated and overstated, and as leading to the unwelcome con-
sequence that there could be mental states with no neural states underneath at
all. Either way, in social science the more qualiﬁed view of Humphreys’ critics
seems apt. While there has been a long debate among philosophers of physics
about whether entangled particles retain any individuality,50 in social life the
“particles” are biological individuals whose bodies cannot fuse even in princi-
ple. As for our minds, although I have argued that shared language gives rise
to entangled mental states, here too fusion faces a limit in the physical struc-
tures protecting quantum coherence within each of our brains.51 Importantly,
however, despite their more qualiﬁed view of basal loss, Humphreys’ critics
agree with him that entanglement involves ontological emergence. By the same
token, I will argue that the fact that individuals cannot completely fuse their
identities is compatible with the ontological emergence of social structures. In
both cases we are dealing with wholes that are not reducible ontologically to
parts, because the identity of the latter is not separable from the whole.
Before proceeding there is one important wrinkle to add. The discussion
around Humphreys’ argument has been asymmetric in the sense that it has
assumed that what is emergent is the entangled state, which is to say the whole.
However, as Bitbol argues, we can see entangled parts as emergent as well.52
Drawing on quantum ﬁeld theory, he points out that sub-atomic particles are not
substantial individuals in themselves, but particle-like processes or vibrations
in the universal quantum ﬂux. As such, “there is no essential difference between
the alleged ‘basic’ level and the emergent level,”53 and thus no “ground” upon
which one might build a stratiﬁed ontology of levels. So when particles become
entangled they too acquire new properties, namely relational properties to the
whole.54 In entanglement therefore, parts and whole are “co-emergent,” rather
than only the latter emerging from an ontologically prior base of the former.
This symmetry of emergent entanglement plays a key role in what follows.
The CCP tells us that everything in the world, including individuals and
society, is physical (vv. material). In the case of people the referent of that
physicality is clear – the body/brain/mind complex. However, I have argued
49 See Kronz and Tiehen (2002), Wong (2006), and Bitbol (2007); though see French and Ladyman
(2003).
50 See for example Castellani, ed. (1998) and Winsberg and Fine (2003).
51 Cf. Swann et al. (2009).
52 See Bitbol (2007: 302–303); note that Bitbol’s general approach to quantum theory is episte-
mological (see Chapter 4), and as such he rejects the idea that there is ontological emergence
in entanglement. However, I don’t think that precludes adapting his argument to my purposes
here.
53 Ibid: 303; also see Campbell and Bickhard (2011).
54 Also see Francescotti (2007).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

258
The agent–structure problem redux
that the physicality of social structures is puzzling, because unlike other macro-
scopic objects (sic) they are unobservable. So let me begin by deﬁning social
structure in qualitative terms and then translating it into physical ones.
I won’t try to review the numerous deﬁnitions of social structure in the soci-
ological literature; for my purposes it is sufﬁcient to distinguish two basic types
of phenomena that often fall under that description.55 The ﬁrst is exempliﬁed
by a demographic structure.56 While demographic patterns are “structural” in
the sense that they constrain human agency, they are not particularly “social,”
given that as distributions of objective attributes they would exist even if peo-
ple were completely unaware of them. Since I do not think we need quantum
theory to understand demography, I shall set this ﬁrst kind of social struc-
ture aside. That leaves the second, which encompasses phenomena like norms,
rules, culture, institutions, and so on. What distinguishes these from a pattern
of objective attributes is that they presuppose a discourse on the basis of which
people act.57 Social structures here are mind-dependent or intentional objects,
and speciﬁcally collective intentions in Searle’s sense, involving shared mental
states and language.58 Speciﬁc social structures like the institution of marriage,
the market economy, or the state are instantiations of this general category,
constituted by the discourses peculiar to their purposes and functioning.
If the physical basis of the mind and language is quantum mechanical, then,
given this deﬁnition, that is true of social structures as well. Which is to say, what
social structures actually are, physically, are superpositions of shared mental
states – social wave functions. I want to highlight here four implications of
this ontology, two of which are at odds with critical realism, but two of which
realists should ﬁnd congenial.
First, against the realist view of social structures as “real but unobservable
entities,” as superposition states social structures are pure potentialities and as
such not classically or really real (much less entities), any more than the wave
functions of sub-atomic particles are real. This explains why social structures
are unobservable, since one cannot observe a wave function, only the result of
its collapse into a particle. Second, and by the same token, against realism’s
stratiﬁed ontology, social structures do not lie on their own level of reality
above (or below) individual agents. In the real world there are just people and
their practices, which imply a ﬂat ontology more like Giddens’ structuration
theory than critical realism.59
55 This distinction is inspired by Hodgson (2002: 167–168); see Porpora (1989) for a wider view.
56 See Archer (1995: 174–175), and for critical discussion see Elder-Vass (2007).
57 Note that this is not to say that people necessarily understand what they are doing when they
act upon such discourses; they might have no idea.
58 See Searle (1995).
59 See Giddens (1979; 1984), and Hodgson (2002: 161–166) for a good overview of the similarities
and differences between critical realism and structuration theory.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

An emergent, holistic but ﬂat ontology
259
Third, despite this ﬂat ontology, conceiving of social structures as superposi-
tions of shared mental states means that they are ontologically emergent. Not in
the classical sense of an autonomous level of reality, but in the quantum sense
of entanglement among the agents who constitute them. This provides a more
plausible physical basis for critical realists’ commitment to emergence than
the classical discourse of levels. Finally, the superposition approach implies
a holistic social ontology, in which the agents participating in a structure are
connected non-locally to each other. This afﬁrms Bhaskar’s “relational” view
of structure as a set of internal relations, as well as the more process-theoretic
relationalism of Mustafa Emirbayer.60
I will ﬂesh out some substantive implications of this view below, but ﬁrst I
want to consider a potential individualist objection to it, which from a classical
standpoint may seem all very mysterious. Doing so will complete the circle by
bringing quantum agents back in. Esfeld, who sees holism as an ontology of
relations rather than things, summarizes the suspicion well:
A metaphysics of relations is often dismissed out of hand, for it seems to be paradoxical.
It seems that (a) relations require relata, that is, things which stand in the relations, and
that (b) these things have to be something in themselves, that is, must have intrinsic
properties over and above the relations in which they stand.61
On this view, supervenience is the only way to understand part/whole relations,
which when applied to social life – where the “relata” are human agents –
implies individualism. As such, any genuinely holistic model of social structure
is a non-starter.
Given that externalism – a form of holism – is widely accepted in philosophy
of mind I have argued we already have some reasons to resist this conclusion,
and the tensions between externalism and supervenience come even more into
view if the elements of social structures are quantum rather than classical
agents. In that case, the relata of social relations are themselves superposi-
tions – “walking wave functions” – and as such do not have intrinsic properties
in the ﬁrst place, but only have the properties they do by virtue of their entan-
glement with other agents. Indeed, not only do quantum agents lack intrinsic
properties, but if quantum decision theorists are right their properties are often
disjunctive or “incompatible,” which the ontology of supervenience rules out.62
This puts in a different light Pettit’s claim that those who reject supervenience
think that “individual-level facts do not fully determine the social facts.” For
what quantum emergentism implies is that there are no “individual-level facts”
60 See Bhaskar (1979: Chapter 2, passim) and Emirbayer (1997).
61 Esfeld (2004: 626); also see his (1998). See French and Ladyman (2003) for a defense of a
strong version of relations without relata within the context of quantum ﬁeld theory.
62 See Chapter 8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

260
The agent–structure problem redux
apart from the social ones that constitute them. They are co-emergent, because
individuals’ minds are not fully separable.
In sum, a quantum social ontology suggests – as structuration theorists and
critical realists alike have long argued – that agents and social structures are
“mutually constitutive.” I should emphasize that this does not mean “reciprocal
causation” or “co-determination,” with which “mutual constitution” is often
conﬂated in social theory. As quantum entanglement, the relationship of agents
and social structures is not a process of causal interaction over time, but a
non-local, synchronic state from which both are emergent.63 And it is also not
co-determination, since until they collapse in practices neither agents’ minds
nor social structures are in determinate (i.e. actual) states, only potential ones.
Granting these stipulations, however, given that Giddens came up with the
“mutual constitution” formula in 1979, it might fairly be asked what the value
added of a quantum perspective actually is. I would say three things.
First, it provides a physical basis for a thesis that is otherwise untenable.
Given the classical worldview, there are in my view irresistible arguments to
favor an individualist ontology, so that thinking about agents and structures must
be in terms of supervenience. Because supervenience is asymmetric it rules out
even mutual constitution, much less emergence. Quantizing the debate removes
this a priori constraint, which puts a burden of proof on individualism’s advo-
cates to justify their assumption of agent separability, and enables emergentists,
externalists, and holists to ground physically arguments that, qualitatively at
least, seem quite plausible. Second, in a more forward-looking vein, there is
the prospect of using the quantum formalism in new areas. Quantum decision
theory has already proven its worth in thinking about individual agents, and
quantum game theory might do the same for interacting agents. However, to
my knowledge no one has used the formalism to model social structure, which
could have the widest impact of all. Finally, the quantum approach also offers a
way to deal with the heretofore most difﬁcult question for social emergentism,
the problem of downward causation, to which I turn now.
Downward causation in social structures
For emergent properties in any domain to be real rather than just explanatory
contrivances, then on pain of epiphenomenalism they must have causal powers,
and speciﬁcally the “downward” (sic) power to affect the parts from which they
emerge.64 Although the language of downward causation is not widely used in
63 Cf. Archer (1995) and Wight (2006: 117).
64 Note that there is nothing mysterious about large objects affecting small ones if the latter are
not part of the former, so we are only talking here about what Kim (2000: 311) calls “reﬂexive”
downward causation.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

An emergent, holistic but ﬂat ontology
261
the social sciences,65 the question of how to think about the causal powers of
social structure (and/or discourse) is an old one, and continues today to exercise
social scientists of many different theoretical persuasions. This is particularly
true of those committed to macro-level theorizing, which includes not just crit-
ical realists and other structuralists, but non-reductive individualists as well.66
In this section I ﬁrst use the philosophical debate to explain why downward cau-
sation is a “problem,” then suggest how a quantum approach offers a solution,
and conclude by applying this framework to the case of social structure.
Empirically it seems that downward causation is all around us.67 If Jones
is thinking happy thoughts and then starts to worry about losing his job, this
mental change will have measurable effects on his blood pressure, anxiety
level, and other biological functions. Similarly, it is well known in biology that
what happens inside individual cells is affected by macroscopic changes within
organs and the body as a whole. Yet the idea of downward causation has proven
very difﬁcult to reconcile with naturalism, and while philosophers have paid
considerable attention to it lately, the dominant view seems to be that it is an
incoherent notion.68
The reason stems from a key principle of the classical worldview: causal
exclusion, which says that if an event has a complete micro-level cause – and in
the classical worldview micro-level causes ultimately rule – then there can be
no “over-determination” of that event by further micro- or macro-level causes.69
Given this principle, if downward causation is deﬁned synchronically then a
vicious circularity ensues, since the putative causal powers of wholes only exist
in virtue of their parts, and so how could they simultaneously cause the latter?
This circularity can be removed by deﬁning downward causation diachronically,
as an interaction between parts and wholes over time.70 However, that strips
the concept of much of its interest. Since wholes are made up of parts, then by
causal exclusion their putative effects at T2 are really just the effects of their
parts at T1. In short, there is “no room at the bottom” for downward causation,
making it only an “illusion.”71 Robert van Gulick sums up the problem nicely:
65 Hodgson (2002) and Elder-Vass (2010a: 58–62) are important exceptions. The phrase was ﬁrst
introduced by Donald Campbell in his (1974).
66 For recent efforts in this vein, see Hodgson (2002), Sawyer (2005), Wight (2006), Elder-Vass
(2010a; 2010b), and List and Spiekermann (2013).
67 Bitbol (2012: 233).
68 See Hulswit (2006) for an excellent overview of the debate.
69 See Kim (1999; 2000), and for other skeptical treatments of downward causation Robinson
(2005) and Davies (2006).
70 This is the strategy of Hodgson (2002) and Elder-Vass (2010a: 60–61).
71 See Davies (2006: 46) and Robinson (2005: 133). Elder-Vass (2010a: 60) rejects this conclusion
as “pure ontological prejudice” on the grounds that the organization of parts plays an irreducible
causal role. While I am sympathetic to his complaint, as we saw in the discussion of superve-
nience the classical worldview does not support emergentism, and as such ‘organization’ could
have at most an explanatory, not ontological status.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

262
The agent–structure problem redux
The challenge of those who wish to combine physicalism with a robustly causal version
of emergence is to ﬁnd a way in which higher-order properties can be causally signiﬁcant
without violating the causal laws that operate at lower physical levels. On one hand,
if they override the micro-physical laws, they threaten physicalism. On the other hand,
if the higher-level laws are merely convenient ways of summarizing complex micro-
patterns that arise in special contexts, then whatever practical cognitive value such laws
may have, they seem to leave the higher-order properties without any real causal work
to do.72
Critics of downward causation routinely assume that ‘causation’ means efﬁcient
causation, in which causes precede and are therefore distinct from their effects,
and there must be a transfer of energy from one to the other. Defenders will often
concede that given such a stipulation, the idea is incoherent, especially in its
synchronic form.73 However, the door is still open to more pluralistic views of
causation, like Aristotle’s four-fold typology of efﬁcient, material, formal, and
ﬁnal causality, which has been the principal resource for those trying to make
sense of the idea.74 One option in this vein, “medium” downward causation,
is to view the higher level as setting constraints or boundary conditions on
activities at the lower level.75 While using all four Aristotelian causes, the logic
here is primarily functionalist (a modern version of ﬁnal causality), in which
the whole controls the parts by selecting activities consistent with its survival.76
Then there is “weak” downward causation, in which the structure of the whole
describes the form or arrangement of the parts. This view has the virtue of
being synchronic, which is the hard case for downward causation. And it is
also attractive from the standpoint of the agent–structure problem because in
emphasizing the arrangement of parts it does not commit us to the reality of the
whole, which in the case of social structure is problematic. Still, this approach
is more descriptive than explanatory, and, as its name suggests, it is the farthest
removed from the everyday sense of causation.
Whether an Aristotelian approach to causality can make sense of downward
causation is unclear. Ignored by defenders of the orthodoxy, even some who
are sympathetic have questions about what precisely it amounts to or if it is
anything more than a useful heuristic.77 However, what I want to emphasize
here is that, as Bitbol makes clear, the literature on downward causation, both
pro and con, has almost without exception assumed a classical CCP.78 That
72 The quote is from Tabaczek (2013:390).
73 See for example Emmeche et al.’s (2000) rejection of “strong” downward causation.
74 On neo-Aristotelian approaches to downward causation, pro and con, see Emmeche et al. (2000),
Moreno and Umerez (2000), de Souza Vieira and El-Hani (2008), and Tabaczek (2013); cf.
Craver and Bechtel (2007), who argue that the role of the whole should not be seen as causal at
all, but as constitutive.
75 See Emmeche et al. (2000: 24–25).
76 Also see Meyering (2000: 194–196).
77 See for example Hulswit (2006) and Bitbol (2012).
78 See Bitbol (2012). This is true even of Davies’ (2006) article on the physics of downward
causation, which addresses quantum theory only at the end. Unfortunately the literature on
quantum emergence has to date not taken up the issue.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

An emergent, holistic but ﬂat ontology
263
would be ﬁne if the world in question really was classical, but most of the
apparent examples of downward causation that motivate interest in it con-
cern life and mind, which I have argued are quantum mechanical. If that’s
right, then the presuppositions of the debate – that physicalism means mate-
rialism, the latter is about substances, causation is local, and so on – are all
wrong.
In introducing a quantum approach to downward causation it is useful to
recall that the idea of emergence as entanglement is synchronic. Parts and
wholes are co-emergent simply by virtue of being entangled. This affects the
distribution of probabilities for the parts’ behavior,79 but that in itself does
not cause anything to happen because what are entangled are superpositions.
While this is nonetheless important given that the static case is the hard one
for emergentism, one would be hard pressed to call it “causation” in anything
but a formal causality sense. However, there is another kind of emergence in
quantum mechanics that has received less attention: the collapse of the wave
function. Collapse is a dynamic process that makes things happen, but I will
argue still in a sense synchronic. Let me take up this issue ﬁrst with reference to
the individual in isolation and then turn to the case of multiple agents entangled
in a social structure.
In Chapter 6 I argued that collapse is a process of temporal symmetry-
breaking in which two phenomena result. One is a material particle that is
experienced as moving forward in time from the past to the future, and the
other is a force of sub-atomic will moving backward from what will become
the future to the past. Both are irreducible to the wave function from which they
ensued (since collapse is non-deterministic), and both exhibit novel properties
relative to its characteristics, satisfying two of the three criteria for ontological
emergence.
What about the third criterion, downward causation? The “force” that col-
lapses the wave function is Will. Will is purposive and as such instantiates
teleological or ﬁnal causation in a strong sense. It is what animates sub-atomic
particles and, more to the point here, all life forms. Since unlike particles the
latter have persisting minds, we may say that Will is the locus of mental cau-
sation, the ability of the mind to direct the behavior of the body, which is often
invoked as a paradigmatic example of downward causation.80
Now, as we have seen, the case for genuine downward causation turns heavily
on its being synchronic, since if it is only diachronic, then the counter-argument
can be made that really what is going on is parts at T1 are affecting parts at T2.
Because wave function collapse is a process that brings forth actuality from
potentiality, it might seem as if it is subject to this criticism. But I don’t think so.
79 Prosser (2012: 37).
80 Or perhaps more precisely, downward “self”-causation given that it is willful; see Bitbol (2012:
251–252).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

264
The agent–structure problem redux
Collapse is a process, yes, but it does not take place in time, since it happens
instantaneously. Rather, it creates time, by breaking the temporal symmetry of
the wave function. This may seem very abstract, but I submit that it conforms
to our own experience of Will. When I move my arm I do not ﬁrst have the will
to move and then act on it, I just do it. This is not to deny that a hugely complex
set of material processes are entrained by and necessary for my movement, but
all of these processes are governed by and instantiate the effect of my will on
my body. The downward causation of will is not diachronic, in other words,
but nor is it static, since it brings consciousness and movement into being.
The difﬁculty here lies in the synchronic/diachronic dichotomy itself, which
presupposes a classical ontology of substances exerting causal powers in time.
Quantum theory in contrast points to a process ontology, in which processes
rather than substances are primary and time itself is an effect.81
In contrast to downward causation within the individual, within a social
structure it is distributed across many different individuals, each of whose free
decisions to collapse the structure’s social wave function make it a material
reality in that moment. This means that downward causation in social structures
always happens locally, in concrete practices in particular contexts, and once
those practices are over the structure that enabled them disappears back into its
wave function. In effect, social structures are continuously popping in and out
of existence with the practices through which they are instantiated.82
This perspective has many resonances with the “practice turn” in social
theory, the advocates of which also reject substantialism and argue that the
agent-structure problem can be solved by setting agents and social structures
aside and focusing instead on practices – on the process of what people do.83
In taking this line, however, practice theorists might reject altogether the idea
of “downward” causation by social structures, with its connotation of distinct
levels of reality in which a higher level exerts causal powers on a lower one.
I share their rejection of levels discourse, and so I agree that the downward
metaphor is misleading. What is going on here is more accurately described
as structures being pulled out of the quantum world of potentiality into the
classical world of actuality by agents. But that does not mean social structures
have no causal powers, for several reasons.
First, a social wave function constitutes a different probability distribution
for agents’ actions than would exist in its absence. Being entangled in a social
structure makes certain practices more likely than others, which I take to involve
81 For process-theoretic critiques of substantialist assumptions in the debate about emergence
and downward causation see Bitbol (2007; 2012), Campbell and Bickhard (2011), and Pratten
(2013).
82 Cf. Schatzki (2006).
83 See for example Bourdieu (1990), Schatzki et al., eds. (2001), and Schatzki (2002); for a
succinct and particularly clear overview of practice thinking see Adler and Pouliot (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

An emergent, holistic but ﬂat ontology
265
formal causation. Second, as we saw in the discussions of quantum semantics
and externalism above, the intentional states that accompany agents’ practices
are not fully separable from the collective intentions which make them possible,
since the latter deﬁne the context in which agents are acting.84 Third, given my
quantum reading of the performative model of man, whenever agents engage in
practices they are actualizing not only a social structure, but also a determinate
identity for themselves. And since human action is purposive, which I have
argued involves ﬁnal causation, this means that when people act in light of a
social structure they are expressing its teleological purpose – they are agents
of the structure as much as they are the agents who pull it “down.” Thus, while
practices might be where we can actually “see” social structures, by themselves
they tell only part of the story.
In sum, social emergentists have been looking for ontological emergence
in the wrong place, in a vertical relationship between a lower level of agents
and a higher level of social structure. There is no higher level in social life
above that of individuals: the reality of social life is ﬂat. Note that this is not
to say that social structures do not vary in scale, since some are quite localized
(the structure of Amish society, say) while others are global (the international
system). The point is rather that scale should be seen as a “horizontal measure
of ‘scope’ or ‘extensiveness’” rather than as a “level – a vertically imagined,
‘nested hierarchical ordering of space.’”85
However, a ﬂat ontology does not mean that social emergentism’s historical
rival, reductionism or individualism, is true. The crux of my critique was that,
given its classical worldview, individualism assumes that individuals are fully
separable entities in well-deﬁned determinate states. Externalist philosophy of
mind provides qualitative arguments against this assumption, which are backed
up by the physical arguments of quantum decision theory, quantum semantics
and quantum emergence. This view ﬁnds emergence not in vertical relation-
ships between levels, but in holistic horizontal ones among agents, whose
states are constituted by non-local entanglements mediated by language. As
superpositions social structures are only potentialities rather than actualities,
but this is equally the case for agents. Their superposed states are co-emergent,
and if they become real realities they do so together in localized practices,
which themselves are emergent from the dynamic process of wave function
collapse.86 Perhaps paradoxically, therefore, a quantum approach suggests that
84 This might be seen as analogous to material causation in the Aristotelian scheme, though there
is nothing “material” about it except its strictly behavioral aspect.
85 See Marston et al. (2005: 420) and the “scale debate” in geography which their work has
inspired, and especially El-Khoury (2015), who in a comprehensive review links this debate
explicitly to quantum ideas about the social.
86 Theodore Schatzki’s (2002; 2005) concept of a “site ontology” seems like a productive “site,” as
it were, for further unpacking this suggestion in social theoretic terms; also see Woodward et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

266
The agent–structure problem redux
to understand emergence properly we need a horizontal rather than vertical
worldview.87
Throughout this chapter my focus has been on emergence in an onto-
logical sense. Given that ontological individualism is compatible with non-
reductionism in an epistemological or methodological sense, this might make
the argument seem far removed from the actual explanatory practices of social
scientists. However, if ontological individualism falls, then the supervenience
approach that supports epistemological non-reductionism falls as well, and as
such will mischaracterize the explanatory role of both agents and structures.
What is going on in situations where it seems that irreducible structures need
to be invoked is not that multiple realizability means there is an excess of
explanatory leverage, beyond what the intrinsic properties and interactions of
agents can tell us. What is going on is that agents are themselves emergent
from interaction, and that the causal power of the structures in which they are
embedded is not that of efﬁcient causation, but ﬁnal causation or collective
purposiveness.88
(2012), who while writing from a New Materialist perspective, develop Schatzki’s idea in
interesting ways that relate to a number of my own concerns.
87 Cf. van Dijk and Withagen (2014), who argue that Wittgenstein’s later work embodies such a
worldview.
88 I hope to develop the teleological powers of social structures in future work; for a preliminary
attempt to do so outside of a quantum framework see Wendt (2003).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

14
Toward a quantum vitalist sociology
The dominant model of man in naturalistic social science today is materialist,
ontologically deterministic, and mechanistic. At least it is no longer behaviorist
too; although behavioralism remains strong, almost all social scientists agree
that human behavior is affected by unobservable intentional states that must be
dealt with as best we can. Yet while it is recognized that people have minds, the
fact that our minds are conscious plays little role in mainstream scholarship,
where we are modeled as either machines or zombies, and thus, in effect, as
dead. If this is true of human beings, in turn, then it must be all the more so of
society. And indeed, in contemporary sociology1 materialism is unquestioned,
error terms are chalked up to complexity or poor data rather than free will, and
causal mechanisms are the gold standard of explanation. At the end of the day,
social systems are just matter in motion – complex, even intelligent matter, but
dead just the same.
In this book I have laid the groundwork for a different, albeit still naturalist,
sociology. Building on quantum consciousness theory, in Parts II and III I
argued that human beings are conscious, free, and purposive in a teleological
sense – in short, very much alive. I suggested this amounts to a genuinely
vitalist ontology – not the ersatz vitalism of New Materialism, but a pheno-
menological vitalism in which subjectivity is constituted by a physical but
non-material and unobservable life force: quantum coherence. In subsequent
chapters I extended this framework to social structures, which by virtue of the
quantum character of language entangle individuals with and enable them to act
non-locally upon each other. Like the minds of individuals, social structures
are in superposition and thus also exhibit quantum coherence. The question
that arises, therefore, is whether my phenomenological vitalism extends to
social systems, which is to say, is society itself an organism, with subjectivity
and consciousness? The logic of my argument I think demands an afﬁrmative
answer, though it is such a controversial claim that I hesitate to bring it up –
both because it risks undermining all my hard work, and because I cannot
1 I mean this term in the broad rather than narrow, disciplinary sense, as encompassing all macro-
level social sciences.
267
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

268
The agent–structure problem redux
give it the theoretical development it deserves here. Yet I can hardly avoid the
question either, since if it is implied by my argument then critics will surely
bring it up for me. So while what follows is only a gesture in this direction, let
me put the idea of a vitalist sociology on the table.2
I shall do so using the state as an example. Unlike the decentralized social
structures that I addressed in the previous chapter, the state has a centralized
structure that gives it a capacity for corporate agency. That makes it an “easy”
case for the thesis that social systems are organisms, so if the argument does not
ﬂy here then it won’t for less centralized systems either (though currently I’m
unsure what to make of the latter in any case). I unfold the argument in three
parts, the ﬁrst ﬁlling in a missing piece of the agent–structure relationship, the
second exploring some contours of the state as organism idea, and the third
taking up the question of collective consciousness. Since I’m almost out of
gas and over my word limit, and have addressed the ﬁrst and second pieces in
previous work,3 I will concentrate my energies on the third.
The holographic state
The state is a social system constituted, on the one hand, by a social structure
organized around particular forms of language (of citizenship, territoriality,
sovereignty, and so on), and on the other, by the myriad practices of those who
participate in this discourse (both citizens and outsiders). Conceptualized in
quantum terms, as a structure the state is a wave function shared non-locally
across both time and space by millions of people, but as such it is only a
potential reality, not an actual one. As a practice, in turn, the state is an actual
but local phenomenon, materializing momentarily as people collapse its wave
function in their daily affairs such as voting, paying taxes, and going to war, and
then disappearing again. Neither aspect captures our ability to “see” the state,
the former because wave functions are not really “there,” the latter because
practices are not the state as a whole. I argue in a moment that what is missing
from the model is the state’s holographic character. But ﬁrst let me say a bit
more about the individuals who make up the state.
According to the ﬂat ontology I defended above, only individuals and their
practices are really real. As such, in a classical sense, states are nothing but
individuals and their interactions; there is no higher reality of the state existing
above them. However, unlike classical agents, quantum ones are endowed
with superposed minds entangled through language, which means that they
enfold socially shared wave functions within their subjectivities, one of which
concerns the state. So the members of states are not fully separable from its
2 I hope to develop these ideas further in future work.
3 See Wendt (2004) and (2010) respectively.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Toward a quantum vitalist sociology
269
wave function either, but constituted in irreducibly relational terms by their
co-participation in this discursive form.
The picture that suggests itself here is one of individuals as Leibnizian
monads, who mirror the social whole within their minds and reﬂect it back
in their practices. Leibniz’s monads were “windowless” and thus needed God
to ensure their harmony with the whole. In contrast, quantum monads have
windows that enable us to directly perceive the world, including other minds.
While in this substitution we lose the pre-established harmony provided by God,
we gain the ability to work toward harmony through naturalistic processes of
learning and socialization, which evidently have enabled us to create relatively
durable societies.4 Still, as quantum monads we do not mirror the social whole
all of the time or equally, which suggests a need for three distinctions.
First, since an individual cannot act simultaneously on the many different
wave functions which they embody, following Teruaki Nakagomi we can dis-
tinguish between “active” and “passive” monads,5 which describe two modes of
relating to our social entanglements. When we are in active mode we are think-
ing about the potentials of a given wave function and collapsing it to actualize
a desired reality; in passive mode we are doing something else. Considering
the myriad practices in which we all engage, this means that with respect to
most of our entanglements we will be in passive mode at any given moment.
The switch from passive to active mode is therefore crucial, which is accom-
plished by attention.6 Attention to a particular wave function will often result
from measurements by other people, which focus the individual on that set of
potentials rather than others. Thus, even though “the state” is always present
as a potentiality within its subjects, most of the time we are not thinking about
it, and as such it only has “occasional relevance” for us.7
Consider for example the War in Iraq between 2003 and 2011. The active
monads were the leaders, combatants, and supporters on all sides, during those
times of the day when their decisions were actually making war; the passive
monads were everyone else, including the previously active monads when they
were eating breakfast or sleeping. This means that most Americans most of the
time were not actually at war with Iraq. Our imagery should be the horizontal
one of warring ant colonies rather than the vertical one of dueling Leviathans:
viewed by aliens in space, the war was nothing but particular “ants” living in
one colony ﬂying a long way to ﬁght with those in another. As casualties rose
new individuals arrived to take their place, but at no point were all Americans
actually making war. Importantly, this is not to say that U.S. citizens as a whole
4 On quantum monadology see especially Nakagomi (2003a; 2003b); cf. Tarde (1895/2012) and
Lash (2005) on Georg Simmel’s vitalism, which in its phenomenological, intersubjective spirit
seems relatively close to my own.
5 Nakagomi (2003a: 19) refers to the latter as “null” monads.
6 See Schwartz et al. (2005: 1322–1323).
7 See Coulter (2001: 36–38).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

270
The agent–structure problem redux
were not party to the war, since when those who made munitions or MREs were
on the job they were active monads enabling the troops to ﬁght, and even as
passive monads their acceptance of the war made it possible. But at the end of
the day the war was fought by those who actually lived it, not by the rest of us.
Speaking of decisions to make war, a second distinction should be made
between individuals who have the authority to speak for a state as a whole –
its leaders – and those who do not. Following Leibniz we might call leaders
“dominant” monads, which contain within themselves the reasons for the col-
lective actions of their members.8 Other monads defer to the dominant, giving
the latter “ﬁrst mover” status in collapsing the state’s wave function and by
implication giving up their own right to act against the chosen path (at least at
that moment). In quantum terms this may be understood as a system of entan-
gled particles in which, by virtue of its internal structure, when measurements
are made on the system by the environment the choice of how to respond is not
made locally by the particles on the spot, but centrally by the leader.
This has at least two interesting implications. One is that because the state’s
wave function has many potential outcomes, the intentions and character of
leaders are crucial in determining which policies are realized. Even in highly
constrained situations, small differences in leaders can make big differences
in what actually happens (think of Al Gore being President in 2003 rather
than Bush), so there is a reason here to “bring leaders back in.” The other is
that when a dominant monad collapses a state’s potentialities into an actual
choice, it has non-local consequences for everyone else in the group, and
even beyond. Just as Socrates’ death instantaneously constituted Xantippe as a
widow, Bush’s decision for war was a Cambridge Change for all Americans and
Iraqis,9 altering our status from peoples at peace to ones at war. Importantly,
this was not a causal change. To be sure, just as a chain of classical events was
required for Xantippe to learn of Socrates’ death, implementing Bush’s choice
required millions of other choices, each of which also collapsed the state’s wave
function into classical events in the world. But by virtue of being the dominant
monad, Bush’s decision non-locally changed the probabilities that all those
other choices would be made, and once they were made, what gave them all
the meaning of “going to war” was the new socially shared superposition that
Bush had created. This kind of causation might be seen as the basis for a
quantum conceptualization of structural power, according to which dominant
monads, by virtue of their position within a social wave function, can affect
others through action at a distance.10
The third distinction reﬂects the fact that individuals vary hugely in the
extent to which they possess the knowledge that constitutes a given social wave
8 See Look (2002), Nachtomy (2007).
9 On Cambridge Changes see Chapter 10, p. 195 and passim.
10 Cf. Barnett and Duvall (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Toward a quantum vitalist sociology
271
function. In medieval Europe, many peasants probably had no idea what polity
they were “members” of, much less what its policies were, and even today not
every monad carries a perfect image of the social whole within. This suggests
that people who are unaware of their state and/or what is being done in its
name are not subjects of the state, only objects. By this I mean that, on the one
hand, since leaders are empowered to act on behalf of all their citizens, we are
all potential objects of manipulation by leaders; on the other hand, however,
only those with an awareness of what is going on – the “attentive public” – can
be subjects in/of the state, in the sense of being able to act purposefully on its
potentials. Note that being an object of the state is different than being a passive
monad. Whereas the latter can become active monads if they choose, the latter
cannot even in principle until they acquire the relevant knowledge. Everyone
is an active monad somewhere, but to do so you have to be “in the know.”
Conceptualizing individuals as monads is half of the story, but what is the
whole – in this case the state – that we are mirroring in our practices and
thoughts? Recall that practices and thoughts are the classical effects of mea-
surements of quantum phenomena, and as such what they mirror can’t be the
state as social structure, which exists only as a potentiality. So when we observe
a policeman arresting a drunk driver, although the state’s wave function is col-
lapsing before our very eyes, we are not actually seeing the structure that makes
the collapse possible. Similarly when we imagine the state in our thoughts – we
are not “seeing” it as a superposition, but as an intentional object, which is to
say what its decoherence looks like in our consciousness. So what is the onto-
logical status of this object, which we all know is “there” even though we can’t
see it?
The answer is that the state is a kind of hologram.11 This hologram is dif-
ferent from those created artiﬁcially by scientists in the lab, and also from the
holographic projection that I argued in Chapter 11 enables us to see ordinary
material objects, since in these cases there is something there visible to the
naked eye. However, if, as some physicists have argued, the whole universe is
a hologram, then there is no reason to demand that holograms be visually per-
ceptible (which would be anthropocentric to boot). What matters is whether the
holographic principle is operative in social contexts, where three considerations
suggest an afﬁrmative answer.
First, in any hologram, the information that generates the whole is encoded
in each pixel rather than, as in a photograph, distributed across pixels that
stand in a 1:1 correspondence to points in the image. This is precisely what
a monadological view of individuals entails: that the whole (here the state) is
present in the parts, not made up of them. Granted, I just suggested that in
social holograms it is rarely the case that every part contains the whole, but
11 Cf. Bradley’s (2000) holographic analysis of social collectives, and see Milovanovic (2014) for
a comprehensive overview of holographic thinking for social science.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

272
The agent–structure problem redux
this is more a mark of the imperfection of social holograms than a difference
in kind. Thus, just as one could destroy most of a holographic plate and still
recover the overall image (albeit fuzzier) from what is left, so a state could
lose most of its population in a natural disaster and yet be able to reconstruct
its core institutions from those who survived.12 So there is a dual implication
here. On the one hand, a holographic perspective suggests that even in “state-
centric” ﬁelds like IR, individuals matter much more than is typically assumed.
On the other, however, it also makes individuals massively redundant, since
with the partial exception of leaders, the unique qualities of a state’s members
will mostly wash out in the practices that realize it. This “democratic” quality
enables the state to project a stable identity over time, but at the cost of most
individuals not mattering qua individuals most of the time.
Second, it is not just what monads are statically, but what they do dynami-
cally – how they behave – which encodes holographic information. As Edgar
Mitchell and Robert Staretz put it, “quantum emissions from any material entity
carry information non-locally about the event history (e.g. an evolving record of
everything that has happened) of the quantum states of the emitting matter.”13
In the case of the policeman, the emissions are the words, “you are under
arrest,” and by virtue of his entanglement with society the history of those
words is not just his alone, but the history of the shared quantum state that
deﬁnes what putting someone under arrest means. The policeman’s practices
enfold the history of the whole state, in other words, rather than being a purely
local and one-off phenomenon.14
Finally, the essence of any holographic process is “wave front reconstruc-
tion,”15 without which there is no perception of the object in question. Recall
that holography involves three kinds of waves: object waves emitted by objects
in the world form an interference pattern with reference waves emitted from a
holographic projector (in this case the brain), the object hidden in which is then
deciphered by reconstructive waves on the same frequency as the reference
waves. In the policeman case, the object waves are the sights and sounds of
“you are under arrest,” while the reference waves are coming continuously from
our own visual and auditory senses. The key is the reconstructive waves in our
brain, which by virtue of our entanglement in the state and English language
are on the same frequency as the object waves coming from the policeman. The
resulting reconstruction enables us to understand immediately what is going on.
Note that this does not constitute seeing “the state,” per se; what we are seeing
is just an arrest, so the state is only implicit. However, if we step back and think
12 In the ideal case, “the whole information of current states of all active monads can be obtained
from that of a single active monad”; Nakagomi (2003a: 21).
13 Mitchell and Staretz (2011: 942).
14 Cf. Schmidt (2007: 145–146).
15 Robbins (2006: 367).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Toward a quantum vitalist sociology
273
about what makes the arrest possible, then we will be conscious of “the state”
as an intentional object or Idea.16 So even though we cannot literally see the
state, because it is enfolded holographically within our minds and practices,
by attending to it we can nonetheless perceive it.17 In short, the state is like a
rainbow – it only exists when someone is looking at it.18
The state as an organism
With this holographic model in place we can turn now to the idea of the state
as an organism. Organicism can be based on either a materialist or vitalist
ontology, and as such it is not the same thing as vitalism; indeed within biology
today materialist organicism is a perfectly respectable (if still minority) view,
whereas vitalism is not.19 So while I will be combining the two, in principle it
is possible to accept the argument in this section while rejecting that in the next.
The idea that society and/or the state are organisms was widely held in the
nineteenth century.20 Yet, as a result of the genetic revolution, the fact that critics
often conﬂated organicism with vitalism, and the perceived association of both
with fascism, social organicism fell into disrepute by the mid-twentieth century.
Recently, however, it has regained some of its currency, especially in biology
of all places, where research on insect colonies has led to a substantial revival
of the concept of the “superorganism,” “a collection of single creatures that
together possess the functional organization implicit in the formal deﬁnition of
organism.”21 David Sloan Wilson has done more than anyone to take the logical
next step of applying this concept to human society, where it has been picked
up by some others.22 For reasons that will become apparent in a moment, at
this stage it is not possible to say anything deﬁnitive about what this revival
entails for the nature of the state. But it does raise two big questions that might
help structure our thinking about it.23
First, is the state an organism or superorganism? The literature on social
insects has focused on the latter, on the assumption that the concept of an
organism is well understood and clearly not exempliﬁed by colonies. Yet, in
fact, biologists have no more idea how to deﬁne ‘organism’ than they do ‘life.’24
16 On the Idea of the state see Buzan (1991: 65–66) and Wendt (1999: 218–219).
17 Cf. Ittelson (2007).
18 On rainbows and perception see Manzotti (2006: 10–14).
19 See for example Gilbert and Sarkar (2000).
20 For overviews see for example Levine (1995) and Cheah (2003).
21 Wilson and Sober (1989: 341); see H¨olldobler and Wilson (2009) for a good introduction to the
superorganism literature.
22 See Wilson (2002), Wendt (2004), Heylighen (2007), Keseber (2012), and Hoffecker (2013).
23 See Mainville (2015) for an effort to grapple with these questions in an IR context.
24 Pepper and Herron (2008) is a good overview of various deﬁnitions, and on the current debate
see the special issue on organisms in History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences (2010) and
also Bouchard and Huneman, eds. (2013).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

274
The agent–structure problem redux
Part of the problem is that organisms take a mind-boggling variety of forms,
over which it has proven impossible to deﬁne a set of necessary and sufﬁcient
conditions. But recently this difﬁculty has been compounded by recognition that
“paradigmatic” organisms like vertebrates contain millions of other organisms
that exist in symbiosis with their host, which makes human beings look a lot
like superorganisms.25 Matt Haber calls this the “problem of the paradigm,”
which takes two forms – assuming that an organism is the same thing as an
individual, and assuming there is a paradigmatic organism at all.26 Haber’s own
suggestion is to dispense with all organism concepts, and conceive of colonies
instead as individuals; Samir Okasha’s “rank-free” approach, in contrast, would
treat colonies as a kind of organism.27 Point being, while we can probably
agree that states are not vertebrates,28 what form of life they are is by no means
clear.
Second, and related, how should we conceptualize the boundaries of social
organisms? This question is especially pressing in the human case, since the
answer would depend on whether we are talking about languages, states,
societies, the international system, and/or world society (to name just some
of the possibilities), and therefore how many social organisms there are. Here
too biological theory offers little guidance, except that the issue is related to
the equally murky question of what deﬁnes an individual, to which various
answers have been proposed.29 If quantum coherence is constitutive of life,
however, then the need to protect it would lend support to the “immunological”
approach to individuality. In recent years it has become clear that all organisms
(and colonies) possess an immune system, which monitors the environment for
threats and generates an immune response when they appear.30 It is easy to see
such a process at work in the state (the securitization of immigration anyone?),
although it might ﬁgure in decentralized social organisms as well. Either way,
given that the boundaries of human societies are constantly evolving, there is
an opportunity here for social scientists to learn from the biological literature
on the evolution of individuality.31
Radical as it is in some ways, social organicism does not in itself entail a
vitalist sociology, which its advocates would surely want no truck with. As I
suggested in Chapter 7, this is because biologists take a materialist ontology for
granted, and as such, although some may think that even primitive organisms
have minds, by virtue of their materialism their conception of mind does not
thematize consciousness. Thus, it comes as no surprise that the question of
25 See for example Gilbert et al. (2012).
26 Haber (2013: 198).
27 See Okasha (2011).
28 The cover of Hobbes’ Leviathan notwithstanding . . .
29 See Pradeu (2010) for a good overview.
30 See for example Tauber (1994) and Pradeu (2010). This approach also resonates with the theory
of autopoiesis, which has already found its way into the social sciences.
31 See Buss (1987) and Bouchard and Huneman, eds. (2013); cf. Wendt (2003).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Toward a quantum vitalist sociology
275
whether superorganisms are conscious has to my knowledge never been asked.
I don’t have that luxury, given that I have argued that quantum coherence is the
physical basis not only of life but of consciousness. So here goes . . . !
The state and collective consciousness
For many years it was assumed that groups could not have minds even in the
truncated, materialist sense simply because they do not have brains. However,
while groups have not acquired brains since then, today multiple lines of
scholarship argue they do have the functional equivalent. In philosophy there
has been substantial work on the concept of collective intentionality, which
suggests that the attribution of intentional states and agency to groups is not
just a useful ﬁction, but – depending on whom you read – justiﬁed in a realist
sense.32 And then there are the even larger and more empirically grounded
literatures on distributed, extended, and group cognition, all of which suggests
that cognition takes place not just in the head but also outside in transactions
with the world.33 While by no means uncontested,34 these ideas are well within
the mainstream of contemporary thinking about social cognition, and have also
found resonance among biologists, who coined the phrase “swarm intelligence”
to describe cognition in insect colonies.
These literatures offer rich resources for theorizing about states as organisms,
but I will not review them here,35 because although they imply that states have
minds, their contributors almost without exception reject the possibility of
group consciousness. In this they have common sense on their side, since even
to my biased ear “what is it like to be a state?” is a much stranger question
than “what is it like to be a bat?” and experiments have shown that people are
in fact much more willing to attribute cognitive properties to groups than they
are conscious and/or emotional ones.36 The main reason seems to be that our
normal experience of consciousness (sic) is indivisible and private. Thus, while
it is not hard to conceive of the members of a group sharing the cognitive labor
involved in working toward a common end (you write that section of the paper,
I’ll write this one . . . ), it is difﬁcult even to imagine what shared consciousness
would be like. Telepathic powers or a unitary, supra-individual like the Borg on
Star Trek come to mind, but you’ll be reassured to hear that I won’t be going
32 For the major points of departure in this debate see Gilbert (1989), Bratman (1993), Searle
(1995), and most recently Pettit and List (2011).
33 These literatures are expanding rapidly; for seminal statements see Hutchins (1995), Clark and
Chalmers (1998), and Wilson (2001) respectively, and Theiner et al. (2010) and Walter (2014b)
for recent integrative perspectives.
34 See for example Adams and Aizawa (2008) and Rupert (2009).
35 See Wendt (2004) for a preliminary effort.
36 See Huebner et al. (2010), which shows, however, that this also varies by culture.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

276
The agent–structure problem redux
there.37 In short, group “consciousness” seems reducible to the consciousness
of individuals, in which case the state is quite literally a “zombie.”38
Beyond its disturbing imagery (yikes!), I take this to be a signiﬁcant challenge
to my conception of a vitalist sociology, since unlike neo-vitalists like Bennett
and Latour who are already operating at the sociological level, I have made
consciousness a constitutive feature of life. Indeed, without a physical basis for
collective consciousness, even treating the state as an organism would on my
view be problematic in anything but a metaphorical sense. Despite its counter-
intuitive character, however, with quantum help I believe such a concept can
be fashioned, which I shall do in three steps.
The ﬁrst is to free consciousness from the conﬁnes of the skull and get it out
into the world. Although that might itself seem counter-intuitive, it is a core
principle of enactivism, which is a relatively new but now well-established
position in the philosophy of mind.39 To set up the enactivist intervention
it makes sense to start with the “extended mind” hypothesis put forward by
Andy Clark and David Chalmers.40 Their idea is that if a mind is “reliably
coupled” with devices that aid thinking, like calculators, notebooks, or for that
matter, other people, then the material “vehicle” of that mind includes parts
of its environment, since there is no principled reason to distinguish cognitive
operations inside the brain from those in “processing loops” with prostheses
outside.41 The claim is controversial,42 but it supports my larger argument and
so let me assume it is true, since my more immediate problem is that most of its
advocates, including Clark, reject the idea of extended consciousness. The crux
of his critique is that information processing coupled with the environment is
vastly slower than in the brain alone, and only the latter has enough “band-
width” to generate experience.43 The upshot is externalism about cognition,
but internalism about consciousness.
This is a curious critique, considering that materialists like Clark actually
have no idea what generates experience, much less how much “band-width” it
requires. However, the real issue here is an assumption about what conscious-
ness is.44 If materialists are right that consciousness supervenes on brain states
trapped inside of a skull, then yes, we should reject the idea of extended con-
sciousness, but it is precisely this belief that enactivists question. In their view,
37 See Mathiesen (2005: 237) and Szanto (2014: 109).
38 See Szanto (2014), and also Huebner (2011) for an argument to similar effect.
39 On enactivism see for example Hurley (1998), No¨e (2004), and Thompson (2007).
40 See Clark and Chalmers (1998).
41 Note that this “vehicle externalism” is different than the “content” externalism discussed in
Chapter 13.
42 See the special issue of Cognitive Systems Research in 2010 devoted to the debate.
43 See Clark (2009: 984–985).
44 The following discussion draws especially on Ward (2012) and Laughlin (2013); also see
Manzotti (2006).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Toward a quantum vitalist sociology
277
consciousness is a transaction between the mind and its environment, under-
stood not just as a causal relationship in which the world affects consciousness,
but as a constitutive relationship in which experience is intrinsically world-
involving. The vehicle not just of cognition but of consciousness too is the
brain plus the world.
Enactivism, I submit, conforms to our actual experience: when we open our
eyes the world is right there, rather than something from which it seems we have
to wait for input. From a classical standpoint it may be objected that light takes
time to get from objects to our eyes, which means that mind and world are fully
separable and the latter’s role must therefore be causal. However, as I argued
in Chapter 12, a quantum view of light buttresses the enactivist case. If light
enables direct, non-local perception of the world, then the time-lag objection
is moot and consciousness could indeed be intrinsically world-involving.
A quantum interpretation of extended consciousness takes us part way toward
collective consciousness, but only part, because even extended consciousness
is still centered in individual brains and thus solipsistic. A plausible second
step therefore would be to invoke the concept of ‘We-feeling,’ which seems to
get at something like ‘collective consciousness,’ and is not only widely used
by philosophers of collective intentionality, but has been studied empirically
by social psychologists as well. Unfortunately, the philosophers almost never
mention collective consciousness (except to emphasize that it is not what they
are talking about);45 and while the social psychologists have shown that We-
feelings are routine and ubiquitous, they almost all consider it an individual-
level emotion.46 A provocative exception is Jonathan Mercer, who argues that
since it is well known that emotions track identities, and that identities can
be emergent, group-level phenomena, then “feeling like a state” is emergent
too.47 But while open to the possibility of collective consciousness,48 Mercer
perhaps wisely does not bring it up, and ultimately it is unclear in his account
what the ontological status of group-level feeling is, since he is as wary of
reiﬁcation as anyone. Indeed so am I, having defended a ﬂat ontology in which
even collective cognitions are not a “level” of reality above the individual.49
We can nevertheless move forward on the basis of Hans Bernhard Schmid’s
phenomenological analysis of the “sense of us,” which he sees as being presup-
posed by collective intentions.50 Schmid argues that the dominant understand-
ings of this sense – social identity theory and plural subject theory – are logically
45 Mathiesen (2005) and Midgley (2006) are the only exceptions of which I am aware.
46 See Stephan et al. (2014) for a review and helpful typology of approaches to emotions “beyond
the body.”
47 See Mercer (2014), which also provides an excellent overview and analysis of relevant social
psychological scholarship on group emotions.
48 Personal communication.
49 Cf. Wendt (1999: Chapter 4).
50 See Schmid (2014); all page references in this and the next two paragraphs are to this article.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

278
The agent–structure problem redux
problematic. According to the former, the sense of us refers to an object – the
group – around which actors’ beliefs coalesce; “social unities are ‘the partici-
pants’ consciousness of that unity’” (p. 10). In Schmid’s view this is circular,
because to constitute a social unity it is not enough that members just happen
to have the same beliefs, they have to form a unity together, which implies a
collective intention that the sense of us is supposed to clarify. According to the
latter, in turn, the sense of us refers to a (plural) subject, in which the relevant
beliefs are not yours or mine, but “ours.” In Schmid’s view this leads to an inﬁ-
nite regress, because forming a plural subject is something that – once again –
can only be done together, which implies a preexisting plural subject, and so on.
Schmid’s own proposal is to deﬁne the sense of us not as an object or a subject
but as a mode of relating to each other, a “plural self-awareness” “in which mem-
bers experience the world from a shared perspective” (p. 11).51 For my purposes
a key feature of his view is that, unlike other accounts of collective intention-
ality, which deny that there is anything “it is like” for a group to be in a mental
state, Schmid’s “plural self-awareness” is explicitly about “what it is like for us”
(p. 14, emphasis added). He does not actually come out and say “collective con-
sciousness,” but invoking Nagel’s famous phrase brings him tantalizingly close.
Schmid makes his argument in qualitative terms, with no thought to what it
implies physically, but if we were to ask that question it seems clear that this
is implicitly a quantum model. For example, he emphasizes that the individual
self does not exist prior to self-awareness, which agrees with the argument of
Chapter 8 that the mind is a superposition that is only actualized in the collapse
of its wave function, i.e. in experience. Based on his experiential conception
of the self, in turn, Schmid argues that plural self-awareness is just what the
plural self is (p. 18). In his own argument, this serves the purpose of enabling
him to avoid the logical problems that attend thinking of the sense of us as an
object or a subject, but it is what a quantum perspective would suggest as well.
We-feeling does not reduce to the consciousness of separable individuals, but
neither does it presuppose a collective object or subject existing over and above
them. What it presupposes is only a social wave function, which could come
into being either from co-presence in a concrete situation (before they say a
word, strangers meeting on a desert island would become entangled simply
by virtue of visual perception) or, more often, from prior socialization (being
taught in school that we are all citizens of X). However, as a potentiality a social
wave function alone does not constitute We-feeling; it is only when individuals
actualize it in collapse that they experience “us.” As with any experience, in
so doing they constitute themselves as separable individuals, but by virtue of
entanglement this experience is also non-locally connected to others, whether
concrete or imagined, and as such it is more than just what We-feeling is like
51 Cf. Mathiesen (2005: 247–248), which takes a simulationist view of collective consciousness
that I read as more individualistic than Schmid’s.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Toward a quantum vitalist sociology
279
for me, but what it is like for us. So the object and subject of collective intentions
are not prior to collective consciousness, but emergent from it, in a quantum
sense.
This argument, I think, brings us much closer to a physical basis for collective
consciousness, but it might now be objected that the whole idea of collective
consciousness is a contradiction in terms, since consciousness is normally
indivisible and unitary – an I-feeling rather than a We-feeling. Schmid himself
argues that groups do not have an authoritative point of view like individuals
do, and as such there is no “I, the state,” only “We, the People” (p. 23). So let
me take a third step, which is to try to turn the tables by arguing that even the
consciousness of individuals is collective.
What is the primary unit of life? Intuitively one might think the organism,
which lives and dies as a whole, but in biology the dominant view has actually
long been the opposite, that cells are primary.52 Rather than seeing multi-
cellular organisms in top-down or organicist terms as a whole to which the
parts are subservient, “cell theory” does so in bottom-up terms as a symbiosis
of autonomous living beings. The evidence for this view is multi-faceted,
including the fact that single-celled organisms are the smallest unambiguous
life forms, that despite being highly specialized every cell has a copy of its
organism’s DNA, that cells can be extracted from organisms and kept alive,
that cells have behavioral autonomy within the organism, and so on.53 This is
not to deny that multi-cellular organisms are in some ways special, but from
a cell theoretic perspective they are superorganisms, massive colonies of cells
with no real ontological status of their own.54
In considering the relevance of cell theory for the possibility of collective
consciousness two potential objections stand out. The ﬁrst is that cell theory is
atomistic and reductionist, and as such might seem to conﬂict with the holism of
quantum biology. And indeed, in suggesting above that the state is an organism,
I myself invoked not cell theory but organicism to help make the case. However,
if emergence is understood in quantum terms and, as I have argued, quantum
coherence is a condition of possibility for life, then the two theories can be
reconciled without reducing one to the other. Cells would constitute emergent,
coherent states of their own elements (microtubules and the rest), and then
in virtue of quantum entanglement with other cells a macroscopic coherent
state would emerge at the level of the whole organism. As one would expect
from a quantum perspective on any part/whole relation, with respect to cells,
organisms and what is alive, the answer is both/and, not either/or.
52 As Baluska et al. (2004: 9) put it, “[t]he cell doctrine is ﬁrmly embedded in all biological
disciplines and acts as a general paradigm of organismal and tissue construction and function.”
53 See for example Sitte (1992: S1–2) and Reynolds (2010: 198–199), and Reynolds (2007) for a
good overview of the historical debate over the cell theory.
54 Nicholson (2010: 205). Interestingly, the most serious challenges to cell theory concern not
vertebrates, but plants; see Baluska et al. (2004).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

280
The agent–structure problem redux
The second objection is that if cells are the basic units of life, and if life
is co-extensive with subjectivity, then that implies that each cell in our bodies
is independently conscious. Most modern cell theorists would want none of
that.55 For them cells are just machines – though then again for them even
organisms are just machines, which seems equally counter-intuitive. However,
outside biology the idea of cell consciousness has been taken seriously by
some eminent philosophers, most notably Whitehead, who conceptualized the
individual as a “society” of elementary conscious units, and also Schr¨odinger,
who saw the individual as a “republic of cells” the consciousness of which is
not separable from the universe as a whole.56 So why then is our experience
unitary rather than a cacophony of squawking cells? The qualitative answer
would be that organisms57 are hierarchically structured such that it is only
a dominant monad which experiences the whole. I recognize that this points
toward a potentially problematic homunculus view of subjectivity, but if so then
the physical answer at least suggests a new understanding of what that would
entail. Traditionally the homunculus has been understood in classical terms
as a physically separable seat of consciousness within the brain. In contrast,
the quantum coherence of life means that even if our experience is that of a
dominant monad, that monad is a superposition entangled non-locally with all
the other cells in the organism, and as such is not separable from them. So when
it decoheres into experiences, what it is instantiating is the consciousness of a
collective, not that of a single cell.
As a social scientist I can’t help but take pleasure in the fact that this argument
suggests a “pan-social” ontology, in which, rather than starting with individuals
and building up from there, sociology instead goes all the way down (at least
within life).58 Indeed, sociological metaphors played a key role in the develop-
ment of cell theory in the nineteenth century,59 and today there are indications
that more than a metaphor is involved here, if cells communicate with each
other through a language that is isomorphic with human language.60
Of more immediate relevance however, is what this inversion of our usual way
of thinking does to skepticism about the possibility of collective consciousness.
If the seemingly unitary consciousness of individuals is itself collective, then
55 Though there are exceptions; see for example Margulis (2001), Edwards (2005), and Sevush
(2006); for a less radical but not unrelated argument see Zeki (2003) on the “disunity of
consciousness.”
56 On Whitehead in this respect see Hartshorne (1972) and Grifﬁn (1998: 185–198), and on
Schr¨odinger see Poser (1992: 160).
57 Or at least animals; in nineteenth-century cell theory plants were routinely treated as having a
more “egalitarian” structure and thus would not have a unitary consciousness.
58 See d’Hombres and Mehdaoui (2012) on Alfred Espinas’ “sociologization” of biology.
59 See Reynolds (2008).
60 See Ji (1997) on this speciﬁc argument, and more generally Clark (2010), Baslow (2011) and
Marijuan et al. (2013) on inter-cellular communication.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Toward a quantum vitalist sociology
281
collective consciousness at the sociological level, and in particular in states
and other centralized organizations, is no longer an oxymoron. As with the
individual, in the state there is a dominant monad that experiences and speaks
for the whole, namely the leader, who, contra Schmid, can legitimately say, “I,
the State,” and by virtue of his structural position does have an authoritative
point of view on what the state feels. To be sure, anyone else who is a subject
in the state’s hologram can “feel like a state” too – like when children pledge
allegiance to the ﬂag or soldiers take an oath to defend their country – although
because they are not dominant monads their experience is more “what it is like
for us” than the leader’s “ . . . for me.” Still, this democratic quality of collective
consciousness might suggest a difference from individual consciousness, for
which – even if it is collective – there is no evidence that cells in my spleen
can experience what it is like to be me, and (fortunately!) I in turn have no
experience of their experiences. Yet, perhaps the two cases are not so dissimilar.
After all, we have no way of knowing what our cells experience, and one should
also allow for the fact that individuals are far more autonomous and complex
than cells, and as such capable of a much wider range of experiences. And just
as with me and my spleen, leaders have no idea when their citizens are feeling
like a state. So while what I have offered here is far from a thorough examination
of the concept, I hope my basic strategy for giving collective consciousness a
physical basis is sound enough to pursue further.
The politics of vitalist sociology
Social organicism, collective consciousness, the cell state embodied by the
leader: what next, the F¨uhrerprinzip? I grant it could all sound rather sinister,
so would a quantum sociology – on my rendition at least – lead inexorably
toward fascism? Well, it is true that the Nazis did invoke Driesch’s vitalism
to help justify conquering “less vital” peoples – although they had to ﬁre
Professor Driesch as a result, who objected to this use of his ideas.61 On the
other hand, Jakob von Uexk¨ull, another thinker associated with vitalism and
a father of biosemiotics, did not object, having written a book on the state
as an organism that conceived of foreigners as “parasites” and was about “as
harsh a model of othering as one could possibly come up with.”62 And then of
course most famously there is Carl Schmitt, vitalist and erstwhile Nazi Party
member. However, Schmitt’s vitalism was “not taken from a biological but
from a theological, philosophical, or political-ideological register,”63 and as
61 See Bennett (2010: 69).
62 Drechsler (2009: 90). For further discussion of von Uexk¨ull in relation to fascism see Harrington
(1996) and Stella and Kleisner (2010), and on Oka Asajiro’s similar ideas in pre-war Japan see
Sullivan (2011).
63 See Braun (2012: 4), emphasis in the original.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

282
The agent–structure problem redux
such is very different from the naturalist vitalism on offer here. And while
other nineteenth-century reactionaries sometimes made use of vitalist ideas,
anti-colonial and progressive movements did so as well,64 and today vitalism
is associated less with fascism than with the New Ageism of a post-modern
culture trying to “re-enchant” the world.65 In sum, Bennett I think is right that
whatever link there is between vitalism and violence is contingent.66
Indeed, if there is any inherent politics to quantum vitalist sociology, then I
would argue that it is voluntarist. Against determinists, voluntarists emphasize
the creativity and freedom of individuals to resist and overcome structural
constraints. To be sure, even more than vitalism voluntarism was central to
Nazi ideology,67 and some of the philosophers to whom the Nazis looked for
voluntarist inspiration, such as Leibniz and Schopenhauer, have inspired my
own argument. Yet, as with vitalists, voluntarists worked for the good guys too,
like the many existentialists who fought in the French Resistance.
Consider in contrast the political slope of materialism, with its picture of
a deterministic reality in which people and society are just machines and
consciousness and freedom have no place. Whereas vitalism privileges life, as
Schopenhauer and more recently Hans Jonas argued materialism is a philosophy
that privileges death. For materialists dead matter is the norm, the baseline in
terms of which life must be explained; the living, in effect, are nothing but
assemblages of the dead.68 Not only does that blur the distinction between life
and non-life philosophically, it also raises questions about what happens when
such a view permeates society, like it does today, such that it becomes “under
the ontological dominance of death.”69 For while it is difﬁcult for moderns to
conceive, the ancients thought of life as the normal state, not death, and as such
there is an implicit societal choice here, one that might plausibly shape attitudes
not just toward nature but toward each other. While in a vitalist ontology there is
no guarantee that individuals will put their agency to progressive causes, at least
there they have the option, to experience and make of society what they will.
64 See Schwartz (1992), Reill (2005), and Jones (2010).
65 A serious manifesto for which might be Berman (1981).
66 Bennett (2010: 90).
67 See Strehle (2011), and also Braun (2012).
68 For a good discussion of Jonas (1966) on this issue see Wolters (2001).
69 See Wolters (2001: 91), quoting Jonas.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Conclusion
In this book I have addressed the physical basis of social life. Within the
social sciences the de facto ontology is dualism. While most social scientists
would probably consider themselves materialists, and virtually everyone at
least implicitly accepts the CCP, positivists and interpretivists alike routinely
reference intentional phenomena in their social theorizing. This is problematic
because such phenomena presuppose consciousness, and no progress has been
made on integrating consciousness with the materialist worldview. Philosophers
seem increasingly inclined to think that consciousness must therefore be an
illusion, but that would leave social scientists in a tough spot. Either we become
behaviorists, eschewing reference to intentional phenomena altogether, or we
retain them in our explanations and become dualists and tacit vitalists.
The source of this dualism is an assumption that the relevant causal closure
constraints on solving the mind–body problem are those of classical mechan-
ics, which describes a purely material world of matter and energy. But since
the 1930s we have known that the causal closure principles in the universe
as a whole are quantum mechanical rather than classical, where the physical
constraints on explanation are radically different. In particular, quantum theory
admits a neutral monist/panpsychist interpretation in which ‘physical’ does not
equal ‘material,’ and instead sees the material world described by classical
physics and the mental world of consciousness as joint effects of an underlying
reality that is neither. The question then is whether an ontology in which con-
sciousness goes “all the way down” can scale up to the human and speciﬁcally
sociological level. While there are a priori reasons to doubt it, there is growing
experimental evidence that human behavior in fact follows quantum principles.
If that evidence continues to mount, it would conﬁrm a key prediction of quan-
tum consciousness theory, according to which our subjectivity is a macroscopic
quantum mechanical phenomenon – that we are walking wave functions. That
would constitute a basis for solving the mind–body problem, and in so doing
unifying physical and social ontology within a naturalistic, though no longer
materialist, worldview.
Apart from laying out this metaphysical argument, which is due to others, my
own contribution has been to show that it offers traction on some long-standing
283
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

284
Conclusion
controversies in social ontology. My “case studies” were issues surrounding the
nature of human agents and their relationship to social structures, but these by
no means exhaust the applicability of quantum consciousness theory to social
science. Thus, in addition to other issues in social ontology beyond the agent–
structure problem, it may be useful to highlight what I have not done in this
book. On the explanatory side, I have not developed a general theory of society
like liberalism or Marxism; I have not proposed speciﬁc theories of relatively
autonomous social systems like the international system; and I have not tested
any theories against empirical evidence. And on the normative side, I have not
suggested how a quantum approach might affect our thinking about law, human
rights, or any of the other issues that make up moral and political philosophy.
Insofar as these literatures are based on classical assumptions – or implicit
quantum ones that struggle for recognition – my expectation is that bringing
the radical conceptual armory of quantum theory to bear on them would be
transformative. In short, there is still a long way to go before the potential of a
quantum social science is realized.
Night thoughts on epistemology1
I do however want to say a few words about another topic that I bracketed in
this book, which is social epistemology. As we saw in Part I, unlike in the clas-
sical worldview, with its clear separation of subjects and objects, in quantum
physics questions of epistemology and ontology are difﬁcult to separate. This
is due to the Measurement Problem, in which the observation of sub-atomic
phenomena in some way participates in what actually happens, such that we
cannot safely assume that the latter is independent of the former. What con-
clusion to draw from this is a key question in the debate over quantum theory,
with some philosophers arguing that it demands an instrumental interpretation
of the theory, while others a realist one. By focusing on ontology rather than
epistemology I have therefore taken sides right up front on a deeply contested
issue. Yet since philosophers of quantum physics are themselves divided, there
is no justiﬁcation I could offer for it (or the reverse) that would satisfy those
who think it is a mistake. If pressed I would say that a realist approach is
more likely to yield hypotheses, like quantum consciousness theory, that might
advance our knowledge down the road. But in the end I see this more as a
matter of personal disposition than anything else.
Having said that, however, let me offer a glimpse of how the particular
quantum ontology that I have advocated might speak to the Explanation/
1 These are far from worked out in my own mind, and as such are more trial balloons that I hope
others will clarify and/or criticize.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Conclusion
285
Understanding debate in social epistemology.2 The debate is about “the pos-
sibility of naturalism” in social inquiry, or whether a social science on the
model of the natural sciences is possible and/or desirable.3 More speciﬁcally,
given that the natural sciences aspire to objective, third-person knowledge,
the debate is about whether there is any place in a science of society for the
second- (and even ﬁrst-) person analyses characteristic of interpretivist work,
which treat the objects of social inquiry as subjects with their own meanings
and point of view – as a “You” rather than an “It.” That this would be prob-
lematic makes sense if our model of natural science is classical. There is no
role for second- and ﬁrst-person perspectives if we are trying to explain rocks
or glaciers, which are not subjects and exist whether we observe them or not.
In that context, trying to maintain a separation of subject and object makes
sense.
In quantum physics objects cannot be said to exist prior to their realization
in measurement by an observer. Does this mean we need a participatory episte-
mology to understand sub-atomic particles? Well, yes and no. On the one hand,
I have argued that the collapse of the wave function is a process of temporal
symmetry-breaking in which not only a material particle is produced, but also a
sub-atomic experience of that process. So yes, in our interaction (sic) with the
particle (sic), the second- and ﬁrst-person (sic) dimensions are always there.
On the other hand, the experience of a particle is ephemeral, and “what it is
like” to be one is probably beyond the human capacity to understand. Indeed,
we face such an epistemic limit even in our dealings with other organisms,
like Nagel’s bat, whose experiences are not ephemeral but persist in memory.
At the highest level of biological organization – apes, chimps, and dogs – we
might gain some genuine second-person understanding, but in general when it
comes to interpreting meanings we are stuck in a bubble with our fellow human
beings. Note, however, that these are limits to our knowledge, and as such do
not mean that other organisms do not have meaningful experiences, much less
that they are mere machines or objects.
As I argued in Chapter 12, however, we are in a very good position to know
other human minds, which points to what I see as the most important episte-
mological implication of this book: subjectivity – and here I mean conscious
subjectivity – can and should be “brought back in” to social science. That chal-
lenges positivists and interpretivists alike, both of whom have tended to run
away from subjectivity, as something either that is not relevant to science or is
a Cartesian anxiety that in a post-modern world we can now thankfully leave
2 Quantum theorists who are not wedded to this ontology reach rather different epistemological
conclusions; see for example Plotnitsky (1994; 2010) and Barad (2007).
3 See Bhaskar (1979). The adjective ‘physical’ would be better than ‘natural’ here, since, as I
argued in Chapter 1, ‘physical’ is open to both classical and quantum interpretations, which have
very different implications for what a “natural” science entails.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

286
Conclusion
behind. In my view, a social science that has no place for subjectivity has no
place either for its own subject matter or for its audience, and in that case what’s
the point? Moreover, if they can get past their hang-ups about it, recovering
subjectivity is a task to which interpretivists and positivists can both contribute.
Interpretivists, especially in the phenomenological tradition, of course have
much to say about how to study subjectivity,4 but perhaps more surprisingly, so
do some positivists who have dealt with individual-level data.5 This common
ground does not mean that ﬁrst-, second-, and third-person inquiries are the
same; quite the contrary, in my own view they are complementary in a quantum
sense – individually incomplete, mutually exclusive, but jointly necessary for
a complete description.6 Thus, in contrast to my previous effort to reconcile
interpretivism and positivism through a “via media,” which assumed a classical
either/or choice,7 from a quantum perspective their relationship should be seen
as both/and, such that there will always be “two [or three?] stories to tell.”8
The only question then is which epistemically incomplete stance to take for a
given problem.
Speaking of which, the kind of participatory ontology that quantum theory
implies gives the problem of what question to ask in our research – von Neu-
mann’s “Process 1” – a new and more loaded signiﬁcance than it has typically
had in the past. As graduate students in the social sciences we are taught that it
is legitimate to let our values and interests guide us in choosing our questions.
But in the conventional, Weberian understanding, that value-laden process ends
when we start our actual research; then, the goal of objectivity demands that
we keep our values and interests out of the picture. Such a dualism cannot
be sustained in quantum physics, and lately is coming into question even in
other physical sciences, where non-epistemic values are increasingly seen by
philosophers as having a role to play not only in choosing research questions,
but also in evaluating their answers.9 This subject–object “endogeneity” is all
the more important in the social sciences, where researchers may be members
of the very system they are observing. That does not mean individual social
scientists can expect to have a measurable impact on society, although collec-
tively we might, analogous to the way in which self-conscious observation of
one’s own consciousness may change the latter over time.
4 For a good starting point see Zahavi (2005).
5 See for example Petranker (2003), Kahneman and Krueger (2006), Overgaard et al. (2008), and
Lahlou (2011); and for a skeptical view see Irvine (2012).
6 I’m not sure what to do with ﬁrst-person experience unmediated by the second-person framework
of a researcher, but for some ideas see Rudolph and Rudolph (2003).
7 See Wendt (1999: Chapter 2).
8 See Hollis and Smith (1990). Note that not everyone sympathetic to the idea of quantum
consciousness agrees that complementarity is its epistemological implication; see for example
Jonas (1984: 225–227).
9 See Elliott and McKaughan (2014) and McAllister (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Conclusion
287
However, the breakdown of the subject–object dualism in quantum contexts
does highlight that in asking a given question: (1) social scientists are collapsing
a socially shared wave function, locally for us as researchers, and thereby calling
forth a reality rather than just passively observing one given to us as spectators,
and (2) our research is therefore responsible, at the micro-level, for helping
to create, sustain and/or transform that reality. This is not to say that if social
scientists refuse to study something which they disapprove of – as some in
IR would have us do with the state – it will disappear, since most social facts
are sustained by thousands or millions of lay people “observing” them, not by
social scientists. But it does emphasize our complicity in that process, both
empirically and politically.
These quantum effects suggest that the hope of social scientiﬁc realists –
that through the continuing improvement of our theories and measurement
techniques we will get closer and closer to truths of social life – is misplaced.10 If
it does sometimes seem like we are getting closer, as in the “democratic peace”
(widely seen as the closest thing in IR to a scientiﬁc law), then that should
be seen as the effect that repeated measurements by lay persons and social
scientists alike have in stabilizing a certain reality, not of better approximating
an independently existing one. However, this does not mean social science
does not produce knowledge, or that truth is merely an effect of power. Even in
quantum physics, where our power to inﬂuence what is observed would seem
to be at its maximum, we cannot in fact determine whatever outcome we like.
Yet we do not for that reason say physicists’ knowledge of sub-atomic particles
is purely subjective, only that it is probabilistic. By the same token, even
though social scientists cannot completely eliminate their own error terms –
not just because of complexity but because that is where agency lies – we can
still get some grip on the world around us. So I do not see a quantum social
science implying anti-realism so much as what Bernard d’Espagnat calls “open”
realism. There is something there, independent of us academic observers, even
if we cannot subject it to the steel jaws of necessity.11
Two last points about epistemology. First, one issue that a quantum per-
spective suggests positivists and interpretivists alike will need to rethink is
causation. As we have seen quantum processes like the collapse of the wave
function and action at a distance are not causal, at least in the usual, efﬁcient
causal sense. For positivists this challenges the current fashion of trying to
explain social phenomena by reference to causal mechanisms, the very lan-
guage of which exudes a classical worldview. For interpretivists the challenge
might seem less, since they were never interested in causation in the ﬁrst place –
but there is still the question of what to do with a quantum naturalism. My own
view is that it supports an interpretation of reasons as ﬁnal or teleological
10 Cf. Wendt (1999: Chapter 2).
11 See d’Espagnat (2006: 28, 117–118, and passim).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

288
Conclusion
causes, and although the non-local causation found in social structures is not
efﬁcient causation, as its name suggests it remains “causation” of a sort, per-
haps akin to that in Cambridge Changes. While these are important challenges,
however, they are also an opportunity, since quantum theorists themselves do
not know how to think about causation.12 Insofar as sub-atomic phenomena are
just like social phenomena, perhaps we can help them ﬁgure it out.
Second, an important virtue of quantum consciousness theory is that it can
explain the possibility of social science itself, which is something we do consci-
ously. Mastering literature, ﬁnding questions, conceptualizing, operationaliz-
ing, collecting and analyzing data, and eventually basking in our conclusions –
these are all practices that we experience, and experience as freely chosen as
well. The classical materialist naturalism that, at least ofﬁcially, is the basis for
positivism is at a complete loss to explain these experiences – yet it is hard to
imagine machines or zombies doing what we do. For their part, interpretivists
at least take the consciousness of social scientists as given, but they too cannot
explain it. For our activities to make sense, therefore, we need an ontology
that can accommodate our subjectivity within a naturalistic worldview. Rather
than focusing on our side of this problem, my strategy has been to change the
worldview side, in the hopes that this can overcome the implicit dualism
within our work.13
Too elegant not to be true?
As I indicated in Chapter 1, it is not necessary to believe that the ontology
proposed in this book is capital-T true to think that it might be a useful heuristic
for doing social science. Indeed, the advocates of some of my key dialectical
resources – quantum decision theory, game theory, and semantics – themselves
generally take an agnostic position on questions of ontology. That makes sense
intellectually, since we do not have to agree on the nature of reality to see
if a quantum approach can predict experimental results. And it makes sense
strategically, since their work is more likely to be accepted by others if it
is not freighted with controversial ontological baggage. My effort to show
that a quantum approach sheds new light on debates in social theory can be
read in the same, pragmatist spirit. Of course, insofar as these various efforts
succeed they will not leave social science where it was before. In particular,
they raise the question “if quantum theorizing about X works so well, then
why are you still engaged in classical theorizing?” Even as a heuristic, in other
words, a successful quantum social science implicitly calls upon those in the
12 For a good introduction see Price and Corry, eds. (2007).
13 Although I am no student of his work, this was apparently also Michael Polanyi’s approach to
reconciling the “two cultures”; see Zhenhua (2001–2002) for a useful overview.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Conclusion
289
mainstream to justify something they have always taken for granted. One of
the ﬁrst places where this call may become salient is in graduate methods
training, which, if my own experience is any guide, is a touchy subject. But
beyond foreshadowing a potential conﬂict in this area, a non-realist or “as if ”
reading of quantum social science has the virtue of not forcing those who are
interested in exploring these ideas empirically to change their entire worldview
ﬁrst.
Yet in the longer run there are limits to such an agnostic approach, especially
in the theoretical domains with which I have been concerned in this book. This
is not simply because at the end of the day human beings either are, or are not,
walking wave functions. It is because of the politics of science, for many in the
classical orthodoxy are not agnostic about ontology. In the natural sciences we
see this in the dismissal of vitalism as unscientiﬁc, in the hostile reception that
quantum consciousness theory and until recently panpsychism have received,
in the increasingly strident assertions that consciousness and free will are
illusions, and – in a domain that I have not addressed in this book – in defenses
of evolutionary theory against any and all criticisms. The intensity of these
attitudes suggests that these are not just garden-variety scientiﬁc disagreements,
but spring from a concern to defend a metaphysics that is felt to be under siege.
In the social sciences we see the same thing. In many departments the attitude
toward interpretivists, post-structuralists, and others who take meaning and
subjectivity seriously is not “let a thousand ﬂowers bloom,” but “this is not
Science and it must not be supported.” Don’t hire people who practice such
arts, if you make that mistake don’t tenure them, don’t fund their research,
and don’t publish it in top journals. Crucially, the conception of “science”
that is being legislated here is a classical one, in which meaning, subjectivity,
and apparently now also free will, all do not belong. So while I encourage
those who are intrigued by my argument to remain agnostic about its truth
while seeing what it can do on the ground, eventually someone in a position
of power may say, “but it isn’t true” – or perhaps more precisely, “it can’t be
true and therefore it isn’t” – and dismiss the results as no more scientiﬁc than
vitalism.
If you will allow me another military metaphor, therefore, the “as if”
approach to quantum social science is akin to guerrilla warfare, attacking unex-
plained anomalies in the orthodox lines, using local successes like quantum
decision theory to build popular support, and training cadres in the new method-
ological techniques. But the politics of ontology being what they are, if Mao was
right then at some point guerrilla warfare must give way to conventional war –
to a more realist view of quantum social science that would be a frontal assault
on the classical mainstream. Undoubtedly it is too early for such an assault
to succeed, not least because if Thomas Kuhn was right, paradigms don’t
change through decisive battles anyway, but through the gradual generational
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

290
Conclusion
replacement of those wedded to the old paradigm by those embracing the new.14
In arguing that human beings really are walking wave functions, therefore, my
goal has been only to try to foresee what such a confrontation might look like.
Given what I have said in this section I cannot urge others to make the same
leap, but having gone out on this limb myself I want to conclude this book with
my personal justiﬁcation for a realist view of quantum social science.
The argument would be that it is an inference to the best explanation, or
IBE. IBE is a principle of inference for choosing between theories when, for
whatever reason, deduction and induction cannot be applied.15 It has a strong
pedigree in the history of science, and is widely used in the law and everyday
life as well. The basic idea is that even if we cannot prove a theory to be true,
it is still possible to rationally conclude that it is the best theory relative to its
competitors and as such should be adopted as the most likely to be true. The
“relative” is crucial; unlike the principle of inference known as “abduction” or
“retroduction,” with which often it is conﬂated, IBE is essentially contrastive in
nature, pitting two or more explanations for a given phenomenon against each
other.16 So the question here would be whether, given the CCP, a quantum or
a classical ontology provides the best explanation for consciousness and social
life.
But how shall we deﬁne ‘best’? Na¨ıvely one might think it means “most
likely to be true given the evidence,” but this would be circular and trivialize
IBE. The challenge rather is to deﬁne ‘best’ independently of the evidence
while showing that, as a consequence of the inference, a theory can be judged
as most likely to be true.17 To do this IBE theorists use “explanatory virtues” to
assess competing theories. Inevitably, there is no agreement on what precisely
these virtues are, but in an attempt to clarify the literature Adolfas Mackonis has
come up with ﬁve that are widely used: coherence, depth, breadth, simplicity,
and empirical adequacy.18 However, he ultimately folds the last into the ﬁrst,
and depth is of interest mostly to those with a mechanistic worldview and as
such not very useful here. So let me brieﬂy compare our two candidates on the
remaining three criteria.
Coherence refers to a theory’s ﬁt with relevant background knowledge, by
which is primarily meant theories that are already well established, but in
Mackonis’ view may also include empirical data or tests of the theories in
14 See Kuhn (1962/1996).
15 The literature on IBE is extensive; see Lipton (2004) for a good overview, and Clayton (1997)
offers a succinct treatment specially adapted to theory choice in metaphysics.
16 Mackonis (2013: 976–978) sees abduction as only the ﬁrst step in an IBE.
17 See Glass (2012: 413).
18 See Mackonis (2013); cf. McAllister (1989), for example, who identiﬁes ﬁve criteria: internal
consistency, consistency with extant well-corroborated theories, predictive accuracy, predictive
scope, and fruitfulness.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Conclusion
291
question. While often seen as the most important virtue, coherence is tricky
to apply to theories that would force a change in the background knowledge
itself, as in a Kuhnian paradigm change, which depending on what counts as
the “relevant” background may or may not be the case here. If the relevant
background is taken to be quantum physics itself – our foundational science
of reality – then a quantum social ontology is much more “virtuous” than its
classical rival. However, two other ways to deﬁne the background point the other
way. First, the foundation of my approach, quantum consciousness theory, is not
just quantum-physical but panpsychist, which is clearly not coherent with well-
established theory. Second, defenders of classical social ontology can point out
that quantum phenomena mostly wash out above the molecular level, and so
the relevant background is classical physics and neuroscience, not quantum.
On the other hand, to the extent that empirical tests are allowed to count as
part of the background, then the striking successes of quantum decision theory
favor a quantum ontology. So on balance, the coherence jury is either still out,
or hung. However, when it comes to the other two virtues I think the ontology
developed in this book comes out a clear winner.
Explanatory breadth refers to the extent to which a theory uniﬁes different
kinds of facts, the more the better. Normally these facts would all be presumed
to be material facts, in which case the quantum formalism – which “far exceeds
[the breadth] of any competitor”19 on its home turf of physics – clearly out-
performs classical thinking in the domains of social science to which it has
been applied so far. In particular, whereas to my knowledge no one writing
from a classical standpoint has suggested that human choice behavior and
semantic behavior are in any way connected (and their literatures are totally
independent), as we have seen quantum theory can be used to explain both.
This is not in itself an argument for quantum consciousness theory, although if
these behaviors are intentional and therefore presuppose consciousness, then a
more direct connection can be made. But even speaking strictly behaviorally,
given the gulf that currently separates these domains, it is striking that a single
formalism taken straight from physics can unify them – and can subsume
classical choice and semantic behavior in the bargain.
Yet that is only the tip of the iceberg, for where there is truly no comparison
between the two ontologies is in the ability of quantum consciousness theory
to unify utterly different kinds of facts, namely material and phenomenal ones.
The latter have stymied the classical worldview for centuries, and so its advo-
cates have now been reduced to arguing that the appearance we have of being
conscious is just that, an appearance. Quantum consciousness theory, in con-
trast, can “save” the appearance of consciousness and in so doing make sense of
many other apparent phenomenal facts: the apparently meaningful character of
19 See Mackonis (2013: 983), quoting Paul Thagard.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

292
Conclusion
our behavior, our apparently free will, the apparently teleological force of our
reasons, our apparent ability to ﬁll in and even change the historical past, and
the invisible yet apparently emergent nature of social structures. I cannot prove
that all these appearances are genuine, but arguing that they are all illusions
seems not just like a second-best strategy, but a strategy of last resort. So if
we can unify all these appearances under a theory that treats them as real (in a
quantum sense), why would we infer otherwise?
Simplicity (or parsimony) is akin to breadth as a virtue, except that whereas
breadth is about explaining more facts with the same theoretical resources,
simplicity is about explaining the same facts with fewer resources.20 Ironi-
cally, simplicity has several potential dimensions and thus has been difﬁcult
to deﬁne.21 However, social scientists are all trained to make their theories as
parsimonious as possible, so for my purposes an intuitive, “you know it when
you see it” criterion should sufﬁce here.
The simplicity question comes up especially with the theory of quantum
consciousness, which, recall, has two parts: quantum brain theory and panpsy-
chism. For the brain to be a quantum computer many things must turn out to be
true, which suggests a low simplicity score. On the other hand, it is not obvious
a true classical theory of the brain would be any simpler, since the human brain
is the most complex system known in the universe. Moreover, and this I think
is decisive, the hypothesized effect of the zillions of interactions in a quan-
tum brain is a single organizing principle that is entirely lacking in classical
brain theory: quantum coherence, to which everything else in the brain is sub-
servient. So while the details are extraordinarily complex, the result is extremely
simple.
This in turn relates to the other half of the theory: consciousness. Here there
is almost no contrast to make, since there is no classical theory of conscious-
ness on the horizon, whereas on the quantum side we at least have a candidate.
Even a complex quantum explanation would be simpler than no explanation
at all. However, the quantum argument is in fact very simple: consciousness
is an aspect of matter at the elementary level (panpsychism), which is ampli-
ﬁed upward by quantum coherence in the brain. Compare this to the image
offered by materialists in their own quest to explain consciousness: an incredi-
bly complex machine, chugging along, neurons ﬁring all over the place, which
somehow spits out consciousness. Quantum consciousness theory is specula-
tive, but compared to the alternative its simplicity is hard to beat.
The literature on IBE emphasizes the explanatory virtues of theories,
because, assuming that science is rational, it should be explanatory power
that matters most in judging which of two theories is more likely to be true.
I have argued that on this score a quantum social ontology will eventually
20 See Mackonis (2013: 987).
21 See McAllister (1991).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Conclusion
293
be a clear winner. Nevertheless, given that quantum consciousness theory and
quantum social science are both still in their infancy it is difﬁcult to draw
this inference convincingly today, which is a good reason for readers to take
an “as if” rather than realist attitude toward these ideas. I suppose if I were
completely rational then I should do the same, but in my view a quantum social
ontology has another kind of virtue from which an IBE can be drawn now: an
aesthetic one.
Philosophers have long recognized that alongside explanatory power aes-
thetic considerations play a role in theory choice, and indeed simplicity and
breadth are routinely cited as instances of both virtues. Yet concerned to defend
the rationality of science, most philosophers think the aesthetic virtues of the-
ories are reducible to the explanatory. This may be less true of scientists, and
especially physicists. Philosopher James McAllister offers some choice quotes
from the latter, and also makes a strong analytical case that “truth and beauty”
are complementary and not always correlated.22 While I am inclined toward
his view, I won’t defend it here. Instead, I want to conclude with a bold claim:
whatever their current force as explanatory virtues, the coherence, breadth, and
simplicity of the quantum hypothesis make it too elegant not to be true.
For the price of two simple propositions, quantum consciousness theory
offers not just a solution to the mind–body problem, or additionally, to the
nature of life and of time, which are mostly beyond the concerns of this book.
And it does not just solve the Agent–Structure and Explanation-Understanding
problems, or explain quantum decision theory’s success in predicting otherwise
anomalous behavior. What the theory offers is all of these things and more, and
with them a uniﬁcation of physical and social ontology that gives the human
experience a home in the universe. With its elegance, in other words, comes
not just extraordinary explanatory power, but extraordinary meaning, which at
least this situated observer ﬁnds utterly lacking in the classical worldview.
You might not share my aesthetic sense and thus be reluctant to believe we
really are walking wave functions. That’s of course ﬁne. But by arguing it
could be true I hope I have given you reason to suspend your belief that we
really are just classical machines, and thus to suspend your disbelief in quantum
consciousness long enough to try assuming it in your work. If you do, perhaps
you will ﬁnd your own home in the universe too.
22 See McAllister (1996); note however that although critical of reductionism, he too ultimately
wants to defend the rationality of aesthetic judgments. See Montano (2013) for an alternative,
more naturalistic view.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
Abbott, Derek, Paul Davies, and Arun Pati, eds. (2008) Quantum Aspects of Life,
London: Imperial College Press.
Abram, David (1996) The Spell of the Sensuous, New York: Vintage Books.
Adams, Fred and Kenneth Aizawa (2008) The Bounds of Cognition, Oxford: Blackwell.
Adler, Emanuel and Vincent Pouliot (2011) “International Practices,” International
Theory, 3(1), 1–36.
Aerts, Diederik (1998) “The Entity and Modern Physics: The Creation-Discovery View
of Reality,” in E. Castellani, ed., Interpreting Bodies, Princeton University Press,
pp. 223–257.
(2009) “Quantum Particles as Conceptual Entities: A Possible Explanatory Frame-
work for Quantum Theory,” Foundations of Science, 14(4), 361–411.
(2010) “Interpreting Quantum Particles as Conceptual Entities,” International Jour-
nal of Theoretical Physics, 49(12), 2950–2970.
Aerts, Diederik and Sven Aerts (1995/6) “Applications of Quantum Statistics in Psy-
chological Studies of Decision Processes,” Foundations of Science, 1(1), 85–97.
Aerts, Diederik, Jan Broekaert, and Liane Gabora (2011) “A Case for Applying an
Abstracted Quantum Formalism to Cognition,” New Ideas in Psychology, 29(2),
136–146.
Aerts, Diederik, Marek Czachor, and Bart D’Hooghe (2006) “Towards a Quantum
Evolutionary Scheme: Violating Bell’s Inequalities in Language,” in N. Gontier,
et al., eds., Evolutionary Epistemology, Language and Culture, Dordrecht:
Springer, pp. 453–478.
Aerts, Diederik, Bart D’Hooghe, and Emmanuel Haven (2010) “Quantum Experimental
Data in Psychology and Economics,” International Journal of Theoretical Physics,
49(12), 2971–2990.
Afﬁﬁ, Ramsey (2013) “Learning Plants: Semiosis between the Parts and the Whole,”
Biosemiotics, 6(3), 547–559.
Aharonov, Yakir, Peter Bergmann, and Joel Lebowitz (1964) “Time Symmetry in the
Quantum Process of Measurement,” Physical Review, 134, 1410–1416.
Aharonov, Yakir and Lev Vaidman (1990) “Properties of a Quantum System during the
Time Interval between Two Measurements,” Physical Review A, 41(1), 11–20.
Aharonov, Yakir and M. Suhail Zubairy (2005) “Time and the Quantum: Erasing the
Past and Impacting the Future,” Science, 307, 875–879.
Albert, David (1992) Quantum Mechanics and Experience, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
(2000) Time and Chance, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
294
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
295
Albert, David and Barry Loewer (1988) “Interpreting the Many Worlds Interpretation,”
Synthese, 77(2), 195–213.
Alfano, Mark (2012) “Wilde Heuristics and Rum Tum Tuggers: Preference Indetermi-
nacy and Instability,” Synthese, 189(1), 5–15.
Alﬁnito, Eleonora and Giuseppe Vitiello (2000) “The Dissipative Quantum Model of
Brain,” Information Sciences, 128(3–4), 217–229.
Al-Khalili, Jim and Johnjoe McFadden (2015) Life on the Edge: The Coming of Age of
Quantum Biology, London: Bantam Press.
Allen, Amy (1998) “Power Trouble: Performativity as Critical Theory,” Constellations,
5(4), 456–471.
Allen, Colin and Michael Trestman (2014) “Animal Consciousness,” Stanford Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy (Summer 2014 edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.
stanford.edu/archives/sum2014/entries/consciousness-animal/.
Allen, Garland (2005) “Mechanism, Vitalism and Organicism in Late Nineteenth and
Twentieth-Century Biology,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences, 36(2), 261–283.
Alter, Torin and Yujin Nagasawa (2012) “What Is Russellian Monism?” Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 19(9–10), 67–95.
Andersen, P. B., C. Emmeche, N. Finneman, and P. Christiansen, eds. (2000) Downward
Causation: Minds, Bodies, and Matter, Aarhus University Press.
Ankersmit, Frank (2005) Sublime Historical Experience, Stanford University Press.
Apel, Karl-Otto (1984) Understanding and Explanation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Archer, Margaret (1995) Realist Social Theory: The Morphogenetic Approach, Cam-
bridge University Press.
(2007) “The Ontological Status of Subjectivity,” in C. Lawson, J. Latsis, and N.
Martins, eds., Contributions to Social Ontology, London: Routledge, pp. 17–
31.
Arenhart, Jonas (2013) “Wither Away Individuals,” Synthese, 190(16), 3475–3494.
Arﬁ, Badredine (2005) “Resolving the Trust Predicament in IR: A Quantum Game-
Theoretic Approach,” Theory and Decision, 59(2), 127–174.
(2007) “Quantum Social Game Theory,” Physica A, 374(2), 794–820.
Arshavsky, Yuri (2006) “‘The Seven Sins’ of the Hebbian Synapse: Can the Hypothesis
of Synaptic Plasticity Explain Long-Term Memory Consolidation?” Progress in
Neurobiology, 80(3), 99–113.
Asano, Masanari, Irina Basieva, Andrei Khrennikov, Masanori Ohya, and Yoshiharu
Tanaka (2012) “Quantum-Like Dynamics of Decision-Making,” Physica A, 391(5),
2083–2099.
Asano, Masanari, Masanori Ohya, and Andrei Khrennikov (2011) “Quantum-Like
Model for Decision Making Process in Two Players Game,” Foundations of
Physics, 41(3), 538–548.
Astington, Janet Wilde and Eva Filippova (2005) “Language as the Route into Other
Minds,” in B. Malle and S. Hodges, eds., Other Minds: How Humans Bridge
the Divide between Self and Others, New York, NY: Guilford Press, pp. 209–
222.
Atmanspacher, Harald (2003) “Mind and Matter as Asymptotically Disjoint, Inequiv-
alent Representations with Broken Time-Reversal Symmetry,” Biosystems, 68(1),
19–30.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

296
Bibliography
(2011) “Quantum Approaches to Consciousness,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy (Summer 2011 edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/sum2011/entries/qt-consciousness/.
Atmanspacher, Harald and Thomas Filk (2014) “Non-Commutative Operations in Con-
sciousness Studies,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 21(3–4), 24–39.
Atmanspacher, Harald, Thomas Filk and Hartmann R¨omer (2004) “Quantum Zeno
Features of Bistable Perception:” Biological Cybernetics, 90(1), 33–40.
Atmanspacher, Harald and Hans Primas (2006) “Pauli’s Ideas on Mind and Matter in
the Context of Contemporary Science,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 13(3),
5–50.
Atmanspacher, Harald and Hartmann R¨omer (2012) “Order Effects in Sequential Mea-
surements of Non-Commuting Psychological Observables,” Journal of Mathemat-
ical Psychology, 56, 274–280.
Atmanspacher, Harald, Hartmann R¨omer, and Harald Walach (2002) “Weak Quantum
Theory: Complementarity and Entanglement in Physics and Beyond,” Foundations
of Physics, 32(3), 379–406.
Baars, Bernaard (2004) “Subjective Experience Is Probably not Limited to Humans,”
Consciousness and Cognition, 14(1), 7–21.
Baars, Bernard and David Edelman (2012) “Consciousness, Biology and Quantum
Hypotheses,” Physics of Life Reviews, 9(3), 285–294.
Baer, John, James Kaufman, and Roy Baumeister, eds. (2008) Are We Free? Psychology
and Free Will, Oxford University Press.
Baer, Wolfgang (2010) “The Physics of Consciousness,” Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 17(3–4), 165–191.
Bahrami, M. and A. Shaﬁee (2010) “Postponing the Past: An Operational Analysis of
Delayed-Choice Experiments,” Foundations of Physics, 40(1), 55–92.
Balaguer, Mark (2004) “A Coherent, Naturalistic, and Plausible Formulation of Liber-
tarian Free Will,” Nous, 38(3), 379–406.
(2009) “Why There Are No Good Arguments for Any Interesting Version of Deter-
minism,” Synthese, 168(1), 1–21.
(2010) Free Will as an Open Scientiﬁc Problem, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Balazs, Andras (2004) “Internal Measurement: Some Aspects of Quantum Theory in
Biology,” Physics Essays, 17(1), 80–94.
Ball, Philip (2011) “The Dawn of Quantum Biology,” Nature, 474, 272–274.
Baluska, Frantisek, Dieter Volkmann, and Peter Barlow (2004) “Eukaryotic Cells and
Their Cell Bodies: Cell Theory Revised,” Annals of Botany, 94(1), 9–32.
Banks, Erik (2010) “Neutral Monism Reconsidered,” Philosophical Psychology, 23(2),
173–187.
Barad, Karen (2003) “Posthumanist Performativity: How Matter Comes to Matter,”
Signs, 28(3), 801–831.
(2007) Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of
Matter and Meaning, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Barham, James (2008) “The Reality of Purpose and the Reform of Naturalism,”
Philosophia Naturalis, 44(1), 31–52.
(2012) “Normativity, Agency, and Life,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Bio-
logical and Biomedical Sciences, 43(1), 92–103.
Barlow, Peter (2008) “Reﬂections on ‘Plant Neurobiology,’” Biosystems, 92(2), 132–
147.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
297
Barnett, Michael and Raymond Duvall (2005) “Power in International Politics,” Inter-
national Organization, 59(1), 39–75.
Barrett, Jeffrey (1999) The Quantum Mechanics of Minds and Worlds, Oxford
University Press.
(2006) “A Quantum-Mechanical Argument for Mind–Body Dualism,” Erkenntnis,
65(1), 97–115.
Bartlett, Gary (2012) “Computational Theories of Conscious Experience: Between a
Rock and a Hard Place,” Erkenntnis, 76(2), 195–209.
Basile, Pierfrancesco (2006) “Rethinking Leibniz: Whitehead, Ward and the Idealistic
Legacy,” Process Studies, 35(2), 207–229.
(2010) “It Must Be True – But How Can it Be? Some Remarks on Panpsychism
and Mental Composition,” Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement, 67, 93–
112.
Baslow, Morris (2011) “Biosemiosis and the Cellular Basis of Mind,” Biosemiotics,
4(1), 39–53.
Bass, L. (1975) “A Quantum Mechanical Mind–Body Interaction,” Foundations of
Physics, 5(1), 159–172.
Baumeister, Roy, E. J. Masicampo, and Kathleen Vohs (2011) “Do Conscious Thoughts
Cause Behavior?” Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 331–361.
Beck, Friedrich and John Eccles (1992) “Quantum Aspects of Brain Activity and the
Role of Consciousness,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 89(23),
11357–11361.
(1998) “Quantum Processes in the Brain: A Scientiﬁc Basis of Consciousness,”
Cognitive Studies, 5(2), 95–109.
Becker, Christian and Reiner Manstetten (2004) “Nature as a You: Novalis’ Philosoph-
ical Thought and the Modern Ecological Crisis,” Environmental Values, 13(1),
101–118.
Becker, Theodore, ed. (1991) Quantum Politics: Applying Quantum Theory to Political
Phenomena, New York: Praeger.
Bedau, Mark (1997) “Weak Emergence,” Nous, 31, 375–399.
(1998) “Four Puzzles About Life,” Artiﬁcial Life, 4(2), 125–140.
Beim Graben, Peter and Harald Atmanspacher (2006) “Complementarity in Classical
Dynamical Systems,” Foundations of Physics, 36(2), 291–306.
Bekenstein, Jacob (2003) “Information in the Holographic Universe,” Scientiﬁc Ameri-
can, August, 59–65.
Belousek, Darrin (2003) “Non-Separability, Non-Supervenience, and Quantum Ontol-
ogy,” Philosophy of Science, 70(4), 791–811.
Benioff, Paul (2002) “Language Is Physical,” Quantum Information Processing, 1(6),
495–509.
Ben-Jacob, E., D. Coffey, and Alfred Tauber (2005) “Seeking the Foundations of Cog-
nition in Bacteria,” Physica A, 359(1), 495–524.
Bennett, Jane (2010) Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things, Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
Bennett, Max and Peter Hacker (2003) Philosophical Foundations of Neuroscience,
Oxford: Blackwell.
Bentley, Arthur (1941) “The Human Skin: Philosophy’s Last Line of Defence,” Philos-
ophy of Science, 8(1), 1–19.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

298
Bibliography
Benton, E. (1974) “Vitalism in Nineteenth-Century Science Thought,” Studies in History
and Philosophy of Science, 5(1), 17–48.
Berkovitz, Joseph (1998) “Aspects of Quantum Non-Locality I,” Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics, 29(2), 183–222.
(2008) “On Predictions in Retro-Causal Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics,”
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 39(4), 709–735.
(2014) “Action at a Distance in Quantum Mechanics,” Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Spring 2014 edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/spr2014/entries/qm-action-distance/.
Berman, Morris (1981) The Reenchantment of the World, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.
Bernecker, Sven (2004) “Memory and Externalism,” Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research, 69(3), 605–632.
Bertau, Marie-Cecile (2014a) “Exploring Language as the ‘In-Between,’” Theory and
Psychology, 24(4), 524–541.
(2014b) “On Displacement,” Theory and Psychology, 24(4), 442–458.
Bertelsen, Preben (2011) “Intentional Activity and Free Will as Core Concepts in
Criminal Law and Psychology,” Theory and Psychology, 22(1), 46–66.
Beyler, R. (1996) “Targeting the Organism: The Scientiﬁc and Cultural Context of
Pascual Jordan’s Quantum Biology, 1932–1947,” Isis, 87(2), 248–273.
Bhargava, Rajeev (1992) Individualism in Social Science, Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Bhaskar, Roy (1979) The Possibility of Naturalism, New York: Routledge.
(1982) “Emergence, Explanation, and Emancipation,” in P. Secord, ed., Explaining
Human Behavior, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, pp. 275–310.
(1986) Scientiﬁc Realism and Human Emancipation, London: Verso.
Bierman, Dick (2006) “Empirical Research on the Radical Subjective Solution of the
Measurement Problem: Does Time Get Its Direction through Conscious Obser-
vation?” in D. Sheehan, ed., Frontiers of Time, Retrocausation – Experiment and
Theory, Melville, NY: American Institute of Physics, pp. 238–259.
Bigaj, Tomasz (2012) “Ungrounded Dispositions in Quantum Mechanics,” Foundations
of Science, 17(3), 205–221.
Birch, Jonathan (2012) “Robust Processes and Teleological Language,” European Jour-
nal for Philosophy of Science, 2(3), 299–312.
Birksted-Breen, Dana (2003) “Time and the Apr`es-Coup,” The International Journal of
Psychoanalysis, 84(6), 1501–1515.
Bishop, Robert (2013) “Essay Review: Teleology at Work in the World?” Mind and
Matter, 11(2), 243–255.
Bitbol, Michel (2002) “Science as if Situation Mattered,” Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 1(2), 181–224.
(2007) “Ontology, Matter and Emergence,” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sci-
ences, 6(3), 293–307.
(2008) “Is Consciousness Primary?” NeuroQuantology, 6(1), 53–71.
(2011) “The Quantum Structure of Knowledge,” Axiomathes, 21(2), 357–371.
(2012) “Downward Causation without Foundations,” Synthese, 185(2), 233–255.
Bitbol, Michel, Pierre Kerszberg, and Jean Petitot, eds. (2009) Constituting Objectivity:
Transcendental Perspectives on Modern Physics, Berlin: Springer.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
299
Bitbol, Michel and Pier Luigi Luisi (2004) “Autopoiesis with or without Cogni-
tion: Deﬁning Life at Its Edge,” Journal of the Royal Society Interface, 1, 99–
107.
Bobro, Marc and Kenneth Clatterbaugh (1996) “Unpacking the Monad: Leibniz’ Theory
of Causality,” The Monist, 79(3), 408–425.
Bohl, Vivian and Nivedita Gangopadhyay (2014) “Theory of Mind and the Unobserv-
ability of Other Minds,” Philosophical Explorations, 17(2), 203–222.
Bohm, David (1951) Quantum Theory, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
(1980) Wholeness and the Implicate Order, London: Routledge.
(1990) “A New Theory of the Relation of Mind and Matter,” Philosophical Psychol-
ogy, 3(2), 271–286.
Bohm, David and B. J. Hiley (1993) The Undivided Universe, London: Routledge.
Bohr, Niels (1933) “Light and Life,” Nature, 131, 421–423 and 457–459.
(1937) “Causality and Complementarity,” Philosophy of Science, 4(3), 289–298.
(1948) “On the Notions of Causality and Complementarity,” Dialectica, 2, 312–319.
Boi, L. (2004) “Theories of Space-Time in Modern Physics,” Synthese, 139(3), 429–489.
Bokulich, Alisa (2012) “Distinguishing Explanatory from Nonexplanatory Fictions,”
Philosophy of Science, 79(5), 725–737.
Bolender, John (2001) “An Argument for Idealism,” Journal of Consciousness Studies,
8(4), 37–61.
Bordley, Robert and Joseph Kadane (1999) “Experiment-Dependent Priors in Psychol-
ogy and Physics,” Theory and Decision, 47(3), 213–227.
Bordonaro, Michael and Vasily Ogryzko (2013) “Quantum Biology at the Cellular
Level – Elements of the Research Program,” Biosystems, 112(1), 11–30.
Bortoft, Henri (1985) “Counterfeit and Authentic Wholes,” in D. Seamon and R. Muger-
auer, eds., Dwelling, Place and Environment, Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff Pub-
lishers, pp. 281–302.
Bouchard, Fr´ed´eric and Philippe Huneman, eds. (2013) From Groups to Individuals:
Evolution and Emerging Individuality, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bourdieu, Pierre (1990) The Logic of Practice, Stanford University Press.
Bourget, David and David Chalmers (2014) “What Do Philosophers Believe?” Philo-
sophical Studies, 170(3), 465–500.
Bousso, Raphael (2002) “The Holographic Principle,” Reviews in Modern Physics,
74(3), 825–874.
Bradley, Raymond (2000) “Agency and the Theory of Quantum Vacuum Interaction,”
World Futures, 55(3), 227–275.
Brainerd, Charles, Zheng Wang, and Valerie Reyna (2013) “Superposition of Episodic
Memories: Overdistribution and Quantum Models,” Topics in Cognitive Sciences,
5(4), 773–799.
Brandenburger, Adam (2010) “The Relationship between Quantum and Classical Cor-
relation in Games,” Games and Economic Behavior, 69(1), 175–183.
Brandt, Lewis (1973) “The Physics of the Physicist and the Physics of the Psychologist,”
International Journal of Psychology, 8(1), 61–72.
Bratman, Michael (1993) “Shared Intentions,” Ethics, 104(1), 97–113.
Braun, Kathrin (2012) “From the Body of Christ to Racial Homogeneity: Carl Schmitt’s
Mobilization of ‘Life’ against ‘the Spirit of Technicity,’” The European Legacy,
17(1), 1–17.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

300
Bibliography
Brewer, Bill (2007) “Perception and Its Objects,” Philosophical Studies, 132(1), 87–
97.
Brinkmann, Svend (2006) “Mental Life in the Space of Reasons,” Journal for the Theory
of Social Behaviour, 36(1), 1–16.
Brown, Robin and James Ladyman (2009) “Physicalism, Supervenience and the Fun-
damental Level,” The Philosophical Quarterly, 59, 20–38.
Bruza, Peter and Richard Cole (2006) “Quantum Logic of Semantic Space,”
arXiv:quant-ph/0612178v1.
Bruza, Peter, Kirsty Kitto, Douglas Nelson, and Cathy McEvoy (2009) “Is There Some-
thing Quantum-Like about the Human Mental Lexicon?” Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 53(5), 362–377.
Bub, Jeffrey (2000) “Indeterminacy and Entanglement: The Challenge of Quantum
Mechanics,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 51(4), 597–615.
Burge, Tyler (1979) “Individualism and the Mental,” in P. French, et al., eds., Midwest
Studies in Philosophy, vol. 4, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press,
pp. 73–121.
(1986) “Individualism and Psychology,” The Philosophical Review, 95(1), 3–45.
(2005) “Disjunctivism and Perceptual Psychology,” Philosophical Topics, 33(1),
1–78.
Burns, Jean (1999) “Volition and Physical Laws,” Journal of Consciousness Studies,
6(10), 27–47.
Burwick, Frederick and Paul Douglass, eds. (1992) The Crisis in Modernism: Bergson
and the Vitalist Controversy, Cambridge University Press.
Busemeyer, Jerome and Peter Bruza (2012) Quantum Models of Cognition and Decision,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Busemeyer, Jerome, Riccardo Franco, Emmanuel Pothos, and Jennifer Trueblood (2011)
“A Quantum Theoretical Explanation for Probability Judgment Errors,” Psycho-
logical Review, 118(2), 193–218.
Busemeyer, Jerome, Zheng Wang, and James Townsend (2006) “Quantum Dynamics of
Human Decision-Making,” Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 50(3), 220–241.
Buss, L. (1987) The Evolution of Individuality, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Butler, Judith (1990) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity, New
York: Routledge.
(1993) Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of ‘Sex,’ New York: Routledge.
Butterﬁeld, Jeremy (1995) “Quantum Theory and the Mind,” The Aristotelian Society,
Supplementary Volume LXIX, 112–158.
Buzan, Barry (1991) People, States, and Fear, Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2nd edition.
Callender, Craig and Robert Weingard (1997) “Trouble in Paradise? Problems for
Bohm’s Theory,” The Monist, 80(1), 24–43.
Camerer, Colin (2003) Behavioral Game Theory, Princeton University Press.
Campbell, Donald T. (1974) “‘Downward Causation’ in Hierarchically Organised Bio-
logical Systems,” in F. Ayala and T. Dobzhansky, eds., Studies in the Philosophy
of Biology, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, pp. 179–186.
Campbell, Richard (2010) “The Emergence of Action,” New Ideas in Psychology, 28(3),
283–295.
Campbell, Richard and Mark Bickhard (2011) “Physicalism, Emergence and Downward
Causation,” Axiomathes, 21(1), 33–56.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
301
ˇCapek, Miliˇc (1992) “Microphysical Indeterminacy and Freedom: Bergson and Peirce,”
in F. Burwick and P. Douglass, eds., The Crisis in Modernism: Bergson and the
Vitalist Controversy, Cambridge University Press, pp. 171–189.
Carlin, Laurence (2006) “Leibniz on Final Causes,” Journal of the History of Philosophy,
44(2), 217–233.
Carminati, G. Galli and F. Martin (2008) “Quantum Mechanics and the Psyche,” Physics
of Particles and Nuclei, 39(4), 560–577.
Carruthers, Peter (2007) “Invertebrate Minds,” The Journal of Ethics, 11(3), 275–297.
Cartwright, Nancy (1999) The Dappled World: A Study of the Boundaries of Science,
Cambridge University Press.
Castagnoli, Giuseppe (2009) “The Quantum Speed Up as Advanced Cognition of the
Solution,” International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 48(3), 857–873.
(2010) “Quantum One Go Computation and the Physical Computation Level of
Biological Information Processing,” International Journal of Theoretical Physics,
49(2), 304–315.
Castellani, Elena, ed. (1998) Interpreting Bodies: Classical and Quantum Objects in
Modern Physics, Princeton University Press.
(2002) “Reductionism, Emergence, and Effective Field Theories,” Studies in History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 33(2), 251–267.
Chalmers, David (1995) “Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness,” Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 2(3), 200–219.
(1996) The Conscious Mind, Oxford University Press.
(1997) “Moving Forward on the Problem of Consciousness,” Journal of Conscious-
ness Studies, 4(1), 3–46.
(2010) The Character of Consciousness, Oxford University Press.
Cheah, Pheng (2003) Spectral Nationality, New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Chen, Kay-Yut and Tad Hogg (2006) “How Well Do People Play a Quantum Prisoner’s
Dilemma?” Quantum Information Processing, 5(1), 43–67.
Chiereghin, Franco (2011) “Paradoxes of the Notion of Antedating,” Journal of Con-
sciousness Studies, 18(3–4), 24–43.
Chomsky, Noam (1995) “Language and Nature,” Mind, 104, 1–61.
Churchland, Patricia Smith (1981) “On the Alleged Backwards Referral of Experiences
and its Relevance to the Mind–Body Problem,” Philosophy of Science, 48(2),
165–181.
Churchland, Paul (1988) Matter and Consciousness, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, Andy (2009) “Spreading the Joy? Why the Machinery of Consciousness is
(Probably) Still in the Head,” Mind, 118, 963–993.
Clark, Andy and David Chalmers (1998) “The Extended Mind,” Analysis, 58(1), 7–19.
Clark, Kevin (2010) “Bose-Einstein Condensates Form in Heuristics Learned by Ciliates
Deciding to Signal ‘Social’ Commitments,” Biosystems, 99(3), 167–178.
Clarke, Chris (2007) “The Role of Quantum Physics in the Theory of Subjective Con-
sciousness,” Mind and Matter, 5(1), 45–81.
Clarke, Peter (2014) “Neuroscience, Quantum Indeterminism and the Cartesian Soul,”
Brain and Cognition, 84(1), 109–117.
Clarke, Randolph and Capes, Justin (2014) “Incompatibilist (Nondeterministic) The-
ories of Free Will,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2014 edi-
tion), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/
incompatibilism-theories/.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

302
Bibliography
Clayton, Philip (1997) “Inference to the Best Explanation,” Zygon, 32(3), 377–
391.
(2006) “Conceptual Foundations of Emergence Theory,” in P. Clayton and P. Davies,
eds., The Re-Emergence of Emergence, Oxford University Press, pp. 1–31.
Cleland, Carol (2012) “Life without Deﬁnitions,” Synthese, 185(1), 125–144.
(2013) “Is a General Theory of Life Possible?” Biological Theory, 7(4), 368–379.
Cleland, Carol and Christopher Chyba (2002) “Deﬁning ‘Life’,” Origins of Life and
Evolution of the Biosphere, 32(4), 387–393.
Cochran, Andrew (1971) “Relationships between Quantum Physics and Biology,” Foun-
dations of Physics, 1(3), 235–250.
Cohen, I. Bernard (1994) “The Scientiﬁc Revolution and the Social Sciences,” in I. B.
Cohen, ed., The Natural Sciences and the Social Sciences, Boston, MA: Kluwer,
pp. 153–203.
Cole, Andrew (2013) “The Call of Things: A Critique of Object-Oriented Ontologies,”
the minnesota review, 80, 106–118.
Coleman, Sam (2012) “Mental Chemistry: Combination for Panpsychists,” dialectica,
66(1), 137–166.
(2014) “The Real Combination Problem: Panpsychism, Micro-Subjects, and Emer-
gence,” Erkenntnis, 79(1), 19–44.
Compton, Arthur (1935) The Freedom of Man, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Conrad, Michael (1996) “Cross-Scale Information Processing in Evolution, Develop-
ment and Intelligence,” Biosystems, 38(2–3), 97–109.
Contessa, Gabriele (2010) “Scientiﬁc Models and Fictional Objects,” Synthese, 172(2),
215–229.
Conway, John and Simon Kochen (2006) “The Free Will Theorem,” Foundations of
Physics, 36(10), 1441–1473.
Coole, Diane and Samantha Frost (2010a) “Introducing the New Materialisms,” in
Coole and Frost, eds., New Materialisms, Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
pp. 1–43.
eds. (2010b) New Materialisms: Ontology, Agency, and Politics, Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
Cooper, W. Grant (2009) “Evidence for Transcriptase Quantum Processing Implies
Entanglement and Decoherence of Superposition Proton States,” Biosystems,
97(2), 73–89.
Cornejo, Carlos (2004) “Who Says What the Words Say? The Problem of Linguistic
Meaning in Psychology,” Theory and Psychology, 14(1), 5–28.
(2008) “Intersubjectivity as Co-Phenomenology: From the Holism of Meaning to
the Being-in-the-world-with-others,” Integrative Psychological and Behavioral
Science, 42(2), 171–178.
Corradini, Antonella and Timothy O’Connor, eds. (2010) Emergence in Science and
Philosophy, London: Routledge.
Costa de Beauregard, Olivier (2000) “Efﬁcient and Final Cause as CPT Reciprocals,” in
E. Agazzi and M. Pauri, eds., The Reality of the Unobservable, Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, pp. 283–291.
Coulter, Jeff (2001) “Human Practices and the Observability of the ‘Macro-Social,’”
in T. Schatzki, et al., eds., The Practice Turn in Contemporary Social Theory,
London: Routledge, pp. 29–41.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
303
Craddock, Travis and Jack Tuszynski (2010) “A Critical Assessment of the Information
Processing Capabilities of Neuronal Microtubules Using Coherent Excitations,”
Journal of Biological Physics, 36(1), 53–70.
Cramer, John (1986) “The Transactional Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics,”
Reviews of Modern Physics, 58(3), 647–687.
(1988) “An Overview of the Transactional Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics,”
International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 27(2), 227–250.
Crane, Tim (2014) “The Problem of Perception,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Winter 2014 edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
win2014/entries/perception-problem/.
Crane, Tim and D. H. Mellor (1990) “There is No Question of Physicalism,” Mind, 99,
185–206.
Craver, Carl and William Bechtel (2007) “Top-Down Causation without Top-Down
Causes,” Biology and Philosophy, 22(4), 547–563.
Crook, Seth and Carl Gillett (2001) “Why Physics Alone Cannot Deﬁne the ‘Physical,’”
Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 31(3), 333–360.
Cudd, Ann (1993) “Game Theory and the History of Ideas about Rationality,” Economics
and Philosophy, 9(1), 101–133.
Cummins, Robert, Martin Roth, and Ian Harmon (2014) “Why It Doesn’t Matter to
Metaphysics What Mary Learns,” Philosophical Studies, 167(3), 541–555.
Cunningham, Andrew (2007) “Hume’s Vitalism and Its Implications,” British Journal
for the History of Philosophy, 15(1), 59–73.
Currie, Gregory (1984) “Individualism and Global Supervenience,” British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science, 35(4), 345–358.
Cushing, James (1994) Quantum Mechanics: Historical Contingency and the Copen-
hagen Hegemony, University of Chicago Press.
Cvrˇckov´a, Fatima, Helena Lipavsk´a, and Viktor ˇZ´arsk´y (2009) “Plant Intelligence: Why,
Why Not or Where?” Plant Signaling and Behavior, 4(5), 394–399.
Dalla Chiara, Maria Luisa, Roberto Giuntini, and Roberto Leporini (2006) “Holistic
Quantum Computational Semantics and Gestalt-Thinking,” in A. Bassi, et al.,
eds., Quantum Mechanics, Melville, NY:American Institute of Physics, pp. 86–
100.
(2011) “Holism, Ambiguity and Approximation in the Logics of Quantum Compu-
tation: A Survey,” International Journal of General Systems, 40(1), 85–98.
Danto, Arthur (1965) Analytical Philosophy of History, Cambridge University Press.
Darby, George (2012) “Relational Holism and Humean Supervenience,” British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 63(4), 773–788.
Davidson, Donald (1963) “Actions, Reasons, and Causes,” The Journal of Philosophy,
60(7), 685–700.
Davies, Paul C. W. (2004) “Does Quantum Mechanics Play a Non-Trivial Role in Life?”
Biosystems, 78(1–3), 69–79.
(2006) “The Physics of Downward Causation,” in P. Clayton and P. Davies, eds., The
Re-Emergence of Emergence, Oxford University Press, pp. 35–52.
Davies, Kim (2014) “Emergence from What? A Transcendental Understanding of the
Place of Consciousness,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 21(5–6), 10–32.
De Barros, J. Acacio (2012) “Quantum-Like Model of Behavioral Response Computa-
tion Using Neural Oscillators,” Biosystems, 110(3), 171–182.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

304
Bibliography
De Barros, J. Acacio, and Patrick Suppes (2009) “Quantum Mechanics, Interference,
and the Brain,” Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 53(5), 306–313.
De Chardin, Teilhard (1959) The Phenomenon of Man, New York, NY: Harper & Row.
De Jaegher, Hanne (2009) “Social Understanding Through Direct Perception? Yes, by
Interacting,” Consciousness and Cognition, 18, 535–542.
DeLanda, Manuel (2002) Intensive Science and Virtual Philosophy, London: Conti-
nuum.
Dellis, A. T. and I. K. Kominis (2012) “The Quantum Zeno Effect Immunizes the Avian
Compass against the Deleterious Effects of Exchange and Dipolar Interactions,”
Biosystems, 107(3), 153–157.
Dennett, Daniel (1971) “Intentional Systems,” The Journal of Philosophy, 68(4), 87–
106.
(1987) The Intentional Stance, Cambridge: MIT Press.
(1991) Consciousness Explained, Boston, MA: Little, Brown.
(1996) “Facing Backwards on the Problem of Consciousness,” Journal of Conscious-
ness Studies, 3(1), 4–6.
Denton, Michael, Govindasamy Kumaramanickavel, and Michael Legge (2013) “Cells
as Irreducible Wholes: The Failure of Mechanism and the Possibility of an Organi-
cist Revival,” Biology and Philosophy, 28(1), 31–52.
De Regt, Henk and Dennis Dieks (2005) “A Contextual Approach to Scientiﬁc Under-
standing,” Synthese, 144(1), 137–170.
DeRose, Keith (2009) The Case for Contextualism, Oxford University Press.
D’Espagnat, Bernard (1995) Veiled Reality: An Analysis of Present-Day Quantum
Mechanical Concepts, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
(2011) “Quantum Physics and Reality,” Foundations of Physics, 41(11), 1703–1716.
De Quincey, Christian (2002) Radical Nature: Rediscovering the Soul of Matter, Mont-
pelier, VT: Invisible Cities Press.
De Souza Vieira, Fabiano and Charbel Ni˜no El-Hani (2008) “Emergence and Downward
Determination in the Natural Sciences,” Cybernetics and Human Knowing, 15(3–
4), 101–134.
De Uriarte, Brian (1990) “On the Free Will of Rational Agents in Neoclassical Eco-
nomics,” Journal of Post Keynesian Economics, 12(4), 605–617.
Deutsch, David (1999) “Quantum Theory of Probability and Decisions,” Proceedings
of the Royal Society, A455, 3129–3197.
Dewey, John and Arthur Bentley (1949) Knowing and the Known, Boston, MA: Beacon
Press.
De Witt, Bryce and N. Graham, eds. (1973) The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quan-
tum Mechanics, Princeton University Press.
Dharamsi, Karim (2011) “Re-Enacting in the Second Person,” Journal of the Philosophy
of History, 5(2), 163–178.
D’Hombres, Emmanuel and Soraya Mehdaoui (2012) “‘On What Condition is the
Equation Organism – Society Valid? Cell Theory and Organicist Sociology in the
Works of Alfred Espinas (1870s–80s),” History of the Human Sciences, 25(1),
32–51.
Dijksterhuis, Ap and Henk Aarts (2010) “Goals, Attention, and (Un)Consciousness,”
Annual Review of Psychology, 61, 467–490.
Di Paolo, Ezequiel (2005) “Autopoiesis, Adaptivity, Teleology, Agency,” Phenomenol-
ogy and the Cognitive Sciences, 4(4), 429–452.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
305
Dobbs, H. A. C. (1951) “The Relation between the Time of Psychology and the Time
of Physics (Parts I and II),” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 2(6 and
7), 122–141 and 177–192.
Domondon, Andrew (2006) “Bringing Physics to Bear on the Phenomenon of Life: The
Divergent Positions of Bohr, Delbr¨uck, and Schr¨odinger,” Studies in History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 37(3), 433–458.
Dorato, Mauro and Michael Esfeld (2010) “GRW as an Ontology of Dispositions,”
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 41(1), 41–49.
Dorato, Mauro and Matteo Morganti (2013) “Grades of Individuality: A Pluralistic View
of Identity in Quantum Mechanics and in the Sciences,” Philosophical Studies,
163(3), 591–610.
D’Oro, Giuseppina and Constantine Sandis (2013) “From Anti-Causalism to Causalism
and Back: A History of the Reasons/Causes Debate,” in D’Oro and Sandis, eds.,
Reasons and Causes, New York, NY: Palgrave MacMillan, pp. 7–48.
Dorsey, Jonathan (2011) “On the Supposed Limits of Physicalist Theories of Mind,”
Philosophical Studies, 155(2), 207–225.
Dowe, Phil (1997) “A Defense of Backwards in Time Causation Models in Quantum
Mechanics,” Synthese, 112(2), 233–246.
Dray, W. H. (1960) “Historical Causation and Human Free Will,” University of Toronto
Quarterly, 29(3), 357–369.
Drechsler, Wolfgang (2009) “Political Semiotics,” Semiotica, 173(1–4), 73–97.
Dugi´c, Miroljub, Milan ´Cirkovi´c, and Dejan Rakovi´c (2002) “On a Possible Physical
Metatheory of Consciousness,” Open Systems and Information Dynamics, 9(2),
153–166.
Dupr´e, John (1993) The Disorder of Things, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Eddington, Arthur Stanley (1928) The Nature of the Physical World, New York:
Macmillan.
Edwards, Jonathan (2005) “Is Consciousness Only a Property of Individual Cells?”
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 12(4–5), 60–76.
Egg, Matthias (2013) “Delayed-Choice Experiments and the Metaphysics of Entangle-
ment,” Foundations of Physics, 43(9), 1124–1135.
Ehlers, J¨urgen (1997) “Concepts of Time in Classical Physics,” in H. Atmanspacher and
E. Ruhnau, eds., Time, Temporality, Now, Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp. 191–200.
Einstein, Albert, Boris Podolsky, and N. Rosen (1935) “Can Quantum-Mechanical
Descriptions of Physical Reality be Considered Complete?,” Physical Review,
47(10), 777–780.
Eisert, Jens, Martin Wilkens, and Maciej Lewenstein (1999) “Quantum Games and
Quantum Strategies,” Physical Review Letters, 83(15), 3077–3080.
Elder-Vass, Dave (2007) “For Emergence: Reﬁning Archer’s Account of Social Struc-
ture,” Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 37(1), 25–44.
(2010a) The Causal Power of Social Structure, Cambridge University Press.
(2010b) “The Causal Power of Discourse,” Journal for the Theory of Social
Behaviour, 41(2), 143–160.
El-Hani, Charbel Ni˜no and Claus Emmeche (2000) “On Some Theoretical Grounds for
an Organism-Centered Biology: Property Emergence, Supervenience, and Down-
ward Causation,” Theory in Biosciences, 119(3–4), 234–275.
El-Khoury, Ann (2015) “Alternative Ways of Knowing,” Chapter 4 in her Globalization
Development, and Social Justice, Oxford: Routledge, forthcoming.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

306
Bibliography
Elliott, Kevin and Daniel McKaughan (2014) “Nonepistemic Values and the Multiple
Goals of Science,” Philosophy of Science, 81(1), 1–21.
Elsasser, Walter (1951) “Quantum Mechanics, Amplifying Processes, and Living Mat-
ter,” Philosophy of Science, 18(4), 300–326.
(1987) Reﬂections on a Theory of Organisms: Holism in Biology, Baltimore, MD:
The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Elster, Jon (1983) Explaining Technical Change, Cambridge University Press.
Emirbayer, Mustafa (1997) “Manifesto for a Relational Sociology,” American Journal
of Sociology, 103(2), 281–317.
Emmeche, Claus, Simo Koppe and Frederik Stjernfelt (2000) “Levels, Emergence, and
Three Versions of Downward Causation,” in P. Andersen, et al., eds., Downward
Causation: Minds, Bodies and Matter, Aarhus University Press, pp. 13–34.
Ephraim, Laura (2013) “Beyond the Two-Sciences Settlement: Giambattista Vico’s
Critique of the Nature-Politics Opposition,” Political Theory, 41(5), 710–737.
Epstein, Brian (2009) “Ontological Individualism Reconsidered,” Synthese, 166(1),
187–213.
Esfeld, Michael (1998) “Holism and Analytic Philosophy,” Mind, 107, 365–380.
(1999) “Wigner’s View of Physical Reality,” Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics, 30(1), 145–154.
(2000) “Is Quantum Indeterminism Relevant to Free Will?” Philosophia Naturalis,
37, 177–187.
(2001) Holism in Philosophy of Mind and Philosophy of Physics, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
(2004) “Quantum Entanglement and a Metaphysics of Relations,” Studies in History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 35(4), 625–641.
(2007) “Mental Causation and the Metaphysics of Causation,” Erkenntnis, 67, 207–
220.
Fahrbach, Ludwig (2005) “Understanding Brute Facts,” Synthese, 145(3), 449–466.
Farr, Robert (1997) “The Signiﬁcance of the Skin as a Natural Boundary in the Sub-
Division of Psychology,” Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 27(2/3),
305–323.
Feinberg, Gerald, Shaughan Lavine, and David Albert (1992) “Knowledge of the Past
and Future,” The Journal of Philosophy, 89(12), 607–642.
Feinberg, Todd (2012) “Neuroontology, Neurobiological Naturalism, and Conscious-
ness,” Physics of Life Reviews, 9(1), 13–34.
Fellingham, John and Doug Schroeder (2006) “Quantum Information and Accounting,”
Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, 23, 33–53.
Fels, Daniel (2012) “Analogy between Quantum and Cell Relations,” Axiomathes, 22(4),
509–520.
Ferrero, M., V. Gomez Pin, D. Salgado, and J. L. Sanchez-Gomez (2013) “A Further
Review of the Incompatibility between Classical Principles and Quantum Postu-
lates,” Foundations of Science, 18(1), 125–138.
Ferretti, Francesco and Erica Cosentino (2013) “Time, Language and Flexibility of the
Mind,” Philosophical Psychology, 26(1), 24–46.
Filk, Thomas (2013) “Temporal Non-locality,” Foundations of Physics, 43(4), 533–47.
Filk, Thomas and Albrecht von M¨uller (2009) “Quantum Physics and Consciousness:
The Quest for a Common Conceptual Foundation,” Mind and Matter, 7(1), 59–
79.
Fine, Arthur (1993) “Fictionalism,” Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 18, 1–18.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
307
Fischer, Joachim (2009) “Exploring the Core Identity of Philosophical Anthropology
through the Works of Max Scheler, Helmuth Plessner, and Arnold Gehlen,” Iris,
1(1), 153–170.
Fitch, W. Tecumseh (2008) “Nano-intentionality: A Defense of Intrinsic Intentionality,”
Biology and Philosophy, 23(2), 157–177.
Flanagan, Brian (2001) “Are Perceptual Fields Quantum Fields?” Informac¸˜ao e
Cognic¸˜ao, 3(1), 14–41.
(2007) “Multi-Scaling, Quantum Theory, and the Foundations of Perception,” Neuro-
Quantology, 4(1), 404–427.
Fodor, J. A. (1974) “Special Sciences (Or: The Disunity of Science as a Working
Hypothesis),” Synthese, 28(2), 97–115.
Fodor, Jerry (2000) The Mind Doesn’t Work That Way, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fohn, Adeline and Susann Heenen-Wolff (2011) “The Destiny of an Unacknowledged
Trauma,” The International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 92(1), 5–20.
Ford, Alan and F. David Peat (1988) “The Role of Language in Science,” Foundations
of Physics, 18(12), 1233–1242.
Forsdyke, Donald (2009) “Samuel Butler and Human Long Term Memory: Is the
Cupboard Bare?” Journal of Theoretical Biology, 258(1), 156–164.
Fowler, Carol (1986) “An Event Approach to the Study of Speech Perception from a
Direct-Realist Perspective,” Journal of Phonetics, 14(1), 3–28.
(1996) “Listeners Do Hear Sounds, not Tongues,” Journal of the Acoustical Society
of America, 99(3), 1730–1741.
Fox Keller, Evelyn (2011) “Towards a Science of Informed Matter,” Studies in History
and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 42(2), 174–179.
Foxwall, Gordon (2007) “Intentional Behaviorism,” Behavior and Philosophy, 35, 1–55.
(2008) “Intentional Behaviorism Revisited,” Behavior and Philosophy, 36, 113–155.
Francescotti, Robert (2007) “Emergence,” Erkenntnis, 67, 47–63.
Franck, Georg (2004) “Mental Presence and the Temporal Present,” in G. Globus, K.
Pribram, and G. Vitiello, eds., Brain and Being, Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
pp. 47–68.
(2008) “Presence and Reality: An Option to Specify Panpsychism?” Mind and Matter,
6(1), 123–140.
Franco, Riccardo (2009) “The Conjunction Fallacy and Interference Effects,” Journal
of Mathematical Psychology, 53(5), 415–422.
Franc¸ois, Arnaud (2007) “Life and Will in Nietzsche and Bergson,” SubStance, 36(3),
100–114.
Frank, Manfred (2002) “Self-Consciousness and Self-Knowledge: On Some Difﬁculties
with the Reduction of Subjectivity,” Constellations, 9(3), 390–408.
Frankfurt, Harry (1971) “Freedom of the Will and the Concept of a Person,” The Journal
of Philosophy, 68(1), 5–20.
Freeman, Walter and Giuseppe Vitiello (2006) “Nonlinear Brain Dynamics as Macro-
scopic Manifestation of Underlying Many-Body Field Dynamics,” Physics of Life
Reviews, 3, 93–118.
French, Steven (1998) “On the Withering Away of Physical Objects,” in E. Castellani,
ed., Interpreting Bodies, Princeton University Press, pp. 93–113.
(2002) “A Phenomenological Solution to the Measurement Problem? Husserl and
the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics,” Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics, 33(3), 467–491.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

308
Bibliography
French, Steven and James Ladyman (2003) “Remodelling Structural Realism: Quantum
Physics and the Metaphysics of Structure,” Synthese, 136(1), 31–56.
Freudenburg, William, Scott Frickel and Robert Gramling (1995) “Beyond the Nature/
Society Divide: Learning to Think About a Mountain,” Sociological Forum, 10(3),
361–392.
Freundlieb, Dieter (2000) “Why Subjectivity Matters: Critical Theory and the Philoso-
phy of the Subject,” Critical Horizons, 1(2), 229–245.
(2002) “The Return to Subjectivity as a Challenge to Critical Theory,” Idealistic
Studies, 32(2), 171–189.
Friederich, Simon (2011) “How to Spell Out the Epistemic Conception of Quantum
States,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 42(3), 149–157.
(2013) “In Defence of Non-Ontic Accounts of Quantum States,” Studies in History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 44(2), 77–92.
Friedman, Milton (1953) “The Methodology of Positive Economics,” in Friedman,
Essays in Positive Economics, University of Chicago Press, pp. 3–34.
Friedman, Norman (1997) The Hidden Domain: Home of the Quantum Wave Function,
Nature’s Creative Source, Eugene, OR: Woodbridge Group.
Frisch, Mathias (2010) “Causes, Counterfactuals, and Non-Locality,” Australasian Jour-
nal of Philosophy, 88(4), 655–672.
Fr¨ohlich, Herbert (1968) “Long-Range Coherence and Energy Storage in Biological
Systems,” International Journal of Quantum Chemistry, 2(5), 641–649.
Fry, Iris (2012) “Is Science Metaphysically Neutral?” Studies in History and Philosophy
of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 43(3), 665–673.
Fuchs,
Christopher
and
Asher
Peres
(2000)
“Quantum
Theory
Needs
No
‘Interpretation,’” Physics Today, March, 70–71.
Fuchs, Christopher and R¨udiger Schack (2014) “Quantum Measurement and the Paulian
Idea,” in H. Atmanspacher and C. Fuchs, eds., The Pauli-Jung Conjecture, Exeter:
Imprint Academic, pp. 93–107.
Fuchs, Thomas and Hanne De Jaegher (2009) “Enactive Intersubjectivity: Participa-
tory Sense-Making and Mutual Incorporation,” Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, 8(4), 465–486.
Fusaroli, Riccardo, Nivedita Gangopadhyay, and Kristian Tyl´en (2014) “The Dialogi-
cally Extended Mind: Language as Skilful Intersubjective Engagement,” Cognitive
Systems Research, 29–30, 31–39.
Gabora, Liane (2002) “Amplifying Phenomenal Information,” Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 9(8), 3–29.
Gabora, Liane and Diederik Aerts (2002) “Contextualizing Concepts Using a Mathe-
matical Generalization of the Quantum Formalism,” Journal of Experimental and
Theoretical Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 14, 327–358.
Gabora, Liane, Eleanor Rosch, and Diederik Aerts (2008) “Toward an Ecological Theory
of Concepts,” Ecological Psychology, 20(1), 84–116.
Gabora, Liane, Eric Scott, and Stuart Kauffman (2013) “A Quantum Model of Exapta-
tion: Incorporating Potentiality into Evolutionary Theory,” Progress in Biophysics
and Molecular Biology, 113(1), 108–116.
Gallagher, Shaun (2008a) “Inference or Interaction: Social Cognition without Precur-
sors,” Philosophical Explorations, 11(3), 163–174.
(2008b) “Direct Perception in the Intersubjective Context,” Consciousness and Cog-
nition, 17(2), 535–543.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
309
Gallagher, Shaun and Somogy Varga (2014) “Social Constraints on the Direct Perception
of Emotions and Intentions,” Topoi, 33(1), 185–199.
Gallese, Vittorio (2008) “Mirror Neurons and the Social Nature of Language,” Social
Neuroscience, 3(3–4), 317–333.
Gallese, Vittorio and Alvin Goldman (1998) “Mirror Neurons and the Simulation Theory
of Mindreading,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2, 493–501.
Gamez, David (2008) “Progress in Machine Consciousness,” Consciousness and Cog-
nition, 17(3), 887–910.
Gantt, Edwin and Richard Williams (2014) “Psychology and the Legacy of Newtonian-
ism,” Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology, 34(2), 83–100.
Gao, Shan (2008) “A Quantum Theory of Consciousness,” Minds and Machines, 18(1),
39–52.
(2011) “Meaning of the Wave Function,” International Journal of Quantum Chem-
istry, 111(15), 4124–4138.
(2013) “A Quantum Physical Argument for Panpsychism,” Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 20(1–2), 59–70.
Garrett, Brian (2006) “What the History of Vitalism Teaches Us about Consciousness
and the ‘Hard Problem,’” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 72(3),
576–588.
(2013) “Vitalism versus Emergent Materialism,” in S. Normandin and C. T. Wolfe,
eds., Vitalism and the Scientiﬁc Image in Post-Enlightenment Life Science, 1800–
2010, Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp. 127–154.
Gell, Alfred (1992) The Anthropology of Time, Oxford: Berg.
Georgiev, Danko (2013) “Quantum No-Go Theorems and Consciousness,” Axiomathes,
23(4), 683–695.
Germine, Mark (2008) “The Holographic Principle of Mind and the Evolution of Con-
sciousness,” World Futures, 64, 151–178.
Gerrans, Philip and David Sander (2014) “Feeling the Future: Prospects for a Theory
of Implicit Prospection,” Biology and Philosophy, 29(5), 699–710.
Ghirardi, G. C., Alberto Rimini, and Tullio Weber (1986) “Uniﬁed Dynamics for Micro-
scopic and Macroscopic Systems,” Physical Review D, 34, 470–491.
Ghirardi, Giancarlo (2002) “Making Quantum Theory Compatible with Realism,” Foun-
dations of Science, 7(1–2), 11–47.
Gibson, James (1979) The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception, Boston, MA:
Houghton Mifﬂin.
Giddens, Anthony (1979) Central Problems in Social Theory, Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press.
(1984) The Constitution of Society, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Giere, Ronald (2009) “Why Scientiﬁc Models Should Not Be Regarded as Works of
Fiction,” in M. Suarez, ed., Fictions in Science, London: Routledge, pp. 248–258.
Gigerenzer, Gerd and Wolfgang Gaissmaier (2011) “Heuristic Decision Making,”
Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 451–482.
Gilbert, Margaret (1989) On Social Facts, Princeton University Press.
Gilbert, Scott, Jan Sapp, and Alfred Tauber (2012) “A Symbiotic View of Life: We
Have Never Been Individuals,” The Quarterly Review of Biology, 87(4), 325–
340.
Gilbert, Scott and Sahotra Sarkar (2000) “Embracing Complexity: Organicism for the
21st Century,” Developmental Dynamics, 219(1), 1–9.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

310
Bibliography
Gillett, Grant (1989) “Perception and Neuroscience,” British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science, 40(1), 83–103.
Glass, David (2012) “Inference to the Best Explanation: Does It Track Truth?” Synthese,
185(3), 411–427.
Glimcher, Paul (2005) “Indeterminacy in Brain and Behavior,” Annual Review of Psy-
chology, 56, 25–56.
Globus, Gordon (1976) “Mind, Structure, and Contradiction,” in G. Globus, G. Maxwell,
and I. Savodnik, eds., Consciousness and the Brain, New York: Plenum Press,
pp. 271–293.
(1998) “Self, Cognition, Qualia and World in Quantum Brain Dynamics,” Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 5(1), 34–52.
Glymour, Bruce, Marcelo Sabates, and Andrew Wayne (2001) “Quantum Java: The
Upwards Percolation of Quantum Indeterminacy,” Philosophical Studies, 103(3),
271–283.
Godfrey-Smith, Peter (2009) “Models and Fictions in Science,” Philosophical Studies,
143(1), 101–116.
G¨ocke, Benedikt (2009) “What is Physicalism?” Ratio, 22(3), 291–307.
ed. (2012) After Physicalism, South Bend, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Goff, Allan (2006) “Quantum Tic-Tac-Toe: A Teaching Metaphor for Superposition in
Quantum Mechanics,” American Journal of Physics, 74(11), 962–973.
Goff, Philip (2006) “Experiences Don’t Sum,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 13(10–
11), 53–61.
(2009) “Why Panpsychism Doesn’t Help Us Explain Consciousness,” dialectica,
63(3), 289–311.
G¨ok, Selvi and Erdinc¸ Sayan (2012) “A Philosophical Assessment of Computational
Models of Consciousness,” Cognitive Systems Research, 17–18, 49–62.
Goldstein, Sheldon (1996) “Review Essay: Bohmian Mechanics and the Quantum Rev-
olution,” Synthese, 107(1), 145–165.
Gomes, Anil (2011) “Is There a Problem of Other Minds?” Proceedings of the Aris-
totelian Society, 111(3), 353–373.
Gotthelf, Allan (1987) “Aristotle’s Conception of Final Causality,” in A. Gotthelf and
J. Lennox, eds., Philosophical Issues in Aristotle’s Biology, Cambridge University
Press, pp. 204–242.
Grandy, David (2001) “The Otherness of Light: Einstein and Levinas,” Postmodern
Culture, 12(1), 1–20.
(2002) “Light as a Solution to Puzzles about Light,” Journal for General Philosophy
of Science, 33(2), 369–379.
(2009) The Speed of Light, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
(2010) Everyday Quantum Reality, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
(2012) “Gibson’s Ambient Light and Light Speed Constancy,” Philosophical Psy-
chology, 25(4), 539–554.
Greco, Monica (2005) “On the Vitality of Vitalism,” Theory, Culture and Society, 22(1),
15–27.
Gregory, Brad (2008) “No Room for God? History, Science, Metaphysics, and the Study
of Religion,” History and Theory, 47(4), 495–519.
Grethlein, Jonas (2010) “Experientiality and ‘Narrative Reference,’” History and The-
ory, 49(3), 315–335.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
311
Greve, Jens (2012) “Emergence in Sociology: A Critique of Nonreductive Individual-
ism,” Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 42(2), 188–223.
Grifﬁn, David Ray (1998) Unsnarling the World-Knot: Consciousness, Freedom, and
the Mind–Body Problem, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Grifﬁths, Paul (2009) “In What Sense Does ‘Nothing Make Sense Except in the Light
of Evolution’?” Acta Biotheoretica, 57, 11–32.
Grimm, Stephen (2006) “Is Understanding a Species of Knowledge?” British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 57(3), 515–535.
Grove, Peter (2002) “Can the Past Be Changed?” Foundations of Physics, 32(4), 567–
587.
Grush, Rick and Patricia Smith Churchland (1995) “Gaps in Penrose’s Toilings,” Journal
of Consciousness Studies, 2(1), 10–29.
Guala, Francesco (2000) “Artefacts in Experimental Economics: Preference Rever-
sals and the Becker-DeGroot-Marschak Mechanism,” Economics and Philosophy,
16(1), 47–75.
Guo, Hong, Juheng Zhang, and Gary Koehler (2008) “A Survey of Quantum Games,”
Decision Support Systems, 46(1), 318–332.
Gustafson, Don (2007) “Neurosciences of Action and Noncausal Theories,” Philosoph-
ical Psychology, 20(3), 367–374.
Gustafsson, Martin (2010) “Seeing the Facts and Saying What You Like: Retroactive
Redescription and Indeterminacy in the Past,” Journal of the Philosophy of History,
4(3–4), 296–327.
G¨uzeldere, G¨uven (1997) “The Many Faces of Consciousness: A Field Guide,” in N.
Block, et al., eds., The Nature of Consciousness, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
pp. 1–67.
Haber, Matt (2013) “Colonies Are Individuals: Revisiting the Superorganism Revival,”
in F. Bouchard and P. Huneman, eds., From Groups to Individuals, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, pp. 195–217.
Habermas, J¨urgen (2002) “A Conversation about God and World,” in E. Mendietta, ed.,
Religion and Rationality, Cambridge: Polity Press, pp. 147–167.
(2007) “The Language Game of Responsible Agency and the Problem of Free Will,”
Philosophical Explorations, 10(1), 13–50.
Hacking, Ian (1995) Rewriting the Soul: Multiple Personality and the Sciences of
Memory, Princeton University Press.
Hagan, S., S. Hameroff, and J. Tuszynski (2002) “Quantum Computation in Brain
Microtubules: Decoherence and Biological Feasibility,” Physical Review E, 65,
061901–1 to 061901–11.
Hall, Roland (1995) “The Nature of the Will and Its Place in Schopenhauer’s Philoso-
phy,” Schopenhauer-Jahrbuch, 76, 73–90.
Hameroff, Stuart (1994) “Quantum Coherence in Microtubules: A Neural Basis
for Emergent Consciousness?” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 1(1), 91–
118.
(1997) “Quantum Vitalism,” Advances: The Journal of Mind–Body Health, 13(4),
143–22.
(1998) “Quantum Computation in Brain Microtubules? The Penrose-Hameroff ‘Orch
OR’ Model of Consciousness,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London A, 356, 1869–1896.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

312
Bibliography
(2001a) “Biological Feasibility of Quantum Approaches to Consciousness,” in P. Van
Loocke, ed., The Physical Nature of Consciousness, Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
pp. 1–61.
(2001b) “Consciousness, the Brain, and Spacetime Geometry,” Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences, 929, 74–104.
(2007) “The Brain is Both Neurocomputer and Quantum Computer,” Cognitive
Science, 31(6), 1035–1045.
(2012a) “How Quantum Brain Biology Can Rescue Conscious Free Will,” Frontiers
in Integrative Neuroscience, 6, article 93.
(2012b) “Quantum Brain Biology Complements Neuronal Assembly Approaches to
Consciousness: Comment,” Physics of Life Reviews, 9(3), 303–305.
(2013) “Quantum Mathematical Cognition Requires Quantum Brain Biology,”
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3), 287–290.
Hameroff, Stuart, Alex Nip, Mitchell Porter, and Jack Tuszynski (2002) “Conduction
Pathways in Microtubules, Biological Quantum Computation, and Consciousness,”
Biosystems, 64(1–3), 149–168.
Hameroff, Stuart and Roger Penrose (1996) “Conscious Events as Orchestrated Space-
Time Selections,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 3(1), 36–53.
(2014a) “Consciousness in the Universe: A Review of the ‘Orch OR’ Theory,” Physics
of Life Reviews, 11(1), 39–78.
(2014b) “Reply to Criticism of the ‘Orch OR Qubit’,” Physics of Life Reviews, 11,
104–112.
Hamlyn, D. W. (1983) “Schopenhauer on the Will in Nature,” Midwest Studies in
Philosophy, 8, 457–467.
Hanauske, Matthias, Jennifer Kunz, Steffen Bernius, and Wolfgang K¨onig (2010)
“Doves and Hawks in Economics Revisited: An Evolutionary Quantum Game
Theory Based Analysis of Financial Crises,” Physica A, 389, 5084–5102.
Hannan, Barbara (2009) The Riddle of the World: A Reconsideration of Schopenhauer’s
Philosophy, Oxford University Press.
Hansen, Nathaniel (2011) “Color Adjectives and Radical Contextualism,” Linguistics
and Philosophy, 34(3), 201–221.
Harder, Peter (2003) “The Status of Linguistic Facts,” Mind and Language, 18(1),
52–76.
Hardy, Lucien (1998) “Spooky Action at a Distance in Quantum Mechanics,” Contem-
porary Physics, 39(6), 419–429.
Harr´e, Rom (2002) “Social Reality and the Myth of Social Structure,” European Journal
of Social Theory, 5(1), 111–123.
Harrington, Anne (1996) Reenchanted Science: Holism in German Culture from Wilhelm
II to Hitler, Princeton University Press.
Hartshorne, Charles (1972) “The Compound Individual,” in Hartshorne, Whitehead’s
Philosophy, Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, pp. 41–61.
Harvey, Graham (2006) Animism: Respecting the Living World, New York: Columbia
University Press.
Haven, Emmanuel and Andrei Khrennikov (2013) Quantum Social Science, Cambridge
University Press.
Healey, Richard (1991) “Holism and Nonseparability,” The Journal of Philosophy,
88(8), 393–421.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
313
(1994) “Nonseparable Processes and Causal Explanation,” Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science, 25(3), 337–374.
(2011) “Reduction and Emergence in Bose-Einstein Condensates,” Foundations of
Physics, 41(6), 1007–1030.
(2012) “Quantum Theory: A Pragmatist Approach,” British Journal for the Philoso-
phy of Science, 63(4), 729–771.
(2013) “Physical Composition,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics, 44(1), 48–62.
Heelan, Patrick (1995) “Quantum Mechanics and the Social Sciences: After Hermeneu-
tics,” Science and Education, 4(2), 127–136.
(2004) “The Phenomenological Role of Consciousness in Measurement,” Mind and
Matter, 2(1), 61–84.
(2009) “The Role of Consciousness as Meaning Maker in Science, Culture, and
Religion,” Zygon, 44(2), 467–486.
Heil, John (1998) “Supervenience Deconstructed,” European Journal of Philosophy,
6(2), 146–155.
Held, Carsten (1994) “The Meaning of Complementarity,” Studies in History and Phi-
losophy of Science, 25(6), 871–893.
Hellingwerf, Klaas (2005) “Bacterial Observations: A Rudimentary Form of Intelli-
gence?” Trends in Microbiology, 13(4), 152–158.
Helrich, Carl (2007) “Is There a Basis for Teleology in Physics?” Zygon, 42(1), 97–
110.
Henderson, James (2010) “Classes of Copenhagen Interpretations,” Studies in History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 41(1), 1–8.
Henderson, Leah (2014) “Can the Second Law be Compatible with Time Reversal
Invariant Dynamics?” Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 47,
90–98.
Hennig, Boris (2009) “The Four Causes,” The Journal of Philosophy, 106(3), 137–160.
Henrich, Dieter (2003) “Subjectivity as a Philosophical Principle,” Critical Horizons,
4(1), 7–27.
Herbert, Nick (1985) Quantum Reality, New York, NY: Anchor Books.
Herschbach, Mitchell (2008) “Folk Psychological and Phenomenological Accounts of
Social Perception,” Philosophical Explorations, 11(3), 223–235.
Heylighen, Francis (2007) “The Global Superorganism,” Social Evolution and History,
6(1), 57–117.
Hildner, Richard, Daan Brinks, Jana Nieder, Richard Cogdell, and Niek van Hulst
(2013) “Quantum Coherent Energy Transfer over Varying Pathways in Single
Light-Harvesting Complexes,” Science, 340, 1448–1451.
Hiley, B. J. (1997) “Quantum Mechanics and the Relationship between Mind and
Matter,” in P. Pylkk¨anen, et al., eds., Brain, Mind and Physics, Amsterdam: IOS
Press, pp. 37–53.
Hiley, Basil and Paavo Pylkk¨anen (1997) “Active Information and Cognitive Science –
A Reply to Kieseppa,” in P. Pylkk¨anen, et al., eds., Brain, Mind and Physics,
Amsterdam: IOS Press, pp. 64–85.
Hiley, B. J. and Paavo Pylkk¨anen (2001) “Naturalizing the Mind in a Quantum Frame-
work,” in P. Pylkk¨anen and T. Vaden, eds., Dimensions of Conscious Experience,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 119–144.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

314
Bibliography
Hindriks, Frank (2008) “False Models as Explanatory Engines,” Philosophy of the
Social Sciences, 38(3), 334–360.
(2013) “The Location Problem in Social Ontology,” Synthese, 190(3), 413–437.
Hinterberger, Thilo and Nikolaus von Stillfried (2013) “The Concept of Complemen-
tarity and Its Role in Quantum Entanglement and Generalized Entanglement,”
Axiomathes, 23(3), 443–459.
Ho, Mae-Wan (1996) “The Biology of Free Will,” Journal of Consciousness Studies,
3(3), 231–244.
(1997) “Quantum Coherence and Conscious Experience,” Kybernetes, 26(3), 265–
276.
(1998) The Rainbow and the Worm: The Physics of Organisms, Singapore: World
Scientiﬁc.
(2012) Living Rainbow H2O, Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Hodgson, David (2011) “Quantum Physics, Consciousness, and Free Will,” in R.
Kane, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Free Will, Oxford University Press, pp. 57–
83.
(2012) Rationality + Consciousness = Free Will, Oxford University Press.
Hodgson, Geoffrey (2002) “Reconstitutive Downward Causation,” in E. Fullbrook,
ed., Intersubjectivity in Economics: Agents and Structures, London: Routledge,
pp. 159–180.
Hoefer, Carl (2003) “For Fundamentalism,” Philosophy of Science, 70(5), 1401–
1412.
H¨olldobler, B. and Edward O. Wilson (2009) The Superorganism, New York, NY:
Norton.
Hoffecker, John (2013) “The Information Animal and the Super-Brain,” Journal of
Archaeological Method and Theory, 20(1), 18–41.
Hoffman, J. and G. Rosenkrantz (1984) “Hard and Soft Facts,” The Philosophical
Review, 93(3), 419–434.
Hoffmeyer, Jesper (1996) Signs of Meaning in the Universe, Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
(2010) “A Biosemiotic Approach to the Question of Meaning,” Zygon, 45(2), 367–
390.
Hogarth, R. and H. Einhorn (1992) “Order Effects in Belief Updating,” Cognitive
Psychology, 24(1), 1–55.
Hollis, Martin and Steve Smith (1990) Explaining and Understanding International
Relations, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hollis, Martin and Robert Sugden (1993) “Rationality in Action,” Mind, 102, 1–
35.
Holman, Emmett (2008) “Panpsychism, Physicalism, Neutral Monism and the Russel-
lian Theory of Mind,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 15(5), 48–67.
Holton, Richard (2006) “The Act of Choice,” Philosophers’ Imprint, 6(3), 1–
15.
Home, Dipankar (1997) Conceptual Foundations of Quantum Physics, New York:
Plenum Press.
Honderich, Ted (1988) A Theory of Determinism, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Honner, John (1987) The Description of Nature: Niels Bohr and the Philosophy of
Quantum Physics, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
315
Honneth, Axel and Hans Joas (1988) Social Action and Human Nature, Cambridge
University Press.
Hopﬁeld, John (1994) “Physics, Computation, and Why Biology Looks so Different,”
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 171, 53–60.
Horgan, Terence (1993) “From Supervenience to Superdupervenience,” Mind, 102,
555–586.
Horgan, Terence and Uriah Kriegel (2008) “Phenomenal Intentionality Meets the
Extended Mind,” The Monist, 91(2), 347–373.
Howell, Robert (2009) “Emergentism and Supervenience Physicalism,” Australasian
Journal of Philosophy, 87(1), 83–98.
Hudson, Robert (2000) “Perceiving Empirical Objects Directly,” Erkenntnis, 52(3),
357–371.
Huebner, Bryce (2011) “Genuinely Collective Emotions,” European Journal for Phi-
losophy of Science, 1(1), 89–118.
Huebner, Bryce, Michael Bruno, and Hagop Sarkissian (2010) “What Does the Nation
of China Think about Phenomenal States?” Review of Philosophy and Psychology,
1(2), 225–243.
Hull, George (2013) “Reiﬁcation and Social Criticism,” Philosophical Papers, 42(1),
49–77.
Hulswit, Menno (2006) “How Causal Is Downward Causation?” Journal for General
Philosophy of Science, 36(2), 261–287.
Humphreys, Paul (1985) “Why Propensities Cannot Be Probabilities,” The Philosophi-
cal Review, 94(4), 557–570.
(1997a) “How Properties Emerge,” Philosophy of Science, 64(March), 1–17.
(1997b) “Emergence, Not Supervenience,” Philosophy of Science, 64 (Proceedings),
S337–S345.
(2008) “Synchronic and Diachronic Emergence,” Minds and Machines, 18(4), 431–
442.
Huneman, Philippe (2006) “From the Critique of Judgment to the Hermeneutics of
Nature,” Continental Philosophy Review, 39(1), 1–34.
Hunt, Tam (2011) “Kicking the Psychophysical Laws into Gear: A New Approach to
the Combination Problem,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 18(11–12), 96–134.
Hurley, Susan (1998) Consciousness in Action, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Hut, Piet and Roger Shepard (1996) “Turning ‘The Hard Problem’ Upside Down and
Sideways,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 3(4), 313–329.
Hutchins, Edwin (1995) Cognition in the Wild, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
H¨uttemann, Andreas (2005) “Explanation, Emergence, and Quantum Entanglement,”
Philosophy of Science, 72(1), 114–127.
Hutto, Daniel (2004) “The Limits of Spectatorial Folk Psychology,” Mind and Lan-
guage, 19(5), 548–573.
(2008) Folk Psychological Narratives: The Sociocultural Basis of Understanding
Reasons, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Iacoboni, Marco (2008) Mirroring People: The New Science of How We Connect with
Others, New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
(2009) “Imitation, Empathy, and Mirror Neurons,” Annual Review of Psychology, 60,
653–670.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

316
Bibliography
Igamberdiev, A. U. (2012) Physics and Logic of Life, New York: Nova Science Pub-
lishers.
Irvine, Elizabeth (2012) Consciousness as a Scientiﬁc Concept, Dordrecht: Springer.
Itkonen, Esa (2008) “Concerning the Role of Consciousness in Linguistics,” Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 15(6), 15–33.
Ittelson, William (2007) “The Perception of Nonmaterial Objects and Events,”
Leonardo, 40(3), 279–283.
Jackendoff, Ray (2002) Foundations of Language, Oxford University Press.
Jackman, Henry (1999) “We Live Forwards but Understand Backwards,” Paciﬁc Philo-
sophical Quarterly, 80, 157–177.
(2005) “Temporal Externalism, Deference, and Our Ordinary Linguistic Practice,”
Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, 86(3), 365–380.
Jackson, Frank (1982) “Epiphenomenal Qualia,” The Philosophical Quarterly, 32, 127–
136.
(1986) “What Mary Didn’t Know,” The Journal of Philosophy, 83(5), 291–295.
Jackson, Patrick (2008) “Foregrounding Ontology: Dualism, Monism, and IR Theory,”
Review of International Studies, 34(1), 129–153.
Jacob, Pierre (2008) “What Do Mirror Neurons Contribute to Human Social Cognition?”
Mind and Language, 23(2), 190–223.
(2011) “The Direct-Perception Model of Empathy: A Critique,” Review of Philosophy
and Psychology, 2(3), 519–540.
(2014) “Intentionality,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2014 edi-
tion), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2014/entries/
intentionality/.
Jacquette, Dale (2005) The Philosophy of Schopenhauer, Montreal: McGill-Queens
University Press.
Jahn, Robert and Brenda Dunne (2005) “The PEAR Proposition” Journal of Scientiﬁc
Exploration, 19(2), 195–245.
James, William (1890) The Principles of Psychology, New York, NY: Henry Holt and
Co.
Janaway, Christopher (2004) “Nietzsche and Schopenhauer: Is the Will Merely a Word?”
in T. Pink and M. Stone, eds., The Will and Human Action, London: Routledge,
pp. 173–196.
Jansen, Franz Klaus (2008) “Partial Isomorphism of Superposition in Potentiality Sys-
tems of Consciousness and Quantum Mechanics,” NeuroQuantology, 6(3), 278–
288.
Janzen, Greg (2012) “Physicalists Have Nothing to Fear from Ghosts,” International
Journal of Philosophical Studies, 20(1), 91–104.
Jaskolla, Ludwig and Alexander Buck (2012) “Does Panexperiential Holism Solve
the Combination Problem?” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 19(9–10), 190–
199.
Jaynes, Julian (1976) The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral
Mind, Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Jenkins, C. S. and Daniel Nolan (2008) “Backwards Explanation,” Philosophical Stud-
ies, 140(1), 103–115.
Ji, Sungchul (1997) “Isomorphism between Cell and Human Languages,” Biosystems,
44(1), 17–39.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
317
Jibu, Mari and Kunio Yasue (1995) Quantum Brain Dynamics and Consciousness,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
(2004) “Quantum Brain Dynamics and Quantum Field Theory,” in G. Globus, et al.,
eds., Brain and Being, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, pp. 267–290.
John, E. R. (2001) “A Field Theory of Consciousness,” Consciousness and Cognition,
10(2), 184–213.
Jonas, Hans (1966) The Phenomenon of Life, Evanston, IL: Northwestern University
Press.
(1984) “Appendix: Impotence or Power of Subjectivity,” in Jonas, The Imperative of
Responsibility, University of Chicago Press, pp. 205–231.
Jones, Brandon (2014) “Alfred North Whitehead’s Flat Ontology,” Journal of Con-
sciousness Studies, 21(5–6), 174–195.
Jones, Donna (2010) The Racial Discourses of Life Philosophy, New York, NY:
Columbia University Press.
Jones, Robert (2013) “Science, Sentience, and Animal Welfare,” Biology and Philoso-
phy, 28(1), 1–30.
Jones, Tessa (2013) “The Constitution of Events,” The Monist, 96(1), 73–86.
Jonker, Catholun, et al. (2002) “Putting Intentions into Cell Biochemistry,” Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 214(1), 105–134.
Jordan, J. Scott (1998) “Recasting Dewey’s Critique of the Reﬂex Arc Concept via a
Theory of Anticipatory Consciousness,” New Ideas in Psychology, 16(3), 165–187.
Jorgensen, Andrew (2009) “Holism, Communication, and the Emergence of Public
Meaning,” Philosophia, 37(1), 133–147.
Josephson, Brian and Fotini Pallikari-Viras (1991) “Biological Utilization of Quantum
Nonlocality,” Foundations of Physics, 21(2), 197–207.
Judisch, Neal (2008) “Why ‘Non-Mental’ Won’t Work: On Hempel’s Dilemma and the
Characterization of the ‘Physical’,” Philosophical Studies, 140(3), 299–318.
Kadar, Endre and Judith Effken (1994) “Heideggerian Meditations on an Alternative
Ontology for Ecological Psychology,” Ecological Psychology, 6(4), 297–341.
Kadar, Endre and Robert Shaw (2000) “Toward an Ecological Field Theory of Perceptual
Control of Locomotion,” Ecological Psychology, 12(2), 141–180.
Kahneman, Daniel and Alan Krueger (2006) “Developments in the Measurement of
Subjective Well-Being,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20(1), 3–24.
Kaidesoja, Tuukka (2009) “Bhaskar and Bunge on Social Emergence,” Journal for the
Theory of Social Behaviour, 39(3), 300–322.
Kane, Robert (1996) The Signiﬁcance of Free Will, Oxford University Press.
ed. (2011) The Oxford Handbook of Free Will, Oxford University Press.
Karakostas, Vassilios (2009) “From Atomism to Holism: The Primacy of Non-
Supervenient Relations,” NeuroQuantology, 7(4), 635–656.
Karsten, Siegfried (1990) “Quantum Theory and Social Economics,” The American
Journal of Economics and Sociology, 49(4), 385–399.
Kastner, Ruth (1999) “Time-Symmetrized Quantum Theory, Counterfactuals and
‘Advanced Action,’” Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 30(2),
237–259.
(2008) “The Transactional Interpretation, Counterfactuals, and Weak Values in Quan-
tum Theory,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 39(4), 806–
818.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

318
Bibliography
Kawade, Yoshimi (2009) “On the Nature of the Subjectivity of Living Things,” Bio-
semiotics, 2(2), 205–220.
(2013) “The Origin of Mind: The Mind-Matter Continuity Thesis,” Biosemiotics,
6(3), 367–378.
Kesebir, Selin (2012) “The Superorganism Account of Human Sociality,” Personality
and Social Psychology Review, 16(3), 233–261.
Kessler, Oliver (2007) “From Agents and Structures to Minds and Bodies: Of Super-
venience, Quantum, and the Linguistic Turn,” Journal of International Relations
and Development, 10(3), 243–271.
Ketterle, Wolfgang (1999) “Experimental Studies of Bose-Einstein Condensation,”
Physics Today, December, 30–35.
Khalifa, Kareem (2013) “The Role of Explanation in Understanding,” British Journal
for the Philosophy of Science, 64(1), 161–187.
Khalil, Elias (2003) “The Context Problematic, Behavioral Economics and the Trans-
actional View,” Journal of Economic Methodology, 10(2), 107–130.
Khandker, Wahida (2013) “The Idea of Will and Organic Evolution in Bergson’s Phi-
losophy of Life,” Continental Philosophy Review, 46(1), 57–74.
Khoshbin-e-Khoshnazar, Mohammadreza and Rita Pizzi (2014) “Quantum Superpo-
sition in the Retina: Evidence and Proposals,” NeuroQuantology, 12(1), 97–
101.
Khrennikov, Andrei (2010) Ubiquitous Quantum Structure: From Psychology to
Finance, Berlin: Springer.
(2011) “Quantum-Like Model of Processing of Information in the Brain Based on
Classical Electromagnetic Field,” Biosystems, 105(3), 251–259.
Khrennikov, Andrei and Emmanuel Haven (2009) “Quantum Mechanics and Violations
of the Sure-Thing Principle,” Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 53(5), 378–
388.
Khrennikova, Polina, Emmanuel Haven, and Andrei Khrennikov (2014) “An Applica-
tion of the Theory of Open Quantum Systems to Model the Dynamics of Party
Governance in the US Political System,” International Journal of Theoretical
Physics, 53(4), 1346–1360.
Kieseppa, I. A. (1997) “Is David Bohm’s Notion of Active Information Useful in Cogni-
tive Science?” in P. Pylkk¨anen, et al., eds., Brain, Mind and Physics, Amsterdam:
IOS Press, pp. 54–63.
Kim, Jaegwon (1974) “Noncausal Connections,” Nous, 8(1), 41–52.
(1990) “Supervenience as a Philosophical Concept,” Metaphilosophy, 21(1–2), 1–27.
(1998) Mind in a Physical World, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(1999) “Making Sense of Emergence,” Philosophical Studies, 95(1–2), 3–36.
(2000) “Making Sense of Downward Causation,” in P. Andersen, et al., eds., Down-
ward Causation, Aarhus University Press, pp. 305–321.
(2006) “Emergence: Core Ideas and Issues,” Synthese, 151(3), 547–559.
King, Chris (1997) “Quantum Mechanics, Chaos and the Conscious Brain,” The Journal
of Mind and Behavior, 18(2/3), 155–170.
King, Gary, Robert Keohane, and Sidney Verba (1994) Designing Social Inquiry,
Princeton University Press.
Kirk, Robert (1997) “Consciousness, Information, and External Relations,” Communi-
cation and Cognition, 30(3/4), 249–272.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
319
Kirschner, Marc, John Gerhart, and Tim Mitchison (2000) “Molecular ‘Vitalism’,” Cell,
100(1), 79–88.
Kitto, Kirsty and R. Daniel Kortschak (2013) “Contextual Models and the Non-
Newtonian Paradigm,” Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology, 113(1),
97–107.
Kitto, Kirsty, Brentyn Ramm, Laurianne Sitbon, and Peter Bruza (2011) “Quantum
Theory Beyond the Physical: Information in Context,” Axiomathes, 21(2), 331–
345.
Klemm, David and William Klink (2008) “Consciousness and Quantum Mechanics:
Opting from Alternatives,” Zygon, 43(2), 307–327.
Kojevnikov, Alexei (1999) “Freedom, Collectivism, and Quasiparticles: Social
Metaphors in Quantum Physics,” Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological
Sciences, 29(2), 295–331.
Kolak, Daniel (2004) I Am You: The Metaphysical Foundations for Global Ethics,
Berlin: Springer.
Koons, Robert and George Bealer, eds. (2010) The Waning of Materialism, Oxford
University Press.
Kriegel, Uriah (2003) “Is Intentionality Dependent upon Consciousness?” Philosophical
Studies, 116(3), 271–307.
(2004) “Consciousness and Self-Consciousness,” The Monist, 87(2), 185–209.
Kronz, Frederick and Justin Tiehen (2002) “Emergence and Quantum Mechanics,”
Philosophy of Science, 69(2), 324–347.
Krueger, Joel (2012) “Seeing Mind in Action,” Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences, 11, 149–173.
Kuhn, Thomas (1962/1996) The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, University of
Chicago Press, 3rd edition.
Kull, Kalevi (2000) “An Introduction to Phytosemiotics: Semiotic Botany and Vegetative
Sign Systems,” Sign Systems Studies, 28, 326–350.
Kuttner, Ran (2011) “The Wave/Particle Tension in Negotiation,” Harvard Negotiation
Law Review, 16(1), 331–366.
Ladyman, James (2008) “Structural Realism and the Relationship between the Special
Sciences and Physics,” Philosophy of Science, 75(5), 744–755.
Lahlou, Saadi (2011) “How Can We Capture the Subject’s Perspective?” Social Science
Information, 50(3–4), 607–655.
Lakatos, Imre (1970) “Falsiﬁcation and the Methodology of Scientiﬁc Research Pro-
grammes,” in I. Lakatos and A. Musgrave, eds., Criticism and the Growth of
Knowledge, Cambridge University Press, pp. 91–196.
Laloe, F. (2001) “Do We Really Understand Quantum Mechanics?” American Journal
of Physics, 69(6), 655–701.
Lambert-Mogiliansky, Ariane and Jerome Busemeyer (2012) “Quantum Type Indeter-
minacy in Dynamic Decision-Making,” Games, 3(2), 97–118.
Lambert-Mogiliansky, Ariane, Shmuel Zamir, and Herve Zwirn (2009) “Type Indeter-
minacy: A Model of the KT (Kahneman-Tversky)-Man,” Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 53(5), 349–361.
La Mura, Pierfrancesco (2009) “Projective Expected Utility,” Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 53(5), 408–414.
Larrain, Antonia and Andres Haye (2014) “A Dialogical Conception of Concepts,”
Theory and Psychology, 24(4), 459–478.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

320
Bibliography
Lasersohn, Peter (2012) “Contextualism and Compositionality,” Linguistics and Phi-
losophy, 35(2), 171–189.
Lash, Scott (2005) “Lebenssoziologie: Georg Simmel in the Information Age,” Theory,
Culture and Society, 22(3), 1–23.
Laszlo, Ervin (1995) The Interconnected Universe, Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Latour, Bruno (2005) Reassembling the Social: An Introduction to Actor-Network
Theory, Oxford University Press.
Lau, Joe and Max Deutsch (2014) “Externalism about Mental Content,” Stanford Ency-
clopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2014 edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato
.stanford.edu/archives/sum2014/entries/content-externalism/.
Laughlin, Victor (2013) “Sketch This: Extended Mind and Consciousness Extension,”
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 12(1), 41–50.
Lavelle, Jane Suilin (2012) “Theory-Theory and the Direct Perception of Mental States,”
Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 3(2), 213–230.
Lawson, Tony (2012) “Ontology and the Study of Social Reality,” Cambridge Journal
of Economics, 36(2), 345–385.
Le Boutillier, Shaun (2013) “Emergence and Reduction,” Journal for the Theory of
Social Behaviour, 43(2), 205–225.
Lehner, Christoph (1997) “What It Feels Like to be in a Superposition, and Why,”
Synthese, 110(2), 191–216.
Lemons, John, Kristin Shrader-Frechette, and Carl Cranor (1997) “The Precautionary
Principle: Scientiﬁc Uncertainty and Type I and Type II Errors,” Foundations of
Science, 2(2), 207–236.
Lenoir, Timothy (1982) The Strategy of Life: Teleology and Mechanics in Nineteenth
Century German Biology, Boston, MA: Kluwer.
Leudar, Ivan and Alan Costall (2004) “On the Persistence of the ‘Problem of Other
Minds’ in Psychology,” Theory and Psychology, 14(5), 601–621.
Levine, Donald (1995) “The Organism Metaphor in Sociology,” Social Research, 62(2),
239–265.
Levine, Joseph (1983) “Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap,” Paciﬁc Philo-
sophical Quarterly, 64, 354–361.
(2001) Purple Haze: The Puzzle of Consciousness, Oxford University Press.
Levy, Neil (2005) “Libet’s Impossible Demand,” Journal of Consciousness Studies,
12(12), 67–76.
Lewis, Peter (2005) “Interpreting Spontaneous Collapse Theories,” Studies in History
and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 36(1), 165–180.
Lewtas, Patrick (2013a) “What It Is Like to Be a Quark,” Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 20(9–10), 39–64.
(2013b) “Emergence and Consciousness,” Philosophy, 88(4), 527–553.
(2014) “The Irrationality of Physicalism,” Axiomathes, 24(3), 313–341.
Libet, Benjamin (1985) “Unconscious Cerebral Initiative and the Role of Conscious
Will in Voluntary Action,” The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 8(4), 529–
566.
(2004) Mind Time, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Linell, Per (2013) “Distributed Language Theory, With or Without Dialogue,” Language
Sciences, 40, 168–173.
Lipari, Lisbeth (2014) “On Interlistening and the Idea of Dialogue,” Theory and Psy-
chology, 24(4), 504–523.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
321
Lipton, Peter (2004) Inference to the Best Explanation, London: Routledge, 2nd
edition.
(2009) “Understanding without Explanation,” in H. de Regt, S. Leonelli and K.
Eigner, eds., Scientiﬁc Understanding, University of Pittsburgh Press, pp. 43–63.
List, Christian and Kai Spiekermann (2013) “Methodological Individualism and
Holism in Political Science,” American Political Science Review, 107(4), 629–
643.
Litt, Abninder, et al. (2006) “Is the Brain a Quantum Computer?” Cognitive Science,
30(3), 593–603.
Lloyd, Seth (2011) “Quantum Coherence in Biological Systems,” Journal of Physics:
Conference Series 302, article 012037.
Lockwood, Michael (1989) Mind, Brain, and the Quantum, Oxford: Blackwell.
(1996) “‘Many Minds’ Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics,” British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science, 47(2), 159–188.
Lodge, Paul and Marc Bobro (1998) “Stepping Back inside Leibniz’s Mill,” The Monist,
81(4), 553–572.
Loewer, Barry (1996) “Freedom from Physics: Quantum Mechanics and Free Will,”
Philosophical Topics, 24(2), 91–112.
London, Fritz and Edmond Bauer (1939/1983) “The Theory of Observation in Quantum
Mechanics,” in J. Wheeler and W. Zurek, eds., Quantum Theory and Measurement,
Princeton University Press, pp. 217–259.
Look, Brandon (2002) “On Monadic Domination in Leibniz’ Metaphysics,” British
Journal for the History of Philosophy, 10(3), 379–399.
Luisi, Pier Luigi (1998) “About Various Deﬁnitions of Life,” Origins of Life and
Evolution of the Biosphere, 28(4–6), 613–622.
Maas, Harro (1999) “Mechanical Rationality: Jevons and the Making of Economic
Man,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 30(4), 587–619.
Machery, Edouard (2012) “Why I Stopped Worrying about the Deﬁnition of Life . . .
and Why You Should as Well,” Synthese, 185(1), 145–164.
MacKenzie, Donald (2006) “Is Economics Performative? Option Theory and the Con-
struction of Derivatives Markets,” Journal of the History of Economic Thought,
28(1), 29–55.
Mackonis, Adolfas (2013) “Inference to the Best Explanation, Coherence and Other
Explanatory Virtues,” Synthese, 190(6), 975–995.
Mainville, Sebasti´en (2015) “The International System and Its Environment: Evolution-
ary and Developmental Perspectives on Change in World Politics,” Ph.D. disser-
tation, Ohio State University.
Majorek, Marek (2012) “Does the Brain Cause Conscious Experience?” Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 19(3–4), 121–144.
Malin, Shimon (2001) Nature Loves to Hide: Quantum Physics and the Nature of
Reality, a Western Perspective, Oxford University Press.
Malpas, Jeff (2002) “The Weave of Meaning: Holism and Contextuality,” Language
and Communication, 22(4), 403–419.
Manousakis, Efstratios (2006) “Founding Quantum Theory on the Basis of Conscious-
ness,” Foundations of Physics, 36(6), 795–838.
Mantzavinos, C. (2012) “Explanations of Meaningful Actions,” Philosophy of the Social
Sciences, 42(2), 224–238.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

322
Bibliography
Manzotti, Riccardo (2006) “A Process Oriented View of Conscious Perception,” Journal
of Consciousness Studies, 13(6), 7–41.
Marcer, Peter (1995) “A Proposal for a Mathematical Speciﬁcation for Evolution and
the Psi Field,” World Futures, 44(2), 149–159.
Marcer, Peter and Walter Schempp (1997) “Model of the Neuron Working by Quantum
Holography,” Informatica, 21, 519–534.
(1998) “The Brain as a Conscious System,” International Journal of General Systems,
27(1–3), 231–248.
Marchettini, Nadia, et al. (2010) “Water: A Medium Where Dissipative Structures Are
Produced by a Coherent Dynamics,” Journal of Theoretical Biology, 265(4), 511–
516.
Marcin, Raymond (2006) In Search of Schopenhauer’s Cat, Washington, DC: Catholic
University Press of America.
Margenau, Henry (1967) “Quantum Mechanics, Free Will, and Determinism,” The
Journal of Philosophy, 64(21), 714–725.
Margulis, Lynn (2001) “The Conscious Cell,” Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 929, 55–70.
Margulis, Lynn and Dorion Sagan (1995) What Is Life?, New York, NY: Simon &
Schuster.
Marijuan, Pedro, Raquel del Moral, and Jorge Navarro (2013) “On Eukaryotic Intelli-
gence: Signaling System’s Guidance in the Evolution of Multicellular Organiza-
tion,” Biosystems, 114(1), 8–24.
Marin, Juan Miguel (2009) “’Mysticism in Quantum Mechanics: The Forgotten Con-
troversy,” European Journal of Physics, 30(4), 807–822.
Markoˇs, Anton and Fatima Cvrˇckov´a (2013) “The Meanings(s) of Information,
Code . . . and Meaning,” Biosemiotics, 6(1), 61–75.
Markosian, Ned (1995) “The Open Past,” Philosophical Studies, 79(1), 95–105.
(2004) “A Defense of Presentism,” in D. Zimmerman, ed., Oxford Studies in Meta-
physics: Volume I, Oxford University Press, pp. 47–82.
Marr, David (1982) Vision: A Computational Investigation into the Human Represen-
tation and Processing of Visual Information, New York, NY: W. H. Freeman and
Company.
Marshall, I. N. (1989) “Consciousness and Bose-Einstein Condensates,” New Ideas in
Psychology, 7(1), 73–83.
Marston, Sallie, John Paul Jones III, and Keith Woodward (2005) “Human Geography
without Scale,” Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers, 30(4), 416–
423.
Martin, F., F. Carminati, and G. Galli Carminati (2010) “Quantum Information, Oscil-
lations and the Psyche,” Physics of Particles and Nuclei, 41(3), 425–451.
Martinez-Martinez, Ismael (2014) “A Connection between Quantum Decision Theory
and Quantum Games,” Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 58, 33–44.
Mather, Jennifer (2008) “Cephalopod Consciousness: Behavioural Evidence,” Con-
sciousness and Cognition, 17(1), 37–48.
Mathews, Freya (2003) For Love of Matter: A Contemporary Panpsychism, Albany,
NY: SUNY Press.
Mathiesen, Kay (2005) “Collective Consciousness,” in D. Smith and A. Thomasson,
eds., Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind, Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 235–
250.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
323
Matson, Floyd (1964) The Broken Image: Man, Science and Society, New York:
G. Braziller.
Matsuno, Koichiro (1993) “Being Free from Ceteris Paribus: A Vehicle for Founding
Physics on Biology Rather than the Other Way Around,” Applied Mathematics and
Computation, 56(2–3), 261–279.
Matthiessen, Hannes Ole (2010) “Seeing and Hearing Directly,” Review of Philosophy
and Psychology, 1(1), 91–103.
Matzkin, A. (2002) “Realism and the Wavefunction,” European Journal of Physics,
23(3), 285–294.
Maudlin, Tim (1998) “Part and Whole in Quantum Mechanics,” in E. Castellani, ed.,
Interpreting Bodies, Princeton University Press, pp. 46–60.
(2003) “Distilling Metaphysics from Quantum Physics,” in M. Loux and D. Zim-
merman, eds., Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics, Oxford University Press, pp.
461–487.
(2007) The Metaphysics within Physics, Oxford University Press.
Maul, Andrew (2013) “On the Ontology of Psychological Attributes,” Theory and
Psychology, 23(6), 752–769.
Mavromatos, Nick (2011) “Quantum Coherence in (Brain) Microtubules and Efﬁcient
Energy and Information Transport,” Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 329(1),
12026–12056.
Maynard, Douglas and Thomas Wilson (1980) “On the Reiﬁcation of Social Structure,”
in S. McNall and G. Howe, eds., Current Perspectives in Social Theory, vol. 1,
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, pp. 287–322.
Mayr, Ernst (1982) “Teleological and Teleonomic: A New Analysis,” in H. Plotkin, ed.,
Learning, Development, and Culture, New York: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 17–38.
(1992) “The Idea of Teleology,” Journal of the History of Ideas, 53(1), 117–135.
McAllister, James (1989) “Truth and Beauty in Science Reason,” Synthese, 78(1), 25–
51.
(1991) “The Simplicity of Theories: Its Degree and Form,” Journal for General
Philosophy of Science, 22(1), 1–14.
(1996) Beauty and Revolution in Science, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
(2014) “Methodological Dilemmas and Emotion in Science,” Synthese, 191(13),
3143–3158.
McClure, John (2011) “Attributions, Causes, and Actions: Is the Consciousness of Will
a Perceptual Illusion?” Theory and Psychology, 22(4), 402–419.
McDaniel, Jay (1983) “Physical Matter as Creative and Sentient,” Environmental Ethics,
5(4), 291–317.
McDermid, Douglas (2001) “What Is Direct Perceptual Knowledge? A Fivefold Con-
fusion,” Grazer Philosophische Studien, 62(1), 1–16.
McFadden, Johnjoe (2001) Quantum Evolution, New York: Norton.
(2007) “Conscious Electromagnetic Field Theory,” NeuroQuantology, 5(3), 262–270.
McGinn, Colin (1989) “Can We Solve the Mind–Body Problem?” Mind, 98, 349–
366.
(1995) “Consciousness and Space,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 2(3), 220–230.
(1999) The Mysterious Flame, New York: Basic Books.
McIntyre, Lee (2007) “Emergence and Reduction in Chemistry: Ontological or Episte-
mological Concepts?” Synthese, 155(3), 337–343.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

324
Bibliography
McKemmish, Laura, Jeffrey Reimers, Ross McKenzie, Alan Mark, and Noel Hush
(2009) “Penrose-Hameroff Orchestrated Objective-Reduction Proposal for Human
Consciousness is not Biologically Feasible,” Physical Review E, 80(2), 021912–1
to 021912–6.
McLaughlin, Brian (1992) “The Rise and Fall of British Emergentism,” in A. Beck-
ermann, H. Flohr, and J. Kim, eds., Emergence or Reduction?, Berlin: Walter de
Gruyter, pp. 49–93.
McSweeney, Brendan (2000) “Looking Forward to the Past,” Accounting, Organizations
and Society, 25(8), 767–786.
McTaggart, J. M. E. (1908) “The Unreality of Time,” Mind, 17, 456–473.
McTaggart, Lynne (2002) The Field, New York, NY: Quill.
Megill, Jason (2013) “A Defense of Emergence,” Axiomathes, 23(4), 597–615.
Melkikh, Alexey (2014) “Congenital Programs of the Behavior and Nontrivial Quantum
Effects in the Neurons Work,” Biosystems, 119, 10–19.
Menard, Claude (1988) “The Machine and the Heart: An Essay on Analogies in Eco-
nomic Reasoning,” Social Concept, 5, 81–95.
Mensky, M. (2005) “Concept of Consciousness in the Context of Quantum Mechanics,”
Physics Uspekhi, 48(4), 389–409.
Mercer, Jonathan (2010) “Emotional Beliefs,” International Organization, 64(1), 1–31.
(2014) “Feeling like a State: Social Emotion and Identity,” International Theory,
6(3), 515–535.
Mesquita, Marcus et al. (2005) “Large-Scale Quantum Effects in Biological Systems,”
International Journal of Quantum Chemistry, 102(6), 1116–1130.
Meyer, David (1999) “Quantum Strategies,” Physical Review Letters, 82(5), 1052–1055.
Meyer, John and Ronald Jepperson (2000) “The ‘Actors’ of Modern Society: The
Cultural Construction of Social Agency,” Sociological Theory, 18(1), 100–
120.
Meyering, Theo (2000) “Physicalism and Downward Causation in Psychology and the
Special Sciences,” Inquiry, 43(2), 181–202.
Michell, Joel (2005) “The Logic of Measurement: A Realist Overview,” Measurement,
38(4), 285–294.
Midgley, David (2006) “Intersubjectivity and Collective Consciousness,” Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 13(5), 99–109.
Millar, Boyd (2014) “The Phenomenological Directness of Perceptual Experience,”
Philosophical Studies, 170(2), 235–253.
Miller, Dale (1990) “Biological Systems and the Rumored Animate-Sentient Like
Aspect of Physical Phenomena,” Journal of Biological Physics, 17(3), 145–150.
(1992) “Agency as a Quantum-theoretic Parameter: Synthetic and Descriptive Utility
for Theoretical Biology,” Nanobiology, 1, 361–371.
Milovanovic, Dragan (2014) Quantum Holographic Criminology, Durham, NC: Car-
olina Academic Press.
Mingers, John (1995) “Information and Meaning,” Information Systems Journal, 5(4),
285–306.
Miranker, Willard (2000) “Consciousness is an Information State,” Neural, Parallel and
Scientiﬁc Computations, 8, 83–104.
(2002) “A Quantum State Model of Consciousness,” Journal of Consciousness Stud-
ies, 9(3), 3–14.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
325
Mirowski, Philip (1988) Against Mechanism: Protecting Economics from Science,
Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littleﬁeld.
(1989) “The Probabilistic Counter-Revolution, or How Stochastic Concepts Came to
Neoclassical Economic Theory,” Oxford Economic Papers, 41(1), 217–235.
Mitchell, Edgar and Robert Staretz (2011) “The Quantum Hologram and the Nature of
Consciousness,” in R. Penrose, S. Hameroff, and S. Kak, eds., Consciousness and
the Universe, Cambridge, MA: Cosmology Science Publishers, pp. 933–965.
Mitchell, Jeff and Mirella Lapata (2010) “Composition in Distributional Models of
Semantics,” Cognitive Science, 34(8), 1388–1429.
Monk, Nicholas (1997) “Conceptions of Space-Time: Problems and Possible Solutions,”
Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 28(1), 1–34.
Montano, Ulianov (2013) “Beauty in Science: A New Model of the Role of Aesthetic
Evaluations in Science,” European Journal for Philosophy of Science, 3(2), 133–
156.
Montero, Barbara (1999) “The Body Problem,” Nous, 33(2), 183–200.
(2001) “Post-Physicalism,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8(2), 61–80.
(2003) “Varieties of Causal Closure,” in S. Walter and H.-D. Heckmann, eds., Phys-
icalism and Mental Causation, London: Imprint Academic, pp. 173–187.
(2009) “What Is the Physical?” in B. McLaughlin, et al., eds., The Oxford Handbook
of Philosophy of Mind, Oxford University Press, pp. 173–188.
Moore, David (2002) “Measuring New Types of Question-Order Effects,” Public Opin-
ion Quarterly, 66(1), 80–91.
Moore, J. (2013) “Mentalism as a Radical Behaviorist Views It – Part I,” The Journal
of Mind and Behavior, 34(2), 133–164.
Moreno, Alvaro and Jon Umerez (2000) “Downward Causation at the Core of Living
Organization,” in P. Andersen, et al., eds., Downward Causation, Aarhus University
Press, pp. 99–117.
Morganti, Matteo (2009) “A New Look at Relational Holism in Quantum Mechanics,”
Philosophy of Science, 76(5), 1027–1038.
Morris, Suzanne, John Taplin, and Susan Gelman (2000) “Vitalism in Na¨ıve Biological
Thinking,” Developmental Psychology, 36(5), 582–595.
Mortimer, Geoffrey (2001) “Did Contemporaries Recognize a ‘Thirty Years War’?”
English Historical Review, 116, 124–136.
Mould, Richard (1995) “The Inside Observer in Quantum Mechanics,” Foundations of
Physics, 25(11), 1621–1629.
(2003) “Quantum Brain States,” Foundations of Physics, 33(4), 591–612.
Mozersky, M. Joshua (2011) “Presentism,” in C. Callender, ed., The Oxford Handbook
of Philosophy of Time, Oxford University Press, pp. 122–144.
Munro, William Bennett (1928) “Physics and Politics – An Old Analogy Revised,”
American Political Science Review, 22(1), 1–11.
Mureika, J. R. (2007) “Implications for Cognitive Quantum Computation and Decoher-
ence Limits in the Presence of Large Extra Dimensions,” International Journal of
Theoretical Physics, 46(1), 133–145.
Nachtomy, Ohad (2007) “Leibniz on Nested Individuals,” British Journal for the History
of Philosophy, 15(4), 709–728.
Nadeau, Robert and Menas Kafatos (1999) The Non-Local Universe: The New Physics
and Matters of the Mind, Oxford University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

326
Bibliography
Nagel, Alexandra (1997) “Are Plants Conscious?” Journal of Consciousness Studies,
4(3), 215–230.
Nagel, Thomas (1974) “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” The Philosophical Review, 83(4),
435–450.
(1979) “Panpsychism,” in Nagel, Mortal Questions, Cambridge University Press,
pp. 181–195.
(2012) Mind and Cosmos: Why the Materialist Neo-Darwinian Conception of Nature
is Almost Certainly False, Oxford University Press.
Nakagomi, Teruaki (2003a) “Mathematical Formulation of Leibnizian World: A Theory
of Individual-Whole or Interior-Exterior Reﬂective Systems,” Biosystems, 69(1),
15–26.
(2003b) “Quantum Monadology: A Consistent World Model for Consciousness and
Physics,” Biosystems, 69(1), 27–38.
Narby, Jeremy (2005) Intelligence in Nature, New York, NY: Penguin.
Nelson, Douglas, Cathy McEvoy, and Lisa Pointer (2003) “Spreading Activation or
Spooky Action at a Distance?” Journal of Experimental Psychology, 29(1), 42–
∗∗52.
Neuman, Yair (2008) “The Polysemy of the Sign: From Quantum Computing to the
Garden of Forking Paths,” Semiotica, 169(6), 155–168.
Neurath, Otto (1932/1959) “Sociology and Physicalism,” in A. J. Ayer, ed., Logical
Positivism, Glencoe, IL: Free Press, pp. 282–317.
Ney, Alyssa and David Albert, eds. (2013) The Wave Function: Essays on the Meta-
physics of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford University Press.
Ni, Peimin (1992) “Changing the Past,” Nous, 26(3), 349–359.
Nicholson, Daniel (2010) “Biological Atomism and Cell Theory,” Studies in History
and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 41(3), 202–211.
(2013) “Organisms ࣔMachines,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological
and Biomedical Sciences, 44(4), 669–678.
No¨e, Alva, ed. (2002) “Is the Visual World a Grand Illusion?” Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 9(5–6), special issue.
(2004) Action in Perception, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
No¨e, Alva and Evan Thompson (2004) “Are There Neural Correlates of Consciousness?”
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 11(1), 3–28.
Normandin, Sebastian and Charles Wolfe, eds. (2013) Vitalism and the Scientiﬁc Image
in Post-Enlightenment Life Science, 1800–2010, Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Norris, Christopher (1998) “On the Limits of ‘Undecidability’: Quantum Physics,
Deconstruction, and Anti-Realism,” Yale Journal of Criticism, 11(2), 407–432.
Nunn, Chris (2013) “On Taking Monism Seriously,” Journal of Consciousness Studies,
20(9–10), 77–89.
Ochs, Elinor (2012) “Experiencing Language,” Anthropological Theory, 12(2), 142–
160.
O’Connor, Timothy (2000) Persons and Causes: The Metaphysics of Free Will, Oxford
University Press.
(2014) “Free Will,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2014 edition),
Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2014/entries/freewill/.
O’Connor, Timothy and Hong Yu Wong (2005) “The Metaphysics of Emergence,”
Nous, 39(4), 658–678.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
327
(2012) “Emergent Properties,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2014
edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2012/entries/
properties-emergent/.
Okasha, Samir (2011) “Biological Ontology and Hierarchical Organization: A Defense
of Rank Freedom,” in B. Calcott and K. Sterelny, eds., The Major Transitions in
Evolution Revisited, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 53–64.
Omn`es, Roland (1995) “A New Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics and Its Conse-
quences in Epistemology,” Foundations of Physics, 25(4), 605–629.
O’Neill, John, ed. (1973) Modes of Individualism and Collectivism, New York, NY: St.
Martin’s Press.
Orlandi, Nicoletta (2013) “Embedded Seeing: Vision in the Natural World,” Nous, 47(4),
727–747.
Orlov, Yuri (1982) “The Wave Logic of Consciousness: A Hypothesis,” International
Journal of Theoretical Physics, 21(1), 37–53.
Ortner, Sherry (2001) “Specifying Agency: The Comaroffs and Their Critics,” Inter-
ventions, 3(1), 76–84.
(2005) “Subjectivity and Cultural Critique,” Anthropological Theory, 5(1), 31–52.
Overgaard, Morten, Shaun Gallagher, and Thomas Ramsoy (2008) “An Integration
of First-Person Methodologies in Cognitive Science,” Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 15(5), 100–120.
Overgaard, Soren (2004) “Exposing the Conjuring Trick: Wittgenstein on Subjectivity,”
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 3(3), 263–286.
Oyama, Susan (2010) “Biologists Behaving Badly: Vitalism and the Language of Lan-
guage,” History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences, 32(2–3), 401–423.
Pacherie, Elisabeth (2014) “Can Conscious Agency Be Saved?” Topoi, 33(1), 33–45.
Packham, Catherine (2002) “The Physiology of Political Economy: Vitalism and Adam
Smith’s Wealth of Nations,” Journal of the History of Ideas, 63(3), 465–481.
Padgett, John, Doowan Lee, and Nick Collier (2003) “Economic Production as Chem-
istry,” Industrial and Corporate Change, 12(4), 843–878.
Pagin, Peter (1997) “Is Compositionality Compatible with Holism?” Mind and Lan-
guage, 12(1), 11–33.
(2006) “Meaning Holism,” in E. Lepore and B. Smith, eds., The Oxford Handbook
of Philosophy of Language, Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 213–232.
Palmer, Stephen (1999) Vision Science: Photons to Phenomenology, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Papineau, David (2001) “The Rise of Physicalism,” in C. Gillett and B. Loewer, eds.,
Physicalism and Its Discontents, Cambridge University Press, pp. 3–36.
(2009) “Physicalism and the Human Sciences,” in C. Mantzavinos, ed., Philosophy
of the Social Sciences, Cambridge University Press, pp. 103–123.
(2011) “What Exactly is the Explanatory Gap?” Philosophia, 39, 5–19.
Parsons, Stephen (1991) “Time, Expectations and Subjectivism,” Cambridge Journal
of Economics, 15(4), 405–423.
Paternoster, Alfredo (2007) “Vision Science and the Problem of Perception,” in M.
Marraffa, M. De Caro, and F. Ferretti, eds., Cartographies of the Mind, Berlin:
Springer Verlag, pp. 53–64.
Paty, Michel (1999) “Are Quantum Systems Physical Objects with Physical Properties?”
European Journal of Physics, 20(6), 373–388.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

328
Bibliography
Pauen, Michael (2012) “The Second-Person Perspective,” Inquiry, 55(1), 33–49.
Peacock, Kent (1998) “On the Edge of a Paradigm Shift: Quantum Nonlocality and the
Breakdown of Peaceful Coexistence,” International Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, 12(2), 129–149.
Peijnenburg, Jeanne (2006) “Shaping Your Own Life,” Metaphilosophy, 37(2), 240–
253.
Penrose, Roger (1994) Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science of
Consciousness, Oxford University Press.
Pepper, John and Matthew Herron (2008) “Does Biology Need an Organism Concept?”
Biological Review, 83(4), 621–627.
Pereira, Alfredo (2003) “The Quantum Mind/Classical Brain Problem,” NeuroQuantol-
ogy, 1(1), 94–118.
Perlman, Mark (2004) “The Modern Philosophical Resurrection of Teleology,” The
Monist, 87(1), 3–51.
Perus, Mitja (2001) “Image Processing and Becoming Conscious of Its Result,” Infor-
matica, 25, 575–592.
Pestana, Mark (2001) “Complexity Theory, Quantum Mechanics and Radically Free
Self Determination,” Journal of Mind and Behavior, 22(4), 365–388.
Peterman, William (1994) “Quantum Theory and Geography: What Can Dr. Bertlmann
Teach Us?” Professional Geographer, 46(1), 1–9.
Petranker, Jack (2003) “Inhabiting Conscious Experience: Engaged Objectivity in the
First-Person Study of Consciousness,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 10(12),
3–23.
Pettit, Philip (1993a) The Common Mind, Oxford University Press.
(1993b) “A Deﬁnition of Physicalism,” Analysis, 53(4), 213–223.
Pettit, Philip and Christian List (2011) Group Agents, Oxford University Press.
Phelan, Mark and Adam Waytz (2012) “The Moral Cognition/Consciousness Connec-
tion,” Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 3(3), 293–301.
Pickering, Martin and Simon Garrod (2013) “An Integrated Theory of Language Pro-
duction and Comprehension,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(4), 329–347.
Piotrowski, Edward and Jan Sladkowski (2003) “An Invitation to Quantum Game The-
ory,” International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 42(5), 1089–1099.
Piro, Francesco (1997) “Is It Possible to Co-operate without Interaction?” Synthesis
Philosophica, 12(2), 433–444.
Plankar, Matej, Simon Brezan, and Igor Jerman (2013) “The Principle of Coherence in
Multi-level Brain Information Processing,” Progress in Biophysics and Molecular
Biology, 111(1), 8–29.
Platt, John (1956) “Ampliﬁcation Aspects of Biological Response and Mental Activity,”
American Scientist, 44(2), 180–197.
Plotnitsky, Arkady (1994) Complementarity: Anti-Epistemology after Bohr and Der-
rida, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
(2010) Epistemology and Probability: Bohr, Heisenberg, Schr¨odinger, and the Nature
of Quantum-Theoretical Thinking, New York, NY: Springer.
Pockett, Susan (2002) “On Subjective Back-Referral and How Long It Takes to Become
Conscious of a Stimulus,” Consciousness and Cognition, 11(2), 144–161.
Poland, Jeffrey (1994) Physicalism: The Philosophical Foundations, Oxford University
Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
329
Polanyi, Michael (1968) “Life’s Irreducible Structure,” Science, 160, 1308–1312.
Polonioli, Andrea (2014) “Blame It on the Norm: The Challenge from ‘Adaptive Ratio-
nality’,” Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 44(2), 131–150.
Porpora, Douglas (1989) “Four Concepts of Social Structure,” Journal for the Theory
of Social Behaviour, 19(2), 195–221.
(2006) “Methodological Atheism, Methodological Agnosticism and Religious Expe-
rience,” Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 36(1), 57–75.
Portmore, Douglas (2011) “The Teleological Conception of Practical Reasons,” Mind,
120(477), 117–153.
Poser, Hans (1992) “The Notion of Consciousness in Schr¨odinger’s Philosophy of
Nature,” in J, G¨otschl, ed., Erwin Schr¨odinger’s World View, Dordrecht: Kluwer,
pp. 153–168.
Pothos, Emmanuel and Jerome Busemeyer (2009) “A Quantum Probability Explanation
for Violations of ‘Rational’ Decision Theory,” Proceedings of the Royal Society
B, 276, 2171–78.
(2013) “Can Quantum Probability Provide a New Direction for Cognitive Modeling?”
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(3), 255–327 (includes open peer commentary).
(2014) “In Search for a Standard of Rationality,” Frontiers in Psychology, 5, article
49.
Power, Sean Enda (2010) “Perceiving External Things and the Time-Lag Argument,”
European Journal of Philosophy, 21(1), 94–117.
Pradeu, Thomas (2010) “What Is an Organism? An Immunological Answer,” History
and Philosophy of Life Science, 32(2–3), 247–268.
Pradhan, Rajat (2012) “Psychophysical Interpretation of Quantum Theory,” Neuro-
Quantology, 10(4), 629–654.
Pratten, Stephen (2013) “Critical Realism and the Process Account of Emergence,”
Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 43(3), 251–279.
Predelli, Stefano (2005) “Painted Leaves, Context, and Semantic Analysis,” Linguistics
and Philosophy, 28(3), 351–374.
Pribram, Karl (1971) Languages of the Brain, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
(1986) “The Cognitive Revolution and Mind/Brain Issues,” American Psychologist,
41(5), 507–520.
Price, Huw (1996) Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point, Oxford University Press.
(2012) “Does Time-Symmetry Imply Retrocausality? How the Quantum World Says
‘Maybe,’” Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 43(2), 75–
83.
Price, Huw and Richard Corry, eds. (2007) Causation, Physics, and the Constitution of
Reality, Oxford University Press.
Primas, Hans (1992) “Time-Asymmetric Phenomena in Biology,” Open Systems and
Information Dynamics, 1(1), 3–34.
(2003) “Time-Entanglement between Mind and Matter,” Mind and Matter, 1(1),
81–119.
(2007) “Non-Boolean Descriptions for Mind-Matter Problems,” Mind and Matter,
5(1), 7–44.
(2009) “Complementarity of Mind and Matter,” in H. Atmanspacher and H. Primas,
eds., Recasting Reality, Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp. 171–209.
Prosser, Simon (2012) “Emergent Causation,” Philosophical Studies, 159(1), 21–39.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

330
Bibliography
Puryear, Stephen (2010) “Monadic Interaction,” British Journal for the History of
Philosophy, 18(5), 763–795.
Putnam, Hilary (1975) Mind, Language and Reality, Cambridge University Press.
Pylkk¨anen, Paavo (1995) “Mental Causation and Quantum Ontology,” Acta Philosoph-
ica Fennica, 58, 335–348.
(2004) “Can Quantum Analogies Help Us to Understand the Process of Thought?” in
G. Globus, K. Pribram, and G. Vitiello, eds., Brain and Being, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, pp. 165–195.
(2007) Mind, Matter and the Implicate Order, Berlin: Springer.
Pyyhtinen, Olli (2009) “Being-With: Georg Simmel’s Sociology of Association,”
Theory, Culture and Society, 26(5), 108–128.
Radder, Hans and Gerben Meynen (2012) “Does the Brain ‘Initiate’ Freely Willed
Processes? A Philosophy of Science Critique of Libet-type Experiments and Their
Interpretation,” Theory and Psychology, 23(1), 3–21.
Rahnama, Majid, Vahid Salari, and Jack Tuszynski (2009) “How Can the Visual Quan-
tum Information Be Transferred to the Brain Intact, Collapsing There and Causing
Consciousness?” NeuroQuantology, 7(4), 491–499.
Ram, Vimal (2009) “Meanings Attributed to the Term ‘Consciousness’: An Overview,”
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 16(5), 9–27.
Read, Rupert (2008) “The ‘Hard’ Problem of Consciousness Is Continually Reproduced
and Made Harder by All Attempts to Solve It,” Theory, Culture and Society, 25(2),
51–86.
Recanati, Franc¸ois (2002) “Does Linguistic Communication Rest on Inference?” Mind
and Language, 17(1–2), 105–126.
(2005) “Literalism and Contextualism,” in G. Preyer and G. Peter, eds., Contextualism
in Philosophy, Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 171–196.
Reddy, Vasudevi and Paul Morris (2004) “Participants Don’t Need Theories: Knowing
Minds in Engagement,” Theory and Psychology, 14(5), 647–665.
Redman, Deborah (1997) The Rise of Political Economy as a Science, Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Reed, Edward (1983) “Two Theories of the Intentionality of Perceiving,” Synthese
54(1), 85–94.
Rehberg, Karl-Siegbert (2009) “Philosophical Anthropology from the End of World
War I to the 1940s in Current Perspective,” Iris, 1(1), 131–152.
Reill, Peter-Hanns (2005) Vitalizing Nature in the Enlightenment, Berkeley, CA: Uni-
versity of California Press.
Reimers, Jeffrey, Laura McKemmish, Ross McKenzie, Alan Mark, and Noel Hush
(2009) “Weak, Strong, and Coherent Regimes of Fr¨ohlich Condensation and their
Applications to Terahertz Medicine and Quantum Consciousness,” PNAS, 106(11),
4219–4224.
Reynolds, Andrew (2007) “The Theory of the Cell State and the Question of Cell
Autonomy in Nineteenth and Early Twentieth-Century Biology,” Science in Con-
text, 20(1), 71–95.
(2008) “Ernst Haeckel and the Theory of the Cell State,” History of Science, 46(2),
123–152.
(2010) “The Redoubtable Cell,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences, 41(3), 194–201.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
331
Reynolds, David (2003) “The Origins of the Two ‘World Wars’: Historical Discourse
and International Politics,” Journal of Contemporary History, 38(1), 29–44.
Ricciardi, L. and H. Umezawa (1967) “Brain and Physics of Many-Body Problems,”
Kybernetik, 4(2), 44–48.
Rieskamp, Jorg, Jerome Busemeyer, and Barbara Mellers (2006) “Extending the Bounds
of Rationality: Evidence and Theories of Preferential Choice,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 44(3), 631–661.
Ringen, Jon (1999) “Radical Behaviorism: B.F. Skinner’s Philosophy of Science,” in
W. O’Donohue and R. Kitchener, eds., Handbook of Behaviorism, New York, NY:
Academic Press, pp. 159–177.
Risjord, Mark (2004) “Reasons, Causes, and Action Explanation,” Philosophy of the
Social Sciences, 35(3), 294–306.
Robb, David and John Heil (2014) “Mental Causation,” Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy (Spring 2014 edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/spr2014/entries/mental-causation/.
Robbins, Stephen (2002) “Semantics, Experience and Time,” Cognitive Systems
Research, 3(3), 301–337.
(2006) “Bergson and the Holographic Theory of Mind,” Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 5(3–4), 365–394.
Robinson, Andrew and Christopher Southgate (2010) “A General Deﬁnition of Inter-
pretation and Its Application to Origin of Life Research,” Biology and Philosophy,
25(2), 163–181.
Robinson, Howard (2012) “Qualia, Qualities, and the Our Conception of the Physical
World,” in B. G¨ocke, ed., After Physicalism, South Bend, IN: University of Notre
Dame Press, pp. 231–263.
Robinson, William (2005) “Zooming In on Downward Causation,” Biology and Philos-
ophy, 20(1), 117–136.
Rogeberg, Ole and Morten Nordberg (2005) “A Defence of Absurd Theories in Eco-
nomics,” Journal of Economic Methodology, 12(4), 543–562.
Romero-Isart, Oriol, Mathieu Juan, Romain Quidant, and Ignacio Cirac (2010) “Toward
Quantum Superposition of Living Organisms,” New Journal of Physics, 12(3),
article 033015.
Romijn, Herms (2002) “Are Virtual Photons the Elementary Carriers of Conscious-
ness?” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 9(1), 61–81.
Rosa, Luiz and Jean Faber (2004) “Quantum Models of the Mind: Are They Compatible
with Environment Decoherence?” Physical Review E, 70(3), 031902.
Rosen, Steven (2008) The Self-Evolving Cosmos: A Phenomenological Approach to
Nature’s Unity-in-Diversity, Singapore: World Scientiﬁc.
Rosenberg, Gregg (2004) A Place for Consciousness, Oxford University Press.
Rosenblueth, Arturo, Norbert Wiener, and Julian Bigelow (1943) “Behavior, Purpose
and Teleology,” Philosophy of Science, 10(1), 18–24.
Rosenblum, Bruce and Fred Kuttner (1999) “Consciousness and Quantum Mechanics,”
Journal of Mind and Behavior, 20(1), 229–256.
(2002) “The Observer in the Quantum Experiment,” Foundations of Physics, 32(8),
1273–1293.
(2006) Quantum Enigma: Physics Encounters Consciousness, Oxford University
Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

332
Bibliography
Roth, Paul (2012) “The Pasts,” History and Theory, 51(3), 313–339.
Rovane, Carol (2004) “Alienation and the Alleged Separateness of Persons,” The Monist,
87(4), 554–572.
Rudolph, Lloyd and Susanne Rudolph (2003) “Engaging Subjective Knowledge: How
Amar Singh’s Diary Narratives of and by the Self Explain Identity Formation,”
Perspectives on Politics, 1(4), 681–694.
Ruetsche, Laura (2002) “Interpreting Quantum Theories,” in P. Machamer and M.
Silberstein, eds., The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Science, Oxford: Black-
well, pp. 199–226.
Ruiz-Mirazo, Kepa, Arantza Etxeberria, Alvaro Moreno, and Jes´us Ib´a˜nez (2000)
“Organisms and Their Place in Biology,” Theory in Biosciences, 119(3–4), 209–
233.
Rupert, Robert (2009) Cognitive Systems and the Extended Mind, Oxford University
Press.
Ryle, Gilbert (1949) The Concept of Mind, London: Hutchinson.
Rysiew, Patrick (2011) “Epistemic Contextualism,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy (Winter 2011 edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2011/entries/contextualism-epistemology/.
Sahu, Satyajit, Subrata Ghosh, Daisuke Fujita, and Anirban Bandyopadhyay (2011)
“Computational Myths and Mysteries That Have Grown Around Microtubule in
the Last Half a Century and Their Possible Veriﬁcation,” Journal of Computational
and Theoretical Nanoscience, 8(3), 509–515.
Sahu, Satyajit, Subrata Ghosh, Batu Ghosh, Krishna Aswani, Kazuto Hirata, Daisuke
Fujita, and Anirban Bandyopadhyay (2013a) “Atomic Water Channel Controlling
Remarkable Properties of a Single Brain Microtubule,” Biosensors and Bioelec-
tronics, 47(15), 141–148.
Sahu, Satyajit, Subrata Ghosh, Kazuto Hirata, Daisuke Fujita, and Anirban Bandy-
opadhyay (2013b) “Multi-Level Memory Switching Properties of a Single Brain
Microtubule,” Applied Physics Letters, 102(12), 123701–123704.
Samuel, Arthur (2011) “Speech Perception,” Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 49–72.
Sappington, A. A. (1990) “Recent Psychological Approaches to the Free Will versus
Determinism Issue,” Psychological Bulletin, 108(1), 19–29.
Satinover, Jeffrey (2001) The Quantum Brain, New York, NY: Wiley.
Savage, L. J. (1954) The Foundations of Statistics, New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Savitt, Steven (1996) “The Direction of Time,” British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 47(3), 347–370.
Sawyer, R. Keith (2002) “Durkheim’s Dilemma: Toward a Sociology of Emergence,”
Sociological Theory, 20(2), 227–247.
(2005) Social Emergence: Societies as Complex Systems, Cambridge University
Press.
Sayes, Edwin (2014) “Actor-Network Theory and Methodology: Just What Does It
Mean to Say that Nonhumans Have Agency?” Social Studies of Science, 44(1),
134–149.
Sch¨afer, Lothar (2006) “Quantum Reality and the Consciousness of the Universe,”
Zygon, 41(3), 505–532.
Schatzki, Theodore (2002) The Site of the Social, University Park, PA: Pennsylvania
State University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
333
(2005) “The Sites of Organizations,” Organization Studies, 26(3), 465–484.
(2006) “On Organizations as They Happen,” Organization Studies, 27(12), 1863–
1873.
Schatzki, Theodore, Karin Knorr-Cetina, and Eike von Savigny, eds. (2001) The Practice
Turn in Contemporary Social Theory, London: Routledge.
Schilbach, Leonhard, Bert Timmermans, Vasudevi Reddy, Alan Costall, Gary Bente,
Tobias Schlicht, and Kai Vogeley (2013) “Toward a Second-Person Neuroscience,”
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(4), 393–414.
Schindler, Samuel (2014) “Explanatory Fictions – For Real?” Synthese, 191(8), 1741–
1755.
Schlosser, Markus (2014) “The Neuroscientiﬁc Study of Free Will: A Diagnosis of the
Controversy,” Synthese, 191(2), 245–262.
Schmid, Hans Bernhard (2014) “Plural Self-Awareness,” Phenomenology and the Cog-
nitive Sciences, 13(1), 7–24.
Schmidt, R. C. (2007) “Scaffolds for Social Meaning,” Ecological Psychology, 19(2),
137–151.
Schneider, Jean (2005) “Quantum Measurement Act as a Speech Act,” in R. Buccheri,
et al., eds., Endophysics, Time, Quantum and the Subjective, Singapore: World
Scientiﬁc, pp. 345–354.
Schr¨odinger, Erwin (1944) What Is Life?, Cambridge University Press.
(1959) Mind and Matter, Cambridge University Press.
Schroeder, Severin (2001) “Are Reasons Causes? A Wittgensteinian Response to David-
son,” in Schroeder, ed., Wittgenstein and Contemporary Philosophy of Mind, New
York: Palgrave, pp. 150–170.
Schubert, Glendon (1983) “The Evolution of Political Science: Paradigms of Physics,
Biology, and Politics,” Politics and the Life Sciences, 1(2), 97–124.
Schueler, G. F. (2003) Reasons and Purposes, Oxford University Press.
Schwartz, Jeffrey, Henry Stapp, and Mario Beauregard (2005) “Quantum Physics in
Neuroscience and Psychology,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B, 360, 1309–1327.
Schwartz, Sanford (1992) “Bergson and the Politics of Vitalism,” in F. Burwick and P.
Douglass, eds., The Crisis in Modernism, Cambridge University Press, pp. 277–
305.
Scott, Joan (1991) “The Evidence of Experience,” Critical Inquiry, 17(4), 773–797.
Seager, William (1995) “Consciousness, Information and Panpsychism,” Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 2(3), 272–288.
(2009) “Panpsychism,” in B. McLaughlin, et al., eds., The Oxford Handbook of
Philosophy of Mind, Oxford University Press, pp. 206–219.
(2010) “Panpsychism, Aggregation, and Combinatorial Infusion,” Mind and Matter,
8(2), 167–184.
(2012) “Emergentist Panpsychism,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 19(9–10),
19–39.
(2013) “Classical Levels, Russellian Monism and the Implicate Order,” Foundations
of Physics, 43(4), 548–567.
Searle, John (1991) “Intentionalistic Explanations in the Social Sciences,” Philosophy
of the Social Sciences, 21(3), 332–344.
(1992) The Rediscovery of the Mind, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

334
Bibliography
(1995) The Construction of Social Reality, New York: Free Press.
(2001) Rationality in Action, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Seevinck, M. P. (2004) “Holism, Physical Theories and Quantum Mechanics,” Studies
in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 35(4), 693–712.
Sehon, Scott (2005) Teleological Realism: Mind, Agency, and Explanation, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Sending, Ole (2002) “Constitution, Choice and Change: Problems with the ‘Logic
of Appropriateness’ and Its Use in Constructivist Theory,” European Journal of
International Relations, 8(4), 443–470.
Seth, Anil, Bernaard Baars, and David Edelman (2005) “Criteria for Consciousness in
Humans and Other Mammals,” Consciousness and Cognition, 14(1), 119–139.
Sevush, Steven (2006) “Single-Neuron Theory of Consciousness,” Journal of Theoret-
ical Biology, 238(3), 704–725.
Shani, Itay (2010) “Mind Stuffed with Red Herrings: Why William James’ Critique of
the Mind-Stuff Theory Does not Substantiate a Combination Problem for Panpsy-
chism,” Acta Analytica, 25(4), 413–434.
Shanks, Niall (1993) “Quantum Mechanics and Determinism,” The Philosophical
Quarterly, 43, 20–37.
Shannon, C. (1949) “The Mathematical Theory of Communication,” in C. Shannon and
W. Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of Communication, Urbana, IL: University
of Illinois Press, pp. 3–91.
Shapiro, J. A. (2007) “Bacteria Are Small But Not Stupid,” Studies in History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 38(4), 807–819.
Shaw, Robert, Endre Kadar, and Jeffrey Kinsella-Shaw (1994) “Modelling Systems with
Intentional Dynamics: A Lesson from Quantum Mechanics,” in K. Pribram, ed.,
Origins: Brain and Self Organization, Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, pp. 54–
101.
Sheehy, Paul (2006) The Reality of Social Groups, Aldershot: Ashgate.
Sheets-Johnstone, Maxine (1998) “Consciousness: A Natural History,” Journal of Con-
sciousness Studies, 5(3), 260–294.
(2009) “Animation: The Fundamental, Essential, and Properly Descriptive Concept,”
Continental Philosophy Review, 42(3), 375–400.
Sheperd, Joshua (2013) “The Apparent Illusion of Conscious Deciding,” Philosophical
Explorations, 16(1), 18–30.
Shimony, Abner (1963) “Role of the Observer in Quantum Theory,” American Journal
of Physics, 31(10), 755–773.
(1978) “Metaphysical Problems in the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics,” Inter-
national Philosophical Quarterly, 18(1), 2–17.
Shoemaker, Paul (1982) “The Expected Utility Model: Its Variants, Purposes, Evidence
and Limitations,” Journal of Economic Literature, 20(2), 529–563.
Short, T. L. (2007) “Final Causation,” chapter 5 in Short, Peirce’s Theory of Signs,
Cambridge University Press, pp. 117–150.
Shulman, Robert and Ian Shapiro (2009) “Reductionism in the Human Sciences,” in C.
Mantzavinos, ed., Philosophy of the Social Sciences, Cambridge University Press,
pp. 124–129.
Siegfried, Tom (2000) The Bit and the Pendulum: From Quantum Computing to M
Theory, New York, NY: Wiley.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
335
Sieroka, Norman (2007) “Weyl’s ‘Agens Theory’ of Matter and the Zurich Fichte,”
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science, 38(1), 84–107.
(2010) “Geometrization versus Transcendent Matter: A Systematic Historiography of
Theories of Matter Following Weyl,” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science,
61(4), 769–802.
Siewert, Charles (1998) The Signiﬁcance of Consciousness, Princeton University Press.
(2011) “Consciousness and Intentionality,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall 2011 edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
fall2011/entries/consciousness-intentionality/.
Silberstein, Michael (2002) “Reduction, Emergence and Explanation,” in P. Machamer
and M. Silberstein, eds., The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Science, Oxford:
Blackwell, pp. 80–107.
(2009) “Essay Review: Why Neutral Monism is Superior to Panpsychism,” Mind and
Matter, 7(2), 239–248.
Silberstein, Michael and John McGeever (1999) “The Search for Ontological Emer-
gence,” The Philosophical Quarterly, 49, 182–200.
Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter and Lynn Nadel, eds. (2011) Conscious Will and Responsi-
bility: A Tribute to Benjamin Libet, Oxford University Press.
Sitte, Peter (1992) “A Modern Concept of the ‘Cell Theory,’” International Journal of
Plant Science, 153(3), S1–S6.
Sklar, Lawrence (2003) “Dappled Theories in a Uniform World,” Philosophy of Science,
70(2), 424–441.
Skrbina, David (2005) Panpsychism in the West, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Sloan, Phillip (2012) “How Was Teleology Eliminated in Early Molecular Biology?”
Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 43(1),
140–151.
Slovic, Paul (1995) “The Construction of Preference,” American Psychologist, 50(5),
364–371.
Smith, C. U. M. (2001) “Renatus Renatus: The Cartesian Tradition in British Neuro-
science and the Neurophilosophy of John Carew Eccles,” Brain and Cognition,
46(3), 364–372.
Smith, Joel (2010a) “The Conceptual Problem of Other Bodies,” Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, 110(2), 201–217.
(2010b) “Seeing Other People,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 81(3),
731–748.
Smith, John (2012) “The Endogenous Nature of the Measurement of Social Prefer-
ences,” Mind and Society, 11(2), 235–256.
Smolin, Lee (2001) Three Roads to Quantum Gravity, New York, NY: Basic
Books.
Sole, Albert (2013) “Bohmian Mechanics without Wave Function Ontology,” Studies
in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 44(4), 365–378.
Sollberger, Michael (2008) “Na¨ıve Realism and the Problem of Causation,” Disputatio,
3, 1–19.
(2012) “Causation in Perception: A Challenge to Na¨ıve Realism,” Review of Philos-
ophy and Psychology, 3(4), 581–595.
Sozzo, Sandro (2014) “A Quantum Probability Explanation in Fock Space for Borderline
Contradictions,” Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 58(1), 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

336
Bibliography
Spaulding, Shannon (2012) “Mirror Neurons are Not Evidence for the Simulation
Theory,” Synthese, 189(3), 515–534.
Sprigge, T. L. S. (1983) The Vindication of Absolute Idealism, Edinburgh University
Press.
Squires, Euan (1990) Conscious Mind in the Physical World, Philadelphia, PA: Institute
of Physics.
(1994) The Mystery of the Quantum World, Philadelphia, PA: Institute of Physics.
Stapp, Henry (1972/1997) “The Copenhagen Interpretation,” Journal of Mind and
Behavior, 18(2–3), 127–154.
(1993) Mind, Matter, and Quantum Mechanics, Berlin: Springer Verlag.
(1996) “The Hard Problem: A Quantum Approach,” Journal of Consciousness Stud-
ies, 3(3), 194–210.
(1999) “Attention, Intention, and Will in Quantum Physics,” Journal of Conscious-
ness Studies, 6(8–9), 143–164.
(2001) “Quantum Theory and the Role of Mind in Nature,” Foundations of Physics,
31(10), 1465–1499.
(2005) “Quantum Interactive Dualism: An Alternative to Materialism,” Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 12(11), 43–58.
(2006) “Quantum Interactive Dualism, II: The Libet and Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen
Causal Anomalies,” Erkenntnis, 65(1), 117–142.
Stawarska, Beata (2008) “‘You’ and ‘I,’ ‘Here’ and ‘Now’: Spatial and Social Situated-
ness in Deixis,” International Journal of Philosophical Studies, 16(3), 399–418.
(2009) Between You and I: Dialogical Phenomenology, Athens, OH: Ohio University
Press.
Stazicker, James (2011) “Attention, Visual Consciousness and Indeterminacy,” Mind
and Language, 26(2), 156–184.
Steffensen, Sune Vork (2009) “Language, Languaging, and the Extended Mind Hypoth-
esis,” Pragmatics and Cognition, 17(3), 677–697.
Steffensen, Sune Vork and Stephen Cowley (2010) “Signifying Bodies and Health:
A Non-Local Aftermath,” in S. Cowley, et al., eds., Signifying Bodies, Braga:
Portuguese Catholic University Press, pp. 331–355.
Steinberg, S. H. (1947) “The Thirty Years War: A New Interpretation,” History, 32,
89–102.
Stella, Marco and Karel Kleisner (2010) “Uexk¨ullian Umwelt as Science and as Ideol-
ogy,” Theory in Biosciences, 129(1), 39–51.
Stephan, Achim, Sven Walter, and Wendy Wilutzky (2014) “Emotions beyond Brain
and Body,” Philosophical Psychology, 27(1), 65–81.
Stewart, John (1996) “Cognition = Life: Implications for Higher-Level Cognition,”
Behavioural Processes, 35(1–3), 311–326.
Stout, Rowland (1996) Things That Happen Because They Should: A Teleological
Approach to Action, Oxford: Clarendon Press..
Strawson, Galen (2004) “Real Intentionality,” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sci-
ences, 3(3), 287–313.
(2006) “Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism,” Journal of Con-
sciousness Studies, 13(10–11), 3–31.
Strehle, Stephen (2011) “The Nazis and the German Metaphysical Tradition of Volun-
tarism,” The Review of Metaphysics, 65(1), 113–137.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
337
Stuart, C., Y. Takahashi, and H. Umezawa (1978) “On the Stability and Non-Local
Properties of Memory,” Journal of Theoretical Biology, 71(4), 605–618.
Stubenberg, Leopold (2014) “Neutral Monism,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philoso-
phy (Fall 2014 edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/
fall2014/entries/neutral-monism/.
Stueber, Karsten (2002) “The Psychological Basis of Historical Explanation: Reen-
actment, Simulation, and the Fusion of Horizons,” History and Theory, 41(1),
25–42.
Su´arez, Antoine and Peter Adams, eds. (2013) Is Science Compatible with Free Will?
Exploring Free Will and Consciousness in the Light of Quantum Physics and
Neuroscience, Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Suarez, Mauricio (2007) “Quantum Propensities,” Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics, 38(2), 418–438.
ed. (2009) Fictions in Science, London: Routledge.
Suddendorf, Thomas and Michael Corballis (2007) “The Evolution of Foresight: What Is
Mental Time Travel, and Is It Unique to Humans?” Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
30(3), 299–351.
Suddendorf, Thomas, Donna Rose Addis, and Michael Corballis (2009) “Mental Time
Travel and the Shaping of the Human Mind,” Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B, 364, 1317–1324.
Sullivan, Gregory (2011) “The Instinctual Nation-State: Non-Darwinian Theories, State
Science and Ultra-Nationalism in Oka Asajiro’s Evolution and Human Life,” Jour-
nal of the History of Biology, 44(3), 547–586.
Svozil, Karl and Ron Wright (2005) “Statistical Structures Underlying Quantum
Mechanics and Social Science,” International Journal of Theoretical Physics,
44(7), 1067–1086.
Swann, William, Angel Gomez, D. Conor Seyle, J. Francisco Morales, and Carmen
Huici (2009) “Identity Fusion: The Interplay of Personal and Social Identities in
Extreme Group Behavior,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96(5),
995–1011.
Swenson, Rod (1999) “Epistemic Ordering and the Development of Space-Time: Inten-
tionality as a Universal Entailment,” Semiotica, 127(1–4), 567–597.
Swinburne, Richard (2013) Mind, Brain, and Free Will, Oxford University Press.
Sylvester, Christine (2012) “War Experiences/War Practices/War Theory,” Millennium,
40(3), 483–503.
Sytsma, Justin (2009) “Phenomenological Obviousness and the New Science of Con-
sciousness,” Philosophy of Science, 76(5), 958–969.
Szanto, Thomas (2014) “How to Share a Mind: Reconsidering the Group Mind Hypoth-
esis,” Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 13(1), 99–120.
Tabaczek, Mariusz (2013) “The Metaphysics of Downward Causation,” Zygon, 48(2),
380–404.
Talbot, Michael (1991) The Holographic Universe, New York: Harper Collins.
Tanesini, Alessandra (2006) “Bringing About the Normative Past,” American Philoso-
phical Quarterly, 43(3), 191–206.
(2014) “Temporal Externalism: A Taxonomy, an Articulation, and a Defence,” Jour-
nal of the Philosophy of History, 8(1), 1–19.
Tanney, Julia (1995) “Why Reasons May Not Be Causes,” Mind and Language, 10(1/2),
105–128.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

338
Bibliography
Tantillo, Astrida (2002) The Will to Create: Goethe’s Philosophy of Nature, University
of Pittsburgh Press.
Tarde, Gabriel (1895/2012) Monadology and Sociology, Melbourne: re.press.
Tauber, Alfred (1994) The Immune Self: Theory or Metaphor? Cambridge University
Press.
(2013) “Immunology’s Theories of Cognition,” History and Philosophy of the Life
Sciences, 35(2), 239–264.
Tegmark, Max (2000a) “Importance of Quantum Decoherence in Brain Processes,”
Physical Review E, 61(4), 4194–4206.
(2000b) “Why the Brain Is Probably Not a Quantum Computer,” Information Sci-
ences, 128(3), 155–179.
(2014) “Consciousness as a State of Matter,” arXiv:1401.1219v2.
Teller, Paul (1986) “Relational Holism and Quantum Mechanics,” British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science, 37(1), 71–81.
(1998) “Quantum Mechanics and Haecceities,” in E. Castellani, ed., Interpreting
Bodies, Princeton University Press, pp. 114–141.
Temby, Owen (2013) “What Are Levels of Analysis and What Do They Contribute
to International Relations Theory?” Cambridge Review of International Affairs,
online.
Teufel, Thomas (2011) “Wholes that Cause their Parts: Organic Self-Reproduction
and the Reality of Biological Teleology,” Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 42(2), 252–260.
Theiner, Georg, Colin Allen, and Robert Goldstone (2010) “Recognizing Group Cog-
nition,” Cognitive Systems Research, 11(4), 378–395.
Thomas, Michael, Harry Purser, and Denis Mareschal (2012) “Is the Mystery of Thought
Demystiﬁed by Context-Dependent Categorisation?” Mind and Language, 27(5),
595–618.
Thompson, Evan (2007) Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of the
Mind, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Todd, Patrick (2013) “Soft Facts and Ontological Dependence,” Philosophical Studies,
164(3), 829–844.
Toepfer, Georg (2012) “Teleology and Its Constitutive Role for Biology as the Science
of Organized Systems in Nature,” Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological
and Biomedical Sciences, 43(1), 113–119.
Togeby, Ole (2000) “Anticipated Downward Causation and the Arch Structure of Texts,”
in P. Andersen, et al., eds., Downward Causation: Minds, Bodies and Matter,
Aarhus University Press, pp. 261–277.
Tollaksen, Jeff (1996) “New Insights from Quantum Theory on Time, Consciousness,
and Reality,” in S. Hameroff, A. Kaszniak, and A. Scott, eds., Toward a Science of
Consciousness, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 551–567.
Tononi, Giulio (2008) “Consciousness as Integrated Information: A Provisional Mani-
festo,” Biological Bulletin, 215(3), 216–242.
Trewavas, Anthony (2003) “Aspects of Plant Intelligence,” Annals of Botany, 92(1),
1–20.
(2008) “Aspects of Plant Intelligence: Convergence and Evolution,” in S. Conway
Morris, ed., The Deep Structure of Biology, West Conshohocken, PA: Templeton
Foundation Press, pp. 68–110.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
339
Trout, J. D. (2002) “Scientiﬁc Explanation and the Sense of Understanding,” Philosophy
of Science, 69(2), 212–233.
Trueblood, Jennifer and Jerome Busemeyer (2011) “A Quantum Probability Account
of Order Effects in Inference,” Cognitive Science, 35(8), 1518–1552.
Turausky, Keith (2014) “Conference Report: ‘The Most Interesting Problem in the
Universe,’” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 21(7–8), 220–240.
Tuszynksi, Jack, ed. (2006) The Emerging Physics of Consciousness, Berlin: Springer
Verlag.
Tuszynski, J., J. Brown, and P. Hawrylak (1997) “Dielectric Polarization, Electri-
cal Conduction, Information Processing, and Quantum Computation in Microtu-
bules,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A, 356, 1897–
1926.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman (1983) “Extensional versus Intuitive Reasoning:
The Conjunctive Fallacy in Probability Judgment,” Psychological Review, 90(4),
293–315.
Tversky, Amos, Paul Slovic, and Daniel Kahneman (1990) “The Causes of Preference
Reversal,” American Economic Review, 80(1), 204–217.
Tyl´en, Kristian, Ethan Weed, Mikkel Wallentin, Andreas Roepstorff, and Chris Frith
(2010) “Language as a Tool for Interacting Minds,” Mind and Language, 25(1),
3–29.
Uzan, Pierre (2012) “A Quantum Approach to the Psychosomatic Phenomenon: Co-
Emergence and Time Entanglement of Mind and Matter,” KronoScope, 12(2),
219–244.
Vaihinger, Hans (1924) The Philosophy of ‘As If’, New York: Harcourt Brace.
Valenza, Robert (2008) “Possibility, Actuality, and Free Will,” World Futures, 64(2),
94–108.
Van Camp, Wesley (2014) “Explaining Understanding (or Understanding Explanation),”
European Journal for Philosophy of Science, 4(1), 95–114.
Vandenberghe, Frederic (2002) “Reconstructing Humants: A Humanist Critique of
Actant-Network Theory,” Theory, Culture and Society, 19(5–6), 51–67.
Van Dijk, Ludger and Rob Withagen (2014) “The Horizontal Worldview: A Wittgen-
steinian Attitude towards Scientiﬁc Psychology,” Theory and Psychology, 24(1),
3–18.
Van Duijn, Marc and Sacha Bem (2005) “On the Alleged Illusion of Conscious Will,”
Philosophical Psychology, 18(6), 699–714.
Van Gulick, Robert (2001) “Reduction, Emergence and Other Recent Options on the
Mind–Body Problem: A Philosophical Overview,” Journal of Consciousness Stud-
ies, 8(9–10), 1–34.
Van Putten, Cornelis (2006) “Changing the Past: Retrocausality and Narrative Construc-
tion,” Metaphilosophy, 37(2), 254–258.
Vannini, Antonella (2008) “Quantum Models of Consciousness,” Quantum Biosystems,
2, 165–184.
Varga, Somogy (2011) “Existential Choices: To What Degree is Who We Are a Matter
of Choice?” Continental Philosophy Review, 44(1), 65–79.
Vedral, Vlatko (2010) Decoding Reality: The Universe as Quantum Information, Oxford
University Press.
Velmans, Max (2000) Understanding Consciousness, London: Routledge.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

340
Bibliography
(2002) “Making Sense of Causal Interactions between Consciousness and Brain,”
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 9(11), 69–95.
(2003) “Preconscious Free Will,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 10(12), 42–61.
(2008) “Reﬂexive Monism,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 15(2), 5–50.
Verheggen, Claudine (2006) “How Social Must Language Be?,” Journal for the Theory
of Social Behaviour, 36(2), 203–219.
Vermersch, Pierre (2004) “Attention between Phenomenology and Experimental Psy-
chology,” Continental Philosophy Review, 37(1), 45–81.
Vicente, Agustin (2006) “On the Causal Completeness of Physics,” International Studies
in the Philosophy of Science, 20(2), 149–171.
(2011) “Current Physics and ‘the Physical,’” British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 62(2), 393–416.
Vimal, Ram (2009) “Subjective Experience Aspect of Consciousness, Parts I and II,”
Neuroquantology, 7(3), 390–410 and 411–434.
Vitiello, Giuseppe (2001) My Double Unveiled: The Dissipative Quantum Model of
Brain, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Von Lucadou, Walter (1994) “Wigner’s Friend Revitalized?” in H. Atmanspacher and
G. Dalenoort, eds., Inside Versus Outside, Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp. 369–388.
Von Neumann, John and Oskar Morgenstern (1944) Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior, Princeton University Press.
Von Uexk¨ull, Jakob (1982[1940]) “The Theory of Meaning,” Semiotica, 42(1), 25–82.
Von Wright, Georg (1971) Explanation and Understanding, Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press.
Walach, Harald and Nikolaus von Stillfried (2011) “Generalised Quantum Theory –
Basic Idea and General Intuition,” Axiomathes, 21(2), 185–209.
Walker, Evan Harris (1970) “The Nature of Consciousness,” Mathematical Biosciences,
7(1–2), 131–178.
Wallace, Alan (2000) The Taboo of Subjectivity, Oxford University Press.
Wallin, Annika (2013) “A Peace Treaty for the Rationality Wars?” Theory and Psychol-
ogy, 23(4), 458–478.
Walsh, D. M. (2006) “Organisms as Natural Purposes,” Studies in History and Philos-
ophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 37(4), 771–791.
Walsh, Denis (2012) “Mechanism and Purpose: A Case for Natural Teleology,” Studies
in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 43(1), 173–181.
Walter, Sven (2014a) “Willusionism, Epiphenomenalism, and the Feeling of Conscious
Will,” Synthese, 191(10), 2215–2238.
(2014b) “Situated Cognition: A Field Guide to Some Open Conceptual and Ontolog-
ical Issues,” Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 5(2), 241–263.
Waltz, Kenneth (1979) Theory of International Politics, Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Wang, Zheng and Jerome Busemeyer (2013) “A Quantum Question Order Model Sup-
ported by Empirical Tests of an a priori and Precise Prediction,” Topics in Cognitive
Science, 5(4), 689–710.
Wang, Zheng, Jerome Busemeyer, Harald Atmanspacher, and Emmanuel Pothos (2013)
“The Potential of Using Quantum Theory to Build Models of Cognition,” Topics
in Cognitive Science, 5(4), 672–688.
Ward, Barry (2014) “Is There a Link between Quantum Mechanics and Consciousness?”
in C. U. M. Smith and H. Whitaker, eds., Brain, Mind and Consciousness in the
History of Neuroscience, Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp. 273–302.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
341
Ward, Dave (2012) “Enjoying the Spread: Conscious Externalism Reconsidered,” Mind,
121, 731–751.
Warﬁeld, Ted (2003) “Compatibilism and Incompatibilism,” in M. Loux and D. Zim-
merman, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Metaphysics, Oxford University Press,
pp. 613–30.
Warren, William (2005) “Direct Perception: The View from Here,” Philosophical Top-
ics, 33(1), 335–361.
Waters, Christopher and Bonnie Bassler (2005) “Quorum Sensing: Cell-to-Cell Com-
munication in Bacteria,” Annual Review of Cell and Development, 21, 319–
346.
Weber, Andreas and Francisco Varela (2002) “Life after Kant: Natural Purposes and
the Autopoietic Foundations of Biological Individuality,” Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences, 1(2), 97–125.
Weber, Marcel (2005) “Genes, Causation and Intentionality,” History and Philosophy
of the Life Sciences, 27(3–4), 407–420.
Weberman, David (1997) “The Nonﬁxity of the Historical Past,” Review of Metaphysics,
50(4), 749–768.
Weekes, Anderson (2009) “Whitehead’s Unique Approach to the Topic of Conscious-
ness,” in M. Weber and A. Weekes, eds., Process Approaches to Consciousness
in Psychology, Neuroscience, and Philosophy of Mind, Albany, NY: SUNY Press,
pp. 137–172.
(2012) “The Mind–Body Problem and Whitehead’s Non-Reductive Monism,” Jour-
nal of Consciousness Studies, 19(9–10), 40–66.
Wegner, Daniel (2002) The Illusion of Conscious Will, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Wegner, Daniel, et al. (2004) “Pr´ecis of The Illusion of Conscious Will, with Commen-
taries,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 27(5), 649–692.
Weisskopf, Walter (1979) “The Method is the Ideology: From a Newtonian to a
Heisenbergian Paradigm in Economics,” Journal of Economic Issues, 13(4), 869–
884.
Wendt, Alexander (1987) “The Agent–Structure Problem in International Relations
Theory,” International Organization, 41(3), 335–370.
(1998) “On Constitution and Causation in International Relations,” Review of Inter-
national Studies, 24 (special issue), 101–117.
(1999) Social Theory of International Politics, Cambridge University Press.
(2003) “Why a World State Is Inevitable,” European Journal of International Rela-
tions, 9(4), 491–542.
(2004) “The State as Person in International Theory,” Review of International Studies,
30(2), 289–316.
(2006) “Social Theory as Cartesian Science: An Auto-Critique from a Quantum
Perspective,” in S. Guzzini and A. Leander, eds., Constructivism in International
Relations: Alexander Wendt and his Critics, London: Routledge, pp. 181–219.
(2010) “Flatland: Quantum Mind and the International Hologram,” in M. Albert,
L.-E. Cederman, and A. Wendt, eds., New Systems Theories of World Politics, New
York, NY: Palgrave, pp. 279–310.
Wendt, Alexander and Raymond Duvall (2008) “Sovereignty and the UFO,” Political
Theory, 36(4), 607–644.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

342
Bibliography
Wheeler, John Archibald (1978) “The ‘Past’ and the ‘Delayed-Choice’ Double-Slit
Experiment,” in A. Marlow, ed., Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory,
New York: Academic Press, pp. 9–48.
(1988) “World as System Self-Synthesized by Quantum Networking,” in E. Agazzi,
ed., Probability in the Sciences, Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 103–
129.
(1990) “Information, Physics, Quantum: The Search for Links,” in W. Zurek, ed.,
Complexity, Entropy, and the Physics of Information, Reading, MA: Addison
Wesley, pp. 3–28.
(1994) “Delayed-Choice Experiments and the Bohr-Einstein Dialogue,” in J.
Wheeler, At Home in the Universe, Woodbury, NY: American Institute of Physics,
pp. 112–131.
Whitford, Josh (2002) “Pragmatism and the Untenable Dualism of Means and Ends,”
Theory and Society, 31(3), 325–363.
Widdows, Dominic (2004) Geometry and Meaning, Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Wight, Colin (2006) Agents, Structures and International Relations, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Wigner, Eugene (1962) “Remarks on the Mind–Body Question,” in I. J. Good, ed., The
Scientist Speculates, London: Heinemann, pp. 284–302.
(1964) “Two Kinds of Reality,” The Monist, 48(2), 248–264.
(1970) “Physics and the Explanation of Life,” Foundations of Physics, 1(1), 35–45.
Williams, Meredith (2000) “Wittgenstein and Davidson on the Sociality of Language,”
Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 30(3), 299–318.
Wilson, David Sloan (2002) Darwin’s Cathedral: Evolution, Religion and the Nature
of Society, University of Chicago Press.
Wilson, David Sloan and Elliott Sober (1989) “Reviving the Superorganism,” Journal
of Theoretical Biology, 136(3), 337–356.
Wilson, Jessica (2006) “On Characterizing the Physical,” Philosophical Studies, 131(1),
61–99.
Wilson, Robert (2001) “Group-Level Cognition,” Philosophy of Science, 68 (Proceed-
ings), S262–S273.
Wimsatt, William (2006) “Reductionism and Its Heuristics: Making Methodological
Reductionism Honest,” Synthese, 151(3), 445–475.
Winsberg, Eric and Arthur Fine (2003) “Quantum Life: Interaction, Entanglement, and
Separation,” Journal of Philosophy, 100(2), 80–97.
Witte, F. M. C. (2005) “Quantum 2-Player Gambling and Correlated Pay-Off,” Physica
Scripta, 71(2), 229–232.
Wolf, Fred Alan (1989) “On the Quantum Physical Theory of Subjective Antedating,”
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 136(1), 13–19.
(1998) “The Timing of Conscious Experience,” Journal of Scientiﬁc Exploration,
12(4), 511–542.
Wolters, Gereon (2001) “Hans Jonas’ Philosophical Biology,” Graduate Faculty Phi-
losophy Journal, 23(1), 85–98.
Wong, Hong Yu (2006) “Emergents from Fusion,” Philosophy of Science, 73(3), 345–
367.
Woodward, Keith, John Paul Jones III, and Sallie Marston (2012) “The Politics of
Autonomous Space,” Progress in Human Geography, 36(2), 204–224.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Bibliography
343
Woolf, Nancy and Stuart Hameroff (2001) “A Quantum Approach to Visual Conscious-
ness,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5(11), 472–478.
Worden, R. P. (1999) “Hybrid Cognition,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 6(1),
70–90.
Worgan, S. F. and R. K. Moore (2010) “Speech as the Perception of Affordances,”
Ecological Psychology, 22(4), 327–343.
Wrong, Dennis (1961) “The Oversocialized Conception of Man in Modern Sociology,”
American Sociological Review, 26(2), 183–193.
Yearsley, James and Emmanuel Pothos (2014) “Challenging the Classical Notion of
Time in Cognition: A Quantum Perspective,” Proceedings of the Royal Society B,
281 (1781), article 20133056.
Ylikoski, Petri (2013) “Causal and Constitutive Explanation Compared,” Erkenntnis,
78(2), 277–297.
Young, Arthur (1976) The Reﬂexive Universe, New York, NY: Delacorte Press.
Yu, Shan and Danko Nikolic (2011) “Quantum Mechanics Needs No Consciousness,”
Annalen der Physik, 523(11), 931–938.
Yukalov, Vyacheslav and Didier Sornette (2009a) “Physics of Risk and Uncertainty in
Quantum Decision Making,” European Physical Journal B, 71(4), 533–548.
(2009b) “Processing Information in Quantum Decision Theory,” Entropy, 11(4),
1073–1120.
(2011) “Decision Theory with Prospect Interference and Entanglement,” Theory and
Decision, 70(3), 283–328.
(2014) “Conditions for Quantum Interference in Cognitive Sciences,” Topics in Cog-
nitive Science, 6(1), 79–90.
Zahavi, Dan (2005) Subjectivity and Selfhood: Investigating the First-Person Perspec-
tive, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
(2008) “Simulation, Projection and Empathy,” Consciousness and Cognition, 17(2),
514–522.
Zahavi, Dan and Shaun Gallagher (2008) “The (In)visibility of Others: A Reply to
Herschbach,” Philosophical Explorations, 11(3), 237–244.
Zahle, Julie (2014) “Practices and the Direct Perception of Normative States: Part I,”
Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 43(4), 493–518.
Zaman, L. Frederick (2002) “Nature’s Psychogenic Forces: Localized Quantum Con-
sciousness,” Journal of Mind and Behavior, 23(4), 351–374.
Zammito, John (2006) “Teleology Then and Now: The Question of Kant’s Relevance
for Contemporary Controversies over Function in Biology,” Studies in History and
Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 37(4), 748–770.
Zeilinger, Anton (1999) “Experiment and the Foundations of Quantum Physics,”
Reviews of Modern Physics, 71(2), S288–S297.
Zeki, S. (2003) “The Disunity of Consciousness,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(5),
214–218.
Zhenhua, Yu (2001–2002) “Two Cultures Revisited: Michael Polanyi on the Continuity
between the Natural Science and the Study of Man,” Tradition and Discovery,
28(3), 6–19.
Zhu, Jing (2003) “Reclaiming Volition: An Alternative Interpretation of Libet’s Exper-
iment,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 10(11), 61–77.
(2004a) “Understanding Volition,” Philosophical Psychology, 17(2), 247–273.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

344
Bibliography
(2004b) “Intention and Volition,” Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 34(2), 175–194.
Ziman, John (2003) “Emerging Out of Nature into History: The Plurality of the Sci-
ences,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A, 361, 1617–
1633.
Zimmerman, Michael (1988) “Quantum Theory, Intrinsic Value, and Panentheism,”
Environmental Ethics, 10(1), 3–30.
Zlatev, Jordan (2008) “The Dependence of Language on Consciousness,” Journal of
Consciousness Studies, 15(6), 34–62.
Zohar, Danah (1990) The Quantum Self, New York, NY: Quill.
Zohar, Danah and Ian Marshall (1994) The Quantum Society: Mind, Physics and a New
Social Vision, New York, NY: Morrow.
Zovko, Jure (2008) “Metaphysics as Interpretation of Conscious Life: Some Remarks
on D. Henrich’s and D. Kolak’s Thinking,” Synthese, 162(3), 425–438.
Zukav, Gary (1979) The Dancing Wu Li Masters: An Overview of the New Physics,
New York: Morrow.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316005163.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Index
A-Series time 126–130, 199–200. See also
time-symmetry
absolute space and time 59, 65–66, 88–89.
See also temporal non-locality
action at a distance 51, 53–54, 219–220.
See also quantum entanglement
active information 88
Addition Effect, temporal non-locality
202–203
advanced action 174
relation to reasons as causes 179–181
and temporal non-locality 187
and will 221
Aerts, Diederik 110, 215, 216, 217–220
agency 174–175, 182–188
performative model of 163, 172.
See also will
agent-causation 184
agent–structure problem 6–7, 32, 33–34, 210,
243–246, 255–260. See also social
structure
agents, matter as 122
Albert, David 80
analogy
humans as quantum systems 3–4
mental and quantum domains 91–92
Analytical Philosophy of History (Danto) 192
anomalous phenomena 34
consciousness 14
social structure 22–23
anthropological perspectives 36–37, 103
apr`es-coup 203–204
Archer, Margaret 247
Aristotle 64
causation 63–64, 65, 119–123, 177,
262–263
arrow of time 126–130, 199–200. See also
time-symmetry
as if explanations 26–28, 35–36
assumptions, classical 11–14, 29, 51–52, 59,
88–89, 111–112. See also absolute space
and time; atomism; determinism;
materialism; mechanism; subject–object
distinction
Atmanspacher, Harald 126, 200
atomism 59, 60–62, 88–89, 244–245
B-Series time 126–130, 199–200
backwards causation 65, 179–181
bacterial cognition 117–118. See also
single-celled organisms
bank teller example, representativeness
heuristic 159–161
Barad, Karen (and intra-action) 172, 238
Bauer, Edmond 82
Beck, Friedrich 97
behaviorism 22, 28
Bell, John 40
Experiments 51–54
Bennett, Jane 133, 146–147
Bergson, Henri 132
Bhaskar, Roy 247
bifurcation of nature 67
biological perspectives
deﬁnition of life 133–134
materialist–vitalist controversy 133
quantum biology 107, 135–136
biosemiotics 141–142
bird migration 135
Bitbol, Michel 91–92
black box radiation problem 44
body problem 30. See also mind–body
problem
Bohm, David (Bohm Interpretation) 85–89
Bohr, Niels 48, 49, 50–54, 73–76, 135, 217
Bose-Einstein condensates (BECs) 98–101
Broglie, Louis 45, 87
Bruza, Peter 160
Burge, Tyler 225, 253
Busemeyer, Jerome 158, 159, 160–161
Butler, Judith 163
Cambridge Changes 195, 287–288
Carminati, G. Galli 202
345
Published online by Cambridge University Press

346
Index
Cartwright, Nancy 8
causal closure of physics (CCP) 7–11
causal closure of classical physics (CCCP)
11
deﬁnition 7–8
and ´elan vital 21
emergentist–reductionist debate 247–248
language 211–212
problem of mental causation 175–176
and quantum coherence 144
and social science 11–14, 252, 257–258
and temporal locality 190–191
unscientiﬁc ﬁctions 27–28
causal exclusion 261
causation
Aristotelian 63–64, 65, 119–123, 177,
262–263
backwards 65, 179–181
classical worldviews 64, 177
counterfactual model 64
direct perception 224–225
downward 182, 248, 252, 260–266
epistemology 287–288
ﬁnal or teleological 177–179, 181
hard problem of time 129
human nature 152
problem of mental causation 175–176,
182
cell theory 279–280. See also single-celled
organisms
Chalmers, David 15, 16, 21, 146, 189, 276
The Conscious Mind 113
changing the past 191–205. See also temporal
non-locality
Clark, Andy 276
Clarke, Chris 131
classical physics. See physics
classical worldview
assumptions. See assumptions (classical)
causal exclusion 261
causation 177
changing the past 193–194
direct perception 222, 224–225
emergence 249
free will 182, 183–184, 186
human nature 151–153
language 212–215
mind-reading 231, 233, 237, 239
paradigm shifts 58–59
and quantum theory 40
separability 208–209
social science/social structures 11–14, 22,
245
supervenience 254–255
temporal non-locality 202–203
cognition; See quantum cognition; quantum
consciousness theory
coherence 164–165, 167–168, 290–291.
See also quantum coherence
collapse of wave functions
in all matter 119–123
and Bohm Interpretation 87
and consciousness 189
and determinism 62–63
downward causation 263–265
experiments 46–48, 54–57
interpretations of quantum theory 72
language 216–217
observation, role 81–85
quantum coherence 138, 139–141, 145–146
quantum emergence 256–257
semantic non-locality 235–236
subject–object distinction 67–68
superpositions 278
temporal non-locality 200–202
and will 109–111, 120, 121, 174–175,
179–181
collective consciousness 275–281
combination problem
deﬁnition 92
and panpsychism 92, 123–124, 131–132
commutativity
and order effects 157–158
probability 159–160, 161
complementarity, principle of 35, 64, 74, 75,
135
Two-Slit Experiment 48–49
compositionalism
composition vs. context 212–215
language 212
computational theory of mind. See quantum
brain theory
concept interference, language 217–218
conjunction fallacy, quantum decision theory
159–161
“The Conscious Cell” (Margulis) 118
The Conscious Mind (Chalmers) 113
consciousness 14
collective 275–281
deﬁnition 15, 276–277
features of 115, 116
hard problem of 14–18, 21, 147
idealist vs. materialist interpretations 89
illusion of 17–18, 220, 249, 283, 289, 292
and language 220–221
in all living things 136, 137, 139, 145–146
in matter 120–121
Many Minds Interpretation 80–81
metaphysics of 109–111
mind–body problem 14–18
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Index
347
in plants 118
in single-celled organisms 117–118,
279–280
temporal non-locality 189–191
vitalism 21–22, 146–147
and will 18–20, 174
see also experience; quantum consciousness
theory; subjectivity
constitutive interactions 85
contextualism
composition vs. context 212–215
language 212
quantum 215–221
Conway, John 122
Copenhagen Interpretation 72, 73–76, 86
correspondence view of rationality 164–165
counterfactual model of causation 64
Cramer, John 179, 180, 187–188
Danto, Arthur 192–193
Davidson, Donald 176
decisions 181. See also quantum decision
theory
decoherence 3, 96, 104
Delayed-Choice Experiment 54–57, 127
delayed choice, temporal non-locality 201–204
Dennett, Daniel 21
Descartes, Ren´e 83
d’Espagnat, Bernard 74, 287
determinism 59, 62–63, 88–89
free will 183–184, 186
and quantum theory 40–41, 47–48, 50–54
Devil 27
DeWitt, Bryce 78
dialogue. See language
Dirac choice 68–69, 83–84
direct perception 222–228, 230–233, 242
disjunction effect, probability 160–161
downward causation 182, 248, 252, 260–266
Driesch, Hans 132
dualism 10, 17, 28–29, 189
emergence 248
mind-reading 233
panpsychism 31
and Subjectivist Interpretation 85
see also mind–body problem
Durkheim, Emile 244
Eccles, John 97
efﬁcient causation, Aristotelian view 119–123,
177
ego 84–85
Einstein, Albert 44, 50–54, 75
Eisert, Jens 169
´elan vital. See life force
eliminative materialism 22, 28
emergence 33
classical 249
of consciousness 16, 124–125
Fr¨ohlich tradition 98
quantum 33, 255–260, 263, 265–266
and social structures 244, 247–250
enactivism 277
entanglement, quantum. See quantum
entanglement
epiphenomenalism 256
epistemology 93
Copenhagen Interpretation 75
changing the past 192–193, 199–200
emergence 248–249, 251–252
social 284–288
EPR paper (Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen)
50–54
Esfeld, Michael 175
event-causation 184
Everett, Hugh 78
exclusion argument, mental causation 256–257
expected utility theory (EUT) 155–156, 162,
167
experience 33, 109–111, 141–143. See also
consciousness; subjectivity
experiments, quantum mechanics 43
Bell Experiments 50–54
Delayed-Choice Experiment 54–57
Two-Slit Experiment 43–49
explanation vs. understanding debate 5–6
explanatory breadth, quantum consciousness
theory 291
explanatory power, quantum consciousness
theory 292–293
extended mind hypothesis 276. See also
collective consciousness
externalism, and supervenience 252–255,
259–260
fascism 143–144
feminist perspectives 163, 189
Feynman, Richard 40
ﬁctionalism (as if explanations) 26–28, 35–36
ﬁnal causation 177–179, 181
ﬁrst-person perspective 109–111. See also
subjectivity
ﬂat ontology 33, 244, 247–250, 255, 264–265,
268–269, 277
Fodor, Jerry 17, 212, 215
folk psychology 34, 138, 181, 184
formal causation, Aristotelian view 177
Foucault, Michel 19
free will 28, 175
classical debate about 62–63, 122, 152, 153
Published online by Cambridge University Press

348
Index
free will (cont.)
human nature 152
illusion of 62, 183–184, 186, 289, 292
and quantum theory 182–188
theorem 122, 184–185
“The Free Will Theorem” (Conway and
Kochen) 122
French, Steven 41, 84–85
Fr¨ohlich tradition, quantum brain theory 97,
98–101
Fuchs, Christopher 75
game theory 32–33, 154, 169–173
Garrett, Brian 21
Gell-Mann, Murray 75
generalized (weak) quantum theory 5,
97
Giddens, Anthony 243–244
Gigerenzer, Gerd 165
Gisin, Nicolas 53
global supervenience 254
Glymour, Bruce 63
God 10–11
Godfrey-Smith, Peter 27
Grandy, David 227
group consciousness 275–281
GRW Interpretation (Ghirardi, Rimini, and
Weber) 76–77
Haber, Matt 274
Habermas, J¨urgen 19
Hacking, Ian 192–193
Hameroff, Stuart 30, 99, 187
Hanauske, Matthias 171
hard problem
of consciousness 14–18, 21, 147
of life 134
of time 126–130, 199
Heisenberg, Werner 49, 73
Heisenberg choice 67–68, 83–84
Hiley, Basil 88
Ho, Mae-Wan, 131, 137
holism 3, 33, 62, 128
Copenhagen Interpretation 74
epistemological 74
light 228
mind-reading 233
organicism 144
in quantum physics 62, 167, 216
separability 242
social 244–245, 249–250, 258–259
temporal 196
will 140–141
holograms/holographic projection 228–230,
239
holographic state 271–273
horizontal question, social structures 244–245
human nature 150–153
humans, quantum model 3–4, 149–153
Hume, David 132
Humphreys, Paul 256
Husserl, Edmund 84
idealism 31, 81–86, 89. See also panpsychism;
realism
indeterminacy of the past 192
indirect perception, Time-Lag Argument 239
individualism 249–250
mind-reading 233
ontology 251–252
social structure 259
supervenience 250–251
inference to the best explanation (IBE) 290,
292–293
information
Bohm Interpretation 88
neutral monism 125–126
subjectivity in living things 117–118,
141–143
theoretic ontology 125–126
instrumentalism, Copenhagen Interpretation
75
intentionality 13–14, 28, 175
consciousness 18–20
as if explanations 26–28
social structure 252
see also will
interaction
quantum game theory 172
semantic non-locality 237–238
see also quantum entanglement
interconnnectedness vs. individuality. See
separability
interference patterns, light 44, 46
interference, quantum 160, 161
internalism, and supervenience 252–255
interpretations of quantum theory 58–59,
70–73
Bohmian 85–89
Copenhagen 72, 73–76, 86
GWR 76–77
Many Minds 78, 80–81, 181
Many Worlds 77–81
Subjectivist 81–85
time-symmetric/Transactional 70, 179,
187–188, 229–230
see also panpsychism; realism
interpretivism 28–29
anomaly of consciousness 14
causal closure of physics 8, 10–11
classical social science 12–14
intentionality 18–19
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Index
349
methodological atheism 10–11
quantum consciousness theory 35
intersubjectivity 74
intrinsic properties 252
introspection 84, 110. See also subjectivity
Iraq War 269–270
irreducibility 248
it from bit 83–84, 125–126
Jackson, Frank 16
Jonas, Hans 282
Jordan, Pascual 135
Jung, C. G. 128
Kahneman, Daniel 156, 159
Kahneman-Tversky effects 34, 164,
166–167
Kant, Immanuel 114
Kim, Jaegwon 26
Kochen, Simon 122
Kolak, Daniel 242
Kuttner, Fred 69
Lambert-Mogiliansky, Ariane 162
language 33, 210–212
composition vs. context 212–215
and experience 190
mind-reading 222–223, 233–237
quantum contextualism 215–221
Lapata, Mirella 215
Latour, Bruno 133
leaders 270
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von 269
Levine, Joseph 15
Lewenstein, Maciej 169
Lewis, David 64
Libet, Benjamin 185–188
life
deﬁnitions of 131–132, 133–134, 137–138,
147
hard problem of 134
quantum vitalism 131–132
and subjectivity 116–118, 136, 137, 139
life force (´elan vital) 21–22, 27, 32, 92
quantum coherence 137–138, 267. See also
vitalism
light
Bell Experiments 51–54
dual nature of 43–49, 226–228
visual perception 222–223, 226–228
linguistics. See language
Litt, Abninder 104–105
living things. See life
locality, assumption of 51–52, 54, 63–65.
See also non-locality
location problem, in social ontology 25
Lockwood, Michael 80
Loewer, Barry 80
London, Fritz 82
machines, humans as 153. See also mechanism
MacKenzie, Alexander 192
Mackonis, Adolfas 290
macroscopic systems 68–69, 131
Malin, Shimon 46
Many Minds Interpretation 78, 80–81, 181
Many Worlds Interpretation 77–81
Marcer, Peter 229
Margulis, Lynn 117–118
Martin, F. 202
material causation, Aristotelian view 177
materialism 59–60, 88–89, 181
Bohm Interpretation 86
conﬂation with physicalism 9
consciousness 89
deﬁnition 59, 60
emergence 247–248
and experience 189
human nature 151
language 211–212
materialist–idealist debate 6
materialist–vitalist debate 132–137
mind–body problem 14, 111–112, 114
New Materialism 132, 146, 147, 267
realism 76–81
social structure 267
supervenience 251
See also physicalism
matter (inanimate), distinction from living
things 123–124
Mayr, Ernst 140
McEvoy, Cathy 219
McGeever, John 256
McGinn, Colin 17
McKemmish, Laura 105–107
McTaggart, J. M. E. 126–130, 199–200
meaning, language composition vs. context
212–215
measurement
collapse of wave functions 217
Delayed-Choice Experiment 56–57
EPR paper 50–54
order effects 157–158
semantic non-locality 235–236
subject–object distinction 66–69
Two-Slit Experiment 46
See also observation
mechanism 59, 63–65, 88–89
memory
language 217
temporal non-locality 200–202
Umezawa tradition 101–102
Published online by Cambridge University Press

350
Index
mental causation
exclusion argument 256–257
problem of 175–176, 182
mental time travel 182, 240–241
mentality 85–88, 89, 125. See also
consciousness; No Fundamental
Mentality; panpsychism
Mercer, Jonathan 277
meta-interpretive frameworks 71–73. See also
interpretations of quantum theory
metaphysics, new 109–111, 289
meta-theory, international relations (IR)
discipline 1
Meyer, David 169
microtubules 99–101, 104–107
mind
interpretations of quantum theory 72
in all living things 136–137
problem of other 33, 116, 230
see also consciousness; panpsychism
Mind in Life (Thompson) 136
mind–body dualism 80, 83
mind–body problem 14–18, 29, 30, 72,
93
dualist and materialist views 111–112
experience 116
materialism 114
neutral monism 125–126
quantum brain theory 97
subjective world of experience 111
mind–matter interactions 83, 85
mind-reading 222–223, 230–242. See also
direct perception
minded matter 112. See also panpsychism
Mirowski, Philip 4
Mitchell, Edgar 272
Mitchell, Jeff 215
monads/monadology 269–271
Monk, Nicholas 66
Montero, Barbara 9, 30
Munro, William Bennett 4
Nakagomi, Teruaki 269
Nelson, Douglas 219
Neo-Vitalism 145–146. See also New
Materialism
Neuron Doctrine 96, 99, 103, 109
neuroscientiﬁc perspectives, free will 183,
185–188
neutral monism 93, 111, 124–130, 179
New Materialism 132, 146, 147, 267
Newton, Sir Isaac 43
No Fundamental Mentality 9, 31, 76, 251. See
also realism
non-commutativity 157–158
non-conscious matter, distinction from living
things 123–124
non-locality
assumptions of locality 51–52, 54, 63–65
causation 54, 64
problem of memory 101–102
semantic 230–242
temporal 54–57, 180, 182, 189–205
non-separability. See separability vs.
non-separability
object–subject distinction. See subject–object
distinction
observation, role in quantum phenomena
36–37, 67
Bohm Interpretation 87
Subjectivist Interpretation 81–85
See also measurement
Occam’s Razor, applied to Many World
Interpretation 79
Okasha, Samir 274
ontology 93
Copenhagen Interpretation 75
emergence 248–250, 255–260, 264–265
of events (changing the past) 193–198
ﬂat 33, 244, 247–250, 255, 264–265,
268–269, 277
hierarchical 93, 244
individualism 251–252
quantum emergence 258–259
social 245, 280
supervenience 251
vitalist sociology 267–268
Open Individualism 242
order effects 157–158
ordered water 100, 102, 106
organicism 144
organisms 273–275
organismic purposiveness 177–178
other minds, problem of 33, 116, 230
The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of
Language 220–221
pain, experience of 117
panpsychism 31, 35, 70, 92, 111–114
Bohm Interpretation 85–89
combination problem and quantum
coherence 123–124
deﬁnitions 114–116
and free will 184–185
and neutral monism 124–130
subjectivity in all matter 119–123
subjectivity in living things 116–118
Panpsychism in the West (Skrbina) 112
pan-social ontology 280
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Index
351
Papineau, David 17
paradox of Wigner’s friend 82–83
parsimony, quantum consciousness theory 292
particle theory of light 43–49
past, possibility of changing 191–205. See also
temporal non-locality
Peijnenburg, Jeanne 193, 196–197
Penrose, Roger 30, 99, 186
perception
direct 222–228, 230–233, 242
holographic projection 228–230, 239
problem of 223–226
Peres, Asher 75
performative model of agency 163, 172
Perus, Mitja 229
Pettit, Philip 244, 250–251
phenomenological approach 84–85
philosophical anthropology 36–37, 103
photoelectric effect 44–45
photosynthesis 105, 135
physical basis of language 211–212
physicalism 76, 251
ambiguity of contemporary deﬁnitions 88
deﬁnitions 8–9, 10
No Fundamental Mentality 9, 31, 76, 251
See also materialism; realism
physics
classical 2, 151–153
dual nature of light 226–228
of changing the past 198–205
Pia and the Painted Leaves story 213
pilot-wave model 87
Planck, Max 44
Planck’s constant 44
plants
photosynthesis 105, 135
quantum effects 104–105, 107
subjectivity in 118
Podolsky, Boris, EPR paper 50–54
Pointer, Lisa 219
polarization of light, Bell Experiments 52–54
politics of vitalist sociology 281–282
Polonioli, Andrea 165
positivism 6, 18–20, 28–29
anomaly of consciousness 14
causal closure of physics 8, 10
classical social science 12–13
intentionality 18
methodological atheism 10–11
quantum consciousness theory 35
post-modernism 74
power, structural 34–35
practice turn 264–265
Pradhan, Rajat 229
pragmatics, linguistic 211, 214
preference reversals, quantum decision theory
161–164
Pribram, Karl 229
Price, Huw 65
Primas, Hans 126, 200
Prisoner’s Dilemma, quantum game theory
172
probability judgment 159–161, 164
probability, quantum 40–41, 46–48, 159–161
Process 1 286
Process and Reality (Whitehead) 113
projection postulate 82, 200
proximality principle, causality 225
psyche, deﬁnitions 114–116
psycho-physical duality 84
purposiveness 177–178
Putnam, Hilary 253
Pylkk¨anen, Paavo 88
QFT (quantum ﬁeld theory) 101–102
quantum biology 107, 135–136
quantum brain theory 15, 30–31, 35, 92, 95,
97
current debates 102–108
Fr¨ohlich tradition 98–101
holographic projection 230
memory 200–202
quantum coherence 144–145
and quantum decision theory 155
Umezawa tradition 101–102
see also quantum decision theory
quantum cognition 32–33, 154–156
probability judgment 159–161, 164
rational choice theory 33, 155–156,
164–169
see also quantum consciousness theory;
quantum decision theory
quantum coherence 123–124
cognition 139
as deﬁnition of life 131–132, 137–138, 147
experience 141–143, 145–146
Fr¨ohlich tradition 98–101
as life force 267
materialist–vitalist controversy 132–137
quantum vitalism 143–147
superorganisms 274
will 139–141
quantum contextualism 215–221
quantum consciousness theory 5, 30–36,
91–94, 154–156
elegance/aesthetics 293
explanatory breadth/power 291, 292–293
and quantum game theory 169
quantum vitalism 146–147
social science 288
Published online by Cambridge University Press

352
Index
quantum consciousness theory (cont.)
see also panpsychism; quantum brain
theory; quantum cognition
quantum decision theory 4–5, 6, 12, 32–33,
154, 157
Kahneman-Tversky effects 34
order effects 157–158
preference reversals 161–164
probability 159–161
and quantum brain theory 155
quantum emergence 33, 255–260, 263,
265–266
quantum entanglement 53–54
and atomism 61
emergence 256–257, 263
language 218–220
and quantum game theory 169–173
quantum ﬁeld theory (QFT) 101–102
quantum game theory 32–33, 154, 169–173
quantum interference 160, 161
quantum potential 86, 87–88
quantum probability 40–41, 46–48, 159–161
The Quantum Society (Zohar) 2
quantum theory 29, 39–42, 147, 182–188
quantum tunneling 100
quantum vitalism. See vitalism
Quantum Zeno Effect 164
rational choice theory 33, 155–156, 164–169
readiness potential (RP) 185–188
realism 72–73
assumption 51–52, 54
idealist interpretations 81–89
materialist interpretations 76–81
na¨ıve 223
social structure 258–259
see also Copenhagen Interpretation
reasons as cause of actions (problem of mental
causation) 175–176, 182
reductionism 33
and atomism 61
causal closure of physics 8
will 140–141
reiﬁcation of social structure 23, 25, 26, 27,
28, 244
Reimers, Jeffrey 99
relativism 74
relativity theory 65, 227
Replacement Effect, temporal non-locality
202–203
representational models of perception 223, 224
representativeness heuristic 159
retro-causality (changing the past) 191–205.
See also temporal non-locality
Ricciardi, Luigi 97, 101–102
Rosen, Nathan, EPR paper 50–54
Rosenblum, Bruce 69
RP (readiness potential) 185–188
Ruetsche, Laura 77, 79
Russell, Bertrand 113, 114, 126
Sachs, Mendel 228
Saussure, Ferdinand de 210
Sawyer, Keith 251
Schempp, Walter 229
Schmid, Hans Bernhard 277
Schmitt, Carl 281
Schneider, Jean 235
Schopenhauer, Arthur 110
Schr¨odinger, Erwin 66, 135
cat thought experiment 68–69, 76–77
equation 47, 92
What Is Life? 135
Seager, William 113
Searle, John 20, 63, 113
Sebeok, Thomas 142
self-consciousness 15
self-organization in organisms 136
semantics
linguistic 211
non-locality 230–242
quantum 215–221
sensory perception, living things 143
separability vs. non-separability
classical worldviews 208–209
human mind 33, 149–150, 152
light 228
mind-reading 242
problem of perception 224–225
rational choice theory 166
Silberstein, Michael 256
simplicity (parsimony), quantum
consciousness theory 292
Simulation Theory, theory of mind debate 231,
232
single-celled organisms
learning in 135
subjectivity/consciousness 117–118, 136,
279–280
skeletal past 194–196, 199–200
Skinner, B. F. 22
Sklar, Lawrence 8
Skrbina, David 112
Smith, Adam 132
Smolin, Lee 66
social epistemology 284–288
social holism 244–245, 249–250, 258–259
social organisms 273–275
social science
classical worldviews 11–14
quantum consciousness theory 288
social structure 22–23, 33–34
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Index
353
deﬁnition 243–244
downward causation 260–266
quantum emergence 258–260
state, role of 23–25
threat of reiﬁcation 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 244
see also agent–structure problem
Socrates 194, 270
Sollberger, Michael 225
space
absolute 59, 65–66, 88–89
experience of 190
speed of light 227
spooky action at a distance 51, 219–220.
See also quantum entanglement
spreading activation model, language 219–220
Squires, Euan 87
Stapp, Henry 73, 84, 186
Staretz, Robert 272
state
collective consciousness 275–281
holographic 271–273
as organism 273–275
social structure 23–25
strong argument, quantum brain theory 97.
See also Fr¨ohlich tradition; Umezawa
tradition
structural power 34–35
structure, social. See social structure
sub-atomic particles, cloud chamber 119
subject–object distinction 59, 66–69, 88–89
interpretations of quantum theory 72, 73, 87
light 228
temporal non-locality 189
Subjectivist Interpretation 81–85
subjectivity 28, 93, 109–111
anomaly 7
deﬁnitions 114–116
in living things 116–118
in matter 119–124
see also consciousness
superorganism, state as 273–275
superpositions 47, 52, 85, 162–163, 258–259,
278
deﬁnition 32–33
see also collapse of wave functions
supervenience 80, 250–255, 256
deﬁnition 61
externalism 246, 250–255, 259–260
sure thing principle 160–161
swarm intelligence 275
Tegmark, Max 104
teleological causation 177–179, 181
teleology
living things 140
reasons as causes 175–176, 182
telepathy 232
Teller, Paul 61
temporal non-locality 54–57, 180, 182,
189–205
temporal symmetry. See time-symmetry
theory of mind debate 230–233
Simulation Theory 231, 232
Theory-Theory 231
theory of relativity 65, 227
thick past 194–196
Thompson, Evan 136
time
absolute 59, 65–66, 88–89
hard problem of 126–130, 199
speed of light 227
see also temporal non-locality
Time-Lag argument, indirect perception 225,
239
time-reversal invariance 127
time-symmetry 126–130, 179–181, 189
Tononi, Giulio 146
Transactional Interpretations 70, 179,
187–188, 229–230
trauma, apr`es-coup 203–204
Trewavas, Anthony 118
tunneling, quantum 100
Tversky, Amos 34, 159, 164, 166–167
Twenty Questions game, quantum 67–68
Twin Earth thought experiments 253
Two-Slit Experiment 43–49, 161,
217–218
type indeterminacy, KT man 162
Umezawa, Hiroomi 97, 101–102
unbounded rationality 164–169
Uncertainty Principle 49
atomism 61–62
Bohm Interpretation 86
materialism 60
supervenience 251
understanding vs. explanation debate 5–6
unobservable social structures anomaly 7
unscientiﬁc ﬁctions/ﬁctionalized models
26–28, 35–36
utility maximization 165, 166. See also
rational choice theory
Vaihinger, Hans 27
van Gulick, Robert 261
van Putten, Cornelis 197, 202–203
Velmans, Max 228, 229
vertical question, social structures 244
visual perception. See perception
vitalism 21–22, 32, 33–34, 92, 131–134
cognition 136, 139
experience 137, 141–143, 145–146
Published online by Cambridge University Press

354
Index
vitalism (cont.)
materialist–vitalist controversy 132–137
politics of 281–282
quantum 137–138, 267, 268
terminological usage 143–147
will 136, 139–141
see also life force
vitalist sociology 276
volition 175. See also will
voluntarism 282
von Lucadou, Walter 81
von Neumann chain 68–69, 84
Subjectivist Interpretation 82–83
von Uexk¨ull, Jakob 142, 281
Wang, Zheng 158
war veteran example 202–203
wave front reconstruction
holographic state 272–273
wave functions 3, 29, 31, 283
interpretations of quantum theory 71–72.
See also collapse of wave functions
wave theory of light
Two-Slit Experiment 43–49
wave-particle duality
complementarity, principle of
48–49
weak quantum theory 5, 97
“weak” objectivity 74
Weberman, David 193–198
Weyl, Hermann 122
Wheeler, John 55, 67–68, 82, 83–84
Whitehead, Alfred North
Process and Reality 113
Wigner, Eugene 82
Wilkens, Martin 169
will 33
in all living things 136, 139–141
in all matter 121–122
collapse of wave functions 263–265
features of subjectivity 116
free will 182–188
plants 118
problem of mental causation 182
single-celled organisms 117–118
Wilson, David Sloan 273
Witte, F. M. C. 170
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 19, 214, 232
Wolf, Fred Alan 187–188
World War I 204–205
World War II 204–205
Young, Thomas
Two-Slit Experiment 44
Zahle, Julie 225
Zaman, Frederick 173
zombies 153
Published online by Cambridge University Press

