Foundations of Physics, Vol. 3, No. 2, 1973 
Quantum Theory 
as an Indication of a 
New Order in Physics. 
B. Implicate and Explicate 
Order in Physical Law 
David Bohm 
Birkbeck College, University of London 
London, England 
Received October 27, 1971 
In this paper, we inquire further into the question of the emergence of new 
orders in physics, first raised in an earlier paper. In this inquiry, we are led to 
suggest that the quantum theory indicates the need for yet another new order, 
which we call "enfolded" or "implicate." One of the most striking examples 
of the implicate order is to be seen by considering the function of the hologram, 
which clearly reveals how a total content (in principle extending over the whole 
of space and time) is "enfolded" in the movement of waves (electromagnetic 
and other kinds) in any given region. We then come to the notion that the 
quantum theory indicates that this implicate order is not merely a dependent 
or fortuitous feature of the content, but rather, that it shouM be considered 
as the independent ground of existence of things, while the ordinary explicate 
order is what shouM be considered as dependent. Finally, in the appendix we 
point out how the implicate order is expressed naturally in terms of an algebra 
similar to that of the quantum theory, which is, however, subject to generaliza- 
tions going beyond the limits of what has meaning in this theory. Various new 
directions of further research are indicated, which will be explained in later 
papers. 
139 
© 1973 Plenum Publishing Corporation, 227 West 17th Street, New York, N.Y. 10011. 
825/3/2-x 

140 
David Bohm 
1. INTRODUCTION 
The first paper of this series (Part A) (1) has called attention to the emergence 
of new orders throughout the history of physics. 
A general feature of the development of this subject has been a tendency 
to regard certain basic notions of order as permanent and unchangeable. 
The task of physics was then taken to be to accommodate new observations by 
means of adaptations within these basic notions of order, so as to fit the new 
facts. This kind of adaptation began with the Ptolemaic epicycles, which 
continued from ancient times until the advent of the work of Copernicus, 
Kepler, Galileo, and Newton. But as soon as the basic notions of order in 
classical physics had been fairly clearly expressed, it was supposed that further 
work in physics would consist of adaptation within this order to accommodate 
new facts. This continued until the appearance of relativity and the quantum 
theory. It can accurately be said that since then, the main line of work in 
physics has been adaptation within the general orders underlying these 
theories, to accommodate the facts to which these in turn have led. 
It may thus be inferred that accommodation within already existing 
frameworks of order has generally been considered to be the main activity 
to be emphasized in physics, while the perception of new orders has been 
thought of as something that happens only occasionally, perhaps in 
revolutionary periods, during which what is regarded as the normal process 
of accommodation has broken down. 1 
It is pertinent to this subject to consider Piaget's TM description of all 
intelligent perception in terms of two complementary movements, accom- 
modation and assimilation. From the roots "rood" meaning "measure" and 
"com" meaning "together" one sees that to accommodate means "to 
establish a common measure" (see Part A m for a discussion of the broader 
senses of the notion of measure that are relevant in this context). Examples 
of accommodation are fitting, cutting to a pattern, adapting, imitating, 
conforming to rules, etc. On the other hand, "to assimilate" is "to digest" 
or to make into a comprehensive and inseparable whole (which includes 
oneself). And thus, to assimilate means "to understand." 
It is clear that in intelligent perception, primary emphasis has in general 
to be given to assimilation, while accommodation tends to play a relatively 
secondary role, in the sense that its main significance is as an aid to 
assimilation. 
Of course, we are able in certain sorts of contexts just to accommodate 
something that we observe within known orders of thought, and in this very 
act it will be adequately assimilated. However, it is necessary in more general 
1 For a very clear presentation of this view, see Kuhn. (2~ 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
141 
contexts to give serious attention to the possibility that the old orders of 
thought may cease to be relevant, so that they can no longer coherently be 
adapted to fit the new fact. As has been brought out in some detail in Part A m, 
one may then have to see the irrelevance of old differences, and the relevance 
of new differences, and thus one may open the way to the perception of new 
orders, new measures, and new structures. 
Clearly, such perception can appropriately take place at almost any time, 
and does not have to be restricted to unusual and revolutionary periods, 
in which one finds that the older orders can no longer be conveniently 
adapted to the facts. Rather, one may be continually ready to drop old 
notions of order in various contexts, which may be broad or narrow, and to 
perceive new notions that may be relevant in such contexts. Thus, under- 
standing the fact by assimilating it into new orders can become what could 
perhaps be called the normal way of doing scientific research. 
To work in this way is evidently to give primary emphasis to something 
similar to artistic perception. Such perception begins by observing the whole 
fact in its full individuality, and then by degrees articulates the order that is 
proper to the assimilation of this fact. It does not begin with abstract precon- 
ceptions as to what the order has to be, which are then adapted to the order 
that is observed. 
What then is the proper role of accommodation of facts within known 
theoretical orders, measures, and structures? Here, it is important to note 
that facts are not to be considered as if they were independently existent 
objects, that we might find or pick up in the laboratory. Rather, as the Latin 
root of the word "facere" indicates, the fact is "what has been made" (e.g., 
as in "manufacture"). Thus, in a certain sense, we "make" the fact. That is to 
say, beginning with immediate perception of an actual situation, we develop 
the fact by giving it further order, form, and structure with the aid of our 
theoretical concepts. For example, by using the notions of order prevailing 
in ancient times, men were led to "make" the fact about planetary motions by 
describing and measuring in terms of epicycles. In classical physics, the fact 
was "made" in terms of the order of planetary orbits, measured through 
positions and times. In general relativity, the fact was "made" in terms of the 
order of Riemannian geometry, and of the measure implied by concepts such 
as "curvature of space." And in the quantum theory, the fact was made in 
terms of the order of energy levels, quantum numbers, symmetry groups, 
etc. along with appropriate measures (e.g., scattering cross sections, charges, 
and masses of particles, etc.). 
It is clear then that changes of order and measure in the theory ultimately 
lead to new ways of doing experiments and to new kinds of instruments, which 
in turn lead to the "making" of correspondingly ordered and measured facts 
of new kinds. In this development, the experimental fact serves in the first 

142 
David Bohm 
instance as a test for theoretical notions. Thus, as has been! pointed out in 
Part A m, the general form of theoretical explanation is that of a generalized 
kind of ratio or reason. "As A is to B in our structure of thinking, so it is in 
fact." This ratio or reason constitutes a kind of "common measure" or 
"accommodation" between theory and fact. 
As long as such a common measure prevails, then, of course, the theory 
need not be changed. If the common measure is found not to be realized, 
then the first step is to see whether it can be reestablished by means of adjust- 
ments within the theory without a change in its underlying order. If, after 
reasonable efforts, a proper accommodation of this kind is not achieved, 
then what is needed is a fresh perception of the whole fact. This now includes 
not only the results of experiments, but also the failure of certain lines of 
theory to fit the experimental results in a "common measure." Then, as has 
been indicated earlier, one has to be very sensitively aware of all the relevant 
differences which underly the main orders in the old theory, to see whether 
there is room for a change of overall order. It is being emphasized here that 
this kind of perception should properly be interwoven continually with the 
activities aimed at accommodation, and should not have to be delayed for 
so long that the whole situation becomes confused and chaotic, apparently 
requiring the revolutionary destruction of the old order to clear it up. 
As relativity and quantum theory have shown that it has no meaning to 
divide the observing apparatus from what is observed, so the considerations 
discussed here indicate that it has no meaning to separate the observed fact 
(along with the instruments used to observe it) from the theoretical notions 
of order that help to give "shape" to this fact. As we go on to develop new 
notions of order going beyond those of relativity and quantum theory, it 
will thus not be appropriate to try immediately to apply these notions to 
current problems that have arisen in the consideration of the present set of 
experimental facts. Rather, what is called for in this context is very broadly 
to assimilate the whole of the fact in physics into the new theoretical notions 
of order. After this fact has generally been "disgested," we can begin to 
glimpse new ways in which such notions of order can be tested and perhaps 
extended in various directions. As pointed out at the end of Part A cl), we have 
to proceed slowly and patiently here or else we may become confused by 
"undigested" facts. 
Fact and theory are thus seen to be different aspects of one whole in which 
analysis into separate but interacting parts is not relevant. That is to say, not 
only is undivided wholeness implied in the content of physics (notably 
relativity and quantum theory) but also in the manner of working in physics. 
This means that we do not try always to force the theory to fit the kinds of 
facts that may be appropriate in currently accepted general orders of 
description, but that we are also ready when necessary to consider changes 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
143 
in what is to be meant by fact, which may be required for assimilation of such 
fact into new theoretical notions of order. 
2. UNDIVIDED WHOLENESS--THE LENS AND THE HOLOGRAM 
The undivided wholeness of modes of observation, instrumentation, and 
theoretical understanding indicated above implies the need to consider a 
new order of fact, i.e., the fact about the way in which modes of theoretical 
understanding and of observation and instrumentation are related to each 
other. Until now, we have more or less just taken such a relationship for 
granted, without giving serious attention to the manner in which it arises, 
very probably because of the belief that the study of the subject belongs to 
"the history of science" rather than to "science proper." However, it is now 
being suggested that the consideration of this relationship is essential for an 
adequate understanding of science itself, because the content of the observed 
fact cannot coherently be regarded as separate from modes of observation and 
instrumentation and modes of theoretical understanding. 
An example of the very close relationship between instrumentation 
and theory can be seen by considering the lens, which was indeed one of the 
key features behind the development of modern scientific thought. The 
essential feature of a lens is, as indicated in Fig. 1, that it forms an image 
in which a given point P in the object corresponds (in a high degree of 
approximation) to a point Q in the image. By thus bringing the corres- 
pondence of specified features of object and image into such sharp relief, 
the lens greatly strengthened man's awareness of the various parts of the 
object and of the relationships between these parts. In this way, it furthered 
the tendency to think in terms of analysis and synthesis. Moreover, it made 
possible an enormous extension of this classical order of analysis and synthesis 
to objects that were too far away, too big, too small, or too rapidly moving to 
be thus ordered by means of unaided vision. As a result, scientists were 
encouraged to extrapolate their ideas and to think that such an approach 
would be relevant and valid no matter how far they went, in all possible 
conditions, contexts, and degrees of approximation. 
But as has been seen in Part A, m relativity and quantum theory 
Fig. 1 

144 
David Bohm 
imply undivided wholeness, in which analysis into distinct and well-defined 
parts is no longer relevant. Is there an instrument that can help give a certain 
immediate perceptual insight into what can be meant by undivided wholeness, 
as the lens did for what is to be meant by analysis of a system into parts ? It 
is suggested here that one can obtain such insight by considering a new 
instrument, called hologram. (The name is derived from the Greek words 
"holo" meaning "whole" and "gram" meaning "to write." Thus, the holo- 
gram is an instrument that, as it were, "writes the whole"). 
As shown in Fig. 2, coherent light from a laser is passed through a half- 
silvered mirror. Part of the beam goes on directly to a photographic plate, 
while another part is reflected so that it illuminates a certain whole structure. 
The light reflected from this whole structure also reaches the plate, where it 
interferes with that arriving there by a direct path. The resulting interference 
pattern which is recorded on the plate is not only very complex but also 
usually so fine that it is not even visible to the naked eye. Yet, it is somehow 
relevant to the whole illuminated structure, though only in a highly implicit 
way. 
This relevance of the interference pattern to the whole illuminated 
structure is revealed when the photographic plate is illuminated with laser 
light. As shown in Fig. 3, a wavefront is then created which is very similar 
in form to that coming off the original illuminated structure. By placing the 
eye in this wave, one in effect sees the whole of the original structure, in 
three dimensions, and from a range of possible points of view (as if one were 
looking at it through a window). If we then illuminate only a small region R 
Loser ~ bear~ 
Whole 
i//uznm~Le_~ 
S~r~tc~ccr~ 
Fig. 2 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
145 
Fig. 3 
of the plate, we still see the whole structure, but in somewhat less sharply 
defined detail and from a decreased range of possible points of view (as if 
we were looking through a smaller window). 
It is clear then that there is no one-to-one correspondence between parts 
of an "illuminated object" and parts of an "image of this object on the plate." 
Rather, the interference pattern in each region R of the plate is relevant to the 
whole structure, and each region of the structure is relevant to the whole of 
the interference pattern on the plate. 
Because of the wave properties of light, even a lens cannot produce an 
exact one-to-one correspondence. A lens can therefore be regarded as a 
limiting case of a hologram. 
We can, however, go further and say that in their overall ways of 
indicating the meaning of observations, typical experiments as currently done 
in physics (especially in the "quantum" context) are more like the general 
case of a hologram than like the special case of a lens. For example, consider 
a scattering experiment. As shown in Fig. 4, what can be observed in the 
detector is generally relevant to the whole target, or at least to an area large 
enough to contain a great many atoms. 
Moreover, although one might in principle try to make an image of a 
particular atom, the quantum theory implies that to do this would have 
little or no significance. Indeed, as the discussion of the Heisenberg 
microscope experiment given in Part A shows, m the formation of an image 
is just what is not relevant in a "quantum" context; at most a discussion of 
image formation serves to indicate the limits of applicability of classical 
modes of description. 
be.am 
> 
2> 
Fig. 4 

146 
David Bohm 
So we may say that in current research in physics, an instrument tends 
to be relevant to a whole structure, in a way rather similar to what happens 
with a hologram. To be sure, there are certain differences. For example, 
in current experiments with electron beams or with X-rays, these latter are 
seldom coherent over appreciable distances. If, however, it should ever prove 
to be possible to develop something like an electron laser or an X-ray laser, 
then experiments will directly reveal "atomic" and "nuclear" structures 
without the need for complex chains of inference of the sort now generally 
required, as the hologram does for ordinary large-scale structures. 
3. IMPLICATE AND EXPLICATE ORDER 
What is being suggested here is that the consideration of the difference 
between lens and hologram can play a significant part in the perception of 
a new order that is relevant for physical law. As Galileo noted the distinction 
between a viscous medium and a vacuum and saw that physical law should 
refer primarily to the order of motion of an object in a vacuum, so we might 
now note the distinction between a lens and a hologram and consider the 
possibility that physical law should refer primarily to an order of undivided 
wholeness of the content of a description similar to that indicated by the 
hologram rather than to an order of analysis of such content into separate 
parts indicated by a lens. 
But then, when Aristotle's ideas on movement were dropped, Galileo 
and those who followed him had to consider the question of how the new 
order of motion was to be described in adequate detail. The answer came in 
the form of Cartesian coordinates extended to the language of the calculus 
(differential equations, etc.). But this kind of description is of course 
appropriate only in a context in which analysis into distinct and autonomous 
parts is relevant, and will therefore in turn have to be dropped. What then 
will be the new kind of description appropriate to the present context? 
As happened with Cartesian coordinates and the calculus, such a 
question cannot be answered immediately in terms of definite prescriptions 
as to what to do. Rather, one has to observe the new situation very broadly 
and tentatively and to "feel out" what may be the relevant new features. 
From this, there will arise a discernment of the new order, which will 
articulate and unfold in a natural way (and not as a result of efforts to 
make it fit well-defined and preconceived notions as to what this order 
should be able to achieve). 
We can begin such an inquiry by noting that in some subtle sense, which 
does not appear in ordinary vision, the interference pattern in the whole 
plate can distinguish different orders and measures in the whole illuminated 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
147 
(~) 
(b) 
(o) 
Fig. 5 
structure. For example, the illuminated structure may contain all sorts of 
shapes and sizes of geometric forms (indicated in Fig. 5a), as well as topo- 
logical relationships, such as inside and outside (indicated in Fig. 5b), and 
intersection and separation (indicated in Fig. 5c). All of these lead to different 
interference patterns and it is this difference that is somehow to be described 
in detail. 
The differences indicated above are, however, not only in the plate. 
Indeed, the latter is of secondary significance, in the sense that its main 
function is to make a relatively permanent "written record" of the interference 
pattern of the light that is present in each region of space. More generally, 
however, in each such region, the movement of the light implicitly contains a 
vast range of distinctions of order and measure, appropriate to a whole 
illuminated structure. Indeed, in principle, this structure extends over the 
whole universe and over the whole past, with implications for the whole 
future. Consider, for example, how on looking at the night sky, we are able to 
discern structures covering immense stretches of space and time, which are in 
some sense contained in the movements of light in the tiny space encom- 
passed by the eye (and also how instruments, such as optical and radio 
telescopes, can discern more and more of this totality, contained in each 
region of space). 
There is the germ of a new notion of order here. This order is not to be 
understood solely in terms of a regular arrangement of objects (e.g., in rows) 
or as a regular arrangement of events (e.g., in a series). Rather, a total 
order is contained, in some implicit sense, in each region of space and 
time. 
Now, the word "implicit" is based on the verb "to implicate." This 
means "to fold inward" (as multiplication means "folding many times"). 
So we may be led to explore the notion that in some sense each region contains 
a total structure "enfolded" within it. 
It will be useful in such an exploration to consider some further examples 
of enfolded or implicate order. Thus, in a television broadcast, the visual 
image is translated into a time order, which is "carried" by the radio wave. 
Points that are near each other in the visual image are not necessarily "near" 

148 
David Bohm 
in the order of the radio signal. Thus, the radio wave carries the visual image 
in an implicate order. The function of the receiver is then to explicate this 
order; i.e., to "unfold" it in the form of a new visual image. 
A more striking example of implicate order can be demonstrated in the 
laboratory, with a transparent container full of a very viscous fluid, such as 
treacle, and equipped with a mechanical rotator that can "stir" the fluid 
very slowly but very thoroughly. If an insoluble droplet of ink is placed in 
the fluid and the stirring device is set in motion, the ink drop is gradually 
transformed into a thread that extends over the whole fluid. The latter now 
appears to be distributed more or less at "random" so that it is seen as some 
shade of gray. But if the mechanical stirring device is now turned in the 
opposite direction, the transformation is reversed, and the droplet of dye 
suddenly appears, reconstituted. 
When the dye was distributed in what appeared to be a random way, it 
nevertheless had some kind of order which is different, for example, from that 
arising from another droplet originally placed in a different position. But 
this order is enfolded or implicated in the "gray mass" that is visible in the 
fluid. Indeed, one could thus "enfold" a whole picture. Different pictures 
would look indistinguishable and yet have different implicate orders, which 
differences would be revealed when they were explicated, as the stirring 
device was turned in a reverse direction. 
What happens here is evidently similar in certain crucial ways to what 
happens with the hologram. To be sure there are differences. Thus, in a fine 
enough analysis, one could see that the parts of the ink droplet remain in a 
one-to-one correspondence as they are stirred up and the fluid moves 
continuously. On the other hand, in the functioning of the hologram, there 
is no such a one-to-one correspondence. So in the hologram (as also in 
experiments in a "quantum" context), there is no way ultimately to 
reduce the implicate order to a finer and more complex type of explicate 
order. 
All this calls attention to the relevance of a new distinction between 
implicate and explicate order. Generally speaking, the laws of physics have 
thus far referred mainly to the explicate order. Indeed, it may be said that 
the principle function of Cartesian coordinates is just to give a clear and 
precise description of explicate order. But now we are proposing that in the 
formulation of the laws of physics, primary relevance is to be given to the 
implicate order, while the explicate order is to have a secondary kind of 
significance (e.g., as happened with Aristotle's notions of movement, after 
the development of classical physics). Thus, it may be expected that a 
description in terms of Cartesian coordinates can no longer be given a primary 
emphasis, and that a new kind of description will indeed have to be developed 
for discussing the laws of physics. 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
149 
4. THE HOLOMOVEMENT AND ITS ASPECTS 
To indicate a new kind of description appropriate for giving primary 
relevance to implicate order; let us consider once again the key feature of 
the functioning of the hologram; i.e., in each region of space, the order of 
a whole illuminated structure is "enfolded" and "carried" in the movement 
of light. Something similar happens with a signal that modulates a radio 
wave (see Fig. 6). In all cases, the content or meaning that is "enfolded" 
and "carried" is primarily an order and a measure, permitting the 
development of a structure. With the radio wave, this structure can be that 
of a verbal communication, a visual image, etc., but with the hologram, 
far more subtle structures can be involved in this way (notably three- 
dimensional structures, visible from many points of view). 
More generally, such order and measure can be "enfolded" and "carried" 
not only in electromagnetic waves but also in other ways (by electron beams, 
sound, and in other countless forms of movement). To generalize so as to 
emphasize undivided wholeness, we shall say that what "carries" an implicate 
order is the holomovement, which is an unbroken and undivided totality. In 
certain cases, we can abstract particular aspects of the holomovement (e.g., 
light, electrons, sound, etc.). But more generally, all forms of the holo- 
movement merge and are inseparable. Thus, in its totality, the holomovement 
is not limited in any specifiable way at all. It is not required to conform to 
any particular order, or to be bounded by any particular measure. Thus, 
the holomovement is undefinable and immeasurable. 
To give primary significance to the undefinable and immeasurable 
holomovement implies that it has no meaning to talk of a fundamental 
theory, on which all of physics could find a permanent basis, or to which all 
the phenomena of physics could ultimately be reduced. Rather, each theory 
will abstract a certain aspect that is relevant only in some limited context, 
which is indicated by some appropriate measure. 
In discussing how attention is to be called to such aspects, it is useful to 
note that the word "relevant" is a form obtained from the verb "to relevate," 
which has dropped out of common usage, and which means "to lift up" 
(as in "elevate"). We can thus say that in a particular context that may be 
under consideration, the general modes of description that belong to a given 
Fig. 6 

150 
David Bohm 
theory serve to relevate a certain content, i.e., to lift it into attention so that 
it stands out "in relief." If this content is pertinent in the context under 
discussion, it is said to be relevant, and otherwise, irrelevant. 
To illustrate what it means to relevate certain aspects of the implicate 
order in the holomovement, it is useful to consider once again the example 
of the mechanical device for stirring a viscous fluid, as described in the 
previous section. Suppose that we first put in a droplet of dye and turn the 
stirring mechanism n times. We could then place another droplet of dye 
nearby and stir once again through n turns. We could repeat this process 
indefinitely, with a long series of droplets, arranged more or less along a line, 
as shown in Fig. 7. 
Suppose then that after thus "enfolding" a large number of droplets, 
we turn the stirring device in a reverse direction, but so rapidly that the 
individual droplets are not resolved in perception. Then we will see what 
appears to be a "solid" object (e.g., a particle) moving continuously through 
space. This form of a moving object appears in immediate perception 
primarily because the eye is not sensitive to concentrations of dye lower than 
a certain minimum, so that one does not directly see the "whole movement" 
of the dye. Rather, such perception relevates a certain aspect. That is to say, 
it makes this aspect stand out "in relief," while the rest of the fluid is seen 
only as a "gray background" within which the related "object" seems to be 
moving. 
But, of course, such an aspect has little interest in itself, i.e., apart 
from its broader meaning. Thus, in the present example, one possible meaning 
is that there actually is an autonomous object moving through the fluid. This 
would signify, of course, that the whole order of movement is to be regarded 
as similar to that in the immediately perceived aspect. In some contexts, such 
a meaning is pertinent and adequate (e.g., if we are dealing in the ordinary 
level of experience with a rock flying through the air). However, in the present 
context, a very different meaning is indicated, and this can be communicated 
only through a very different kind of description. 
Such a description has to start by conceptually relevating certain broader 
orders of movement, going beyond any that are similar to those relevated 
in immediate perception. In doing this, one always begins with the holo- 
movement, and then one abstracts out special aspects which involve a totality 
broad enough for a proper description in the context under discussion. In 
the present example, this totality should include the whole movement of the 
fluid and the dye as determined by the mechanical stirring device, and the 
6 0  
o
~
o
e
~
o
 
• 
o 
ow 
Fig. 7 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
151 
movement of the light, which enables us visually to perceive what is 
happening, along with the movement of the eye and nervous system, which 
determines the distinctions that can be perceived in the movement of the light. 
It may then be said that the content relevated in immediate perception 
(i.e., the "moving object") is a kind of intersection between two orders. One 
of these is the order of movement that brings about the possibility of a 
direct perceptual contact (in this case that of the light and the response of the 
nervous system to this light), and the other is an order of movement that 
determines the detailed content that is perceived (in this case, the order of 
movement of the dye in the fluid). Such a description in terms of intersection 
of orders is evidently very generally applicable. ~ 
It has already been seen that in general, the movement of light is to be 
described in terms of "the enfolding and carrying" of implicate orders that 
are relevant to a whole structure, in which analysis into separate and auto- 
nomous parts is not applicable (though, of course, in certain limited contexts, 
a description in terms of explicate orders will be adequate). But in the present 
example, it is also appropriate to describe the movement of the dye in similar 
terms. That is to say, in the movement, certain implicate orders (in the distri- 
bution of dye) become explicate, while explicate orders become implicate. 
To specify this movement in more detail, it is useful here to introduce 
a new measure, i.e., an "implication parameter," denoted by T. In the fluid, 
this would be the number of turns needed to bring a given droplet of dye into 
explicate form. The total structure of dye present at any moment can then 
be regarded as a ordered series of substructures, each corresponding to a 
single droplet N with its implication parameter TN. 
Evidently, we have here a new notion of structure. For we no longer 
build structures solely as ordered and measured arrangements on which we 
join separate things, all of which are explicate together. Rather, we can now 
consider structures in which aspects of different degrees of implication (as 
measured by T) can be arranged in a certain order. 
Such aspects can be quite complex. For example, we could implicate 
a "whole picture" by turning the stirring device n times. We could then 
implicate a slightly different picture, and so on indefinitely. If the stirring 
device were turned rapidly in the reverse direction, we could see a "three- 
dimensional scene" apparently consisting of a "whole system" of objects in 
continuous movement and interaction. 
In this movement, the "picture" present at any given moment would 
consist only of aspects that can be explicated together (i.e., aspects corres- 
ponding to a certain value of the implication parameter T). As events 
See Bohm et al., c4~ where this description of a perceived content considered as the inter- 
section of two orders is treated in a different context. 

152 
David Bohm 
happening at the same time are said to be synchronous, so aspects that can 
be explicated together can be called synordinate, while those that cannot be 
explicated together may then be called asynordinate. Evidently, the new 
notions of structure under discussion here involve asynordinate aspects, 
whereas previous notions involve only synordinate aspects. 
It has to be emphasized here that the order of implication, as measured 
by the parameter T, has no necessary relationship to the order of time (as 
measured by another parameter t). These two parameters are only related in 
a contingent manner (in this case by the rate of turning of the stirring device). 
It is the T parameter that is directly relevant to the description of the 
implicate structure, and not the t parameter. 
When a structure is asynordinate (that is, constituted of aspects with 
different degrees of implication), then evidently the time order is not in 
general the primary one that is pertinent for the expression of law. Rather, 
as one can see by considering the previous examples, the whole implicate 
order is present at any moment, in such a way that the entire structure growing 
out of this implicate order can be described without giving any primary role 
to time. The law of the structure will then just be a law relating aspects with 
various degrees of implication. Such a law will, of course, not be deterministic 
in time. But, as has been indicated in Part A, ~1) determinism in time is not the 
only form of ratio or reason. And as long as we can find ratio or reason in the 
orders that are primarily relevant, this is all that is needed for law. 
One can see in the "quantum context" a significant similarity to the 
orders of movement that have been described in terms of the simple examples 
discussed above. Thus, as shown in Fig. 8, "elementary particles" are 
generally observed by means of tracks that they are supposed to make in 
detecting devices (photographic emulsions, bubble chambers, etc.). Such a 
track is evidently to be regarded as no more than an aspect appearing in 
immediate perception (as was done with the moving sequence of droplets 
of dye indicated in Fig. 7). To describe it as the track of a "particle" is then 
to assume in addition that the primarily relevant order of movement is 
similar to that in the immediately perceived aspect. 
However, the whole discussion of the new order implicit in the quantum 
~ar k~Cl e_" 
¢ 
o 
gmu.[5"i 
O ~. 
Fig. 8 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
153 
theory shows that such a description cannot coherently be maintained. 
For example, the need to describe movement discontinuously in terms of 
"quantum jumps" implies that the notion of a well-defined orbit of a particle 
that connects the visible marks constituting the track cannot have any 
meaning. In any case, the wave-particle properties of matter show that the 
overall movement depends on the total experimental arrangement in a way 
that is not consistent with the idea of autonomous motion of localized 
particles. And, of course, the discussion of the Heisenberg microscope 
experiment indicates the relevance of a new order of undivided wholeness 
in which it has no meaning to talk about an observed object as if it were 
separate from the entire experimental situation in which observation takes 
place. So the use of the descriptive term "particle" in this "quantum" 
context is very misleading. 
Evidently, we have here to deal with something that is similar in certain 
important ways to the example of stirring a dye into a viscous fluid. In both 
cases, there appears in immediate perception an explicate order that cannot 
consistently be regarded as autonomous. In the example of the dye, the 
explicate order is determined as an intersection of the implicate order of 
"the whole movement" of the fluid and an implicate order of distinctions of 
density of dye that are relevated in sense perception. In the "quantum" 
context, there similarly will be an intersection of an implicate order of some 
"whole movement" corresponding to what we have called, for example, 
"the electron," and another implicate order of distinctions that are retevated 
(and recorded) by our instruments. Thus, the word "electron" should be 
regarded as no more than a name by which we call attention to a certain 
aspect of the holomovement, an aspect that can be discussed only by taking 
into account the entire experimental situation and that cannot be specified 
in terms of localized objects moving autonomously through space. And, of 
course, every kind of "particle" which in current physics is said to be a 
basic constituent of matter will have to be discussed in the same sort of terms 
(so that such "particles" are no longer considered as autonomous and 
separately existent). Thus, we come to a new general physical description in 
which "everything implicates everything" in an order of undivided wholeness. 
A mathematical discussion of how the "quantum" context can be 
assimilated in terms of the sort of implicate order discussed above is given in 
the Appendix. 
5. LAW IN THE HOLOMOVEMENT 
We have seen that in the "quantum" context, the order in every 
immediately perceptible aspect of the world is to be regarded as coming out 

154 
David Bohm 
of a more comprehensive implicate order, in which all aspects ultimately 
merge in the undefinable and immeasurable holomovement. How then are we 
to understand the fact that descriptions involving the analysis of the world 
into autonomous components do actually work, at least in certain contexts 
(e.g., those in which classical physics is valid)? 
To answer the question, we first note that the word "autonomy" is 
based on two Greek words, "auto" meaning "self" and "nomos" meaning 
"law." So, to be autonomous is to be self-ruling. 
But evidently, nothing is "a law unto itself." At most, something may 
behave with a relative and limited degree of autonomy, under certain con- 
ditions and in certain degrees of approximation. Indeed, at the very least, 
each relatively autonomous thing (e.g., a particle) is limited by other such 
relatively autonomous things. Such a limitation is currently described in terms 
of interaction. However, we shall introduce here the word "heteronomy" 
to call attention to a law in which many relatively autonomous things are 
related in this way; i.e., externally and more or less mechanically. 
Now, what is characteristic of heteronomy is the applicability of analytic 
descriptions. (As pointed out in Part A, (1~ the root of the word "analysis" 
is the Greek "lysis" meaning "to dissolve" or "to loosen." And since the 
prefix "ana" means "above," it may be said that "to analyze" is to "loosen 
from above," i.e. to obtain a broad view as if from a great height in terms of 
components that are regarded as autonomous and separately existent though 
in mutual interaction.) 
As has been seen, however, in sufficiently broad contexts, such analytic 
descriptions cease to be adequate. What is then called for is holonomy, i.e. the 
law of the whole. Holonomy does not totally deny the relevance of analysis 
in the sense discussed above. Indeed, "the law of the whole" will generally 
include the possibility of describing the "loosening" of aspects from each 
other, so that they will be relatively autonomous in limited contexts (as well 
as the possibility of describing the interactions of these aspects in a system 
of heteronomy). However, any form of relative autonomy (and heteronomy) 
is ultimately limited by holonomy, so that in a broad enough context such 
forms are seen to be merely aspects, relevated in the holomovement, rather 
than disjoint and separately existent things in interaction. 
Scientific investigations have generally tended to begin by relevating 
apparently autonomous aspects of the totality. The study of the laws of these 
aspects has generally been emphasized at first, but as a rule this kind of study 
has led gradually to an awareness that such aspects are related to others 
originally thought to have no significant bearing on the subject of primary 
interest. 
From time to time, a wide range of aspects has been comprehended 
within a "new whole." But of course the general tendency until now has 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
155 
been to fix on this "new whole" as a finally valid general order that is hence- 
forth to be adapted (in the manner discussed in Section 1) to fit any further 
facts that may be observed or discovered. 
It is implied here, however, that even such a "new whole" will itself be 
revealed as an aspect in yet another new whole. Thus, holonomy is not to be 
regarded as a fixed and final goal of scientific research, but rather as a move- 
movement in which "new wholes" are continually emerging. And of course 
this further implies that the total law of the undefinable and immeasurable 
holomovement could never be known or specified or put into words. Rather, 
such a law has necessarily to be regarded as implicit. 
The general question of the assimilation of the overall fact in physics 
in such a notion of law will be discussed in the Appendix and in further 
articles to be published later. 
APPENDIX. IMPLICATE AND EXPLICATE ORDER IN PHYSICAL 
LAW 
A1. Introduction 
In this appendix, the notions of implicate and explicate order that have 
been introduced earlier will be put into a more mathematical form. 
It is important to emphasize, however, that mathematics and physics 
are not being regarded here as sepatate but mutually related structures (so 
that, for example, one could be said to apply mathematics to physics as 
paint is applied to wood). Rather, it is being suggested that mathematics 
and physics are to be considered as aspects of a single, undivided whole. 
In discussing this whole, we begin with the general language which is 
used for description in physics. We may then be said to mathematize this 
language; i.e., to articulate or define it in more detail so that it allows state- 
ments of greater precision from which a broad range of significant inferences 
may be drawn in a clear and coherent way. 
In order that the general language and its mathematization shall be 
able to work together coherently and harmoniously, these two aspects have 
to be similar to each other in certain key ways, though they will, of course, be 
different in other ways (notably in that the mathematical aspect has greater 
possibilities for precision of inferences). Through a consideration of these 
similarities and differences, there can arise what may be called a sort of 
"dialogue" in which new meanings common to both aspects fire created. 
It is in this "dialogue" that the wholeness of the general language and its 
mathematics is to be seen. 
In this appendix we shall then indicate, though only in a very preliminary 
and provisional way, how we can mathematize the general language for 
825/3/2-2 

156 
David Bohm 
developing implicate and explicate orders in a coherent and harmonious 
manner. 
A2. Euclidean Systems of Order and Measure 
We begin by discussing the mathematical description of explicate order. 
Now, explicate order arises primarily as a certain aspect of sense 
perception and of experience with the content of such sense perception. It 
may be added that, in physics, explicate order generally reveals itself in the 
sensually observable results of functioning of an instrument. 
What is common to the functioning of instruments generally used in 
physical research is that the sensually perceptible content is ultimately 
describable in terms of a Euclidean system of order and measure; i.e., one 
that can adequately be understood in terms of ordinary Euclidean geometry. 
We shall therefore begin with a discussion of Euclidean systems of order 
and measure. 
In this discussion, we shall adopt the well-known view of the mathe- 
matician Klein, who considers the general transformations to be the essential 
determining features of a geometry. Thus, in a Euclidean space of three 
dimensions, there are three displacement operators Di. Each of these 
operators defines a set of parallel lines which transform into themselves under 
the operation in question. Then, there are three rotation operators R~. 
Each of these defines a set of concentric cylinders around the origin which 
transform into themselves under the operation in question. Together, they 
define concentric spheres which transform into themselves under the whole 
set of R~. Finally, there is the dilatation operator R0, which transforms a 
sphere of a given radius into one of a different radius. Under this operation, 
the radial lines through the origin transform into themselves. 
From any one set of operators Ri, R0, we obtain another set R', R0', 
corresponding to a different center, by means of a displacement 
(R(, Ro') = Dj(R~ , Ro) Dy 1 
And from the D~, we obtain a set of displacements D{ in new directions by 
the rotation 
D( = RjDiR~ -1 
Now, if D~ is a certain displacement, (Di) ~ will be a displacement of n similar 
steps. This means that displacements can be ordered naturally in an order 
similar to that of the integers. So we may describe displacements on a 
numerical scale. This gives not only an order, but also a measure (insofar as 
we treat successive displacements as equivalent in size). 
Similarly, each rotation Ri determines an ordered and measured series 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
157 
(R~) n of rotations, while a dilatation R 0 determines an ordered and measured 
series (R0) ~ of dilatations. 
It is clear that operations of this kind determine what is meant by 
parallelism and perpendicularity, as well as by congruence and similarity of 
geometric figures. Thus, they determine the essential feature of a Euclidean 
geometry, with its whole system of order and measure. It has to be kept in 
mind, however, that the whole set of operations themselves is what is being 
taken as primarily relevant, while static elements (e.g., straight lines, circles, 
triangles, etc.) are now being regarded as "invariant subspaces" of the 
operations and as configurations formed from these subspaces. 
A3. Transformation and Metamorphosis 
We now go on to discuss the mathematical description of implicate order. 
Implicate order is generally to be described, not in terms of simple 
geometric transformations, such as translations, rotations, and dilatations, 
but rather in terms of a different kind of operation. In the interests of clarity, 
we shall therefore reserve the word transformation to describe a simple 
geometric change within a given explicit order. What happens in the broader 
context of implicate order we shall then call a metamorphosis. This word 
indicates that the change is much more radical than the change of position 
or orientation of a rigid body, and that it is in certain ways more like the 
change from caterpillar to butterfly (in which everything alters in a thorough- 
going manner while some subtle and highly implicit features remain 
invariant). Evidently, the change between illuminated object and its hologram 
(or between an ink droplet and the "gray mass" obtained by stirring it) is 
to be described as a metamorphosis rather than as a transformation. 
We shall use the symbol M for a metamorphosis and T for a trans- 
formation, while E will denote a whole set of transformations that are relevant 
in a given explicate order (D~, R~, R0). Under a metamorphosis, the set E 
will change into another set E' given by 
E': 
MEM -1 
This has hitherto generally been called a similarity transformation, but from 
from now on it will be called a similarity metamorphosis. 
To indicate the essential features of a similarity metamorphosis, let us 
consider the example oI the hologram. In this case, the appropriate meta- 
morphosis M is determined by the Green's function relating amplitudes at 
the illuminated structure to those at the photographic plate. For waves of 
definite frequency co the Green's function is 
G(x -- y) _~ {exp[i(~/c)l x -- y l]}/I x - y [ 

158 
David Bohm 
where x is a coordinate relevant to the illuminated structure and y is one to 
the plate. Thus, if A(x) is the amplitude of the wave at the illuminated 
structure, then the amplitude B(y) at the plate is 
B(y) ~_ f ({exp[i(co/c) ] x -- y il}/t x -- y [) A(x) dx 
The entire illuminated structure is seen from the above to be "carried" 
and "enfolded" in each region of the plate in a way that evidently cannot 
be described in terms of a point-to-point transformation or correspondence 
between x and y. The matrix M(x, y) [which is essentially G(x -- y]) can thus 
be called a metamorphosis of the amplitudes at illuminated structure into 
the amplitudes at the hologram. 
Let us now consider the relationship between transformations E in the 
illuminated structure and concomitant changes in the hologram which follow 
on these transformations. In the illuminated structure, E can be characterized 
as a point-to-point correspondence in which any similar locality is trans- 
formed into a similar locality. The corresponding change in the hologram is 
described by E' = MEM-L This is not a correspondence of points in the 
hologram to each other in which the property of locality of such sets of points 
would be preserved. Rather, each region of the hologram is changed in a 
way that depends on all other such regions. Nevertheless, the change E' 
in the hologram evidently determines the change E in the structure that can 
be seen when the hologram is illuminated with laser light. 
Likewise, in a quantum context, a unitary transformation (e.g., as 
given by a Green's function operating on the state vector) can be understood 
as a metamorphosis in which point-to-point transformations of space and 
time that preserve locality are "enfolded" into more general operations that 
are similar in the sense defined above and which nevertheless are not locality- 
preserving point-to-point transformations. 
A4. Mathematization of the Description of Implicate Order 
The next step is to discuss the mathematization of the language for the 
description of implicate order. 
We begin by considering a metamorphosis M. By applying M again and 
again, we obtain (M)% which describes the enfolding of a given structure n 
times. If we then write Q~ = (M) ~, we have 
Q. : Q~-I = Q.<: 
Q~-2 = M 
Thus, there is a series of similar differences in the Q~ (ndeed, the differences 
are not only similar but are also all equal to M). As pointed out in Part A, m 
such a series of similar differences indicates an order. And since the differences 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
159 
are in the degree of implication, this order is an implicate order. Moreover, 
insofar as successive operations M are regarded as equivalent, there is also 
a measure, in which n can be taken as an implication parameter. 
If we think of the example of droplets of insoluble dye stirred into a 
viscous fluid (so that we let M describe the change of the droplet when the 
system is enfolded by a certain number of turns), then M s describes the change 
of the droplet when subjected to n enfoldings. Each droplet is, however, 
inserted in a position that is displaced by a certain amount relative to the 
preceding droplet. Let this displacement be denoted by D. The nth droplet 
first suffers the displacement D ~ and then the metamorphoris M s, so that the 
net result is given by M~D ~. Let us further suppose that the density of dye 
injected with each droplet can vary, and denote that of the dye injected 
into the nth droplet by the nth droplet with the aid of the operation 
Q~ = CsM~D s. The operator corresponding to the entire series of droplets 
is obtained by adding the contributions of each, to give 
Q = Z CsMSDn 
S 
Moreover, any number of structures, corresponding to Q, Q', Q", etc. can 
also be superposed, to yield 
R=Q+Q'+Q"+'" 
In addition, any such structure can itself undergo a displacement, such as D, 
and a metamorphosis, such as M, to yield 
R' = MDR 
And if the fluid were already a "uniformly gray" background, we could 
give meaning to negative coefficient Cs as signifying the removal of a certain 
amount of dye from a region corresponding to a droplet (rather than to the 
addition of such dye to the region). 
In the above discussion, each mathematical symbol corresponds to an 
operation (transformation and/or metamorphosis). There is a meaning to 
adding operations, to multiplying the result by a number C, and to multi- 
plying operations by each other. If we further introduce a unit operation 
(one which leaves all operations unaltered in multiplication) and a zero 
operation (one which leaves all operations unaltered when added), we will 
have satisfied all the conditions needed for an algebra. 
We see then that an algebra contains key features which are similar to 
the key features of structures built on implicate orders. Such an algebra thus 
makes possible a relevant rnathematization that can be coherently related to 
the general language for discussing implicate orders. 

160 
David Bolnn 
Now, in the quantum theory, an algebra similar to the one described 
above also plays a key role. Indeed, the theory is expressed in terms of linear 
operators (including a unit operator and a zero operator) that can be added 
to each other, multiplied by numbers, and multiplied by each other. All the 
content of the quantum theory can thus be put in terms of such an algebra. 
Of course, in the quantum theory, the algebraic terms are interpreted 
as standing for "physical observables" to which they correspond. However, 
in the approach that is being suggested here, such terms are not to be regarded 
as standing for anything in particular. Rather, they are to be considered as 
extensions of the general language. A single algebraic symbol is thus similar 
to a word, in the sense that its implicit meaning comes out fully only in the 
way in which the language as a whole is used. 
This approach is indeed used in a great deal of modern mathematics, z 
especially in number theory. Thus, one can start with what are called 
undefinable symbols. The meaning of such a symbol is never directly relevant. 
Rather, only relationships and operations in which these symbols take part 
are relevant. 
What we are proposing here is that as we mathematize language in the 
way indicated above, there will arise orders, measures, and structures within 
the language which are similar to (but also different from) orders, measures, 
and structures that are to be perceived in common experience and in 
experience with the functioning of scientific instruments. As further indicated 
above, there can then be a relationship between these two kinds of orders, 
measures, and structures, so that what we talk about and think about will 
have a common ratio or reason with what we can observe and do (see Part A 
for a discussion of this sense of"ratio" or "reason'm). 
This means, of course, that we do not regard terms like "particle," 
"charge," "mass," "position," "momentum," etc., as having primary 
relevance in the algebraic language. Rather, at best, they will have to come 
out as high-level abstractions. As pointed out in this section, the real meaning 
of the "quantum algebra" will then be that it is a mathematization of the 
general language, which enriches the latter and makes possible a more 
precisely articulated discussion of implicate order than is possible in terms 
of the general language alone. 
Of course, algebra is in itself a limited form of mathematization. There 
is no reason in principle why we should not ultimately go on to other sorts 
of mathematization (involving, for example, rings and lattices or still more 
general structures which have yet to be created). However, it will be seen in 
this appendix and in later papers that even within the limits of an algebraic 
structure, one can assimilate a very wide range of aspects of modern physics, 
3 See, for example, Littlewood. ~5) 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
161 
and one can open up a great many interesting new avenues for exploration. 
It is therefore useful to go into the algebraic mathematization if the common 
language in some detail before going into more general kinds of mathe- 
matization. 
AS. Algebra and the Holomovement 
We begin our exploration of the algebraic mathematization of the general 
language by calling attention to the fact that the primary meaning of an 
algebraic symbol is that it describes a certain kind of movement. 
Thus, consider the set of indefinable algebraic terms denoted by A. It 
is characteristic of an algebra that these terms have a relationship given by 
AiAj = ~ )t~Ax 
K 
where )t~ is a set of numerical constants. This relationship means that when 
a given term A~ precedes another one Aj, the result is equivalent to a 
"weighted sum" or superposition of terms (so that an algebra contains a 
sort of "superposition principle" similar in key ways to that which holds 
in the quantum theory). In effect, one can say that although the term A~ is 
"in itself" indefinable, it nevertheless signifies a certain sort of "movement" 
of the total set of terms, in which each symbol Aj is replaced by (or changes 
into) a superposition of symbols Z )tgAx. 
As pointed out earlier, however, in the general language for the 
description of implicate order the indefinable and immeasurable holo- 
movement is considered as the totality in which all that is to be discussed is 
ultimately to be relevated. Similarly, in the algebraic mathematization of 
this general language, we consider as a totality an undefinable algebra in 
which the primary meaning of each term is that it signifies a "whole 
movement" in all the terms of the algebra. Through this key similarity there 
arises the possibility of a coherent mathematization of the sort of general 
description that takes the totality to be the indefinable and immeasurable 
holomovement. 
We can now go further along these lines. Thus, just as in the general 
language, we can consider relatively autonomous aspects of the holo- 
movement, so in its mathematization, we can consider relatively autonomous 
subalgebras which are aspects of the indefinable "whole algebra." As each 
aspect of the holomovement is ultimately limited in its autonomy by the law 
of the whole (i.e., the holonomy), so each subalgebra is ultimately limited 
by the fact that the relevant law involves movements going outside those that 
can be described in terms of the subalgebra in question. 
A given physical context will then be describable in terms of an appro- 

162 
David Bohm 
priate subalgebra. As we approach the limits of this context, we will discover 
that such a description is inadequate and we will consider broader algebras 
until we find a discription that is adequate to the new content to which we 
have thus been led. 
In the context of classical physics, for example, it is possible to abstract 
a subalgebra corresponding to a set of Euclidean operations E. However, 
in a "quantum" context, the "law of the whole" involves metamorphoses M 
which lead out of this subalgebra and into different (but similar) subalgebras 
given by 
E' = MEM -1 
But, as pointed out earlier in these papers, there are now indications that 
even the "quantum" algebra is inadequate in yet broader contexts. So it is 
natural to go on to consider still broader algebras (and ultimately, of course, 
yet more general sorts of mathematization that may prove to be relevant). 
A6. Extension of Principle of Relativity to Implicate Orders 
As a step into the inquiry into more comprehensive forms of 
mathematization, we shall point out the possibility of a certain extension of 
the principle of relativity to implicate orders that is suggested by considering 
how the quantum algebra limits the autonomy of the classical algebra in 
the way described above. 
Now, in a classical context, any structure can be specified in terms of a 
set of operations El, E2, E3 .... (which describe lengths, angles, congruence, 
similarity, etc.). When we go to a broader "quantum" content, we can arrive 
at similar operations, E' = MEM -1. What this similarity means is that if 
any two elements, say E1 and E2, are related in a certain way in the description 
of a specified structure, then there is a set of elements El' and E( describing 
nonlocal "enfolded" transformations that are related in a similar way. Or, 
to put it more concisely, 
EI:E2::E~':E; 
From this, it follows that if we are given a Euclidean system of order and 
measure with certain structures that are built on it, we can always obtain 
another system E' enfolded relative to E, and yet capable of having similar 
structures built on it. 
Hitherto, the principle of relativity has taken a form which may be put 
as follows: Given any structural relationship as described in a frame of 
coordinates corresponding to a certain velocity, it is always possible to have 
a similar structural relationship as described in a frame of coordinates 
corresponding to any other velocity. But it follows from the discussion above 
that the mathematization of the general language in terms of a "quantum" 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
163 
algebra opens up the possibility of an extension of the principle of relativity. 
Such an extension is evidently similar to the principle of complementarity, 
in that when conditions are such that a given order corresponding to a set 
of operations E is explicate, then another order corresponding to similar 
operations E' = MEM -1 is implicate (so that in a certain sense both orders 
cannot be defined together). However, it is different from the principle of 
complementarity in that the primary emphasis is now on orders and measures 
that are relevant to geometry, rather than on mutually incompatible experi- 
mental arrangements. 
It follows from this extension of the principle of relativity that the idea 
of space as constituted of a set of unique and well-defined points, related 
topologically by a set of neighborhoods and metrically by a definition of 
distance, is no longer adequate. Indeed, each set of Euclidean operations 
E' defines such a set of points, neighborhoods, measures, etc. which are 
implicate relative to those defined by another set E'. The notion of space as 
a set of points with a topology and a metric is thus merely an aspect of a 
broader totality. 
It will be helpful here to introduce a further new usage of language. In 
topology, one can describe a space as covered by a complex, constituted 
of elementary figures (e.g., triangles or other basic polygonal cell forms), 
each of which is called a simplex. The word "plex" is a form of the Latin 
"plicare," which, as we have already seen earlier, means "to fold." So, 
"simplex" means "one-fold" and "complex" means "folded together," but 
in the sense of many separate objects that are joined to each other. 
To describe the enfolding of an unlimited set of Euclidean systems of 
orders and measures into each other, we may then introduce the word 
multiplex (which is new in this context). This means "many complexes all 
folded toghether." Literally, this is also what is meant by "manifold." 
However, by custom, this last word has come to mean "continuum." So we 
are led to use the word multiplex to call attention to the primary relevance 
of implicate order and to the inadequacy of a description in terms of a 
continuum. 
Thus far, space has generally been considered as a continuum that can be 
covered by a complex (which is evidently a form of explicate ordering of the 
space). Such a complex can be discussed in terms of coordinate systems. Thus, 
each simplex can be described with the aid of a locally Euclidean frame, and 
the whole space can then be treated through the use of a very large number 
of overlapping coordinate "patches." Or, alternatively, one may find a single 
set of curvilinear coordinates that is applicable over the entire space. The 
principle of relativity then states that all such coordinate systems furnish 
equivalent frames of description (i.e., equivalent for the expression of ratio, 
or reason, or law). 

164 
David Bohm 
We now go on to consider similar sets of operations E and E' which are 
implicate relative to each other. As pointed out above, we are extending the 
principle of relativity by supposing that the orders defined through any two 
operations E and E' are equivalent in the sense that the "law of the whole" is 
such that similar structures can be built on each order. To help make clear 
what is meant here, we note that the orders of movement that are directly 
perceivable to the senses are generally regarded as explicate, while other 
orlers (such as, for example, those appropriate to the description of "an 
electron" in a quantum context) are taken to be implicate. But, according to 
the extended principle of relativity, one can equally well take the "electron" 
order as explicate and our sensual order as implicate. This is to put ourselves 
(metaphorically) in the situation of "the electron" and then to understand 
the latter by assimilating oneself to it and it to oneself. 
This evidently means a thoroughgoing wholeness in our thinking. Or, 
as was put earlier, "All implicates all," even to the extent that "we ourselves" 
are implicated together with "all that we see and think about." So we are 
present everywhere and at all times, though only implicately (that is, 
implicitly). 
The same is true of every "object." It is only in certain special orders of 
description that such objects appear as explicate. But the general law, i.e., 
holonomy, has to be expressed in all orders, in which all objects and all times 
are "folded together." 
A7. Some Preliminary Suggestions Concerning Law in a Multiplex 
We shall now give a few preliminary suggestions as to the lines of inquiry 
into general law as formulated in terms of a multiplex rather than in terms 
of a continuum. 
We begin by recalling that classical descriptions are relevant only in a 
context in which the expression of the law is limited to a particular sub- 
algebra corresponding to a given Euclidean system of order and measure. 
If this system is extended to time as well as space, then such a law can be 
compatible with special relativity. 
The essential feature of special relativity is that the speed of light is an 
invariant limit for the propagation of signals (and causal influences). In this 
connection, we note that a signal will always be constituted of a certain 
explicate order of events, and that in a context in which this explicate order 
ceases to be relevant, the notion of signal will also cease to be relevant (e.g., 
if an order is "enfolded" throughout all of space and time, it cannot 
coherently be regarded as constituting a signal that would propagate infor- 
mation from one place to another over a period of time). This means that 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
165 
where implicate order is involved, the descriptive language of special relativity 
will, in general, no longer be applicable. 
The general theory of relativity is similar to the special theory, in that in 
each region of space-time there is light cone which defines a limiting signal 
velocity. It is different, however, in that each region has its own local 
coordinate frame (denoted by m) related to those of its neighbors (denoted 
by n) through certain general linear transformations T~. But a local 
coordinate frame is, in our point of view, to be regarded as an expression of 
a corresponding Euclidean system of order and measure (which would, 
for example, generate the lines of the frame in question as invariant subspaces 
of the operations E). We therefore consider the Euclidean systems of 
operations E~ and E~ and the transformations relating them 
E. = 
When we consider a series of transformations of these systems around 
a closed circuit of patches, we arrive at what is in mathematical terms called 
the "holomony group." In one sense, this name is appropriate, for this group 
does determine the character of the "whole space." Thus, in general relativity, 
this group is equivalent to the Lorentz group, which is compatible with the 
requirement of an invariant "local light cone." The use of a different group 
here would of course imply a correspondingly different character to the 
"whole space." 
In another sense, however, it would be better to consider the group in 
question as an "autonomy group" rather than as a "holonomy group." 
For, in general relativity (as well as in a wide class of modern field theories), 
the general law is invariant to arbitrary "gauge transformations" of the frames 
in each region, E~' ----- R,~E~R~ 1. The meaning of these transformations can 
be seen by considering several neighboring regions, each containing a 
localized structure; i.e., one which has a negligible connection with 
neighboring structures (so that one may appropriately regard the space 
between them as empty, or approximately so). The significance of gauge 
invariance is then that the laws are such that any two structures can be 
transformed independently of each other, at least within certain limits (e.g., 
as long as there is sufficient "empty space" between them). An example 
of such relative autonomy of structures is that objects that are not too close 
can be turned and translated relative to each other. Evidently it is this 
particular feature of "law of the whole" (i.e., gauge invariance which allows 
for relative autonomy of the kind described above. 
As we go on to a quantum context, the "law of the whole" (i.e., the 
generalization of what is meant by "holonomy group" in Riemannian 
geometry) will involve metamorphosis M as well as transformations T. 

166 
David Bohm 
This will being us to the multiplex, in which new kinds of order and measure 
will be relevant. 
It is important, however, to emphasize that the "law of the whole" 
will not just be a transcription of current quantum theory to a new language. 
Rather, the entire context of physics (classical and quantum) will have to be 
assimilated in a different structure, in which space, time, matter, and 
movement are described in new ways. Such assimilation will then lead on 
to new avenues to be explored, which cannot even be thought about in terms 
of current theories. 
We shall here indicate only a few of the many possibilities of this 
kind. 
First, we recall that we begin with an undefinable total algebra and take 
out subalgebras that are suitable for the description of certain contexts of 
physical research. Now, mathematicians have already worked out certain 
interesting and potentially relevant features of such subalgebras. 
Thus, consider a given subalgebra A. Among its terms Ai, there may be 
some AN which are nilpotent; i.e., which have the property that some powers 
of AN, [say (AN) s] is zero. Among these, there is a subset of terms A~ which 
are properly nilpotent; i.e., which remain nilpotent when multiplied by any 
term of the algebra A i [so that (AiA~) ~ = 
0]. 
As an example, consider first a clifford algebra, in which every term is 
properly nilpotent. However, in a fermionic algebra, with terms Ci and Q.*, 
each Ci and Cj* is nilpotent [i.e., (Ci) 2 = (Cj*) 2 = O] but not properly 
nilpotent [i.e., (C~*C~) ~ ~ 01. 
One may say that properly nilpotent terms describe movements which 
ultimately lead to features that vanish. Thus, if we are seeking to describe 
invariant and relatively permanent features of movement, we should have 
an algebra that has no properly nilpotent terms. Such an algebra can always 
be obtained from any algebra A by subtracting out the properly nilpotent 
terms to give what is called the difference algebra. 
We now consider the following theorem. ~ Every difference algebra can 
be expressed in terms of products of a matrix algebra (i.e., an algebra whose 
rules of multiplication are similar to those of matrices) and a division algebra 
(i.e., an algebra in which the product of two nonzero terms is never zero). 
As regards the division algebra, the possible types of these depend on 
the fields over which the numerical coefficients are taken. If this field is that 
of the real numbers, then there are exactly three division algebras, the real 
numbers themselves, an algebra of order two, which is equivalent to complex 
numbers, and the real quaternions. On the other hand, over the field of 
complex numbers, the only division algebra is that of the complex numbers 
See, for example, Littlewood. ~5~ 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
167 
themselves; (this explains why quaternions, extended to include complex 
coefficients, become a two-rowed matrix algebra). 
It is significant that by mathematizing the general language in terms of 
an initially undefined and unspecified algebra, we arrive naturally at the 
sort of algebras used in current quantum theory for "particles with spin," 
i.e., products of matrices and quaternions. These algebras have in addition, 
however, a significance going beyond that of technical calculations carried 
out in the quantum theory. For example, the quaternions imply invariance 
under a group of transformations similar to rotations in three-dimensional 
space (which can be extended in a simple way to groups similar to the 
Lorentz group). This indicates that in some sense, the key transformations 
determining the (3 + 1)-dimensional order of "relativistic space-time" are 
already contained in the holomovement, described through implicate order, 
mathematized in terms of algebra. 
More precisely, it can be said that, starting from a general algebraic 
mathematization of the language and asking for those features which are 
relatively permanent or invariant (described by algebras without properly 
nilpotent terms) and those features which are not restricted to a particular 
scale (described by algebras whose terms can be multiplied by an arbitrary 
real number), we have arrived at transformations determining an order 
equivalent to that of relativistic space-time. This means, however, that 
if we considered impermanent and noninvariant features (implying algebras 
with properly nilpotent terms) and features that are restricted to particular 
scales (implying algebras over the rationals or over finite number fields), 
then entirely new orders [not reducible at all to (3 ÷ 1)-dimensional order] 
may become relevant. It thus becomes clear that there is here a wide area 
for possible exploration. 
A further area for exploration would be in the development of a new 
description combining classical and quantum aspects in a single or more 
comprehensive structure of language. Instead of regarding classical and 
quantum languages as separate but related by some sort of correspondence 
(as is generally done in current theories), one can, along the lines already 
indicated in this appendix, inquire into the possibility of abstracting these 
as limiting cases of languages mathematized in terms of broader algebras. 
To do this could evidently lead to different theories, having a new content, 
going beyond those of both classical and quantum theories. In this regard, 
it would be particularly interesting to see if algebraic structures would be 
discovered which lead also to relativistic notions as limiting cases (e.g., in 
terms of algebras over finite number fields, rather than over the reals). 
Such theories might be expected to be free of the infinities of current theories, 
and to lead to a generally coherent treatment of the problems that the 
current theories cannot solve. 

168 
David Bohm 
These questions and others of a similar nature will be gone into in later 
papers. 
REFERENCES 
1. D. Bohm, Found. Phys. 1, 359 (1971). 
2. T. Kuhn, The Nature of Scientific Revolutions (University of Chicago Press, 1955). 
3. J. Piaget, The Origin of Intelligence in the Child (Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 
1956). 
4. D. Bohm, B. Hiley, and A. Stuart, Progr. Theoret. Phys. 3, 171 (1970). 
5. D. F. Littlewood, The Skeleton Key of Mathematics (Hutchinson and Co., London, 
1960). 

