Foundations of Physics, VoL 1, No. 4, 1971 
Quantum Theory as an Indication 
of a New Order in Physics. Part A. 
The Development of New Orders 
as Shown Through the History 
of Physics 
D. Bohm 
Birkbeek College, University of London 
London, England 
Received January 12, 1971 
In this paper, we discuss the general significance of order in physics, as a first step toward 
the development of new notions of order. We begin with a brief historical discussion of 
the notions of order underlying ancient Greek views, and then go on to show how these 
changed in key ways with the rise of classical physics. This leads to a broader view of the 
significance of order, which helps to indicate what is to be meant by a change of our 
general notions of order in physics. We then go into relativity and quantum theory, 
showing how these developments actually did bring in further new notions of order, which 
are however inconsistent and otherwise inadequate in certain ways. Finally, using these 
inconsistencies and inadequacies as clues or indications for yet a further new concept of 
order, we make some proposals for novel directions of inquiry (to be discussed in some 
detail in later papers) which could lead to theories as different from relativity and quantum 
theory as these are from classical physics. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Revolutionary changes in physics have always involved the perception of new order 
and attention to the development of new ways of using language that are appropriate 
to the communication of such order. 
359 

360 
D. Bohm 
In the first article of this series, we shall start with a discussion of certain features 
of the history of the development of physics that can help give some insight into what is 
meant by perception and communication of a new order. We shall then go on in later 
articles to present our suggestions regarding the new order that is indicated by the 
consideration of the quantum theory. 
In ancient times, there was only a vague qualitative notion of order in nature. 
With the development of mathematics, notably arithmetic and geometry, the possibility 
arose for defining forms and ratios more precisely, so that, for example, one could 
describe the detailed orbits of planets, etc. However, such detailed mathematical 
descriptions of the motions of the planets and other heavenly bodies implied certain 
general notions of order. Thus, the ancient Greeks thought that the Earth was at the 
center of the Universe, and that surrounding the Earth were spheres, which appro- 
ached the ideal perfection of celestial matter as one got further and further away 
from the Earth. The perfection of celestial matter was supposed to be revealed in cir- 
cular orbits, which were regarded as the most perfect of all geometrical figures, while 
the imperfection of earthly matter was thought to be shown in its very complicated 
and apparently arbitrary movements. Thus, the Universe was both perceived and 
discussed in terms of a certain overall order; i.e., the order of degrees of perfection, 
which corresponded to the order of distance from the center of the Earth. 
Physics as a whole was understood in terms of notions of order closely related to 
those described above. Thus, Aristotle compared the Universe to a living organism, 
in which each part had its proper place and function, so that all worked together to 
make a single whole. Within this whole, an object could move only if there was a 
force acting in it. Force was thus thought of as a cause of motion. So the order of 
movement was determined by the order of causes, which in turn depended on the 
place and function of each part in the whole. 
The general way of perceiving and communicating order in physics was, of 
course, not at all in contradiction with common experience (in which, for example, 
movement is possible as a rule only when there is a force which overcomes friction). 
To be sure, when more detailed observations were made on the planets, it was found 
that their orbits are not actually perfect circles. But this fact was accommodated within 
the prevailing notions of order by considering the orbits of planets as a superposition 
of epicycles, i.e., circles within circles. Thus, one sees an example of the remarkable 
capacity for adaptation within a given notion of order, adaptation that enables one to 
go on perceiving and talking in terms of essentially fixed notions of this kind in spite 
of factual evidence that might at first sight seem to necessitate a thoroughgoing change 
in such notions. With the aid of such adaptations, men could for thousands of years 
look at the night sky and see epicycles there, almost independently of the detailed 
content of their observations. 
It seems clear then that a basic notion of order, such as was expressed in terms of 
epicycles, could never be decisively contradicted, because it could always be adjusted 
to fit the observed facts. But eventually, a new spirit arose in scientific research, which 
led to the questioning of the relevance of the old order, notably by Copernicus, Kepler, 
and Galileo. What emerged from such questioning was in essence the proposal that the 
difference between earthly and celestial matter is not actually very significant. Rather, 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
361 
it was suggested that a key difference is between the motion of matter in empty space 
and its motion in a viscous medium. The basic laws of physics should then refer to the 
motion of matter in empty space, rather than to its motion in a viscous medium. Thus, 
Aristotle was right to say that matter as commonly experienced moved only under the 
action of a force, but he was wrong in supposing that this common experience was 
relevant to the fundamental laws of physics. From this it followed that the key 
difference between celestial and earthly matter was not in its degree of perfection but 
rather in that celestial matter generally moves without friction in a vacuum, whereas 
terrestrial matter moves with friction in a viscous medium. 
Evidently, such notions were not generally compatible with the idea that the 
universe is to be regarded as a single living organism. Rather, in a fundamental 
description, the universe now had to be regarded as analyzable into separately existing 
parts or objects (e.g., planets, atoms, etc.) each moving in a void or vacuum. These 
parts could work together in interaction more or less as do the parts of a machine, 
but could not grow, develop, and function in response to ends determined by an 
"organism as a whole." The basic order for description of movement of the parts 
of this "machine" was taken to be that of successive positions of each constituent 
object at successive moments of time. Thus, a new order became relevant, and a new 
usage of language had to be developed for the description of this new order. 
In the development of new ways of using language, the Cartesian coordinates 
played a key part. Indeed, the very word "coordinate" implies a function of ordering. 
This ordering is achieved with the aid of a grid. This is constituted of three perpendi- 
cular sets of uniformly spaced lines. Each set of lines is evidently an order (similar to 
the order of the integers). A given curve is then determined by a coordination among the 
J(, the Y, and the Z orders. 
Coordinates are evidently not to be regarded as natural objects. Rather, they are 
merely convenient forms of description set up by us. As such, they have a great deal of 
arbitrariness or conventionality (e.g., in orientation, scale, orthogonality, etc. of 
coordinate frames). Despite this kind of arbitrariness, however, it is possible, as is now 
well known, to have a nonarbitrary general law expressed in terms of coordinates. This 
is possible if the law takes the form of a relationship that remains invariant under 
changes in the arbitrary features of the descriptive order. 
To use coordinates is in effect to order our attention in a way that is appropriate 
to the mechanical view of the universe, and thus similarly to order our perception and 
our thinking. It is clear, for example, that though Aristotle very probably would have 
understood the meaning of coordinates, he would have found them of little or no 
significance for his aim of understanding the universe as an organism. But once men 
were ready to conceive of the universe as a machine, they would naturally tend to take 
the order of coordinates as a universally relevant one, valid for all basic descriptions in 
physics. 
Within this new Cartesian order of perception and thinking that had grown up 
after the Renaissance, Newton was able to discover a very general law. It may be 
stated thus: "As with the order of movement in the fall of an apple, so with that of 
the Moon, and so with all." This was a new perception of law, i.e., universal harmony 
in the order of nature, as described in detail through the use of coordinates. Such 

362 
D. Bohm 
perception is a flash of very penetrating insight, which is basically poetic. Indeed, the 
root of the word "poetry" is the Greek "poiein," meaning "to make" or "to create." 
Thus, in its most original aspects, science takes on a quality of poetic communication 
of creative perception of new order. 
A somewhat more "prosaic" way of putting Newton's insight is to write 
A:B::C:D. That is to say, "As the successive positions A, B of the apple are related, so 
are the successive positions C, D of the Moon." This constitutes a generalized notion 
of what may be called ratio. Here, we take ratio in its broadest meaning (e.g., in its 
original Latin sense) which includes all of reason. Science thus aims to discover 
universal ratio or reason, which includes not only numerical ratio or proportion 
(A/B = C/D), but also general qualitative similarity. 
Rational law is not restricted to an expression of causality. Evidently, reason, in 
the sense that is meant here, goes far beyond causality, which latter is a special case of 
reason. Indeed, the basic form of causality is: "I do a certain action X and cause 
something to happen." A causal law then takes the form: "As with such causal actions 
of mine, so with certain processes that can be observed in nature." Thus, a causal law 
provides a certain limited kind of reason. But, more generally, a rational 
explanation takes the form: "As things are related in a certain idea or concept, so 
they are related in fact." 
It is clear from the preceding discussion that in finding a new structure of reason 
or rationality, it is crucialfirst to discern relevant differences. To try to find a rational 
connection between irrelevant differences leads to arbitrariness, confusion, and general 
sterility (e.g., as with epicyeles). So we have to be ready to drop our assumptions as to 
what are the relevant differences, though this has often seemed to be very difficult to do, 
because we tend to give such high psychological value to familiar ideas. 
2. WHAT IS ORDER ? 
Thus far, the term order has been used in a number of contexts that are more or 
less known to everyone, so that its meaning can be seen fairly clearly from its usage. 
But the notion of order is evidently relevant in much broader contexts. Thus, we do 
not restrict order to some regular arrangement of objects or forms in lines or in rows 
(e.g., as with grids). Rather we can consider much more general orders, such as the 
order of growth of a living being, the order of evolution of living species, the order of 
society, the order of a musical composition, the order of painting, the order which 
constitutes the meaning of communication, etc. If we wish to enquire into such 
broader contexts, the notions of order to which we have referred earlier in this article 
will evidently no longer be adequate. We are therefore led to the general question: 
"What is order ?" 
The notion of order is so vast and immense in its implications, however, that it 
cannot be defined in words. Indeed, the best we can do with order is to try to "point 
to it" tacitly and by implication, is as wide as possible a range of contexts in which 
this notion is relevant. We all know order implicitly, and such "pointing" can perhaps 
communicate a general and overall meaning of order without the need for a precise 
verbal definition. 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
363 
1 
I 
1 
1 
1 
I 
X 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 
F 
G 
Fig. 1 
To begin to understand order in such a general sense, we may first recall that in 
the development of classical physics, the perception of a new order was seen to involve 
the discrimination of new relevant differences (positions of objects at successive 
moments of time) along with new similarities that are to be found in the differences 
(similarity of "ratios" in these differences). It is being suggested here that this is the 
seed or nucleus of a very general way of perceiving order, i.e., to give attention to 
similar differences and different similarities, i 
Let us illustrate these notions in terms of a geometric curve. To simplify the 
example, we shall approximate the curve by a series of straight line segments of equal 
length. We begin with a straight line. As shown in Fig. 1, the segments in a straight 
line all have the same direction, so that their only difference is in the position. The 
difference between segment A and segment B is thus a space displacement which is 
similar to the difference between B and C, and so on. We may therefore write 
A:B: :B:C: :C:D: :D:E 
This expression of "ratio" or "reason" may be said to define a curve of first class; 
i.e., a curve having only one independent difference. 
Next, we consider a circle, as illustrated in Fig. 2. Here, the difference between 
A and B is in direction, as well as in position. Thus, we have a curve with two 
independent differences--which is therefore one of second class. But we still have a 
single "ratio" in the differences, A:B: :B:C. 
Now, we come to a helix. Here, the angle between lines can turn in a third 
dimension. Thus, we have a curve of third class. But it, too, is determined by a single 
ratio, A :B: :B:C. 
Thus far we have considered various kinds of similarities in the differences, to 
obtain curves of first, second, third classes, etc. However, in each curve, the similarity 
(or ratio) between successive steps remains invariant. But now we can call attention 
to curves in which this similarity is different as we go along the curve. In this way, we 
are led to consider not only similar differences, but also different similarities of the 
differences. 
x This notion of order was first suggested to the author in a private communication by a well-known 
artist, C. Biederman. For a presentation of his views, see Ref. 1. 
2 
@ 
v 
A 
Fig. 2 

364 
D. Bohm 
[ 
" 
I 
A 
]3 
Fig. 3 
c 
We can illustrate this notion by means of a curve which is a chain of straight 
lines in different directions (see Fig. 3). On the first line (ABCD), we can write 
5' 1 
A:B::B:C 
The symbol $1 stands for "the first kind of similarity," i.e., in direction along the line 
(ABCD). Then we write for the lines (EFG) and (HI J) 
5"2 
Sz 
E:F::F:G 
and 
H:I::I:J 
where $2 stands for "the similarity of the second kind" and Sz for "the similarity of the 
third kind." 
We can now consider the difference of successive similarities (St, $2, $3 .... ) 
as a second degree of difference. From this, we can develop a second degree of similarity 
in these differences. $1 : $2 : : $2 : Sz . 
By thus introducing what is in effect the beginning of a hierarchy of similarities 
and differences, we can go on to curves of arbitrarily high degrees of order. As the 
degrees become indefinitely high, we are able to describe what have commonly been 
called "random" curves--such as those encountered in Brownian motion. This kind 
of ci~rve is not determined by any finite number of steps. Nevertheless, it would not be 
appropriate to call it "disordered," i.e., having no order whatsoever. Rather, it has a 
certain kind of order, which is of an indefinitely high degree. 
In this way, we are led to make an important change in the general language of 
description. We no longer use the term "disorder" but instead we distinguish between 
different degrees of order (so that, for example, there is an unbroken gradation of 
curves, beginning with those of first degree, and going on step by step to those that 
have generally been called "random"). 
It is important to add here that order is not to be identified with predictability. 
Predictability is a property of a special kind of order such that a few steps determine 
the whole order (i.e., as in curves of low degree). But there can be complex and subtle 
orders which are not in essence related to predictability (e.g., a good painting is highly 
ordered, and yet this order does not permit one part to be predicted from another). 
3. MEASURE 
In developing the notion of an order of high degree, we have tacitly brought in the 
idea that each suborder has a limit. Thus, in Fig. 4, the order of the line ABC reaches 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
365 
its limit at the end of the segment C. Beyond this limit is another order EFG, and so on. 
So, the description of a hierarchic order of high degree generally involves the notion 
of limit. 
It is significant to note here that in ancient times the most basic meaning of the 
word "measure" was "limit" or "boundary." In this sense of the word, each thing 
could be said to have its appropriate measure. For example, it was thought that when 
human behavior went beyond its proper bounds (or measure) the result would have to 
be tragedy (as was brought out very forcefully in Greek dramas). Measure was indeed 
considered to be as essential to the understanding of the good. Thus, the origin of the 
word "medicine" is the Latin "mederi," which means "to cure" and which was derived 
from a root meaning "measure." This implied that to be healthy is to have everything 
in a right measure, in body and mind. Similarly, wisdom was equated with moderation 
and modesty (whose common root is also derived from measure), thus suggesting that 
the wise man is the one who keeps everything in the right measure. 
To illustrate this meaning of the word "measure" in physics, one could say that 
"the measure of water" is between 0 ° and 100°C. In other words, measure primarily 
gives the limits of qualities or of orders of movement and behavior. 
Of course, measure has to be specified through proportion or ratio, but in terms 
of the ancient notion, this specification is understood as secondary in significance to 
the boundary or limit which is thus specified. And here one can add that in general 
this specification need not even be in terms of quantitative proportion, but rather can 
be in terms of qualitative reason (e.g., in a drama the proper measure of human 
behavior is specified in qualitative terms, rather than by means of numerical 
ratios). 
In the modern usage of the word "measure," the aspect of quantitative proportion 
or numerical ratio tends to be emphasized much more heavily than it was in ancient 
times. Yet even here the notion of boundary or limit is still present, though in the 
background. Thus, to set up a scale (e.g., of length) one must establish divisions which 
are in effect limits or boundaries of ordered segments. 
By giving attention in this way to older meanings of words along with their 
current meanings, one can obtain a certain insight into the full significance of a 
general notion, such as measure, which is not provided by considering only more 
specialized modern meanings that have been developed in various forms of scientific, 
mathematical, and philosophical analysis. 
4. STRUCTURE AS A DEVELOPMENT FROM ORDER AND MEASURE 
If we consider measure in the broad sense indicated above, we can see how this 
notion works together with that of order. Thus, as shown in Fig. 4, any linear order 
within a triangle (such as the line FG) is bounded (i.e., measured) by the lines AB, BC, 
and CA. Each of these lines is itself an order of segments, which is limited (i.e., 
measured) by the other lines. The shape of the triangle is then described in terms of 
certain proportions between the sides (relative lengths). 
The consideration of the working together of order and measure in ever broader 

366 
D. Bohm 
C 
Fig. 4 
and more complex contexts leads to the notion of structure. As the Latin root "struere" 
indicates, the essential meaning of the notion of structure is to build, to grow, to 
evolve. This word is now treated as a noun, but the Latin suffix "ura" originally 
meant "the action of doing something." To emphasize that 
we are not 
referring mainly to a "finished product" or to an ultimate result, we may introduce 
a new verb, to structate, meaning "to create and dissolve what are now called 
structures." 
Structation is evidently to be described and understood through order and 
measure. For example, consider the structation (construction) of a house. The bricks 
are arranged in an order and in a measure (i.e., within limits) to make walls. The 
walls are similarly ordered and measured to make rooms, the rooms to make a house, 
the houses to make streets, the streets to make cities, etc. 
Structation thus implies a harmoniously organized totality of order and measures, 
which is both hierarchic (i.e., built on many levels) and extensive (i.e., "spreading out" 
on each level). The Greek root of the word "organize" is "ergon" which is based on a 
verb meaning "to work." So one may think of all aspects of a structure as "working 
together" in a coherent way. 
Evidently, this principle of structure is universal. For example, living beings are 
in a continual movement of growth and evolution of structure, which is highly 
organized (e.g., molecules work together to make cells, cells work together to make 
organs, organs to make the individual living being, individual living beings a society, 
etc.) Similarly, in physics, we describe matter as constituted of moving particles 
(e.g., atoms) which work together to make solids, liquids, or gaseous structures, which 
similarly make larger structures, going on up to planets, stars, galaxies, galaxies of 
galaxies, etc. Here, it is important to emphasize the essentially dynamic nature of 
structation, in inanimate nature, in living beings, in society, in human communication, 
etc. (e.g., consider the structure of a language, which is an organized totality of ever- 
flowing movement). 
The kinds of structures that can evolve, grow, or be built are evidently limited by 
their underlying order and measure. New order and measure make possible the 
consideration of new kinds of structure. A simple example of this can be taken from 
music. Here, the structures that can be worked with depend on the order of the notes 
and on certain measures (scale, rhythm, time, etc.) New orders and measures evidently 
make possible the creation of new structures in music. In this paper, we are enquiring 
into how new orders and measures in physics may similarly make possible the consid- 
eration of new structures in physics. 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
367 
5. ORDER, MEASURE, AND STRUCTURE IN CLASSICAL PHYSICS 
As has already been indicated in general terms, classical physics implies a certain 
basic descriptive order and measure. This may be characterized as the use of certain 
Cartesian coordinates and by the notion of universal and absolute order of time, 
independent of that of space. This further implies the absolute character of what may 
be called Euclidean order and measure (i.e., that characteristic of Euclidean geometry). 
With this order and measure, certain structures are possible. In essence, these are based 
on the quasirigid body, considered as a constituent element. The general characteristic 
of classical structure is just the analyzability of everything into separate parts, which 
are either small, quasirigid bodies or their ultimate idealization as extensionless 
particles. As pointed out earlier, these parts are considered to be working together in 
interaction (as in a machine). 
The laws of physics, then, express the reason or ratio in the movements of all the 
parts, in the sense that the law relates the movement of each part to the configuration 
of all the other parts. This law is deterministic in form, in that the only contingent 
features of a system are the initial positions and velocities of all its parts. It is also 
causal, in that any external disturbance can be treated as a cause, which produces a 
specifiable effect that can in principle be propagated to every part of the system. 
With the discovery of Brownian motion, one obtained phenomena that might 
atfirst sight seem to call the whole classical scheme of order and measure into question. 
For movements were discovered which were what have been called here "order of 
unlimited degree," not determined by a few steps (e.g., initial positions and velocities). 
However, this was explained by supposing that whenever we have Brownian motion 
this is due to very complex impacts from smaller particles or from randomly fluctuating 
fields. It is then further supposed that when these additional particles and fields are 
taken into account, the total law will be deterministic. In this way, classical notions of 
order and measure can be adapted, so as to accommodate Brownian motion, which 
would at least on the face of the matter seem to require description in terms of a very 
different order and measure. 
The possibility of such adaptation evidently depends, however, on an assumption. 
Indeed, even if we can trace some kinds of Brownian motion (e.g., of smoke particles) 
back to impacts of smaller particles (atoms), this does not prove that the laws are 
ultimately of the classical deterministic kind. For it is always possible to suppose that 
basically all movements are to be described from the very outset as Brownian motion 
(so that the apparently continuous orbits of large objects such as planets would only 
be approximations to an actually Brownian type of path). Indeed, mathematicians 
(notably, Wiener) have both implicitly and explicitly worked in terms of Brownian 
motion as a basic description, (2,3~ (not explained as a result of impacts of finer 
particles). Such an idea would in effect bring in a new kind of order and measure. If it 
were pursued seriously, this would imply a change of possible structures that would 
perhaps be as great as that implied by the change from Ptolemaic epicycles 
to Newtonian equations of motion. Actually, this line was not seriously pursued in 
classical physics. Nevertheless, as we shall see later, it may be useful to give some 
attention to it, to obtain a new insight into the possible limits of relevance of the 

368 
D. Bohm 
theory of relativity, as well as into the relationship between relativity and quantum 
theory. 
6. THE THEORY OF RELATIVITY 
One of the first real breaks in classical notions of order and measure came with 
the theory of relativity. It is significant to point out here that the root of the theory 
of relativity was probably in a question that Einstein asked himself when he was 
fifteen years old: "What would happen if one were to move at the speed of light and 
look in a mirror ?" Evidently, one would see nothing because the light from one's face 
would never reach the mirror. This led Einstein to feel that light is somehow basically 
different from other forms of motion. 
From our more modern vantage point, we can emphasize this difference yet more 
by considering the atomic structure of the matter out of which we are constituted. If 
we went faster than light then, as a simple calculation shows, the electromagnetic fields 
that hold our atoms together would be left behind us (as the waves produced by an 
airplane are left behind it when it goes faster than sound). As a result, our atoms would 
disperse, and we would fall apart. So it would make no sense to suppose that we could 
go faster than light. 
Now, a basic feature of the classical order and measure of Galileo and Newton 
is that one can in principle catch up with and overtake any form of motion, as long as 
the speed is finite. However, as has been indicated here, it leads to absurdities to 
suppose that we can catch up with and overtake light. 
This perception that light should be considered to be different from other forms of 
motion is similar to Galileo's seeing that empty space and a viscous medium are 
different, with regard to the expression of the laws of physics. In Einstein's case, one 
sees that the speed of light is not a possible speed for an object. Rather, it is like a 
horizon that cannot be reached. Even though we seem to move toward the horizon, we 
never get any closer. As we move toward a light ray, we never get closer to its speed. 
It always remains the same, c, relative to us. 
Relativity introduces new notions concerning the order and measure of time. 
These are no longer absolute, as was the case in Newtonian theory. Rather, they are 
now relative to the speed of a coordinate frame. This relativity of time is one of the 
radically new features of Einstein's theory. 
A very significant change of language is involved in the expression of the new 
order and measure.of time implied by relativistic theory. The speed of light is taken 
not as a possible speed of an object, but rather as the maximum speed of propagation 
of a signal. Heretofore, the notion of signal had played no role in the underlying 
general descriptive order of physics. But now it is playing a key role in this context. 
The word "signal" contains the word "sign," which means "to point to some- 
thing" as well as "to have significance." A signal is indeed a kind of communication. 
So in a certain way, significance, meaning, and communication became relevant in the 
expression of general descriptive order of physics (as did also information, which is, 
however, only a part of the content or meaning of a communication). The full 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
369 
t~be 
Fig. 5 
implications of this have perhaps not yet been realized, i.e., of how certain very subtle 
notions of order going far beyond those of classical mechanics have tacitly been 
brought into the general descriptive framework of physics. 
The new order and measure introduced in relativity theory implies new notions of 
structure, in which the idea of a rigid body can no longer play a key role. Indeed, it is 
not possible in relativity to obtain a consistent definition of an extended rigid body, 
because this would imply signals faster than light. In order to try to accommodate this 
new feature of relativity theory within the older notions of structure, physicists were 
driven to the notion of a particle that is an extensionless point. But, as is well known, 
this effort has not led to generally satisfactory results, because of the infinite fields 
implied by point particles. Actually, relativity implies that neither the point particles 
nor the quasirigid body can be taken as primary concepts. Rather, these have to be 
expressed in terms of events and processes. 
For example, any localizable structure may be described as a worm tube (see 
Fig. 5). Inside this tube ABCD, a complex process is going on, as indicated by the 
many lines within the world tube. It is not possible consistently to analyze movement 
within this tube in terms of "finer particles" because these too would have to be 
described as tubes, and so on ad infinitum. Moreover, each tube is brought into 
existence from a broader background or context, as indicated by the lines preceding 
AD, whine eventually it dissolves back into the background, as indicated by the line 
following CD. Thus, the "object" is an abstraction of a relatively invariant form. That 
is to say, it is more like a pattern of movement than like a solid, separate thing that 
exists autonomously and permanently. 
However, thus far, the problem of obtaining a consistent description of such a 
world tube has not been solved. Einstein did in fact very seriously try to obtain such a 
description in terms of a unified field theory. He took the total field of the whole 
universe as the primary description. This field is continuous and indivisible. Particles 
are then to be regarded as certain kinds of abstraction from the total field, corre- 
sponding to regions of very intense field (called singularities). As the distance from the 
singularity increases (see Fig. 6), the field gets weaker, until it merges imperceptibly 

370 
D. Bohm 
Fig. 6 
with the fields of other singularities. But nowhere is there a break or a division. Thus, 
the classical idea of the separability of the world into distinct but interacting parts is no 
longer valid or relevant. Rather, we have to regard the universe as an undivided and 
unbroken whole. Division into particles or into particles and fields is only a crude 
abstraction and approximation. Thus, we come to an order that is radically different 
from that of Galileo and Newton--the order of undivided wholeness. 
In formulating his description in terms of a unified field, Einstein developed 
the general theory of relativity. This involved a number of further new notions of order. 
Thus, Einstein considered arbitrary sets of continuous curves as allowable coordinates, 
so that he worked in terms of eurvilinear order and measure rather than in terms of 
rectilinear order and measure (though of course such curves are locally still approx- 
imately rectilinear over short enough distances). Through the principles of equivalence 
of gravitation and acceleration and through the use of the Christoffel symbol /'~ 
which methematically describes the local rate of "turning" of the curvilinear coordina- 
tes, Einstein was able to relate this curvilinear order and measure to the gravitational 
field. This relationship implied the need for nonlinear equations, i.e., equations whose 
solution cannot simply be added together to yield new solutions. This nonlinear 
feature of the equations was of crucial significance not only in that it in principle 
opened up the possibility of solutions with stable particlelike singularities of the type 
described above (which are impossible with linear equations), but also in that it had 
very important implications with regard to the question of analysis of the world into 
distinct but interacting components. 
In discussing this question, it is useful first to note that the word "analysis" has 
the Greek root "lysis," which is also the root of the English "loosen" and which means 
"to break up or dissolve." Thus, a chemist can break up a compound into its basic 
elementary constituents, and then he can put these constituents back together again, 
and thus synthesize the compound. The words "analysis" and "synthesis" have, 
however, come to refer not merely to actual physical or chemical operations with 
things, but also to similar operations carried out in thought. Thus, it may be said that 
classical physics is expressed in terms of a conceptual analysis of the world into 
constituent parts (such as atoms or elementary particles) which are then conceptually 
put back together to "synthesize" a total system, by considering the interactions of 
these parts. 
Such parts may be separate in space (as are the atoms), but they may also involve 
more abstract notions that do not imply separation in space. For example, in a wave 
field that satisfies a linear equation, it is possible to choose a set of "normal modes" 
of motion of the entire field, each of which can be regarded as moving independently 
of the others. One can then think of the field analytically, as if every possible form of 
wave motion were constituted out of a sum of such independent "normal modes." 
Even if the wave field satisfies a nonlinear equation, one can in a certain approximation 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
371 
still analyze it in terms of a set of such "normal modes," but these have now to be 
regarded as being mutually dependent because of a certain kind of interaction. 
However, this kind of "analysis and synthesis" is of only limited validity because in 
general the solutions of nonlinear equations have properties that cannot be expressed 
in terms of such an analysis. (In mathematical terms, it can be said, for example, that 
the analysis involves series that do not always converge.) Indeed, the nonlinear 
equations of unified field theory are in general of this character. Thus, it is clear that 
not only is the notion of analysis in terms of spatially separate objects generally 
irrelevant in the context of such theories, but so also is the notion of analysis into 
more abstract constituents that are not regarded as separate in space. 
It is important here to call attention to the difference between analysis and 
description. The word "de-scribe" literally means to "write down." But when we write 
things down, this does not in general mean that the terms appearing in such a descrip- 
tion can be actually "loosened" or "separated" into autonomously behaving compo- 
nents, and then put back together again in a synthesis. Rather, these terms are in 
general abstractions which have little or no meaning when considered as autonomous 
and separate from each other. Indeed, what is primarily relevant in a description is 
how the terms are related by ratio or reason. It is this ratio or reason, which calls 
attention to the whole, that is meant by a description. 
Thus, even conceptually, a description does not in general constitute an analysis. 
Rather, a conceptual analysis provides a special sort of description, in which we can 
think about something as if it were broken into autonomously behaving parts, which 
are then thought about as put back together again in interaction. Such analytic forms 
of description were generally adequate for the physics of Galileo and Newton, but 
as has been indicated here, they have ceased to be so in the physics of Einstein. 
Although Einstein made a very promising start along this new direction of 
thinking in physics, he was never able to arrive at a generally coherent and satis- 
factory theory, starting from the concept of a unified field. As pointed out earlier, 
physicists were therefore left with the problem of trying to adapt the older concept of 
analysis of the world into extensionless particles to the context of relativity, in which 
such an analysis of the world is not really relevant or consistent. 
It will be helpful here to consider certain possible inadequacies in Einstein's 
approach to these questions, though of course only in a very preliminary way. In this 
connection, it is useful to recall that in 1905, Einstein wrote three very fundamental 
papers, one on relativity, one on the quantum of light (photoelectric effects), and one 
on Brownian motion. A detailed study of these papers shows that they are intimately 
related in a number of ways, and this suggests that in Einstein's early thinking he was 
at least tacitly regarding these three subjects as aspects of one broader unity. However, 
with the development of general relativity, there came a very heavy emphasis on the 
continuity of fields. The other two subjects (Brownian motion and the quantum 
properties of light) which involved some kind of discontinuity that was not in harmony 
with the notion of a continuous field, tended to fall into the background, and even- 
tually, to be more or less dropped from consideration, at least within the context of 
general relativity. 
In discussing this question, it will be helpful first to consider Brownian motion, 

372 
D. Bohm 
which is indeed very difficult to describe in a relativistically invariant way. Because 
Brownian motion implies infinite "instantaneous velocities," it cannot be restricted 
to the speed of light. However, in compensation, Brownian motion cannot in general 
be the carrier of a signal. For a signal is some ordered modulation of a "carrier." This 
order is not separable from the meaning of the signal (i.e., to change the order is to 
change the meaning). Thus, one can properly speak of propagation of a signal only in a 
context in which the movement of the "carrier" is so regular and continuous that the 
order is not mixed up. But with Brownian motion, the order is of such a high degree 
(i.e., "random" in the usual sense of the word) that the meaning of a signal would 
no longer be left unaltered in its propagation. Therefore, there is no reason why a 
Brownian curve of infinite order cannot be taken as part of a primary description of 
movement, as long as its average speed is not greater than that of light. In this way, 
it is possible for relativity theory to emerge as relevant to the average speed of a 
Brownian curve (which would also be appropriate for discussing the propagation of a 
signal), while it would have no relevance in a broader context, in which the primary 
law would relate to Brownian curves of indefinitely high degree, rather than to a 
continuous curve of low degree. To develop such a theory would evidently imply a new 
order and measure in physics, (going beyond both Newtonian and Einsteinian ideas) 
and it would lead to correspondingly new structures. 
Consideration of such notions may perhaps point to something new and relevant. 
However, before this sort of inquiry is pursued further, it is better to go into the 
quantum theory, which is in many ways even more significant in this context than is 
Brownian motion. 
7. QUANTUM THEORY 
The quantum theory implies a much more radical change in notions of order and 
measure than even relativity did. To understand this change, one has to consider 
four new features of primary significance introduced by this theory. 
7.1. Indivisibility of the Quantum of Action 
This indivisibility implies that transitions between stationary states are in some 
sense discrete. Thus, it has no meaning to say that a system passes through 
a continuous series of intermediate states, similar to initial and final states. This is, 
of course, quite different from classical physics, which implies such a continuous 
series of intermediate states in every transition. 
7.2. Wave-Particle Duality of the Properties of Matter 
Under different experimental conditions, matter behaves more like a wave or more 
like a particle, but always, in certain ways, like both together. 
7.3. Properties of Matter as Statistically Revealed Potentialities 
Every physical situation is now characterized by a wave function (or more 
abstractly by a vector in Hilbert space). This wave function is not directly related to the 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
373 
actual properties of an individual object, event, or process. Rather, it has to be thought 
of as a description of the potentialities within the physical situation. 2 Different and 
generally mutually incompatible potentialities (e.g., for wavelike or particMike 
behavior) are actualized in different experimental arrangements (so that the wave- 
particle duality can be understood as one of the main forms for the expression of such 
incompatible potentialities). In general, the wave function gives only a probability 
measure for the actualization of different potentialities in a statistical ensemble of 
similar observations carried out under specified conditions, and cannot predict what 
will happen in detail in each individual observation. 
This notion of statistical determination of mutually incompatible potentialities is 
evidently very different from what is done in classical physics, which has no place in it 
to give the notion of potentiality such a fundamental role. In classical physics, one 
thinks that only the actual state of a system can be relevant in a given physical 
situation, and that probability comes in either because we are ignorant of the actual 
state or because we are averaging over an ensemble of actual states that are distributed 
over a range of conditions. But in quantum theory, it has no meaning to discuss the 
actual state of a system apart from the whole set of experimental conditions which are 
essential to actualize this state. 
7.4. Noneausal Correlations (The Paradox of Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen) 
It is an inference from the quantum theory that events that are separated in space 
and that are without possibility of connection through interaction are correlated, in a 
way that can be shown to be incapable of a detailed causal explanation, through the 
propagation of effects at speeds not greater than that of light2 Thus, the quantum 
theory is not compatible with Einstein's basic approach to relativity, in which it is 
essential that such correlations be explainable by signals propagated at speeds not 
taster than that of light. 
All of these evidently imply a breakdown of the general order of description that 
had prevailed before the advent of quantum theory. The limits of this "prequantum'" 
order are indeed brought out very clearly in terms of the uncertainty relations, which 
are commonly illustrated in terms of Heisenberg's famous microscope experiment. 
This experiment will now be discussed here, in a form somewhat different from 
that used by Heisenberg, in order to bring out certain new points. Our first step is to 
go into what it means to make a classical measurement of position and momentum. 
In doing this, we consider the use of an electron microscope, rather than a light 
microscope. 
As shown in Fig. 7, there is in the target an "observed particle" at O, assumed to 
have initially a known momentum (e.g., it may be ~tt rest, with zero momentum). 
Electrons of known energy are incident on the target, and one of these is deflected by 
the particle at O. It goes through the electron lens, following an orbit that leads it to the 
2 For a discussion of this point, see Ref. 4. 
3 For an extensive discussion of this effect, see Chap. 22 of Ref. 4. For a later point of view on this 
subject, see Ref. 5. 
825/I/4-6 

374 
D. Bohm 
Electron 
beam 
Target 
i 
~ 
._ Electron 
lens 
P 
T 
Photographic 
emulsion 
Fig. 7 
focus at P. From here, the particle leaves a track T in a certain direction, as it pene- 
trates the photographic emulsion. 
Now, the directly observable results of this experiment are the position P and the 
direction of the track T. But of course these are in themselves of no interest. It is only 
by knowing overall the experimental conditions (i.e., the structure of the microscope, 
the target, the energy of the incident beam of electrons, etc.) that the experimental 
results become significant in the context of a physical inquiry. With the aid of an 
adequate description of these conditions, one can use the experimental results to make 
inferences about the position of the "observed particle" at O, and about the 
momentum transferred to it in the process of deflecting the incident particle. Thus, 
although the operation of the instrument does influence the observed particle, this 
influence can be taken into account, so that we can infer, and thus "know," both the 
position and momentum of this particle at the time of deflection of the incident 
electron. 
All this is quite straightforward in the context of classical physics, Heisenberg's 
novel step was to consider the implications of the "quantum" character of the electron 
that provides the "link" between the experimental results and what is to be inferred 
from these results. This electron can no longer be described as being just a classical 
particle. Rather, it has also to be described in terms of a "wave" as shown in Fig. 8. 
Electron waves are said to be incident on the target, and diffracted by the atom at O. 
Target 
~--~..~ Electron 
| 
L i 
I// 
I 
lens 
Photographic 
emulsion 
Fig. 8 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
375 
They then pass through the lens, where they are further diffracted and brought to 
focus in the emulsion at P. From here, there starts a track T (just as happened in the 
classical description). 
Evidently, Heisenberg has brought in the four primarily significant features of 
the quantum theory referred to at the beginning of this section. Thus (as happens 
in the interference experiment also), he describes the link electron both as a wave 
(while it is passing from object O through the lens to the image at P) and as a particle 
(when it arrives at the point P and then leaves a track T). The transfer of momentum 
to the "observed atom" at O has to be treated as discrete and indivisible. Between O 
and P, the most detailed possible description of the link electron is in terms of a 
wave function that determines only a statistical distribution of potentialities whose 
actualization depends on the experimental conditions (e.g., the presence of sensitive 
atoms in the emulsion, which can reveal the electron). Finally, the actual results (the 
spot P, the track T, and the properties of the atom O) are correlated in the noncausal 
way mentioned earlier in this article. 
By using all these primary features of the quantum theory in discussing the "link" 
electron, Heisenberg was able to show that there is a limit to the precision of inferences 
that can be drawn about the observed object, given by the uncertainty relations 
(A × Ap >/h). At first, Heisenberg explained the uncertainty as the result of the 
"uncertain" character of the precise orbit of the "electron link" between O and P, 
which also implied an uncertain "disturbance" of the atom O when this electron was 
scattered. But Bohr ~o gave a relatively thorough and consistent discussion of the 
whole situation, which made it clear that the four primary aspects of the quantum 
theory as described above are not compatible with any description in terms of precisely 
defined orbits that are "uncertain" to us. We have thus to do here with an entirely new 
situation in physics, in which the notion of a detailed orbit no longer has any meaning. 
Rather, one can perhaps say that the relationship between O and P through the "link" 
electron is similar to an indivisible and unanalyzable "quantum jump" between 
stationary states, rather than to the continuous though not precisely known movement 
of a particle across the space between O and P. 
What then can be the significance of the description that has been given of 
Heisenberg's experiment ? Evidently, it is only in a context in which classical physics is 
applicable that this experiment can coherently be discussed in this way. Such a 
discussion can therefore at most serve to indicate the limits of relevance of classical 
modes of description; it cannot actually provide a description that is coherent in a 
"quantum" context. 
But even when regarded in this way, the usual discussion of the experiment 
overloops certain key points, which have deep and far-reaching significance. To see 
what these are, we note that from a particular set of experimental conditions as 
determined by the structure of the microscope, etc., one could in some rough sense 
say that the limits of applicability of the classical description are indicated by a certain 
cell in the phase space of this object, which we describe by A in Fig. 9. If, however, 
there had been a different set of experimental conditions (e.g., a microscope of 
another aperture, electrons of different energy, etc.), then these limits would have 
had to be indicated by another cell in phase space, indicated by B. Heisenberg 

376 
D. Bohm 
[ 
B 
Fig. 9 
f~ 
x 
emphasized that both cells must have the same area h, but in doing this he left out 
of account the significance of the fact that their "shapes" are different. 
Of course, in the context of classical physics (in which quantities of the order of 
Plank's constant h can be neglected), all cells can be replaced by dimensionless points, 
so that their "shapes" have no significance at all. Therefore, the experimental results 
carl be said to do nothing more than permit inferences to be drawn about an observed 
object, inferences in which the "shapes" of the cells, and therefore the details of the 
experimental conditions, play only the role of intermediary links in the chain of 
reasoning, which drop out of the ultimate result that is inferred. This means that the 
observed object can consistently be said to exist separately and independently of the 
observing instrument, in the sense that it can be regarded as "having" certain proper- 
ties whether it interacts with anything else (such as an observing instrument) or not. 
However, in the "quantum" context, the situation is very different. Here, the 
"shapes" of the cells remain relevant, as essential parts of the description of the 
observed particle. This latter therefore cannot properly be described except in 
conjunction with a description of the experimental conditions. And if one goes in more 
detail into a mathematical treatment according to the laws of the quantum theory, the 
"wave function" of the "observed object" cannot be specified apart a specification of 
the wave function of the "link electron," which in turn requires a description of the 
overall experimental conditions (so that the relationship between the object and the 
observed result is actually an example of the correlations of the type indicated by 
Einstein, Podolsky, and Rosen, which cannot be explained in terms of the propagation 
of signals as chains of causal influence). This means that the description of the 
experimental conditions does not drop out as a mere intermediary link of inference, 
but remains inseparable from the description of what is called the observed object. 
The "quantum" context thus calls for a new kind of description that does not imply 
the separability of the "observed object" and "observing instrument." Instead, the 
form of the experimental conditions and the meaning of the experimental results have 
now to be one whole, in which analysis into autonomously existent elements is not 
relevant. 
What is meant here by wholeness could be indicated metaphorically by calling 
attention to a pattern (e.g., in a carpet). Insofar as what is relevant is the pattern, it 
has no meaning to say that different parts of such a pattern (e.g., various flowers and 
trees that are to be seen in the carpet) are separate objects in interaction. Similarly, in 
the quantum context, one can regard terms like "observed object," "observing instru- 
ment," "link electron," "experimental results," etc., as aspects of a single overall 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
377 
"pattern" that are in effect abstracted or "pointed out" by our mode of description. 
Thus, to speak of the interaction of "observing instrument" and "observed object" has 
no meaning. 
A centrally relevant change in descriptive order required in the quantum theory 
is thus the dropping of the notion of analysis of the world into relatively autonomous 
parts, separately existent but in interaction. Rather, the primary emphasis is now on 
undivided wholeness, in which the observing instrument is not separable from what is 
observed. 
Though quantum theory is very different from relativity, yet in some deep sense 
they have in common this implication of undivided wholeness. Thus, in relativity, a 
consistent description of the instruments would have to be in terms of a structure of 
singularities in the field (corresponding to what are now generally called "the con- 
stituent atoms" of the instrument). These would merge with the fields of the singulari- 
ties constituting the "observed particle" (and eventually with those constituting "the 
atoms out of which the human observer is constituted"). This is a different sort of 
wholeness from that implied by the quantum theory. But it is similar in that there can 
be no ultimate division between the observing instrument and the observed object. 
Nevertheless, in spite of this deep similarity, it has not proved possible to unite 
relativity and quantum theory in a coherent way. One of the main reasons is that there 
is no consistent means of introducing extended structure in relativity, so that particles 
have to be treated as extensionless points. This has led to infinite results in quantum 
field-theoretical calculations. By means of various formal algorithms (e.g., renormal- 
ization, S matrices, etc.) certain finite and essentially correct results have been ab- 
stracted from the theory. However, at bottom, the theory remains generally unsatis- 
factory, not only because it contains what at least appear to be some serious contra- 
dictions, but also because it certainly has a number of arbitrary features which are 
capable of indefinite adaptation to the facts, somewhat reminiscent of the way in 
which the Ptolemaic eplcycles could be made to accommodate almost any 
observational data that might arise in the application of such a descriptive framework 
(e.g., in renormalization, the vacuum-state wave function has an infinite number of 
arbitrary features). 
It would not, however, be very helpful here to make a detailed analysis of these 
problems. Rather, it will be more useful to call attention to a few general difficulties, 
the consideration of which will perhaps show that these details are not very relevant 
in the context of the present discussion. 
Firstly, quantum field theory begins by defining a field W(x, t). This field is a 
quantum operator, but x and t describe a continuous order in space and time. To 
bring the point out in more detail, we can write the matrix element W.ij(x, t). However, 
as soon as we impose relativistic invariance, we deduce "infinite fluctuations," i.e., 
Wij(x, t) is in general infinite and discontinuous because of "zero-point" quantum 
fluctuations. This contradicts the original assumption of continuity of all functions 
required in any relativistic theory. 
But this emphasis on continuous orders is (as has been pointed out in the previous 
section) a serious weakness of the theory of relativity. If we deal with discontinuous 
order, however (e.g., as in Brownian motion), then the notion of signal ceases to be 

378 
D. Bohm 
relevant (and with it, the notion of limitation to the speed of light). And without the 
notion of signal in a basic role, we are once again free to consider extended struc- 
tures in a primary role in our descriptions. 
Of course, the limitation to the speed of light will hold on the average and in the 
long run. Thus, relativistic notions will be relevant in suitable limiting cases. But the 
theory of relativity need not just be imposed on quantum theory. It is this imposition 
of the underlying descriptive order of one theory on another that led to arbitrary 
features and possible contradictions. 
To see how this comes about, we note that if the relativistic notion of giving a 
fundamental role to the possibility of signalling from one region point to another is to 
have any meaning, the source of a signal must be clearly separated from the region in 
which it is received, not only spatially, but also in the sense that the two must be 
essentially autonomous in their behavior. 
Thus, as shown in Fig. 10, if a signal is emitted from the world tube of a source 
of A, then it has to be propagated continuously without change of order to B, the 
world tube of the receiver. However, at a quantum level of description, the time order 
of events in the world tube at A and B may, according to the uncertainty principle, 
cease to be definable in the usual way. This alone would make the notion of a signal 
meaningless. In addition, the notion of a clear and distinct spatial separation of A and 
B, as well as that of possible autonomy in their behavior, will cease to be relevant, 
because the "contact" between A and B has now to be regarded as similar to an 
indivisible quantum jump of an atom between stationary states. Moreover, the further 
development of this notion along the lines of the experiment of Einstein, Podolsky, and 
Rosen leads to the inference that the connection between A and B cannot in general be 
described in terms of the propagation of causal influences (which type of propagation 
is evidently necessary to provide for an underlying "carrier" of the signal). 
It seems clear then that the relativistic notion of a signal simply does not fit 
A 
x ~ 
World tube 
World 
tube 
/ ~" 
//of receiver 
!~ /~/ofsource 
/ ,7 f 
\ 
/ 
Fig. 10 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
379 
coherently into the "quantum" context. This is basically because such a signal implies 
the possibility of a certain kind of analysis which is not compatible with the sort of 
undivided wholeness that is implied by the quantum theory. In this connection, it may 
indeed by said that although Einstein's unified field theory denies the possibility of 
ultimate analysis of the world into autonomous component elements, nevertheless, the 
notion that the possibility of a signal plays such a basic role implies a different and 
more abstract sort of analysis based on a kind of independent and autonomous 
"information content" which is different in different regions. This abstract kind of 
analysis may not only be inconsistent with quantum theory, but very probably, also 
with the undivided wholeness implied in the other aspects of the theory of 
relativity. 
What suggests itself, then, is that we seriously consider the possibility of dropping 
the idea of the basic role of the notion of signal, but go on with the other aspects of 
relativity theory (especially the principle that laws are invariant relationships, and that 
through nonlinearity of the equations, or in some other way, analysis into autonomous 
components will cease to be relevant). Thus, by letting go of this kind of attachment 
to a certain kind of analysis that does not harmonize with the "quantum" context, we 
open the way for a new theory that comprehends what is still valid in relativity theory, 
but does not deny the indivisible wholeness implied by the quantum theory. 
On the other hand, quantum theory also contains an implicit attachment to a 
certain very abstract kind of analysis, which does not harmonize with the sort of 
indivisible wholeness implied by the theory of relativity. To see what this is, we note 
that discussions such as those centering around the Heisenberg microscope emphasize 
the indivisible wholeness of the observing instrument and the observed object only in 
context of the actual results of an experiment. However, in the mathematical theory, 
the wave function is still generally taken to be a description of overall statistical 
potentialities that are regarded as existing separately and autonomously. In other 
words, the actual and individual object of classical physics is replaced by a more abstract 
kind of potential and statistical object. This latter is said to correspond to the"quantum 
state of the system," which in turn corresponds to "the wave function of the system" 
(or more generally to a vector in Hilbert space). Such usage of language (e.g., to bring 
in words such as "state of a system") implies that we are thinking of something that 
has a separate and autonomous kind of existence. 
The consistency of this way of using language depends to a large extent on the 
mathematical assumption that the wave equation (i.e., the law governing the changes 
with time of the wave function, or the Hilbert space vector) is linear. (Nonlinear 
equations for field operations have been proposed, but even here, this is only a limited 
kind of nonlinearity, in the sense that the basic equation for "the state vector in 
Hilbert space" is always taken to be linear.) Such linearity of equations then allows us 
to regard "state vectors" as having a kind of autonomous existence (similar in certain 
ways to that which is attributed in classical field theories to normal modes, but 
different in that they are more abstract). 
This complete autonomy of the "quantum state" of a system is supposed to hold 
only when it is not being observed. In an observation, it is assumed that we have to do 
with two initially autonomous systems that have come into interaction.(7) One of these 

380 
D. Bohm 
is described by the "state vector of the observed object" and the other by the "state 
vector of the observing apparatus." 
In the consideration of this interaction, certain new features are introduced, 
which correspond to allowing for the possibility of actualizing of the observed system's 
potentialities at the expense of others that cannot be actualized at the same time. 
(Mathematically, one can say that "the wave packet is reduced" or that "a projection 
operation takes place.") 
There is a great deal of controversy and discussion as to precisely how this stage 
is to be treated, because the basic notions involved do not seem to be very clear. 
However, it is not our aim here to criticize these efforts in detail. Rather, we 
wish merely to point out that this whole line of approach reestablishes at the abstract 
level of statistical potentialities the same kind of analysis into separate and 
autonomous components in interaction that is denied at the more concrete level of 
individual objects. It is just this kind of abstract analysis that does not cohere with the 
underlying basic descriptive order of relativity theory. For, as has been seen, relativity 
theory is not compatible with such an analysis of the world into separate components. 
Rather, it ultimately implies that such "objects" have to be understood as merging 
with each other (as field singularities do) to make one indivisible whole. Similarly, one 
may consider the notion that through a thoroughgoing nonlinearity or in some other 
way, quantum theory may be allowed to change, so that the resulting new theory will 
also imply undivided wholeness, not merely at the level of actual individual 
phenomena, but also at the level of potentialities treated in terms of statistical aggre- 
gates. In this way, those aspects of quantum theory that are still valid will be able to 
harmonize with those aspects of relativity that are still valid. 
To give up both the basic role of signal and that of quantum state is, however, 
no small thing. To find a new theory that goes on without these will evidently require 
radically new notions of order, measure, and structure. 
One may suggest here that we are in a position which is in certain ways similar 
to where Galileo stood when he began his inquiries. A great deal of work has been 
done showing the inadequacy of old ideas, which merely permit a range of new facts 
to befitted mathematically (comparable to what was done by Copernicus, Kepler, and 
others). But we have not yet freed ourselves thoroughly from the old order of thinking, 
using language, and observing. We have thus yet to perceive a new order. As with 
Galileo, this must involve seeing new differences so that much of what has been thought 
to be basic in the old ideas will be perceived to be more or less correct, but not of 
primary relevance (as happened, for example, with some of the key ideas of Aristotle.) 
When we see the new basic differences, then (as happened with Newton) we will be 
able to perceive a new universal ratio or reason relating and unifying all the differences. 
This may ultimately carry us as far beyond quantum theory and relativity as Newton's 
ideas went beyond those of Copernicus. 
But, of course, this cannot be done overnight. We have to work patiently, slowly, 
and carefully, to understand the present general situation in physics in a new way. 
Some preliminary steps of this kind will be discussed in later articles of this 
series. 

Quantum Theory as an Indication of a New Order in Physics 
381 
REFERENCES 
1. C. Biederman, Art as the Evolution of Visual Knowledge (Red Wing, Minnesota, 1948). 
2. Max Born and N. Wiener, J. Math. Phys. 5, 84-98 (1926). 
3. N. Wiener and A. Siegel, Phys. Rev. 91, 1551 (1953). 
4. D. Bohm, Quantum Theory (Prentice Hall, New York, 1951). 
5. J. S. Bell, Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 447 (1966). 
6. N. Bohr, Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature (Cambridge University Press, London, 
1934). 
7. J. yon Neumann, The Mathematical Foandations of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton University 
Press, Princeton, N.J., 1955). 

