'~ 
---
,~, 
--- • '':>.. 
~ 'r • / ;••• 
~ . ... 
QUANTUM PHYSICS 
· IN MINUTES 
The inner workings of our universe 
explained in an instant 
~~~~~~~~~~~..... 
Gemma Lavender 

QUANTUM 
PHYSICS 
IN MINUTES 
GEMMA LAVENDER 


QUANTUM 
PHYSICS 
IN MINUTES 
GEMMA LAVENDER 
Quercus 

CONTENTS 
Introduction 
6 
The birth of quantum physics 
8 
Energy levels and spectral lines 
56 
Particle physics 
88 
The wave function 
142 
The language of quantum physics 
184 
Quantum physics and the Universe 212 
The theory of everything 
252 

Multiverses 
286 
The spooky Universe 
304 
Quantum applications 
326 
Quantum biology 
356 
Quantum computing 
370 
The future of quantum physics 
390 
Glossary 
408 
Index 
412 
Acknowledgements 
416 

Introduction 
T
he world of quantum physics is an amazing place, where 
subatomic particles can do seemingly miraculous things. 
They can disappear from one location and spontaneously 
appear in another, or communicate with each other instantly 
despite being on opposite sides of the Universe. Real particles 
can mix with virtual ones that 'borrow' energy from the 
Universe, and these interactions govern the fundamental forces 
that bind atoms and molecules together, creating the structure 
of matter itself To the uninitiated, it seems like magic. 
Quantum physics pushes us to the boundary of what we know 
about physics, and scientists differ in their interpretations of 
what it all means. The one thing everyone seems to agree on is 
that on the smallest scales, nature is probabilistic - God really 
does play dice. For example, probability determines a particle's 
most likely location, or its most likely energy, momentum, or 
numerous other fundamental qualities. For some scientists, 
this is the extent of the meaning behind quantum physics. For 
6 INTRODUCTION 

others, it implies a multiverse of parallel realities where every 
possibility is played out. There's no direct evidence yet that this 
'many-worlds' interpretation is correct, but the mathematics 
cert ainly suggests it is possible. 
The true meaning of quantum physics may be still up for debate, 
but its myriad applications are far more concrete. All of the 
electronics in our computers, phones, televisions and tablets 
operate thanks t o quantum principles. Lasers could not exist 
without t he quantized energy levels in atoms. MRI medical scans 
utilise quantum mechanisms in action wit hin your own body, 
and computers built around the principles of quantum physics 
might soon be solving problems much faster than any computer 
currently in existence. Quantum physics is also a step towards 
the ultimate theory of everything. It casts light on the origin 
of the Big Bang and the large-scale structure of the Universe, 
and some scientists controversially suggest that even human 
consciousness is quantum mechanical in nature 
Quantum physics is science, not magic. Yet what it can do 
is indeed magical and, by seeking to understand it, we f1nd 
ourselves delving into t he very fabric of nat ure and reality. 
INTRODUCTION 7 

What is quantum physics? 
Q
uantum physics describes the science of the very smal l, 
th1ngs tinier than billionths of a metre, on the scale of 
atoms, subatomic particles and the wavelength of light. It also 
shows how many properties are 'quantized' on these tiny scales, 
subdivided in discrete units rather than being continuously 
varying quantities. In our everyday world, it's hard to imagine the 
properties found in this microscopic world. For example, there 
are particles like electrons that have no physical dimensions, and 
others with no mass. Strangest of all, however, is the notion that 
particles can act like waves and waves can act like particles. This 
simple yet confounding fact lies at the heart of quantum physics 
and everything that subsequently flows from it. 
It took scientists a long time to accept this bizarre idea, and 
the revolution that followed had a profound effect on modern 
science. Yet the discovery of quantum theory had its roots in a 
much older debate- the centuries-long argument over whether 
light is made from particles or waves. 
8 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Is light a wave? 
Q
uantum theory has its roots in a f1erce and long-running 
debate over the nature of light. The question as to whether 
light is made from particles or waves dominated science in the 
late 17th century In 1678, Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens 
popularized the hypothesis that light propagated in the form of 
a wave [based on earlier ideas by philosopher Rene Descartes). 
Of course, waves [ranging from tidal waves in water to sound 
waves in air) need a medium through which to propagate. It 
was clear that light waves were not using air as a medium 
-space was known to be airless, and yet we can still see the 
light of the Sun, stars and planets. To get around this, Huygens 
hypothesized a medium that he called the 'luminiferous aether'. 
He neglected to explain exactly what this aether was, beyond 
it being weightless, invisible and apparently everywhere. 
Unsurprisingly, many scientists, key among them Isaac Newton, 
were unconvinced by Huygens' wave theory. Instead, they 
argued that light must be made from particles. 
10 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Studying the motion of water waves 
reveals aspects of wave behaviour, such as 
diffraction, that are also shared by light. 
Diffraction after parallel waves 
pass through a narrow slit. 
Interference pattern between 
two diffracted waves. 

Is light a particle? 
I
nfluential English physicist Isaac Newton proposed a model 
of light as discrete particles (so-called 'corpuscles'). It was 
based not only on objections to the wave theory of Huygens, 
but also upon observation. Newton pointed to the way in 
which light is reflected from a mirror: waves do not travel in 
the straight lines needed to create a reflection, but particles 
do. Furthermore, Newton explained refraction (the bending 
of light in certain materials, such as water) as the effect of 
a medium attracting particles of light and speeding them up. 
Finally, step outside on a sunny day and you will see that there 
are shar p edges to your shadow, whereas if sunlight were 
made of waves, your shadow would surely be fuzzy. 
Newton's model became the leading theory of light, but it 
wasn't well received by everybody, and his rival Robert Hooke 
was one influential voice who still favoured the wave theory. 
Then, in 1801, long after Newton's death, the double-slit 
experiment seemed to disprove corpuscles once and for al l. 
12 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


The double-slit 
experiment 
D
espite the success of Isaac Newton's corpuscu lar theory 
of l1ght, the rival wave theory retained some proponents 
and, at the beginning of the 19th century, Englishman Thomas 
Young appeared to disprove Newton with an experiment t hat is 
replicated by high-school students to this day. 
Young's experiment involves shining sunlight through a barrier 
containing two thin slits and onto a screen. Once through the 
slits, the light creates two spreading diffraction patterns, 
which begin to overlap and interfere with one another. Where a 
trough in one wave coincides with the peak of another, it causes 
them to cancel out, so that when the light f1nally reaches 
the screen, the cancelled waves leave dark bands known as 
'interference fringes'. Since only waves can interfere in this 
fashion, Young concluded that light must be made from waves. 
By studying how the different colours within sunlight formed 
different fringe patterns, he was even able to estimate the 
wavelengths of the various colours. 
14 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Young's double-slit 
experiment 
Interference pattern 
forms on screen 
Barrier with two 
narrow slits 
Destructive 
interference where 
waves hit screen out 
of step 
Constructive 
interference where 
peaks and troughs 
arrive 'in step' 
Diffracted waves 
spread out and overlap 

The Michelson-
Morley experiment 
T
homas Young's proof that light is a wave implied that the 
light-carry1ng medium or aether proposed by Huygens 
[see page 10) must be real too, yet 19th- century scientists 
struggled to detect it. In 1887, American physicists Albert 
Michelson and Edward Morley set out t o settle the question 
using an ingenious and highly sensitive experiment. 
Theory held t hat the a ether was stationary in space, so Earth's 
motion would result in t he speed of light appearing faster in 
the direction of motion compared to a perpendicular direction 
Michelson and Morley built a device called an interferomet er t o 
send beams of light from a single source along perpendicular 
paths before reflecting and recombining them. If t he speed 
of light varied bet ween the paths, then the returning waves 
would slip 'out of phase' with one another, creat ing a patter n of 
interference fringes that shifted over time But t ry as they might, 
Michelson and Morley found the speed of light was the same in all 
directions. The aether did not exist, so how could light be a wave? 
16 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Semi-silvered mirror 
splits light beams along 
perpendicular paths and 
then recombines them 
Sandstone block 
isolated in a pool 
of mercury to 
reduce vibration 
Recombining 
light beams form 
interference pattern 
If the a ether existed, then changes to the speed of 
light in different directions would cause interference 
patterns viewed in the microscope to shift over time. 

Electromagnetism 
I
f light really is a wave, then it seems reasonable to ask: what 
exactly is doing the waving? The properties of an apparently 
unrelated phenomenon, electromagnetism, ultimately proved to 
hold the answer 
In 1831, Michael Faraday discovered the phenomenon of induction, 
in which moving electrical currents 'induce' moving magnetic 
fields, and vice versa. Faraday's experiments (which still form 
the basis of electricity generation) showed a clear link between 
electricity and magnetism, but it was not until1865 that James 
Clerk Maxwell set out a theoretical model for how induction 
and related effects took place Maxwell's theory showed how 
oscillating, intertwined electric and magnetic fields can move 
through space as electromagnetic (em) waves. Crucially, he found 
that em waves moved freely through a vacuum, and propagate 
at a velocity of 300,000 kilometres per second (186,000 mps). 
exactly the same speed as light. If the aether didn't exist, then 
perhaps light was an electromagnetic wave? 
18 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Lines of 
magnetic flux 
! 
'Conventional' current t 
-- flow from positive to --
negative 
Induced 
magnetic field 
around wire 
Lmes of 
+ 
magnetic flux 
The flow of electric current (a stream of negatively charged electron 
particles) through a wire induces a magnetic field around the conductor. 
Reversing the current reverses the direction of the magnetic field . 

Maxwell's equations 
T
o explain electromagnetism f ully, James Clerk Maxwell 
appropriated a number of equations from other scientists 
and assembled them into a cohesive theory. His fwst equation 
describes how t he strength of an electric f1eld decreases with 
the square of distance. In other words, at twice the distance 
from the source, the f1eld is four times weaker. The second 
equation describes t he strength of magnetic f1elds and how 
they always follow closed loops between magnetic poles. 
Maxwell's third equation describes how interactions between 
oscillating electric and magnetic f1elds can create 'electromotive 
force', which manifests as a voltage Fina lly, the fourth equation 
describes how an oscillating electrical current can induce a 
magnetic f1eld with a strength proportional to the size of the 
electrical current. Together, these equations describe how 
electromagnetic waves behave, while providing a theoretical 
explanation for exactly what a light wave is, how it propagates in 
a vacuum and how it interacts with electric and magnetic f1elds. 
20 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

l. v. ~ 
p 
--
a. v. B = o 
3. v X E 
as 
at 
£0 = permittivity 
of free space 
f-Lo= permeability 
of free space 
Rate of change of 
magnetic flux 
/ 
Rate of change 
of electric flux 
I 
aE 
4. V x B = ~0 (J + £0 
) 
at 
In Maxwell's equations, E represents the flux of the 
electric f1eld, 8 the magnetic flux, p the charge within a 
volume of space, and J the current flowing in a conductor. 

Thermodynamics 
and entropy 
A longside the discovery of electromagnetism, the study of 
M. energy in the form of heat led to another 19th-century 
scientific revolution. What became known as the laws of 
thermodynamics introduced several concepts that wou ld prove 
critical to quantum theory. 
The f1rst law of thermodynamics explains how energy is 
conserved when heat is added to a closed system: the total 
energy of the system is equal to the heat supplied, less any 
work done [physical changes to the surroundings) as a result. 
The second law, meanwhile, essentially describes how heat wi ll 
always flow from hotter to colder systems In fact, this law 
describes entropy, a measure of the amount of disorder in a 
system [illustrated opposite). The third law then explains how 
entropy approaches zero as the temperature with in a system 
nears absolute zero. These notions of conservation of energy 
and entropy are discussed further on pages 82 and 320. 
22 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Black bodies 
T
he study of the ways in which objects emit electromagnetic 
waves led, in the mid-19th century, to the idealized concept 
of a 'black body' rad iator. This is an object that is both a 
perfect absorber and a perfect emitter of rad iation. German 
physicist Max Planck found that the hotter the surface of a 
black body, the higher the energy of the light emitted. Hence, 
room-temperature objects glow mostly in infrared, while 
objects heated to thousands of degrees emit mostly visible 
wavelengths, and the hottest objects of all produce light in 
ultraviolet or even shorter wavelengths, such as X-rays. 
A star is often considered the closest thing in nature to a 
perfect black body. Stars show the temperature-energy 
relationship in action: cooler stars emit more red light and 
infrared wavelengths, wh ile hotter stars tend towards the 
blue and ultraviolet. Attempts to study what happens to black 
bodies at the highest temperatures were pivotal to the birth 
of quantum theory (see page 26). 
24 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Light emission from black bodies of different temperatures 
QQQQ 
10,000°C 
Infrared 
Red 
Violet 
Ultraviolet 
Visible light 

The ultraviolet 
catastrophe 
I
n the late 19th century, physicists studying the behaviour of 
'black bodies' at high temperatures found themselves faced 
with a problem: their models of the relationship between a 
black body's temperature and the distribution of radiation 
emitted from its surface fell apart at ultraviolet wavelengths. 
This was later nicknamed the 'ultraviolet catastrophe'. 
Working to resolve the problem, around 1900 German 
physicist Max Planck found that two separate relationships 
described different parts of the energy distribution. An 
approximation derived by Wilhelm Wien in 1896 accurately 
described black- body rad iation at high temperatures, whi le 
the Rayleigh-Jeans law [derived in 1900) showed that on the 
low-temperature end of the spectrum, the energy emitted 
by a black body is proportional to temperature divided by the 
wavele ngth to the power of four [as shown opposite) Planck 
now faced the challenge of reconciling these two apparently 
independent re lationships. 
26 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Quanta 
C
onfronted with the problem of explaining black body 
radiation at high temperatures, Max Planck eventually 
discovered that he could explain the real-life distribution of 
radiation if he assumed that energy was not being released in 
continuous amounts, but was instead emitted in discrete bursts 
or packets of energy that he called quanta [singular quantum). 
Planck realized there was a relation between the energy and 
frequency of black body radiation, def1ned by the simple equation 
shown opposite. Here, E is the energy, f is the frequency and h is 
a constant of proportionality now known as Planck's constant 
[with a value of 6.626 x lQ-34 j oules per second). Planck assumed 
that the quantization of light was somehow a consequence of the 
way in which particles in a black body vibrate. It was not until 1905, 
however, t hat Albert Einstein adopted t he idea of quantization, 
arguing that radiation was f undamentally divided into quantized 
packets called photons. Together, Planck's and Einstein's 
discoveries mark the birt h of quantum physics. 
28 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Discovery of electrons 
A t around the same time that scientists were homing in 
M on the nature of light, the secrets of atomic structure 
were also beginning to unravel. The fwst hints of the 
existence of smaller particles inside atoms emerged from 
studies of a phenomenon known as cathode rays. 
A cathode is a heated electrode that generates a beam 
of particles (in old television sets and laboratory displays, 
these were deflected using magnetic and electric f1elds to 
draw glowing images on a phosphorescent screen, as shown 
opposite). In 1897, English physicist J.J. Thomson determined 
that cathode rays were made of negatively charged particles 
with much smaller masses than atoms, being produced 
from inside them. The fwst subatomic particles ever to be 
discovered, these 'electrons' opened the way for an entirely 
new f1eld of particle physics. At the time, scientists had little 
idea that their debates on the nature of light would soon 
collide with this new world of subatomic particles. 
30 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

The cathode-ray tube 
screen 
Positively charged anode 
generates electric fields 
that accelerate and focus 
electron beam 
Electron beam illuminates 
an area of the screen 
Coils produce changing 
electric field that changes 
direction of beam 
Negatively charged cathode 
emits stream of electrons 

The photoelectric effect 
T
he phot oelectric effect was crucial to both t he conception and 
proof of Einstein's theory of photons [see page 34]. Discovered 
by English engineer Willoughby Smith in 1873, t he phot oelectric 
effect involves t he f low of electr icity f rom some metals when 
they are illuminated under cert ain wavelengths of light By the 
late 19th century, physicists knew enough to interpret this as the 
liberation of electrons from the surface of t he illuminated met al, 
but the puzzling fact remained that, while high-frequency blue and 
ultraviolet light were efficient at knocking out electrons, even the 
most intense beams of red light could not cause electricity to flow 
Einst ein realized that t he phot oelectric effect could be 
explained by interpreting light not as a continuous wave, but as 
discr et e quantized packet s similar t o those used by Planck to 
escape t he ultraviolet cat astrophe [see page 26) Published in 
1905, his t heory predict ed a relationship between the frequency 
of light and the energy of liberated electrons t hat was 
event ually proved in 1916 by American physicist Robert Millikan. 
3 2 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Short-wavelength, 
high-energy light 
Electrons dislodged 
only by high-energy 
light 
Photoelectric material (e.g. 
sodium, potassium, lithium) 
// 
Metals susceptible to the 
photoelectric effect have a loosely 
bound electron in their outermost 
electron shell (see page 60) 
Long-wavelength, 
low-energy light 

Einstein's photon theory 
A I bert Einstein's study of the photoelectric effect led him to 
M. some dramatic conclusions. Max Planck had shown that 
radiation from black bodies seemed to be released in small chunks 
whose energy content was related to frequency Einstein now 
embraced the idea that this was an inherent aspect of light itself, 
rather than something entirely t o do with the emission mechanism. 
According to him, light always came in quantized packets or photons, 
particle-like objects with energy proportional to their frequency. 
This opened up a completely new approach to t he photoelectric 
effect: atomic nuclei are surrounded by electrons in quantized 
energy levels, and it is these t hat interact with incoming photons. In 
order for an electron to escape f rom an atom, it must gain enough 
energy to leap the gap between energy levels. Einstein realized that 
individual photons either carry enough energy to bridge t he gap, or 
they don't (unsuitable photons are deflected away] The deciding 
factor, then, is not the number of incoming photons (the intensity 
of the light] but their frequency (see page 28] 
34 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

.... ...... .... .... 
Electric 
field 
.... .... .. ;-.... .... 
Wavelength 
........ .... .... 
A single photon consists of a short burst of oscillating 
electric and magnetic fields moving through space and 
reinforcing each other by electromagnetic induction. 
... Perpendicular 
(90°) angle 
between 
waves 

Compton scattering 
I
n 1923, American physicist Arthur Compton demonstrated 
another effect that highlights the particle-like nature of 
electromagnetic radiation. Compton fwed X- rays at carbon 
atoms and watched how individual photons rebounded or 
'scattered' off electrons within them. X-ray photons have far 
more energy than is required to liberate an electron from an 
atom, so they have only to give up a little bit of energy to release 
an electron, retaining any remaining energy as they scatter away. 
Owing to this loss of energy, however, each photon now has a 
slightly lower frequency. 
Compton related the process to billiard balls one ball hits 
another, transferring some of its energy and momentum Both 
balls recoil away, but the f1rst ball moves more slowly than it did 
before the collision. This reflects the fact that momentum has to 
be conserved across an entire system during such collisions: if 
light behaves as though it has a momentum of its own, this adds 
to the evidence that it must be a particle, not a wave. 
36 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Electron gains kinetic 
energy and is deflected 
""' 1-) 
Stationary 
electron 
~'e 
\- Scattering 
\ _ angle 
Incoming photon 
Scattered photon with 
less energy and longer 
wavelength 

Wave-particle duality 
B
y the early 1920s, the evidence that light had properties 
of both wave and particle was widely accepted, but the 
question of why light alone displayed this split personality 
remained a mystery In 1924, French scientist Louis-Victor de 
Broglie suggested an explanation of sorts, namely that particles 
such as electrons a/so show dual aspects He proposed that the 
'wavelength' of a particle can be calcu lated by dividing the Planck 
constant (see page 28) by the particle's momentum (a property 
now known as the de Broglie wavelength, shown opposite) 
Indeed, it turns out that a// matter has an associated wavelength, 
and the shape of its wave (called the wave function) acts as a 
probability curve, with peaks in the wave at locations where the 
particle is most likely to be found. The higher the momentum, the 
shorter the de Broglie wavelength, so the wave aspect is only 
noticeable on atomic and subatomic scales. In contrast, the de 
Broglie wavelength of an Olympian running the 100-metre sprint 
is an undetectable lQ-37 metres. 
38 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Electron diffraction 
D
irect proof of de Broglie's ideas about wave-particle 
dual1ty was prov1ded by Clinton Davisson and Lester 
Germer in 1929. Their experiment involved fwing beams of 
electrons at a crystal of pure nickel. Because the de Broglie 
wavelength of electrons is much smaller than the wavelength 
of visible light, the narrow gaps between the crystal's atomic 
planes can act as a diffraction grating. Davisson and Germer 
measured interference fringes, similar to those created by 
light diffraction, in the intensity of electrons arriving on the 
other side of the crystal. The result was soon independently 
corroborated in a similar experiment by British scientist 
George Thomson. 
The fact that electrons undergo diffraction not only showed 
conclusively that they have wavelike properties, but would also 
prove to have immense practical significance. The tiny wavelength 
of electrons allows us to use them to probe the structure of 
matter at much deeper levels than light microscopy 
40 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Rutherford's 
atomic structure 
W
ave-particle duality shows that quantum theory applies not 
only to light, but also to atoms and subatomic particles. So 
how did our understanding of these particles develop? Following 
his discovery of the electron (see page 30), J.J. Thomson proposed 
a simple model of the atom with negatively charged electrons 
embedded in a positively charged space, like plums in a pudding. 
However, in 1908, Ernest Rutherford, Hans Geiger and Ernest 
Marsden discovered a more complex story. In a famous 
experiment, they fwed radioactive alpha particles through a t hinly 
beaten sheet of gold foi l towards a phosphorescent screen that 
illuminated when struck by a particle. Most of the particles passed 
straight through the gold foil, but some had their paths deflected 
slightly, and others bounced straight back. Such behaviour was 
inexplicable in the 'plum- pudding' model, so Rutherford's team 
realized t hat most of the matter in an atom is compressed into a 
t iny central nucleus, now known to be composed of even smaller 
subatomic particles called protons and neutrons. 
42 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Rutherford, Geiger 
and Marsden's gold 
foil experiment 
Phosphorescent 
detector screen 
Alpha 
particle 
source 
A few particles 
strike gold nuclei 
head-on and are 
reflected back 
Some particles 
are deflected by 
close encounters 
with nuclei 
Most particles pass 
undeflected between nuclei 

Bohr's atomic structure 
T
he atom suggested by Rutherford's gold-foil experiment 
is inherently unstable. In his model, electrons should lose 
energy, spiral in and collide with the positively charged nucleus, 
emitting light across a continuous range of wavelengths as 
they do so. Yet, in reality, atoms remain stable and light is 
emitted by electrons only in discrete quanta. 
It was Danish physicist Niels Bohr who began to make sense of 
this by applying the nascent quantum theory to it. He depicted 
electrons as orbiting only in stable orbits, each with a specific 
energy level. For an electron to drop into a lower orbit, it must 
give up some energy, releasing a photon with an energy equal 
to the difference between the two orbits. Similarly, in order to 
jump to a higher orbit an electron must absorb a photon with 
sufficient energy. This is the basic theory behind the science 
of spectroscopy (see page 56), and the difference between 
energy levels is given by an equation called the Planck relation 
[shown on page 29) 
44 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Electron orbits at 
Different orbits 
correspond to 
different energy 
/levels 

The quantum 
mechanical atom 
D
espite the best efforts of Rutherford and Bohr, certain 
aspects of atom1c structure remained a puzzle, and 1t 
wasn't until1925 that the f1nal pieces of the jigsaw slotted 
into place. 
Wave- particle duality tells us that an electron can act as both 
a particle and a wave. If we imagine the orbits of electrons 
as concentric circles around the nucleus (analogous to the 
orbits of the planets around the Sun). then we should know 
where each electron is at any one time. However, if we then 
superimpose the probability wave of the de Broglie wavelength 
onto the electron orbits, we fmd that an electron could exist 
at any point along that wave: for want of a better word, its 
position becomes 'fuzzy'. German physicists Werner Heisenberg 
and Erwin Schri:idinger, who fwst realized this, suggested that 
the electron orbits might better be considered as an electron 
'cloud' or 'swarm'. Today, however, they tend to be referred to 
as 'orbitals'. 
46 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

In the quantum model of the atom, electrons 
occupy diffuse orbitals rather than fixed orbits 
(see page 70 for an explanation of annotation] 
2p orbitals 
(lobes] 
Nucleus 
2s orbital 
(spherical) 
3s orbital 
(spherical] 

Relativity 
T
he early 20th century saw huge advances in physics. 
Alongside explorations of the subatomic and quantum 
realm, perhaps the biggest revolut ion of all came at the other 
end of the size scale, wit h Einstein's theories of special and 
general relativity (published in 1905 and 1915, respectively). 
In fact, both theories wou ld prove t o have important 
implications for quantum physics. Development of the special 
theory (which explains the physics of objects moving at close 
to the speed of light but ignores situations of acceleration) 
led Einstein to the idea that mass and energy are equivalent, 
a keystone of quantum and particle physics (see page 50). 
The general t heory, meanwhile, which considers accelerating 
'reference frames', showed how gravity can distort space 
and make itself felt across vast cosmic distances. Einstein, 
however, wanted a more complete theory that could explain 
how gravity acts on very small scales, as well as at the very 
large, unifying relativity with the quantum world (see page 262). 
48 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Mass-energy equivalence 
T
he most famous equation in all of physics tells us that mass 
and energy are equivalent. Einstein made this remarkable 
discovery while investigating how objects with mass [m) would 
behave when moving near the speed of light (c; the ultimate 
cosmic speed limit, reachable only by massless photons of light). 
The equation's huge scaling factor [the enormous speed of light 
multiplied by itself) reveals just how much energy is locked up in 
even a relatively small mass. For instance, a 1-kilogram [2.2-lb) 
bag of sugar locks up 3 million billion joules of energy. The more 
massive an object, the more energy it contains (and when an 
object moves, it carries even more energy- see page 82). 
This mass-energy equivalence also holds for atoms and particles 
that operate under quantum rules. When physicists discuss 
particles, they don't talk about their mass in kilograms. Instead, 
they refer to their energies, measured in tiny units called 
electronvolts [eV). For example, the rest mass energy of an 
electron [the energy it has when it isn't moving) is 0.511 million eV 
50 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

2 

The Solvay Conference 
T
he f1rst steps towards unifying the disparate strands 
of quantum physics into a complete theory came at the 
1927 Solvay Conference in Brussels, where 29 of the world's 
leading scientists assembled to wrestle with the subject. 
Among them were 17 Nobel Prize winners and giants in 
the world of quantum physics, including Niels Bohr, Arthur 
Compton, Marie Curie, Louis de Broglie, Paul Dirac, Albert 
Einstein, Werner Heisenberg, Wolfgang Pauli, Max Planck and 
Erwin Schrbdinger. 
There were (friendly) divides between these heroes and 
heroines of science. For example, Heisenberg considered the 
question of quantum physics settled, while Einstein was still 
groping for an explanation of why quantum mechanics worked 
at all. It was at this conference that he uttered his famous 
phrase, 'God does not play dice with the Universe; in response 
to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle (see page 172). For 
Einstein, nothing should be left to chance. 
52 
THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Attendees at the 1927 Solvay Conference 

The Copenhagen 
interpretation 
M
uch of the theoretical groundwork laid for quantum physics 
in the 1920s was led by Niels Bohr (opposite) at the University 
of Copenhagen. Scientists including Paul Dirac, Erwin Schrbdinger 
and Werner Heisenberg all came to Denmar k to work with Bohr, 
and their collective efforts gave rise to the so-called 'Copenhagen 
interpretation'. This approach to quantum physics is a sort of 
ideology, claiming that everything we can definitely know about the 
behaviour of a quantum system emerges in the act of measuring 
it, and t hat without measurement, we are limited to describing a 
'wave function' that predicts the probabi lity of certain results. 
Despite its popularity, however, this interpretation was not 
universally accepted. Other approaches have arisen since, from t he 
many-worlds theory to the idea that only a conscious observer can 
cause a wave f unction to resolve into a single outcome (see pages 
286 and 392) However, it was via breakthroughs made using the 
Copenhagen interpretation that scientists f1nally found t he tools 
they needed to work within the bizarre world of quantum physics. 
54 THE BIRTH OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Spectroscopy 
T
he science of spectroscopy is the analysis of the precise 
wavelengths at which materials and objects emit, absorb 
or reflect radiation. It is a hugely powerful tool, used today in a 
whole range of f1elds aside f rom astronomy, including medical 
research, materials science and chemical analysis. For example, 
although the element helium accounts for nearly a quarter 
of all atoms in the Universe, it was unknown until1868, when 
astronomer Norman Lockyer ident ified a prominent 'gap' in 
the Sun's light output at a wavelength of 588 nanometres 
[billionths of a metre). and realized it was t he signature of a 
new element in the Sun's atmosphere absorbing light. 
Spectr oscopy owes its power to the fact that the wavelengths 
of light emitted or absorbed by atoms are intimately linked to 
their internal structure, and are therefore dictated by quantum 
interactions happening between electrons at various energy 
levels. As such, it's an ideal proving ground for discovering and 
understanding many aspects of the quantum world. 
56 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 

Types of spectra 
Prism or spectroscope splits light 
A/ 
mto different wavelengths 
Continuum D. .. .. 
~ ,,,'' 
.... _ ~ 
Incandescent 
Broad spectrum of light 
light source 
Emission 
Hot gas 
Absorption 
~--
Incandescent 
light source 
Cool gas 
Bright lines on dark background 
Absorption lines against 
continuum spectrum 

Atomic structure 
T
he model of an atom as depicted by Rutherford and Bohr 
(see pages 42 and 44) is fairly simple, with an atomic 
nucleus at the centre, surrounded by electrons in their orbits. 
The nucleus is the heart of t he atom. It contains most of the 
atom's mass, and is made from one or more 'nucleons', which are 
either protons or neutrons. Both of these particle types are 
themselves composed of three smaller particles called quarks 
(see page 92) A proton has a positive charge, while a neutron 
is electrically neutral. Because charge is balanced within an 
electrically neutral atom, the positive charge on a proton is 
cancelled out by the negative charge of an electron orbiting it. 
The simplest element - hydrogen - usually has atoms consisting 
of a single proton orbited by a lone electron. Helium consists 
of two protons and usually two neutrons orbited by two 
electrons. At the other extreme, the heaviest known element 
has 118 protons, 118 electrons and 176 neutrons. 
58 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 

Simple atomic structures 
Hydrogen 
1 proton, 1 electron 
Helium 
2 protons, 2 neutrons, 
2 electrons 
Deuterium (heavy hydrogen) 
1 proton, 1 neutron, 1 electron 
Carbon-12 
6 protons, 6 neutrons, 
6 electrons 

Electron shells 
E
lectrons flit around an atom's nucleus in shared 'shells' 
The further away a shell is from the nucleus, the more 
electrons it can accommodate. The fwst shell is known as 
the 'K-shell' and it f 1ts no more than two electrons in it. The 
second shell, called the 'L-shell', can include eight electrons; 
the third 'M- shell' up to 18 electrons; the fourth 'N - she ll', 32 
electrons; and so on. A handy formula allows you to calculate 
the total number of electrons an atom can contain in a given 
shell: 2(n2), where n is the number of t he shell, also known as 
the 'principal quantum number'. So in all the shells leading up 
to and including the M- shell, there can be 2 x (12) + (2 2) + (3 2) = 
2 x (1 + 4 + 9) = 28 electrons. 
The greater its atomic mass, the more electrons an atom 
has, and hence more shells. In any atom, the outermost shell 
is known as the 'valence shell'. Since it directly interacts with 
other atoms, it is this shell that helps, above all, to def1ne the 
chemical properties of that atom. 
60 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 

This schematic shows the distribution of electrons in an atom of 
neodymium [atomic number 60]. The complexities of electron energy levels 
mean that its outermost 32 electrons are distributed through theN, 0 
and P shells, rather than all collecting in the N shell. 

Quantum numbers 
T
he principal quantum number that describes the energy 
levels of electron shells is not the only way in which we def1ne 
the quantum state - that is, the probability wave function - of 
an electron. Alongside it, there are other key quantum numbers 
that help def1ne an electron's properties. 
Electrons have a property called 'spin' (s; see page 102), 
which can have a quantum number of 112 or -%. Meanwhile, 
the 'azimuthal' quantum number (I) describes the angular 
momentum of the electron (although an electron's mass 
is tiny at just 9 x 10-31 kg, it does exist, and therefore an 
orbiting electron must have angular momentum). 
Finally, the 'magnetic' quantum number (m,) describes the 
energy levels present in the 'subshells' of any given electron 
shell (see page 70). Within a magnetic f1eld, m1 can also 
produce further shifts in electron energy, related to a 
phenomenon known as the Zeeman effect (see page 86). 
62 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 

Principal 
Possible values 
quantum 
of azimuthal 
number,n 
quantum num-
ber,/ 
1 
0 
2 
0 
1 
3 
0 
1 
2 
4 
0 
1 
2 
3 
Subshell 
name 
1s 
2s 
2p 
3s 
3p 
3d 
4s 
4p 
4d 
4f 
Poss1ble values 
ofmagnet1c 
quantum 
number,m1 
0 
0 
1, 0, -1 
0 
1, 0, -1 
2, 1, 0, -1, -2 
0 
1, 0, -1 
2, 1, 0, -1, -2 
3, 2, 1, 0, 
-1, -2, -3 
* NB- Two electrons can coexist in each orbital 
if they have opposite spins. 
Number of 
orbitals in 
subshell * 
1 
1 
3 
1 
3 
5 
1 
3 
5 
7 

Electron energy levels 
E
ach electron shell within an atom exists at a different 
energy level, and the further from the nucleus an electron 
travels, the greater the energy it must have. Conversely, the 
closer it lives to the nucleus, the less energy it requires. 
For example, consider an argon atom. This has 18 electrons, 
so entirely fills its K-, L-and M-shells. Electrons in the K-shell 
have -4,408 electronvolts (eV) of energy. The minus sign is 
explained by the fact that the potential energy of an electron 
only reaches zero at an infmite distance from the nucleus, 
so all the electron she lls closer in are considered to have 
negative energy. The electrons in the L-shell have an energy of 
-1,102 eV and in the M-shell their energy is -489.78 eV, so the 
energy levels are getting higher (that is, closer to zero) with 
greater distance from the nucleus. For an electron to jump to 
a higher shell, it therefore must gain some energy by absorbing 
a photon. Conversely, to drop down from this excited state, it 
must lose some energy by emitting a photon. 
64 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 

Energy provided 
by high-energy 
photon 
Electron in excited state 
Ground state 
(lowest energy level) 
Electron cascades 
through energy 
levels, losing energy 
at each step 
Energy released 
as lower-energy 
photon as electron 
drops back to 
ground state 
Fluorescent materials glow when electrons excited by high-energy radiation 
drop back to their original state andre-emit photons of lower energy. 

Calculating energy levels 
W
hen analysing spectra, physicists often need to calculate the 
approximate energy levels of electrons in a particular shell, and 
they can do this using the equation shown opposite. Here, E signif1es 
the energy we are attempting to calculate, h is Planck's constant 
(see page 28), and c the speed of light, 2.998 x 108 m/s. R is a factor 
called the Rydberg constant with a numeric value of 1.097 x 107, Z is 
the atomic number (the number of protons or electrons in an atom) 
and n is the principle quantum number. In our previous example of 
the argon atom, Z = 18, so if we want to calculate the energy of 
the M-shell (n = 3), then we simply multiply everything together 
f = - 6.626 X lQ-34 X (2.998x108) X (1097x107) X (182/32) 
giving -7.845 X lQ-21 joules. Quantum physicists, preferring to 
work in smaller units of energy, translate this to electronvolts 
(the energy needed to move a single electron across a 1 volt 
difference in electric potential), producing a result in this case 
of E= - 489.78 electronvolts (eV). 
66 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 


The ground state 
T
he lowest - energy electr ons in an at om (those in the 
innermost K- shel l) are sometimes described as being in 
the ground st at e: their ener gy cannot get any lower and t hey 
have, in effect, hit t he 'grou nd'. Those electrons in the higher 
electron shells wit h t heir ext r a ener gy ar e, on the ot her 
hand, descri bed as being 'excited'. 
The difference between ground- st ate and excited electrons is 
t he key behind much of t he quantum physics that happens in 
t he electron shells. When an elect ron gains energy by absorbing 
a photon, it becomes excited and t r ies t o JUmp up an ener gy 
leve l. Conver sely, when an electr on loses energy, it emits a 
photon and drops back down t o a lower energy state Why 
would an electron feel the need t o dr op down? All particles ar e 
at t heir happiest when t hey are as close to the gr ound state 
as t hey can get, so excited elect ro ns are inher ent ly unst able. If 
t her e is a vacancy in the electron shell immediately below it, an 
electron will shed excess energy t o occupy that space. 
68 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 

l.Ground 
state 
Electronjumps 
to higher energy 
level 
3.Ground 
state 
2. Excited 
state 
Electron drops 
back to lower 

Electron subshells 
T
he equation given on page 67 might suggest that all electrons 
in the same shell have exactly the same energy, but this is not 
strictly true; as is often the case, quantum physics introduces 
some ambiguity. An electron shell is divided into a number of 
subshells, one of which will have the energy calculated using the 
equation, while the other subshells will have slight variations 
around that energy leveL An electron in a given electron shell 
might exist in any of the subshells. The subshells are distinguished 
using more letters - s, p, d, f, and then following alphabetically, g, 
h, i, and so on The innermost K-shell has just one subshell, known 
as ls. The second, L-shell, has two subshells, 2s and 2p; the third, 
M- shell, has three subs hells, 3s, 3p and 3d, and so on. 
Subshells arise because the wave function of the electrons allows a 
little wiggle room in their spatial distribution - an electron will have 
a given probability of existing in one of the subshells. Which subshell 
in particular can be calculated using the famous Schrodinger wave 
equation (see page 156). 
70 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 

Generalized shapes of individuals, p, d and f subshells 
• 
ls 
2p 
.. _ 
3d 

Quantum degeneracy 
M
athematical models ca lled 'harmonic oscillators' are 
ubiquitous in phys1cs, and offer a way t o descr1be many 
vibrating and wavelike phenomena. The simplest kind of oscillat or 
is a mass attached to the end of a spring, bouncing up and down in 
one - dimension. However, consider a three -dimensional oscillation, 
one that's vibrating up and down, left and right, and back t o front. 
If all three states of vibration oscillate with equal amplitude and 
energy, the system is described as 'degenerate'; fewer numbers 
are needed t o describe it t han we might expect. 
Quantum physics has its own analogous concept of degeneracy 
that applies when more than one quantum state shares the 
same energy level in an electron shell. Quantum degeneracy 
describes how many quantum numbers can have the same 
energy, and is given by t he square of the principle quantum 
number. In a hydrogen atom, a ground-state electron has a 
degeneracy of just 1, but if that electron is boosted into the 
L- shell, it's degeneracy becomes 4 [2 2); in t heM-shel l, 9 [3 2). 
72 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 

Energy levels in a single-electron (hydrogen) atom 
3s 
3p 
3d 
_____ 
Degeneracy 
Sub shells with the same 
principal quantum number 
share the same energy level. 
Non-degenerate 
1s 
ground state 
=9 
Degeneracy= 4 

Hund's rules 
I
n 1927, German physicist Friedrich Hund developed a set 
of rules that help to bring order to the potential chaos of 
electron configurations. He set out three rules to determine 
which configuration of an atom with several electrons has the 
lowest-energy ground state, and is therefore favoured. 
The rules involve adding up the spin (s) and orbital angular 
momentum(/) of all individual electrons to fmd totals denoting 
Sand L, respectively Added together, these then give a 'total 
angular momentum quantum number' (J). The rules themselves 
are shown opposite, but it's their implications that matter most· 
Hund's rules imply that all electrons in singly occupied positions 
must be spinning in the same direction, and also that all empty 
positions must f1rst be filled before electrons can begin pairing up. 
This matters because the configuration of the electrons in the 
outermost shell def1nes an atom's chemical properties, so the 
order in which they occupy the positions is crucial in defining 
how one atom interacts with other atoms and molecules. 
74 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 


Pauli's exclusion principle 
W
hile Hund's rules describe the configuration of electrons, 
they don't offer an explanation as to why these 
configurations happen. That explanation lies in the famous 
exclusion principle discovered by prodigious Austrian physicist 
Wolfgang Pauli in 1925. 
Pauli realized that the number of electrons in every fully 
occupied electron shell- two in the K- shel l, six in the L-shell, 
ten in theM - shell, and so on - were identical to the number 
of possible different arrangements for the quantum numbers 
among electrons in that she ll. He concluded that nature does 
not allow two electrons with identical quantum numbers to 
occupy the same shell; any that attempt to do so are excluded 
(forced into a different shell with a higher energy level). Thus, 
the structure of electron shells is prevented from collapsing. 
It later became clear that Pauli's exclusion principle applies not 
only to electrons, but also to neutrons and protons, with some 
fascinating consequences [see page 236). 
76 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 

Helium 
(2 electrons) 
Boron 
(5 electrons) 
Nitrogen 
(7 electrons) 
Oxygen 
(8 electrons) 
Neon 
(10 electrons) 
Electron distribution in some simple elements 
1s subshell 
2s subshell 
Pauli's exclusion principle prevents 
electrons from sharing identical 
quantum numbers, forcing them to 
take up new positions in the orbital 
shell structure. 
2p sub shell 

Fraunhofer lines 
W
hen sunlight is split by a prism, we can see the visible 
reg1on of the electromagnetic spectrum dispersed 
according to the different wavelengths in its light. In the early 
19th century, scientists began noticing that this rainbow-like 
pattern of colours was crossed by dark lines. German optician 
Joseph von Fraunhofer studied these in depth, identifying over 
500 lines, although thousands of these are now known. 
Fraunhofer lines are produced by atoms in the Sun's atmosphere 
absorbing light emitted at its visible surface, and are a 
consequence of the discrete energy levels within atoms. To JUmp 
between levels, an electron must absorb a photon and take a 
precise amount of energy corresponding to a specific wavelength 
in the spectrum. When many atoms absorb similar photons they 
remove that wavelength from the broad 'continuum' of sunlight, 
creating dark absorption lines. Each line matches a specif1c 
transition in a particular atom, so scientists can use them to 
identify the atomic make-up of stars and other objects. 
78 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 


Emission lines 
A s well as dark absorption lines, electrons can also create bright 
M. 'em1ss1on lines' by releasmg photons as they trans1tlon f rom an 
excited st at e t o a less excited one. Emission lines have wavelengths 
equivalent t o the difference in energy involved in a transition, and 
are produced by energized gases, for instance in neon strip lights or 
the nebulae surrounding newborn star s. 
Hydrogen, t he simplest and most common element in the Universe, 
has its own set of electron transit ions giving rise to specific 
wavelengths of light. The Lyman ser ies, discovered by Theodore 
Lyman in 1906, is produced by electrons dropping from var ious 
energy levels straight to the ground state. The transition from 
the L-shell to the K-shell, known as the Lyman alpha, corresponds 
t o ultraviolet radiation at a wavelengt h of 121 nanometres. The 
transition f rom t heM-shell to the K-shell is t ermed Lyman-beta, 
and so on Meanwhile, the Balmer series, which includes both 
visible and ult raviolet lines, describes transitions from higher 
excited states down to the L-shel l. 
80 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 


Conservation of energy 
and momentum 
T
he f1rst law of thermodynamics (see page 22) is based on 
the 1dea that the total energy of a system is conserved; 
energy cannot be created or destroyed, but it can change from 
one form into another. For example, when an ice cube is heated 
and sublimates, an input of heat energy is transformed into 
kinetic (motion] energy in the molecules of water vapour. 
Energy is not the only property in the Universe that is 
conserved; momentum is too. Think of balls on a pool table. When 
a player strikes the white ball with the cue, it gives the ball a 
certain momentum. When the white ball hits a stationary red 
ball with zero momentum, some of the white ball's momentum 
is passed to the red ball, while the white ball retains the rest of 
its momentum as it rebounds away. The total momentum of the 
white ball and the red ball after the collision is the same as the 
total momentum between the two before the collision. Although 
ice cubes and pool tables are everyday examples, the principles 
behind these conservation laws also hold in particle physics. 
82 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 


Forbidden transitions 
A lthough nature as depicted by quantum physics is inherently 
M. uncertain and messy, it can occasionally be fussy about a 
few things - notably the conservation of properties such as 
energy, momentum (see page 82) and quantum states 
However, an electron doesn't inherently know what the ru les 
are. When it absorbs a photon, it wil l naturally attempt to make 
a quantum jump to a higher energy state, even if that jump 
takes it into a quantum state that's already occupied or one 
that doesn't conserve quantum numbers. When an electron 
makes one of these 'forbidden transitions', it is swiftly forced 
to return to its original state. However, by then it is in some 
ways too late: the electron has already absorbed a photon, so 
we see a dark absorption line. When returning to its original 
state the electron also has to spit out a photon carrying the 
excess energy, so creating an emission line. Hence, absorption 
and emission lines can appear even when the laws of physics 
say that certain transitions shouldn't officially take place. 
84 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 


The Zeeman effect 
T
he concept of electron spin arises frequently in quantum 
physics (for example, 1n our discussions of quantum 
numbers and Hund's r ules, see pages 62 and 74). As effective 
'point masses' with negligible physical dimensions, electrons 
don't actually spin, but t hey sti ll sport quantum properties 
that behave as though they were spinning, and t his spin can 
be distinguished as either up or down (in terms of quantum 
numbers, spins of either 1h or - 112). 
Because electrons have negative electrical charges, their passage 
through an electric f1eld generates a magnetic f1eld, and the spin 
of the electron decides the field's magnetic polarity. Therefore, an 
electric f1eld will deflect electrons with spin up in one direction, 
and those wit h spin down in a different direction. There is also a 
small but measurable energy difference between the two spins, 
which can result in the f1ne splitting of energy levels while under 
the influence of an electric f1eld. This effect was f1rst noted by, and 
subsequently named after, Dutch physicist Pieter Zeeman. 
86 ENERGY LEVELS AND SPECTRAL LINES 

A beam of electrons fired through an electric 
f1eld will produce two spots, not one. 

The particle zoo 
T
he protons, neutrons and electrons found inside everyday 
atoms are just the t1p of the iceberg when 1t comes to 
the particle family tree. The 20th century saw an explosion 
of discoveries as particle accelerators ramped up in power 
and theoretical physics became more advanced. Research 
continues apace in the 21st century, significantly with the 
discovery of the famous Higgs Boson in 2013. 
We describe our best picture of particle physics as the 
'Standard Model'. Like a grand soap opera, the Standard 
Model's family tree is actually the story of three families-
the fermions, the quarks and the so - called force carriers or 
bosons- and how they get along with one another. Relations 
between these particles are determined via fundamental 
forces known as the strong, weak and electromagnetic 
interactions [the fourth fundamental force, gravity, is negligible 
on particle scales]. On these subatomic levels, quantum physics 
is king, moulding and influencing the particles to do its bidding. 
88 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Tracks left by the 
passage of subatomic 
charged particles 
through the Big European 
Bubble Chamber at the 

The Standard Model 
P
hysicists converged on the so-called Standard Model of 
particle physics in the 1970s, following several decades 
of research and discovery. The model describes particles 
at their most fundamental level- those that are indivisible 
or elementary, ground zero for the construction of matter 
[for example, quarks, which cluster together to form other 
particles, such as protons and neutrons). 
However, the Standard Model is more than just an exercise 
in cataloguing particles; it's a model of how the particle world 
operates, describing how those particles interact in ways that 
ultimately enable them to create the world we see around 
us. We'll learn more about them and their interactions in the 
following pages. Yet there will also be unanswered questions, 
puzzles that the Standard Model cannot yet explain, such as 
the origin of the fundamental forces, how neutrinos are able 
to change from one type into another, as well as the nature of 
mysterious 'dark matter'. 
90 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Fermion generations 
II 
Ill 
Charge -1 2/J u 
2/Jc 
2/Jt 
0 y 
~H 
Spin ---1 1/z 
1/z 
1/z 
1 
en 
up 
charm 
top 
photon 
Higgs boson 
~ 
a: 
<( 
::l 
~ 
0 
-1/Jd 
-1/Js 
-1/Jb 
1/2 
1/z 
1/z 
en z 
down 
bottom 
0 
strange 
en 
0 
ID 
w 
(!) 
zo 
::l 
1~2v 
1~2v 
1~2v 
0 
<( 
(!) 
e 
1-l 
't 
1 
en 
electron 
muon 
tau 
Z boson 
z 
neutrino 
neutrino 
neutrino 
0 f-a.. 
0 
w 
....1 
± 
-1e 
-1 !-! 
~1w 
1/z 
1/2 
electron 
W boson 
u 

Quarks 
T
he protons and neutrons found in each atomic nucleus are 
themselves made of tiny particles known as quarks. Murray 
Geii- Mann, the physicist most associated with their discovery, 
named them after a line in James Joyce's novel, Finnegans Wake 
Quarks are tiny, no more than a million-trillionths of a metre 
in size, each containing about one-third the mass of a proton 
or neutron. They are also unique in the Standard Model in that 
their charges are fractions of the charge on an electron, 
rather than whole-number multiples. They come in six flavours, 
somewhat whimsical ly referred to as up, down, strange, charm, 
top and bottom. The last three forms are highly unstable, and 
don't seem to play a role in the structure of matter. 
Quarks bind together in clusters of two or three through a 
fundamental interaction known as the strong force (clusters 
of three form protons and neutrons). So powerful is this force 
that no quark has ever been observed in isolation. 
92 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Top 
quark 
(Mass: 
173 GeV/c2) 
Charm 
quark 
(Mass: 
1275 MeV/c2) 
Up 
quark 
(Mass 
2.3 MeV/c2) 
The three generations of quarks 
Charge +2h 
Bottom 
quark 
(Mass: 
Charge - 1h 
4180 MeV/c 2) 
Strange 
quark 
(Mass: 
95 MeV/c2) 
Down 
quark 
(Mass: 
4.8 MeV/c2) 
Ill 
Gl 
m 
z 
m 
:D 
~ 
0 z 

Hadrons 
P
articles built from quarks are known as hadrons. They can be 
further split into two families, namely baryons (the protons and 
neutrons of the atomic nucleus) with three quarks, and a variety of 
short-lived meson particles wit h two The physics underlying their 
bonding is known as quantum chromodynamics, or QCD (see 
page 260). 'Chromo-' refers to colour (not literal colour, but a 
unique quantum property belonging to quarks). 
Pau li's exclusion principle states that particles with identical 
quantum numbers cannot occupy the same space. The addition 
of a colour property allows quarks that would otherwise have 
t he same quantum numbers to get around t his. There are three 
'colours' red, green and blue (plus ant iquarks that are antired, 
antigreen or antiblue]. Colours and their anticolours attract, and 
can bind two quarks into a meson. The three colours also attract 
each other, leading to baryons formed of one red, one blue and one 
green quark. A 'boson' part icle called a gluon, meanwhile, transmits 
t he strong force between quarks. 
94 PARTICLE PHYSICS 


Leptons 
E
lectrons and the other members of their particle family are 
known as leptons. These are a different breed of particle 
to the hadrons, not least because they are indivisible: there are 
no quarks or other tiny particles making up leptons, so we say 
they are 'elementary'. Alongside the electron, which is vital to 
quantum physics, there are two other types of lepton: the tau 
particle and the muon These are highly unstable and don't really 
play much of a role in normal particle physics. 
Another form of lepton- the neutrino- holds the crown as the 
most bizarre particle that we know. Neutrinos fill the Universe, 
with trillions streaming through your body at this very moment. 
Yet these particles have barely any mass at all, and are able 
to oscillate between three 'flavours' named after their fellow 
leptons: electron, tau and muon neutrinos. Because they 
interact so weakly with other particles and have no electrical 
charge, neutrinos can only be detected indirectly in experiments 
built deep underground to shield them from interference. 
96 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Tau 
particle 
(Mass: 
1777 MeV/c2) 
Muon 
(Mass· 
106 MeV/c' ) 
Electron 
(Mass 
0.51 MeV/c2) 
The three generations of leptons 
Charge- 1 
Tau 
neutrino 
(Mass 
15.5 MeV/c2) 
Muon 
neutrino 
(Mass: 
<0.17 MeV/c2) 
Electron 
neutrino 
(Mass: 
Charge 0 
<0.000 002 MeV/c2) 
Ill 
Gl 
m 
z 
m 
:0 
~ 
0 z 

Dark matter 
D
espite the great strides made by physics in the past 
century, it's a striking fact that all types of visible matter 
account for just 4.9 per cent of the mass and energy in 
the Universe. The rema inder is completely unknown, and the 
bulk of that is accounted for by an energy f1eld known only 
as dark energy. Some 26.8 per cent, however, is composed 
of a substance called dark matter. This is referred to as 
dark because we cannot see it- it does not emit or absorb 
radiation of any sort, and we can only detect its gravity 
through the way it affects the motions of stars on the edges 
of galaxies, and of galaxies on the edges of galaxy clusters. 
Dark matter is assumed to consist of subatomic particles 
of some description, that may be 'hot' or 'cold' (depending on 
how much energy they have). Neutrinos were once a popular 
candidate for hot dark matter, but dark matter is now mostly 
thought to be dominated by cold 'WIMPs' (weakly interacting 
massive particles). whose identity remains mysterious. 
9 8 
PARTICLE PHYSICS 


Electric charge 
T
he electric charge on a particle is, fundamental ly, an indication 
of 1ts susceptibility t o electric and magnetic f1elds, and 1ts 
ability to take part in electromagnetic interactions. Like energy 
and momentum, charge is conserved, meaning the total charge 
in a system is the same before and after an interaction between 
part icles. In fact, charge can play a key role in such interactions, 
since it is susceptible t o the electromagnetic force Charge is also 
quantized: it comes in discrete 'packets' that are usually integer 
multiples of t he charge of the electron or, in the case of quarks, 
simple fractions of the electron charge. Particle charge is never 
in ra ndom amounts, but increases in quantum leaps, so the charge 
that a particle has can be predicted by the Standard Model. 
Particles such as electrons have a negative charge, while others 
like protons and positrons ('antielectrons') have a positive one. 
Neutrinos and neutrons, meanwhile, are electrically neutral, due 
either to an inherent lack of charge, or because the charges of 
their constituent particles cancel out. 
100 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

8 
Every charged particle is surrounded by its own electric field, conventionally 
depicted as emerging from positive charges and flowing into negative ones. As 
with magnetic poles, like charges repel while unlike ones attract each other. 

Particle angular 
momentum 
A ngular momentum is simply the momentum of something 
M. spinning on its axis or moving around something, as distinct 
from the momentum of its straight-line motion through space. 
Particles can have a real angular momentum L [a property that is 
both quantized and conserved during particle interactions- see 
page 82), but the calculations that describe a particle's angular 
momentum also describe another particle property known as 
'spin'. This is important because spin is a quantum number, one of 
the key parameters describing the state of a particle. 
Spin is a strange property; despite the name, it does not refer 
to actual physical rotation, yet it endows particles with a 
magnetic moment in the same way as if it did [see page 106) 
Calculating L involves multiplying a 'position operator' r by a 
'moment um operator' p [operators are tools used to deal 
with vectors- see page 196) To calculate the total angular 
momentum of a particle [denoted J) we also have to add the 
total spin S, so total angular momentum J = rp + S. 
102 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Although spin is not a true 
rotation like that of, for 
example, a spinning top, it 
is still useful to think of 
particles as spinning in one 
direction or another at 
particular quantized rates. 
Spin - 112 
Spin+ 112 

Chirality and parity 
R
otational symmetry plays an important role in particle 
physics. Systems that are identical after a 360-degree 
rotation of their wave function are said to have parity, whereas 
those that change are said to be chiral. Picture an electron 
with spin 112. If you rotate its wave function by 360 degrees, the 
result is not identical to the original, and spin changes to -lJz. 
These changes cause it to behave differently in terms of both 
quantum properties and interactions with other particles. An 
analogy is a mirror image: if an object is not identical to its 
mirror image, it too is chiral. Most letters of the alphabet, for 
instance, are chiral but a few, such as 'A' and 'H' have parity. 
Chirality can be either left- or right-handed (referring to 
how the wave function is rotated). and 'handedness' has 
some important consequences. For example, only left- handed 
fermions (i e. electrons) or right-handed antifermions (i e 
positrons) are capable of interacting with the weak force 
responsible for radioactive decay. 
104 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Just as the amino acids illustrated here are chiral, with 
distinct left-and right-handed forms, so subatomic 
particles can also be chiral.ln both cases, this can have 
an important influence on their behaviour. 

Magnetic moments 
F
araday's laws [see page 18) tell us that a rotating electric 
f1eld can induce a magnetic f1eld. Some particles- electrons, 
for example - possess charge. They are essentially tiny packets 
of electrical current [the electricity we plug into in our homes 
is just a stream of electrons). Electrons also have inherent 
quantum spin, so their rotating electric f1elds should also 
generate a tiny magnetic f1eld Physicists refer to this f1eld as 
an electron's magnetic dipole moment. The 'magnetic moment' 
of a regular bar magnet is calculated as the strength of the poles 
multiplied by the distance between them, so it depends in part on 
how large the bar magnet is. Calculating the magnetic moment 
of an electron is somewhat more complicated, but the magnetic 
moment is always 'antiparallel' to the spin angular momentum. 
The term 'dipole' indicates that a f1eld has both north and south 
poles. Magnetic monopoles with just one pole have not yet been 
found to exist in the Universe, though they are proposed by 
some advanced theories, such as superstrings [see page 274). 
106 PARTICLE PHYSICS 


Spin-orbit interactions 
W
hen an electron is locked in or bit around an at omic nucleus, 
the magnet1c moment created by 1ts quantum sp1n (see page 
102) will interact with the magnetic f1eld induced by its or bital 
motion around the nucleus. This spin-orbit interaction leads to 
the creation of unexpected features that can be detected within 
the spectral lines of an atom. The spin of the electron relative to 
the induced magnetic f1eld can have two different orientat ions, 
either parallel t o the direct ion of motion, or 'antiparallel'. Parallel 
spin has a marginally lower energy t han would otherwise be 
expected, while antiparallel spin has slightly higher energy This 
results in the atomic energy levels splitting in two, a phenomenon 
that physicists refer to as 'f1ne st ructu re'. 
There is also an opposite effect, where the nucleus itself has 
spin and, therefore, a magnetic moment, which interacts with 
the magnetic f1eld induced by the electron. This results in 
'hyperf1ne structure' - extremely small shifts in spectral lines 
that revea l secrets of the energy levels within the atom. 
108 PARTICLE PHYSICS 


Fermions 
P
article physicists catalogue subatomic particles in many 
different ways. Just as particles can be associated with 
different 'families', such as baryons, leptons and mesons, so 
groups of families can be aligned under common characteristics, 
such as quantum spin. This gives rise to the 'fermions', which 
are particles with half- integer spin (in other words, spins 
of 112, %, -% or -%}The fermions include quarks, and hence 
encompass the baryons (see page 94) since the three quarks 
bound together in these particles result in a spin of either % 
or %. Leptons, which have a spin of 112, are also fermions, as are 
composites of particles made from an odd number of quarks, 
such as some atomic nuclei. 
Fermions are named after Italian nuclear physicist Enrico Fermi. 
Their behaviour is described by a mathematical model called 
Fermi-Dirac statistics, and their most important property is 
that they adhere, without fail, to Pauli's exclusion principle, with 
important consequences for atomic structure (see page 76). 
110 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

LEPTONS (Spin 1/z) 
Symbol 
Flavour 
Mass (MeV/c2) 
Charge 
v 
Electron neutrino 
< 0.000 002 
0 
e 
Electron 
0.51 
-1 
vu 
Muon neutrino 
< 0.17 
0 
[), 
Muon 
106 
-1 
v, 
Tau neutrino 
15.5 
0 
c 
Tau 
1777 
-1 
QUARKS (Spin 1/z) 
Symbol 
Flavour 
Mass (MeV/c2) 
Charge 
u 
Up quark 
2.3 
+213 
d 
Down quark 
4.8 
_113 
c 
Charm quark 
1275 
+213 
s 
Strange quark 
95 
_113 
t 
Top quark 
173,000 
+213 
b 
Bottom quark 
4180 
_113 

Bosons 
N
amed after Indian physicist Satyendra Nath Bose, and 
described by a model called Bose-Einstein statistics, bosons 
are particles that have integer or whole-number spins [0, 1, 2, and 
so on) For reasons not entirely understood, bosons happily flout 
Pau li's exclusion principle, so that many bosons can coexist in the 
same quantum state. This is important because it allows them 
to permeate space as so-called 'gauge bosons'- particles that 
transmit the four fundamental forces of nature that hold matter 
together and govern how particles interact [electromagnetism, 
t he strong force, t he weak force and gravity) 
Only elementary bosons are force carriers: these include photons 
[carrying the electromagnetic force), gluons [the strong force), 
Wand Z bosons [the weak force) and the hypothetical graviton 
[gravity). Other bosons include mesons [see page 94), whose two 
quarks have a combined spin of 0 or 1, and atomic nuclei such 
as helium- 4 [which contains two protons and two neutrons, 
amounting to 12 quarks in all and hence a total spin of 6). 
112 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

ELECTROWEAK FORCE 
Symbol 
Name 
Mass 
Charge 
Spin 
(GeV/c2) 
y 
Photon 
0 
0 
1 
w· 
w· boson 
80.39 
+1 
1 
w-
w-boson 
80.39 
-1 
1 
zo 
zo boson 
91.188 
0 
1 
STRONG FORCE 
Symbol 
Name 
Mass 
Charge 
Spin 
(GeV/c2) 
g 
Gluon 
0 
0 
1 
HIGGS FIELD 
Symbol 
Name 
Mass 
Charge 
Spin 
(GeV/c2) 
H 
Higgs 
126 
0 
0 
boson 

Bose-Einstein 
condensates 
T
he fact that bosons don't obey Pauli's exclusion principle means 
there 1s no l1m1t as to how many can be packed 1nto the same 
energy level with the same quantum numbers. In the 1920s, Albert 
Einstein and Satyendra Nath Bose realized this cou ld have some 
strange consequences. Their Bose- Einstein statistics described 
all the quantum states in which a gas of bosons could exist. 
Einstein wondered what would happen if those bosons were chilled 
to j ust a few degrees above absolute zero. He proposed that all 
the bosons would sink to the lowest possible energy level, creating 
a new form of matter called a Bose-Einstein condensate. 
Condensates were f1nally produced in laboratories in the 1990s, 
and freakishly display quantized properties on a visible scale. For 
example, when helium-4 (a bosonic gas] is cooled to 2°C (3 6°F] 
above absolute zero, it starts to act as a superfluid- a liquid with no 
resistance to movement. Bose display many curious properties- they 
can even slow the passage of light to a crawl and even stop it, wh ile 
when stirred, they form vortices that continue to swirl indefinitely 
114 PARTICLE PHYSICS 


The Large Hadron Collider 
I
n order to detect new subatomic particles, physicist s have built 
Immense machines that smash particles together at ultrahigh 
speeds, creating higher and higher energies that briefly give rise 
to short-lived particles not usually found in nature The biggest 
of these particle detectors is the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at 
CERN, on the Swiss- French border near Geneva. 
The LHC's ring-shaped underground tunnel, some 27 kilometres 
(16.8 miles) in circumference, is lined with 1,625 superconducting 
magnets that bend, accelerate and focus beams of hadrons 
ranging from isolated protons to heavier atomic nuclei and 
electrically charged ions. Two beams at a time race around in 
opposite directions, each loaded with up to 120 billion hadrons. 
Accelerating through the underground t ubes, their speeds 
approach the speed of light before they smash into each other at 
energies of up to 13 trillion eV Each year several hundred trillion 
collisions take place, recorded by seven separate experiments 
located in enormous chambers around the ring. 
116 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Key experiments at the 
Large Hadron Collider 
ALICE 
(A Large 
len Collider 
Experiment) 
injection .-------JL...----- injection 
ATLAS (A 
Toroidal LHC 
Apparatus) 
Particle 
dump 
LHCb 
(LHC-beauty) 

LHC discoveries 
T
he Large Hadron Collider is designed to test all kinds 
of exotic particle physics theories, from ideas such as 
supersymmetry [see page 274) to extensions of the Standard 
Model. Its best known quest, however, was the search for the 
famous Higgs boson particle predicted in the Standard Model 
[see page 90). Data co llection began with the LHC's inaugural 
run in 2009, and each followi ng run gr adua lly narrowed down 
the energy range at which the particle might be found. On 
4 July 2012, scientists announced that the Higgs boson had 
fmally been ident if1ed in particle col lisions with an energy of 
between 125 and 127 billion eV as theory predicted. 
The LHC's other discoveries include several new particles 
and the creation of a new, superdense state of matter 
ca lled a quark- gluon plasma, which exists at temperatures 
as high as 5.5 trillion o C [9 9 trillion oF). Upgrades to make 
the accelerator even more powerful wi ll doubtless lead to 
further discoveries. 
118 PARTICLE PHYSICS 


The Higgs boson 
I
magine you've just been dropped into a big vat of treacle 
and are slowly sinking to the bottom. Then imag1ne t hat a 
ball- bearing - tiny, but with the same mass as yourself - is also 
dropped into the treacle. It sinks much faster, reaching the 
bottom before you, because it has a smaller cross-sectional 
area with which to create resistance in the treacle. 
According to British physicist Peter Higgs, this is a good analogy 
for the process that gives particles their mass. They too have 
to wade through a medium of sorts, in this case an invisible one 
known as the Higgs f1eld. The t heory, developed by Higgs in 1964, 
predicts that JUst like the fundamental forces, the Higgs f1eld is 
distributed across spacetime by a boson (see page 112). 
The Higgs boson was f1nally discovered by the Large Hadron 
Collider in 2012, but scientists have yet to decipher many of 
its mysteries: in particular, the crucial question of why some 
particles are more massive than others. 
120 PARTICLE PHYSICS 


Electromagnetic force 
A longside gravity, electromagnetism is the force that we 
M. experience most 1n our daily lives. Whether we're typing 
at a keyboard, turning the page in a book or opening a door, 
everything we do involves interactions between molecules 
and atoms that re ly on the electromagnetic forces between 
charged nuclei and electrons (in particular, the outermost 
electrons in an atom, known as valence electrons, see page 
60). Electromagnetic forces are responsible not only for 
the strong bonds between atoms in molecules and solid 
materials, but also for the weaker bonds that bind molecules 
more loosely in liquids and some gases. Our everyday lives are 
therefore built upon the foundations of quantum phenomena. 
Like other fundamental forces, the electromagnetic force is 
carried by a gauge boson particle - in this case, photons of 
electromagnetic radiation. Because photons travel at the 
speed of light, the electromagnetic force can, in theory, have 
an almost infinite range. 
122 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Fine structures called lamellae on 
the feet of geckos allow them to 
use Vander Waals' forces (a weak 
electromagnetic attraction] to scale 
impossibly smooth surfaces. 

Strong force 
I
f the great range of the electromagnetic force makes it the 
long-distance runner of the Universe, the so-called 'strong 
force' is more like a 100- metre sprinter. It is incredibly powerful 
over the short scales of the atomic nucleus (distances of 
around one million billionths of a metre, or 10-15 metres, also 
known as a femtometre). In fact, at this scale, it's 137 times 
stronger than the electromagnetic force This allows it to easily 
overcome the electromagnetic repulsion that is trying to drive 
positively charged protons apart within the nucleus. 
On the scale of the nucleus, the strong force is carried 
between baryons through the exchange of messenger 
particles cal led pions (a type of meson, see page 94). The 
strong force is also what holds quarks together inside baryons 
and mesons. The force carriers exchanged between the quarks 
are gluons (of wh ich there are eight types). The strength of 
the strong force is why we never see lone quarks outside the 
nucleus: they simply cannot escape its grip. 
124 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

The strong force: binding the nucleus 
d 
u 
tXI 
~ -w 
\IV\ Strong force carried 
between quarks by 
gluon particles 
""' Strong force transmitted 
between baryons by 
pion particles 

Weak force 
T
he weak force gets its name not because it is intrinsically 
weak, but because of its exceptionally short range. At scales 
of one billion billionths of a metre [10-18 metres), it is stronger 
than the electromagnetic force, but at just 10-17 metres, 
electromagnetism gets the upper hand. 
The weak force plays the key role in beta decay, a type of 
radioactivity in which neutrons change spontaneously into protons 
and emit electrons. The reason for its short range is because 
neutrons in atomic nuclei must 'borrow' energy from the Universe in 
order to decay and emit one of the weak force's carriers (a charged 
w• or w-boson, or a neutral Z boson). These bosons are far more 
massive t han a neutron, and the cosmic debt collector doesn't loan 
this much energy out for long; hence, such bosons only last for one 
trillion trillionths of a second before being absorbed by another 
particle in order to repay the energy def1cit Beta decay is also a 
ch iral interaction [see page 104) the preservation of 'handedness' 
helps determine which particu lar interactions can occur. 
126 PARTICLE PHYSICS 


Radioactivity 
W
e're familiar with radioactive phenomena in modern life, 
ranging from natural radon gas to nuclear power, and from 
nuclear weapons to radiocarbon dating. In fact, radioactivity is a 
quantum physical process; no one can predict when an atom will 
undergo radioactive decay, because it is a random, spontaneous 
affair dictated by a probabilistic wave function. 
Energy emitted by radioactive decay is released when a nucleus 
becomes unstable, usually because it has insufficient 'binding energy' 
to hold large numbers of protons and neutrons together against t he 
electromagnetic repulsion of the like-charged protons. The atom's 
solution is to release some of these excess protons and neutrons 
through a process of alpha or beta decay, while also shedding 
excess, quantized 'gamma radiation'. The process transmutes the 
configuration of the nucleus, often into a different element While it's 
impossible to predict the decay of an individual atom, when many 
radioactive atoms are present, it is possible to calculate the 'half 
life'- the t ime it takes for half the sample to decay. 
128 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Cl 
c: 
·c: 
"iii 
E 
OJ '-·a; 
u 
:l 
c: 
...., 
c: 
OJ '-
'" a. 
...... 
0 
OJ 
Cl 
m 
...., 
c: 
OJ u '-
OJ a. 
The probabilistic nature of radioactive decay gives rise to a 
characteristic decay curve in which the quantity of radioactive 
parent atoms halves repeatedly over time . 
•••••••••• 
•••••••••• 
•••••••••• 
•••••••••• 
•••••••••• 
•••••••••• 
•••••••••• 
•••••••••• 
•••••••••• 
•••••••••• 
100 
50 
25 
12.5 
6.25 
0 
• 
I 
1 
• 
I 
2 
Time (half lives] 
• 
I 
3 
4 

Alpha decay 
S
ometimes a particularly heavy element will release a cluster of 
two protons and two neutrons through rad1oact1ve decay. This 
particular combination of protons and neutrons is, in effect, a 
helium nucleus. In terms of radioactivity, however, it is known as an 
alpha particle. Removing these neutrons and protons transforms 
the parent atom into a different element. For example, the alpha 
decay of uranium-238 produces thorium-234. 
Alpha decay is only possible thanks to one of quantum physics' 
more bizarre consequences. An alpha particle requires around 
25 million eV to escape from the binding energy of a nucleus, 
but normally has between 4 and 9 million eV In ordinary 
circumstances this should trap it within the nucleus, behind an 
energy wall known as a Coulomb barrier. However, all particles 
have an associated wave function and, if the alpha particle's 
wave function extends beyond the Coulomb barrier, there is 
a small probability of it appearing outside of the barrier. This 
phenomenon is known as quantum tunnelling (see page 170). 
130 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Alpha decay of Americium-241 
The synthetic element Americium is a common 
component of smoke detectors. Alpha particles 
emitted during its decay ionize air and allow it to 
conduct electricity, completing a circuit. When 
smoke enters the detector, it blocks the passage 
of alpha particles and stops the current. 
Half life of 
432.2 years 
Helium nucleus 
(alpha particle) 
2 protons 
2 neutrons 
Americium-241 nucleus 
95 protons 
Neptunium-237 nucleus 
93 protons 
146 neutrons 
144 neutrons 

Beta decay 
A
s with alpha particles, the term beta particle is used to 
refer to a particle we've already met, but when 1t is 
emitted by radioactive decay. In this case, the particle is an 
electron (and sometimes the electron's antiparticle, a positron) 
Beta decay involves the transformation of a neutron into a 
proton or, less commonly, a proton into a neutron. Each of these 
particles is made of three quarks: protons have two up and one 
down quark, while neutrons have one up and two down. Up and 
down quarks have slightly different energies and can morph 
into one another. In beta-minus decay, an up quark changes to 
a down quark, turning a proton into a neutron while releasing 
a negatively charged electron plus an antineutrino. The less 
common beta-plus decay turns a down quark into an up quark, 
changing a neutron into a proton and releasing a positively 
charged positron and a neutrino Because the overall number of 
protons and neutrons remains the same, an atom undergoing 
beta decay does not change into a different element. 
13 2 
PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Two forms of beta decay 
Beta-minus decay 
Half life of 
5730 yeare 
Carbon-14 nucleus 
6 protons, 8 neutrons 
Nitrogen-14 nucleus 
7 protons, 7 neutrons 
Beta-plus decay 
~ 
+ 
Half life of 
--+ 
Carbon-10 nucleus 
Boron-10 nucleus 
+ 
Antineutrino 
+ 
Neutrino 
6 protons, 4 neutrons 
5 protons, 5 neutrons 
+ 
+ 
Electron 
(beta 
particle) 
+ 
Positron 
(beta-plus 
particle) 

Gamma decay 
F
ollowing an atom's radioactive decay via either an alpha or 
beta particle, the parent nucleus is left in an excited state, 
with its component particles in a configuration that is less 
than optimal Subsequently, the nucleus has to shed energy as 
these particles settle into their lowest- energy configuration 
(in a similar way to excited electrons, see page 68). Excited 
atomic nuclei shed this excess energy as photons of gamma 
radiation, the highest frequency of electromagnetic radiation. 
Gamma decay acts fast - usually within trillionths of a second 
after alpha or beta decay has taken place. For some nuclei, 
however, the process can take a little longer, perhaps one 
billionth of a second instead. Such comparatively long- lasting 
nuclei are termed 'metastable'. 
The emitted gamma ray doesn't always escape into the world at 
large. Often it wi ll collide with an orbiting electron in the atom's 
ground-state K-shell, giving that electron enough energy to 
escape f rom the atom entirely via the photoelectric effect. 
134 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Energy loss through gamma decay 
Excess energy in the form 
of high, unstable spin 
Gamma decay is almost 
instantaneous 
Nucleus drops into a 
stable ground state, 
with lower spin 
Gamma-ray 
photon released I 
Composition of 
nucleus remains 
unchanged 

Virtual particles 
O
ver previous pages we've mostly concerned ourselves with 
long- lasting, persistent particles. But quantum physics has 
another astonishing secret to reveal: much of nature is, in fact, 
held together by ghostly 'virtual particles' that only exist for the 
tiniest length of time, around 10·43 seconds. These particles can 
take almost any form, and f1zz into existence from the vacuum 
energy of the Universe [see page 140) They defy the laws of 
conservation of mass and energy, but because they 'pay back' 
the energy they borrow in order to exist in such a short time, 
the Universe turns a metaphorical blind eye to them. 
Many particle interactions depend on virtual particles: the 
photons that carry the electromagnetic force between 
electric charges are virtual, as are the gluons that hold quarks 
together, and the W and Z bosons that wield the weak force. 
The Vander Waals forces that bond molecules together, and 
even the electrostatic force attracting two metal plates in the 
Casimir effect [see opposite) also rely on virtual photons. 
136 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

The Casimir effect is a weak force that arises between 
parallel metal plates separated by a very small distance in 
a vacuum. It arises because while virtual photons of many 
different wavelengths can pop in and out of existence in 
the space around the plates only short-wavelength ones 
can exist in the space between them. 
Parallel 
metal plates 
Virtual photons of many 
wavelengths exert 
pressure from outside 
Fewer virtual particles 
in gap to create 
outward pressure 
Separation of 
nanometres 

Lamb shift 
D
uring the 1930s, physicists realized that measurements of 
the b1nd1ng energy of electrons in hydrogen atoms differed 
slightly from theoretical predictions. The problem was most 
noticeable in the excited P-shell (see page 60), where the theory 
was just 0.00003 per cent off, but even that was enough to 
cause consternation amongst atomic physicists. 
It turned out that empty space itself was to blame. In quantum 
mechanics, space is never truly empty, but is filled with quantum 
f1elds that f1zz with enough energy to produce countless virtual 
particles that appear and disappear within fractions of a second. 
Among these quantum f1elds is a superposition of random 
electromagnetic f1elds, each with its own associated virtual 
photon. These photons, popping in and out of existence, jostle 
the electron, pushing it around in random directions that create 
a shift in the electron's binding energy. The shift is named after 
Willis Lamb, whose experiments proved the theory, and ultimately 
led to the development of quantum electrodynamics 
138 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Willis Lamb's 1947 experiment measured 
three different types of spectral line 
splitting that arise when a beam of 
hydrogen atoms are exposed to microwave 
radiation in a magnetic f1eld. 
Hyperf1ne splitting due 
to tiny shifts in nuclear 
1 , 
structure 
1,' 
~1~
/'------------~ 
... 
1', 
4.5 x 1Q-5 eV 
4.4 X lQ-6 -----
. 
-
-
-
- ~ ~ ======= 
--- --- - ~- ~ 
~ ========= 
I'------
\ 
eV 
Lamb shifts due to 
influence of virtual photons 
are about 1/10th the scale 
of hyperf1ne structure 
Large-scale 
Zeeman effect 
splitting due to 
influence of 
magnetic field 
(see page 86) 

Vacuum energy 
W
here does the energy to create short-lived virtual 
particles come from7 The Universe is f1lled with a raw 
energy, known as vacuum energy, governed by wave functions 
that allow for the possibility that some of this energy wi ll 
spontaneously turn itself into mass as virtual particle/ 
antiparticle pairs (see page 136). This is possible only because 
of the inherent fuzziness of quantum physics, as described 
by the famous Heisenberg uncertainty principle (see page 
172). In short, the principle makes it impossible to know the 
exact energy of the cosmos at any given time. If the Universe's 
accounting of its total energy is inherently askew, it's unlikely to 
miss those tiny quanta of energy borrowed by virtual particles 
for a short time 
Virtual particles are created everywhere all of the time. 
The Universe is constantly f1zzing with their creation and 
destruction. Some scientists say this causes spacetime itself to 
fluctuate on the tiniest scales, forming a 'quantum foam'. 
140 PARTICLE PHYSICS 

Particles created from 
'borrowed' vacuum energy 
releases 
energy 

The wave-particle world 
S
aying that particles also act as waves is one thing, but what 
does this mean in reality? The particle isn't a physical wave 
like a water wave on the ocean or a sound wave moving through 
the air Instead, it's a description of the probability that a particle 
will have a given location or momentum when measured. This, in 
turn, produces many results that we interpret as particles acting 
like waves For example, if you collect a large number of particles, 
such as a laser beam of photons or a beam of electrons fwed 
from a hot electrode, t hen the spread of probabilities means 
that you can conduct experiments that show them acting en 
masse like waves, rather than discrete particles. 
Don't worry if this is hard to picture- it is counterintuitive 
to how we see the everyday world. Yet the repercussions 
of 'wave-particle duality' are profound: concepts such as 
complementarity, uncertainty and decoherence (see pages 182, 
172 and 176, respectively) completely change the way we think 
about reality. 
142 THE WAVE FUNCTION 


Probability wave function 
O
ften represented by the Greek letter psi ('tjJ), a wave function 
offers a description of the different outcomes of a quantum 
system, and the probability that a particle will have a given 
solution. In practice, a particle's wavelike properties are never 
observed to be smeared out along a wave. Rather, peaks in the 
particle's wave function describe areas where it will is more 
likely to be appear the taller the peak, the greater the likelihood 
This implies that quantum physics is all about probabilities, 
which is why nothing is ever truly certain (at least not in the 
particle world) There's always a chance that a particle could be 
elsewhere, or have a different amount of momentum or energy. 
How we interpret wave functions has far-reaching 
ramifications. The Copenhagen interpretation says that once a 
measurement is made, the wave function 'collapses' to a single 
solution. In contrast, the many-worlds theory (see page 286) 
predicts that every possible solution happens somewhere, 
each one in a parallel universe. 
144 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

>-
1-
::::; 
iii 
<( 
Ill 
0 a: 
a.. 
A simple probability wave function 
Particle most likely 
to be found here 
POSITION 
Particle less likely 
to be found here 
Particle unlikely 
to be found here 

Applying Copenhagen 
A lthough it's not the only way to interpret the meaning of 
M. quantum physics, the Copenhagen interpretation (see 
page 54) has proved the most popular over many decades. 
In some ways, it's also possibly the least imaginative 
interpretation, because it denies the idea of any deeper 
meaning to wave- particle duality: what we see is what we get. 
The Copenhagen interpretation says that the wave function 
is the complete description of all the measurable properties 
of a particle and, conversely, that the properties of a particle 
are entirely based on the probabilities described by the wave 
function. This last point troubled Albert Einstein, prompting 
him famously to claim that 'God does not play dice' The 
interpretation also states that a particle is not actually a 
wave and a particle at the same time, only that experiments 
designed to measure waves (such as Young's slits, see page 
40) will see a wave, while experiments designed to measure 
particles will detect particles. 
146 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

Wavefunction 
spread out 
Measurement 
According to the Copenhagen 
interpretation, the act of 
measurement causes the diffuse 
probabiity wave function to 
collapse, localizing a particle's 
position and other properties. 
Wavefunction 
collapses 

Quantum probabilities 
W
hat exactly are we referring to when we talk about 
'probabilities' in a quantum context? Picture a wave function 
as a curve, or series of curves, on a graph like the one shown 
opposite. The x-axis is a measure of a particle's possible position, 
while they-axis is a property known as amplitude, related to the 
probability that the particle wil l appear in a given position. 
The most probable location is the highest peak on the wave 
function. As the amplitude decreases at greater distance, 
so too does the probability of the particle appearing at 
those locations. The sum of all these probabilities always 
equals 1, meaning that if the particle exists, it must be found 
somewhere along that wave function. So if you fwe a beam 
of electrons through a narrow slit, most wi ll fol low the most 
probable path, but small percentages will be more broadly 
dispersed, making it seem as though the beam is a wave This 
same mechanism explains how the quantum tunnelling vital to 
radioactive decay can take place (see page 170). 
148 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

The wave function of a confined particle in a box can take 
on a number of different forms depending on the particle's 
energy, resulting in patterns of probability distribution 
similar to the harmonics of a vibrating violin string. 
Low-energy particle 
High- energy particle 
Likely position 
of particle 
Likely positions 
of particle 
Position 
Position 

The Born rule 
T
he Born rule is a deceptively simple calculation of the 
probability that a particle exists at a given location along 
its wave function. In other words, if we make a measurement 
to see if a particle is at that location, then the Born rule 
(discovered by physicist Max Born in 1926) gives us the 
probability that we wil l indeed f1nd it there. 
The Born probability is simply the square of the amplitude of the 
wave function - that is, the height of the curve on a graphical 
representation of the wave function- at a particular location. 
The deceptive element of this simplicity arises from the fact 
that, if we probe a little deeper into the workings of quantum 
physics, we can't f1nd any satisfactory reason why the square 
of the amplitude [multiplying the amplitude by itself) should give 
this probability. Given the Born rule's importance to quantum 
physics, this is a profound mystery, but the rule provides the link 
between theoretical predictions of quantum properties and our 
ability to experimentally measure them in the laboratory. 
150 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

Probability density function 
Wave function at time t 0 

Quantum states 
W
ith many different quantum numbers in play on the 
subatomic scale, and wave functions to complicate things 
further, simply determining the properties of a quantum system 
could easily become problematic. Fortunately, however, a concept 
called the 'quantum state' offers a convenient way in which to 
package all the information about a quantum system, from its 
position and momentum to its quantum numbers 
However, because quantum physics is inherently probabilistic, 
the quantum state must be a distribution of all possible values 
for a// of the aforementioned properties. Consider, for example, 
an alpha particle that is trapped in the so- called 'potential well' 
created by the Coulomb barrier around an atomic nucleus, with 
a wave function extending beyond the barrier (see page 168). 
The quantum state includes all outcomes of the particle's wave 
function, including both the possibility that it re mains inside the 
potential well and that it tunnels out. This 'split personality' is at 
the heart of some of the strangest aspects of quantum physics. 
152 THE WAVE FUNCTION 


Quantum superpositions 
T
he ability of a quantum state to have a distribution of 
possible outcomes is known as superposition. Think of 
each outcome having its own wave function, and all those 
wave functions overlapping or being superposed on top 
of each other. Al ignments of the troughs and peaks cause 
those troughs and peaks to increase in amplitude, while 
misalignments cause the wave functions to cancel out. This 
pattern of constructive and destructive interference is 
exactly how everyday waves, such as sound waves, behave. 
In quantum systems, however, the patterns of superposition 
are rather abstract. There is no actual physical wave to 
amplify or intensify, but instead superposed peaks increase 
the probability that, for example, a particle wi ll be in a given 
position. Adding two or more wave functions together can 
therefore create a new quantum state. The double-slit 
experiment (see page 14) offers a good real-world example 
of quantum superposition at work. 
154 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

Wave function #1 
Wave function #2 
Resultant 
wave function 

Schrodinger's wave 
equation 
M
any quantum mechanical concepts are so abstract that 
words and illustrations can never hope to describe them 
completely. Instead, they can only be fully explained using the 
language of mathematics. The most important mathematical 
description of all is offered by Schrodinger's wave equation. 
Developed by physicist Erwin Schrodinger in 1926, the equation 
was initially used to describe the quantum states of electrons 
in atoms. However, it can be adapted to describe quantum 
systems on any scale, up to the size of the Universe itself. 
There are two versions of the equation; a time-independent 
form shown opposite [for non- moving particles), and a time -
dependent one (used for a moving particle with a given location 
at a given time, see page 191). At the heart of the equation 
lies the concept of the wave function, also invented by 
Schrodinger. The equation, and, consequently, the Copenhagen 
interpretation, says that the wave function is the most 
complete description of a particle possible. 
156 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

Time-independent Schrodinger equation in one dimension x 
Reduced Planck 
constant, h/2n 
2m 
I 
a2W(x) 
a 2 
-t:U(x)W(x) 
X 
I 
Mass of particle 
I 
Partial derivative 
of wave function 
(rate of change in 
dimension x) 
Potential energy 
of system 
= EW(x) 
I 
Total energy of 
system 

Quantum harmonic 
oscillators 
T
he classic example of a harmonic oscillator is a pendulum: 
assuming there's no frictional force such as air resistance 
to slow, or 'dampen', the pendulum's swing, it will oscillate with 
constant frequency and amplitude. Many physical phenomena 
involve vibrations, and physicists often use a mathematical model 
based on this kind of idealized motion to describe them. 
The quantum harmonic osci llator is simply the quantum 
analogue to the classical models of the pendulum, and is 
useful for understanding a huge variety of quantum systems, 
such as a molecule with two atoms vibrating around f1xed 
positions. In a quantum pendulum, the weight on the end of 
the wire cou ld exist anywhere along the wave function, and 
since the energy of the ball is quantized (and the energy 
helps determine the frequency of the oscillation). this means 
quantum harmonic osci llators are also quantized. In other 
words, the wave function is only re levant at specific quantized 
energy levels. 
158 THE WAVE FUNCTION 


Special relativity 
E
instein's special theory of relativity describes the 
counterintuitive effects that happen when an object moves 
at 'relativistic' speeds, close to the speed of light. Einstein 
showed that the speed of light remains the same (299,800 
kilometres or 186,000 miles per second) for all observers, no 
matter where they are or how fast they are travelling. In order 
to accommodate this remarkable fact, he found that a variety 
of other physical properties show strange behaviour. 
For example, from the point of view of an outside observer, 
clocks run slower at relativistic speeds, while the dimensions of 
a moving object appear shorter. Because of E = mc2 (see page 
50), the mass of an object travelling ever closer to the speed 
of light also seems to increase, until the mass needed to reach 
light- speed itself becomes infinite. Relativity raises issues for 
quantum physics because special formulations of its equations 
are required to accurately describe what happens in the 
quantum world at close to the speed of light. 
160 THE WAVE FUNCTION 


The Klein-Gordon 
equation 
0 
ne of special relativity's golden rules is that nothing 
travels faster than the speed of light- neither physical 
objects nor information. Despite all the weirdness in quantum 
physics, this is one rule that cannot be broken, and it's one of 
the biggest tests that relativistic quantum theory has to face. 
Schrodinger's wave equation is not relativistic- it deals with 
'wave packets' (groups of superposed wave functions belonging 
to a particle) as standing waves with negligible velocities. 
Schrodinger himself developed a relativistic version of the 
equation init ially, but found it inaccurate because it didn't 
incorporate spin. Subsequently, numerous physicists, including 
Swede Oskar Klein and Germany's Walter Gordon, revisited 
the relativistic version and showed how it cou ld describe the 
relativistic motion of particles with zero spin, such as the 
Higgs boson. Fortunately, the Klein-Gordon equation, as it has 
since become known, shows that wave packets do not travel 
faster than light, preserving the cosmic speed limit. 
162 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

Wave 
function 
Laplacian 
(measures the 
divergence of 
wave function 
in space) 
Second derivative 
(rate of change) 
1 
Speed of 
light 
overtime 
--
Rest mass 
of particle 
Reduced Planck 
constant, h/2n 

The Dirac equation 
W
hile the Klein-Gordon equation works for the very specific 
case of particles with zero spin, a much more adaptable 
equation is needed to deal with quantum effects across a wide 
range of particles at relativistic speeds 
It was shy British genius Paul Dirac who resolved this in 1928. His 
variation of the wave equation works for all particles with a spin 
of 112, meaning that, unlike the Klein-Gordon equation, it can be 
used to describe the energy levels of relativistic hydrogen atoms. 
However, as with the Klein-Gordon equation, some of the Dirac 
equation's solutions appeared to suggest particles with negative 
energy - a physical impossibility that doesn't make sense in the 
everyday world or even in our quantum picture of reality 
Fortunately, Dirac soon came up with a theory to explain this 
apparently nonsensical result. The solutions weren't literally 
particles with negative energy, he argued. Instead, they 
represented something else entirely: antimatter. 
164 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

Imaginary 
unit ( v-1) 
I 
'Gamma 
matrices' 
ihy~a w 
I 
~ 
Reduced Planck 
constant (h/2rr) 
'Four gradient' 
Rest mass of 
Wave 
electron 
function 
I 
I 
- meW - 0 
-
I 
Speed of 
light 

Antimatter 
W
e've encountered antiparticles before [see, for example, 
page 127), but prior to the work of Paul Dirac in the late 
1920s, the concept was completely unknown. The discovery of 
the f1rst antimatter particle, the positron, came in 1932, and 
today we know that every particle in the Standard Model has 
a mirror-image antiparticle with the same mass but opposite 
charge [so if the charge on an electron is -1, then the charge on 
its antiparticle, a positron, is +1). Physicists have also proved that 
antiparticles can form their own 'antiatoms' and 'antimolecules'. 
Put a particle and its antiparticle together and they annihilate 
each other in a flash of energy, producing a pair of high- energy 
photons in their stead. However, antimatter is extremely rare- at 
most the Large Hadron Collider could produce one - billionth of a 
gram of antimatter each year. Nobody knows why antimatter is so 
scarce, but it's a good job that it is- had there been equal amounts 
of matter and antimatter at the dawn of the Universe, their 
annihilation would have left a Universe filled only with photons. 
166 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

Electron 
\ 
Positron 
Annihilation between electrons 
and positrons produces a pair of 
gamma-ray photons each carrying 
energy of 511 keV- the same as the 
rest mass of an electron. 
Annihilation 
transforms particles 
into pure energy 
High-energy 

The Coulomb barrier 
0 
ne intriguing consequence of the quantum nature of 
particles is their ability to be in one place at one moment, 
then reappear in a different place a moment later. This is what 
happens in alpha decay, when a helium nucleus 'tunnels' its way 
out of a larger nucleus. Before we explore quantum tunnelling 
in depth, however, we need a better understanding of the 
barrier through which a particle or nucleus has to tunnel. 
In atoms, this barrier is called the Coulomb barrier. It's not a force 
f1eld, but an electrostatic interaction between nuclei. At very close 
distances to the nucleus, it is attractive, but it becomes repulsive 
just a little further away. This makes it very good at keeping alpha 
particles in and very good at keeping other atomic nuclei out 
The attractive Coulomb barrier that traps an alpha particle 
in the nucleus has an energy around 26 million eV, and should, 
according to classical physics, be insurmountable. Similarly, two 
nuclei trying to join together in a nuclear-fusion reaction require 
enough energy to overcome a repulsive Coulomb barrier. 
168 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

1: 
0 
"iii :; 
c. 
"' 
a: 
Electromagnetic 
Coulomb force repels 
similar charges 
Strong force 
-attracts protons and 
neutrons to each other 
Distance between 
positive charges 
The Coulomb barrier binds protons and 
neutrons together in the confines of the 
atomic nucleus, but also acts to prevent 
separate nuclei from coming too close 
to each other and fusing together. 

Quantum tunnelling 
T
here are two ways of overcoming the Coulomb barrier 
around an atomic nucleus. The fwst way is through sheer 
energy, but for a particle to attain a kinetic energy greater 
than the energy of the Coulomb barrier takes exceptionally 
high temperatures (tens of billions of degrees). Such high 
temperatures do not even exist in the centres of some low-
mass stars, and yet hydrogen nuclei still merge to form helium 
nuclei and emit the energy that makes stars shine. 
Instead, particles are more likely to resort to the second way 
of overcoming the barrier. The wave function of, say, an alpha 
particle or two atomic nuclei trying to fuse together can 
extend beyond the Coulomb barrier, meaning that there is a 
small chance that a particle can appear beyond (or penetrate 
through) the barrier. The size of the Coulomb barrier is different 
for each atomic nucleus so, depending on which nucleus is 
decaying, it may take anything from a few millionths of a second 
to many billions of years for an alpha particle to escape. 
170 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

Classical model of alpha decay 
Alpha 
particle 
Particle 
0 
-~ ... ~~~i 
remains 
111111 
trapped 
Quantum model 
Particle 
wave 
function 
Barrier cannot be overcome 
unless particle has a large 
amount of energy 
Wave function has a small 
but significant chance of 
tunnelling through barrier 
Particle escapes nucleus 
I 

Heisenberg's 
uncertainty principle 
T
he fuzziness of quantum physics isn't only found in the 
wave function, but is also apparent in the properties we 
can measure in a particle. Werner Heisenberg stumbled upon 
this problem, realizing that it is impossible to be certain of 
both the momentum and the position of a particle at any 
one instant: the more accurately we know the value of one 
of these properties, the less accurately we know the other. 
Heisenberg called this his 'uncertainty principle'. It has nothing 
to do with errors in experimental apparatus or method but 
is, instead, a result arising from the behaviour of a particle's 
wave function. The more you can pin down a particle's location, 
the more tightly bunched the wave function (which determines 
the particle's position) becomes. However, this has the 
consequence of making the wave function's wavelength (which 
determines a particle's momentum) less precise. Conversely, 
the more accurately the wavelength is known, the more widely 
distributed the wave function is, giving the particle a greater 
probability of existing in many different locations. 
172 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

Change in position 
I 
~x· 
Change in energy 
I 
~E • 
Change in momentum 
I 
~p 
Change in time 
> 
-
Reduced Planck 
constant (h/2rr) 
I 
11/2 
I 
~t";?.h/2 
The uncertainty principle states that certain complimentary 
pairs of quantum properties (position and momentum, or 
energy and time) cannot both be determined with perfect 
accuracy in the same measurement. 

Uncertainty in action 
H
eisenberg's uncertainty principle has some fascinating real-
life uses. Magnetic resonance Imaging (MRI), for example, 
relies on the relationship between the frequency of a radio-
wavelength photon and its momentum The uncertainty principle 
says we can't know a photon's frequency and its position at t he 
same time, so in a burst of radio photons whose positions are 
known, frequencies will be uncertain and spread across a wide 
range- perfect for probing different parts of the human body. 
The principle also has some other fundamental consequences. 
It dictates the size of electron orbitals, and hence the size of 
atoms themselves. It also explains why the oppositely charged 
electrons and protons in atoms are not attracted to each 
other: moving closer to the nucleus would pin down an electron's 
position so tightly that the uncertainty in its momentum would 
be huge. Quantum tunnelling is another manifestation of the 
uncertainty principle, while virtual particles (see page 136) can 
only exist because of uncertainty in the exact energy of space. 
174 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

Uncertainty and the wave function 
The more accurately an object's de Broglie 
wavelength (related to its momentum) is 
determined, the less accurately its location 
can be pinned down. 
Constraining the object's position leads to 
greater uncertainty in its wavelength and 
momentum- a probem that gets worse the 
more tightly the position is defined. 

Quantum decoherence 
I
f we want to measure a single property of a quantum system- say 
the energy of an electron or the pos1tlon of a proton - we can 
do so with great accuracy. When we make these measurements, 
the wave function is said to collapse. This is a misnomer, however· 
a particle doesn't actually lose its wavelike properties when a 
measurement is made. A bett er way of describing what happens 
is to say t hat quantum information leaks out of the system This 
effect, called decoherence, was outlined in 1970 by Heinz-Dieter Zeh. 
Zeh suggested that when the wave function of a measuring device 
comes into contact with that of a particle, it creates interference 
that causes the particle wave function to decay, allowing precise 
measurement In some ways, this is the opposite of superposition: 
waves are scrambled by dest ructive interference rather than 
strengthened by constructive overlapping. Because larger 
objects are in constant contact with the wave functions of t heir 
environment, they decay much faster, explaining why quantum 
'fuzziness' isn't apparent at everyday scales. 
176 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

Isolated particle 
Particle in wider 
environment 
Wave functions 
from particles 
in larger object 
Properties remain 
superposed 
Interference between 
wavefunctions causes 
superposition to 
••'---- collapse 
Wave functions 
from environment 

Schrodinger's cat 
N
othing lays bare the weirdness of quantum physics so well 
as Schri:idinger's cat. Erwi n Schri:idinger creat ed his famous 
feline thought experiment in 1935, t o demonstrate what he saw 
as the absurdity of the Copenhagen interpretation (see page 54] 
Illust rated opposit e, the experiment imagines a way of putting a 
macrocopic system (a cat that may be alive or dead] into a st at e 
of quantum superposit ion. To a person out side t he box, there is 
no way of knowing whet her and when a rad ioact ive substance has 
decayed therefore, Schri:idinger said, Copenhagen implies t he cat 
is both alive and dead at t he same time until t he box is opened. 
Schri:idinger argued that such a situat ion was intuitively absurd, 
but he rea lly only addressed an extreme reading of Copenhagen 
in which a conscious observer is the cause of t he wave function's 
collapse Niels Bohr, for one, argued for a broader definition of 
observation in t erms of interaction with macroscopic systems 
including the Geiger counter and the cat itself, which would 
therefore trigger collapse long before the box was opened. 
178 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

lmagme lock1ng a cat ins1de a box w1th no way to see in.A small quant1ty 
of rad1oact1ve mater1al, placed 1n the box along w1th the cat, has a known 
probability of decaying 1n a g1ven time frame, governed by quantum rules 
If the decay event happens, a Ge1ge~ counte~ detects the rad1ation, and 
tr1ggers the release of a flOison that kills the cat. 

Testing 
Schrodinger's cat 
N
o cats were harmed in the making of this book, and indeed 
a real-world enaction of Schri:idinger's thought experiment 
would serve no practical purpose since the entire point is that 
events in the sealed box remain undetermined until an outcome 
is observed. But scientists have tested the principle behind it in 
other ways and shown that, despite Schri:idinger's scepticism, the 
Copenhagen interpretation does indeed reflect what happens. 
The trick is to place a quantum system in a state of 
superposition of wave functions. In the cat experiment, 
these belong to the different outcomes of the cat being 
alive or dead. No one has succeeded in superposing such 
large quantum systems in reality, but in experiments photons, 
beryllium atoms and even a vibrating tuning fork composed of 
ten trillion atoms have all been superposed in oscillating states 
that cause them to act as though they are in two places at 
once. The experiments prove what we struggle to embrace: 
that on the smallest scales the Universe really is probabilistic. 
180 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

The challenge is therefore to explain why 
the wave function then resolves itself, 
and why uncertainty doesn't really apply 
to cats and other large-scale objects. 

Complementarity 
T
o Niels Bohr, architect of the Copenhagen interpretation, 
the wave and particle aspects of nature were two sides of 
the same coin that complement one another. If a measurement 
observes an electron acting like a wave, that's because 
the experiment is set up to detect a wave (and likewise if 
it detects a particle). The act of measurement causes the 
electron's wave function to 'collapse' into the wave solution. At 
the same time, we cannot know the fu ll properties of a particle 
without considering both its wave and particle natures, but the 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle puts this complete knowledge 
out of reach. The complementary nature of particles is both a 
blessing and a curse: it allows them to do extraordinary things 
and for the building blocks of the Universe around us to form 
and function. At the same time, however, it creates a sense of 
frustration that on a particle- by- particle basis, the quantum 
world is entirely random and not deterministic. For early 20th-
century physicists who preferred the Universe to run like 
clockwork, this was a hard pill to swallow. 
182 THE WAVE FUNCTION 

Source of 
electrons 
Screen with narrow slit to 
diffract electrons 
Wave function of electron 
before detection 
Electron 
detectors 
Wave function 
collapses to more 
localized form 
depending on 
where electron 
is detected 

Quantum mathematics 
1 ike all physics, the study of the quantum realm is an 
~ inh erent ly mathematical subject. A scientific theory cannot 
rely on making statements of fact alone. It must also have a 
mathematical foundation that both explains observations and 
makes predictions. As we have seen, however, quantum physics 
is radically different to classical physics, and so it requires 
its own brand of mathematics and its own unique equations. 
Concepts that seem counterintuitive from a conceptual 
standpoint suddenly make more sense when viewed with a 
little more understanding of the maths involved. 
Unfortunately, the mathematics of quantum mechanics is hard 
-it took some of the best scientific minds of the 1920s and 
1930s to invent the systems required to make sense of it all. 
This book cannot hope to explain everything but, nevertheless, 
even a cursory look at some of the techniques and terminology 
used can help us to quantify quantum behaviour and provide 
deeper insights into what's really happening. 
184 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


What is a matrix? 
A
common mathematical tool used in a wide variety of 
applications, including quantum physics, a matrix is simply 
a table of numbers arranged in rows and columns. The examples 
shown opposite are square, but equal numbers of rows and 
columns are not compulsory. Each number within the matrix is 
called an 'element'. 
The advantage of a matrix is that it allows you to perform 
mathematical functions on each element sequentially. For 
example, matrices of equal dimensions can be added to, or 
subtracted from, one another by adding or subtracting the 
corresponding properties in each matrix (see opposite, above) 
Multiplying is a little different, and requires the number of 
columns in the fwst matrix to be the same as the number of 
rows in the second. Each row in the fwst matrix then multiplies 
by each column in the second matrix and the products of those 
multiplications are added together (see opposite, below) 
186 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Matrix mechanics 
I
n the 1920s, quantum physicists struggled to conjure up 
a mathematical description of the strange wave -particle 
duality they were observing. A solution came from Max Born, 
who developed an idea from Werner Heisenberg that electron 
orbits were best described by harmonic waves. Heisenberg 
calculated the quantum jumps of the electrons through 
cumbersome equations that contained a lot of multiplication. 
Born realized that these sequences of multiplications could 
be much better described in matrices, where multiplying each 
matrix element helped calculate the electrons' spectral lines 
given their energies. 
Yet, at the time, Born's 'matrix mechanics' approach proved quite 
unpopular. Matrices were considered an oddity of pure maths 
by most physicists in the 1920s, and so this seemed a strangely 
abstract way of depicting electron orbits. Consequently, 
Schrodinger's wave equation (see page 156) remained the more 
popular means of describing the quantum behaviour of particles. 
188 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Wave mechanics 
S
chri:idinger's wave equation takes a different tack to 
matrix mechanics, by turning the wavelike properties of a 
particle into an equation that describes their distribution. In 
essence, the equation describes how the quantum state of a 
system, defmed by its wave function, changes over time. The 
Schri:idinger equation is described as wave mechanics- the 
motion of wavelike matter. In that sense, it offers a quantum 
analogue to Newton's classical second law of motion: force 
equals mass times acceleration [f = ma). 
There are several versions of the Schrodinger wave equation. 
The most common is the time-dependent equation, shown 
opposite. Here, i is the square root of -1 [an 'imaginary' number 
that does not exist as a real number, but is vital to the solution 
of some equations), n is the Planck constant divided by 2:n:, 
'I' is the wave function [see page 144) and H is the Hamiltonian 
operator, which helps to describe the total energy of a 
quantum system [see page 198). 
190 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

The time-dependent Schrodinger equation 
for position vector rat time t 
Hamiltonian 
operator 
I 
A HW(rlt) 
I 
Wave function 
[dependent on 
position and time) 
Reduced Planck 
constant (h/2n) 
--
Partial derivative 
of wave function 
[rate of change 
with respect to 
time) 

Hilbert space 
A
vector is a mathematical quantity, such as velocity or 
acceleration, that has both a magnitude or strength, and 
a direction. We can draw it on a two - dimensional graph with x 
and y axes in what mathematicians call two-dimensional flat or 
Euclidean space. But suppose we want to measure vectors in 
an infinite (or arbitrary) number of dimensions, with an infinite 
(or arbitrary) number of coordinates, not just x andy? Such a 
structure is called Hilbert space, named after physicist David 
Hilbert. You can measure distances and angles within it just as 
you can in Euclidean flatland 
Hilbert space is important to quantum mechanics, where the 
vectors of classical mechanics are replaced by particles whose 
wave functions can have an infinite number of solutions. Both 
wave functions and solutions to the wave equation can be 
visualized in Hilbert space. What's more, string theory, a potential 
'theory of everything' (see page 252], also appears to describe 
the Universe as a Hilbert space with up to a dozen dimensions. 
192 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Three-dimensional space, in which positions can be defined 
in terms of coordinates along three perpendicular axes, is 
a familiar example of a Hilbert space. 

Transformation theory 
A lthough they arrive at the same physical consequences, 
M. matr1x mechanics and the Schri:id1nger wave equation 
[see pages 188 and 156) represent very different versions of 
quantum mechanics. So when Paul Dirac (opposite) developed 
his transformation theory, not only showing how matrix 
mechanics and the Schri:idinger equation are equivalent, but 
unifying them under a single mathematical umbrella, it was a 
maJor achievement. 
Both matrix mechanics and the Schri:idinger equation are 
descriptions of how quantum states evolve. Dirac unif1ed 
the two models by depicting them as 'transformations' in 
Hilbert space. When a quantum state changes over time, 
the vector that describes its wave function is effectively 
moving between different locations in Hilbert space - a 
movement that Dirac described as the transformation. 
Matrix mechanics and the Schri:idinger equation are just two 
different ways of describing such a transformation. 
194 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Quantum operators 
I
n classical Newtonian physics, properties such as energy, 
velocity, momentum and position are given by real, def1ned 
numbers: a car travelling at a velocity of 40 kilometres per 
hour (25 mph) with a kinetic energy of 35,000 joules can be 
located at specific coordinates along every step of its Journey. 
But as we have seen through the wavelike nature of particles 
and Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, it is impossible to give 
exact values to such properties on the scale of atoms and 
particles. Instead, in quantum mechanics these properties are 
def1ned as 'operators' that form the basis of the mathematical 
language of quantum mechanics. Operators describe functions 
that transform one set of quantum states into another set. 
For example, the Hamiltonian operator (see page 198) is the 
operator that describes all possible outcomes when the total 
energy of a quantum system is measured. Similarly, the position 
operator describes the sum of possible outcomes when we 
attempt to measure the position of a particle. 
196 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Observable phenomenon 
Operator 
Name 
Symbol 
Symbol 
Position 
A 
r 
r 
Momentum 
A 
p 
p 
Kinetic energy 
A 
T 
T 
Potential energy 
V(r) 
A V(r) 
Total energy 
A 
E 
H 
Angular momentum 
A 
(in x, y, z directions) 
I 
I 
x~~z 
x~~z 

Hamiltonian operator 
0 
ne of the most important operators in quantum mechanics 
is the Hamiltonian. It describes the set of all possible 
outcomes when measuring the total energy of a quantum 
system. For a single particle, this is essentially the sum of the 
operators describing the particle's kinetic energy (derived 
from motion and mass], and potential energy (derived from its 
position in a force f1eld) However the Hamiltonian can also be 
used when describing energy levels embedded within a system, 
such as those of electrons orbiting around an atomic nucleus. 
Named after 19th-century Irish physicist William Hamilton, the 
operator can vary depending on the number of particles in 
the system being measured. It plays a major role in the time-
dependent Schri:idinger wave equation (see page 190), where 
it instigates evolution of the wave function over time. The 
eigenvalues arising from possible solutions to the equation 
(see page 204) correspond to the energy levels associated 
with those solutions. 
198 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Path integral formulation 
A
s we've seen, the secret behind electron diffraction in the 
double-slit experiment (see page 40) is a particle's ability 
to display wavelike behaviour: a wave can pass through both 
slits, whereas in classical physics a particle's trajectory can 
pass through only one. The particle's wave function is therefore 
a probability distribution, describing all the different possible 
trajectories that the particle could take. 
However, given the uncertainty in knowing which path a wavelike 
particle takes to get from A to B, how can we determine the most 
likely trajectory? The possible routes are virtually infinite, including 
those that go across the Universe and back. It was Richard 
Feynman, one of the greatest minds of the 20th century, who 
came up with a technique to calculate the most likely path of a 
particle, based on ideas initial ly developed by Paul Dirac. Feynman's 
'path integral formu lation' takes t he sum of probabi lities from 
the wave function for every possible path and mat hematically 
combines or integrates them to f1nd the most likely path. 
200 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

A particle can take many different paths 
in moving from point A to point 8 in a 
given time. The path integral approach 
involves combining them all to find the 
most likely route. 
A 
8 

Feynman diagrams 
W
hy bother with complicated equations when you can just 
draw a picture? That sounds flippant, but it's essentially 
the diagrammatic approach pioneered by Richard Feynman when 
representing quantum interactions. A Feynman diagram can show 
particles represented as straight lines converging on a point 
called a vertex, where they interact. The interaction involves the 
exchange of a gauge boson- a photon, gluon, W+ or w-boson 
depending on which quantum f1eld dominates the interaction. The 
gauge bosons are depicted by wiggly lines, and on the other side 
of the interaction the particles resulting from the interaction 
continue on their way (opposite, above). 
Sometimes, a Feynman diagram can show the interaction 
between a photon and a single particle, such as an electron. In 
this case, the straight line of the electron and the wiggly line 
of the photon meet at the vertex The particle absorbs the 
photon and is momentarily excited, represented as a single 
horizontal line, before re -emitting the photon (opposite, below). 
202 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Simple interaction between fermions 
Particle 1 
Particles after 
Gauge boson 
Particle 2 
Electron excitation 
Photon emitted 
absorbed 

Eigenfunctions 
U
sually, when an operator acts on a wave function, it 
transforms the shape of the wave function and therefore 
the probability of various outcomes. But this isn't always the 
case; sometimes the operator creates multiple versions of the 
wave function instead. In this case, each of the resulting wave 
functions is called an 'eigenfunction' (a hybrid German- English 
word essentially meaning 'its own function') 
A common example is the Hamiltonian operator describing the 
total energy of a quantum system When applied to a wave 
function, it typically produces meaningful solutions of the 
Schrodinger equation only for certain discrete values of energy. 
Each of these possible energy states is known as an eigenvalue, 
and the wave function associated with it is its eigenfunction. In 
the broader case of any operator 0 that produces quantized, 
discrete outcomes, the multiple outcomes created by an 
operator become eigenvalues. Each can be associated with an 
index i - a new quantum number that helps def1ne the system. 
204 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Operator 
Wave function 
Eigenvalue 
Eigenfunction 
I 
I 
I 
Qop 'Pi= qi 'Pi 
Wave function 
Eigenfunctions 

The correspondence 
principle 
Q
uantum mechanics deals with the physics of t he very small 
and, as we've seen, quantum behaviour 1s very different to 
the macroscopic behaviour in our everyday world dominated 
by classical physics But t here must come a point in scale at 
which quantum and classical behaviour overlap. At this point, 
calculations conducted using quantum mathematics must 
correspond to the results of classical mathematics. 
Hence the 'correspondence principle', developed by Niels Bohr, 
which states that when quantum systems (or rather their quantum 
numbers) become sufficiently large, they must approximate to 
classical mathematics. This principle is very useful in determining 
which quantum mechanical models have any basis in reality In fact, 
the concept serves well throughout science, dictating that any new 
theory must also be able t o explain the results of any old theory 
that it replaces. For example, in order to succeed, Einstein's general 
relativity had to be able to explain Newton's laws of gravity in new 
t erms, while matching t heir accurate predictions. 
206 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

A quantum harmonic oscillator (see page 158) differs starkly from 
classical models in its ground state, but starts to resemble them 
much more closely in its higher states of oscillation. 
Ground state 
wave function 
Higher state 
:: ~ 
wave function 
~ · 
~. 
+-Classical limit ..,. 
Classical 
/ 
~ 
probability 
distribution 
) 
Classical 
probability 
distribution 
Quantum 
probability 
distribution 
N 
1~ 
Quantum 
I 
I /probability 
, 
V distribution 
1\ 
+--- Classical limit ------+ 

Limits of the 
quantum realm 
I
t's often said that quantum mechanics is the physics of very 
small things, and we know we don't see quantum mechanical 
behaviour in the large- scale everyday world; the position and 
momentum of people and cars and buildings all seem very precise 
to us. So at what point does the correspondence principle 
take hold? What is the largest piece of matter that can exhibit 
quantum mechanical properties? 
One of the most popular tests for quantum properties is the 
double-slit experiment, which tests wave-particle duality. In 
theory, we could simply fwe bigger and bigger chunks of matter 
at the slits and see when the interference fringes disappear. The 
largest molecules so far shown to produce wavelike behaviour 
are carbon 'buckyballs' about a nanometre (a billionth of a metre) 
wide. How much larger we can go before quantum behaviour 
breaks down is still unknown, but tests with viruses, which can be 
several hundred nanometres long, have been proposed. If they 
could show wave- particle duality, it would be truly remarkable. 
208 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Football-shaped carbon molecules known as 
buckyballs have many remarkable properties, not 
least of which is that they are the largest objects 
so far shown to display wave-particle duality. 

Perturbation theory 
W
hile physicists can calculate solutions to Hamiltonian 
operators corresponding to, say, a quantum harmonic 
oscillator or the energy levels of a hydrogen atom with great 
precision, these are pretty idealized scenarios. Hamiltonian 
operators become rapidly more troublesome to solve exactly 
with the more complex Schrbdinger equation. 
Perturbation theory is a trick that physicists use to get 
around t his problem. The idea is to start with a simple quantum 
system, such as a hydrogen atom, and then add a Hamiltonian 
operator that 'perturbs' it, tweaking it incrementally. The 
result is a system for which we already know the solution, 
with additional small corrections or modifications to quantum 
properties, such as energy levels. This is the method used to 
calculate variations in energy levels caused by phenomena 
such as the Stark effect [see opposite) Simple systems act as 
touchstones, allowing physicists to take known solutions and 
use them to explore the solutions to more complex ones. 
210 THE LANGUAGE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Weak 
ELECTRIC FIELD 
Application of an electric field splits the spectral lines of hydrogen 
(indicated by principal quantum number n) into numerous, sometimes 
overlapping, sublevels. The phenomenon, known as the Stark effect, is 
best modelled with perturbation theory. 
Strong 

The Universe 
T
he greatest mystery in all of science is the origin of the 
Universe itself. How did it begin? How has it evolved since 
the dawn of time? Was there anything before it and will 
anything come after it? Are there other universes, and what 
does this all mean for life on Earth? 
Throughout the ages, myth, superstition and religion have 
attempted to provide answers to these questions, but it is 
only relatively recently that science has been able to make a 
meaningful contribution to the discussion. Our telescopes probe 
ever deeper into the Universe, while our microscopes peer closer 
into the subatomic world in which quantum physics reigns. In 
doing so, they have started to provide answers, often involving 
quantum-level effects, that nevertheless wield considerable 
influence on the largest scales of the Universe. Indeed, it may 
be that the whimsical nature of wavefronts and quantum 
fluctuations decided the shape our cosmos would take before 
the f~rst fraction of a second had even passed. 
212 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


The Big Bang 
T
he orgins of the Big Bang theory lie in the fact that space itself 
is expanding [see page 228). 1fthe Universe is getting bigger now, 
then it must have been smaller in the past. Extrapolating backwards, 
scientists believe that everything in today's Universe originated at a 
single point in space around 13.81 billion years ago. 
Contrary to popular belief, however, the Big Bang does not explain 
what caused the birth of the Universe, only what happened 
immediat ely afterwards. The Big Bang itself is shrouded in mystery 
for the fwst t ril lion trillion trillionth [10-36) of a second conditions 
were so intense [all the energy in the Universe packed into a volume 
the size of an apple with a t emperature in excess of 1032°C) that our 
understanding of physics utterly falls apart. This earliest fraction of a 
second was dominated by t he unknown rules of quantum gravity that 
marry quantum physics with Einstein's relativity [see page 48). Even 
the Big Bang itself may have been the result of a random quantum 
fluctuation that allowed the mass-energy of the Universe to pop into 
exist ence in a similar way to today's virtual particles [see page 136). 
214 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


Quantum fluctuations 
I
n the f1rst tiny fractions of a second of the Big Bang, there 
were no atoms, no protons, no quarks, no particles of matter 
at all, just pure energy. Ruled by quantum gravity, this energy was 
subject to myriad quantum fluctuations Virtual particles popped 
in and out of existence everywhere, resulting in stark variations 
in energy density across the tiny fledgling Universe. These 
fluctuations had such a lasting influence that they dictated the 
large-scale distribution of matter, in the form of galaxy clusters 
and superclusters, that we see in the Universe today. 
Einstein's famous equation E = mc2 shows that mass and energy 
are two sides of the same coin and, as the Universe expanded 
and cooled, much of the original raw energy transformed into 
matter. Regions in which the energy density was greatest 
naturally had a greater density of matter. Without those early 
quantum fluctuations, energy and matter wou ld be spread much 
more evenly across space, with particles scattered so thinly 
that no stars, planets or galaxies would be able to form. 
216 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


Cosmic microwave 
background radiation 
F
or 380,000 years after the Big Bang, the Universe was a sea 
of plasma, a state of matter within which atomic nuclei and 
free -floating electrons formed a kind of electrically charged 
'soup'. Photons of light attempting to travel through the 
Universe would continually scatter off the electrons, ricocheting 
like light trapped in fog. However, as the Universe expanded, it 
cooled, and the temperature dropped sufficiently for electrons 
to be captured in orbit around atomic nuclei. As they were 
absorbed, complete atoms formed for the fwst time [mostly 
hydrogen, with small proportions of helium and lithium), and 
photons were at last able to travel unhindered through space. 
Today, we detect photons from this event, called the moment 
of last scattering, in the cosmic microwave background 
radiation [CMBR) - short-wavelength radio waves that can be 
detected from all parts of the sky Tiny temperature variations 
within it are a record of the quantum fluctuations that the 
Universe experienced in the very earliest moments of time. 
218 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 

This detailed map of the CMBR from NASA's WMAP satellite shows variations 
in temperature and density that must have been seeded in the moments 
after the Big Bang by quantum-level variations in the infant Universe. 

The origin of galaxies 
T
he temperature variations seen in the cosmic microwave 
background, resu lting from quantum fluctuations JUSt 
after the Big Bang, went on to form the seeds of galaxies. The 
fluctuations created differences in the energy density of parts 
of the infant Universe and, as the Universe cooled, the raw 
energy condensed into matter distributed unevenly in space. 
Areas that were denser would have had stronger gravity. 
Over time these began to pull other matter towards them, 
generating a sort of 'cosmic web', with long filaments of matter 
stretching for millions of light years around much larger voids. 
The filaments of the cosmic web mirror the pattern that we 
see today in the distribution of galaxy clusters, each containing 
hundreds to thousands of galaxies. Arrangements of many 
clusters form chains or walls of galaxies that are the biggest 
structures in the known Universe. Everything that we see around 
us in the Universe, including these, is a result of initial quantum 
fluctuations that were frozen in place as the Universe expanded. 
220 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


The horizon problem 
T
he furthest dist ance into t he Universe that our telescopes can 
see is the 'cosmic horizon'. Light from anything beyond a certain 
distance simply hasn't had enough t ime to reach us since the Big 
Bang. Astronomers calculate the distance to the cosmic horizon 
at 46.5 billion light years, meaning that Earth lies in the centre 
of a spherical volume 93 billion light years across, the limit of our 
observable Universe. The reason that we can see so far, despite 
the Universe being 13.81 billion years old, is because of cosmic 
expansion light left the most distant visible galaxies 13 billion 
years ago, but they have since been carried even further from us 
This raises an important question light might have had time to 
reach us, but neither it nor any other ki nd of information can have 
reached the opposit e horizon. Yet the Universe looks remarkably 
similar in all directions, more than can be explained if they have not 
had contact since the instant of the Big Bang it self Solving t his 
'horizon problem' required a new theory that would transform our 
understanding of the fwst second of cosm ic history 
222 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


Inflation 
I
n 1980, cosmologist Alan Guth came up with an ingenious 
solution to the horizon problem. He decided that if opposite 
sides of the visible Universe looked like they had once been 
in so-called 'causal contact' (that is, close enough for events 
in one part of space to affect the other), then maybe that 
was because they had. Perhaps somehow the seeds of our 
observable Universe had indeed stayed together for a little 
longer than had previously been suspected7 
Guth's theory, called inflation, proposed that in the very f1rst 
fractions of a second of creation, 'our' Universe remained small 
enough for causal contact. But then, just 10-33 seconds after 
the Big Bang, a sudden burst of accelerating energy called 
inflation caused the Universe to balloon dramatically in size, 
pushing areas that were once in contact so far apart that light 
could never again reach from one side to the other. Inflation 
lasted for an instant, but it played a key role in magnifying the 
quantum fluctuations of the infant Universe (see page 216). 
224 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


Eternal inflation 
T
he theory of inflation still raises unanswered questions. 
Nobody truly understands why it began or, indeed, what 
caused it to stop. Indeed, several cosmologists have proposed 
that, in some parts of the Universe, inflation never stopped. 
One idea is that during inflation the Universe was filled with a 
'false vacuum', a higher energy state that, at least in our part 
of the Universe, decayed back to a ground state. The energy 
of this false vacuum drove the increased expansion. Alan 
Guth suggested that it might only decay in some parts of the 
Universe, creating 'bubbles' of different expansion rates. Each 
bubble would form its own isolated universe, one of many in a 
larger multiverse. In a similar vein, Andrei Linde developed a 
model of chaotic inflation that proposes an eternal multiverse 
arising from a quantum foam in which fluctuations can spark 
new Big Bangs and new periods of inflation in different regions. 
The vagaries of quantum fluctuations could, therefore, mean 
our Universe is just one among an infinite number of universes. 
226 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


The expanding Universe 
I
n the wake of the Big Bang and inflation, the Universe is still 
expanding today, a fact that was discovered by the American 
astronomer Edwin Hubble. Prior to 1925, nobody knew that 
there were galaxies beyond our Milky Way; most scientists 
assumed that the mysterious 'spiral nebulae' were part of our 
own star system. However, using what was then the world's 
largest telescope, Hubble resolved individual stars in these 
spiral nebulae. Using an ingenious method to calculate their 
intrinsic brightness he realized they were millions of light years 
away, and that spiral nebulae must be galaxies in their own right. 
What was more, light from these remote galaxies was stretched 
to longer, redder wavelengths by expanding space and the 
Doppler effect (see opposite). Not only are galaxies generally 
moving away from Earth, but the more distant ones are moving 
away more rapidly, an effect known as Hubble's law. It turns out 
that the Universe is currently expanding at 22.4 kilometres (13 9 
miles) per second per hundred million light years of space. 
228 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


The accelerating 
Universe 
T
he wide acceptance of the Big Bang theory meant that, even 
after the addition of inflation, most cosmologists assumed 
that the expansion of the Universe must have been gradually 
slowing down as its energy became more thinly spread. So 
it came as a startling surprise when, in 1988, two groups of 
astronomers found that the Universe wasn't slowing down at 
all, but was speeding up. The astronomers were probing the 
distant Universe for light from supernovae (exploding stars; see 
page 234), whose brightness can reveal their exact distance 
and therefore pin down the rate of cosmic expansion. Previous 
measurements of expansion had depended on objects in the 
relatively local Universe, but these more distant measurements 
showed how fast the Universe had been expanding over the 
billions of years since the light left these remote galaxies. 
The accelerating rate of expansion shows that the Universe is 
gaining an energy boost from somewhere, and astronomers soon 
gave this mysterious accelerating factor a name: 'dark energy'. 
230 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 

Small Universe 
Accelerating 
expansion drives 
galaxies apart 
more rapidly 
DISTANT PAST 
RECENT PAST 

Dark energy 
W
hat exactly is the force that is driving cosmic expansion 
to accelerate? The answer almost certainly lies in the 
fundamental nature of space on a quantum level. One of the 
leading contenders for the identity of this dark energy is a 
so- called 'cosmological constant' that describes a density 
of energy inherent to each point in space. As the Universe 
expands, there are naturally more points in space, and hence 
exponentially more energy to drive expansion. Unfortunately, 
calculations indicate that the most likely form of cosmological 
constant, called 'vacuum energy' (see page 140). is about 10-54 
times too small to account for the effects of dark energy. 
The other leading possibility is that dark energy is something 
called 'quintessence' which, if it exists, would be a quantum f1eld 
that pervades the Universe and that can have varying strength 
in different regions of time and space. Quintessence could be 
attractive or, in the case of the accelerated expansion, repulsive. 
As yet, however, there is no independent evidence for its existence. 
232 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


The death of stars 
A
stronomers seek out the stellar explosions of supernovae 
to measure the rate of the Universe's expansion because 
certain types explode with predictable levels of light. By 
measuring how bright they appear, astronomers can calculate 
their distance, and compare that with the rate at which they 
are moving across space. But supernovae are more than just 
distance markers. These violent bursts of destruction create 
extreme environments in which quantum effects reign supreme. 
A supernova can manifest in two ways. The f1rst is the explosion 
of a massive star that runs out of fuel (causing its core to 
collapse and a shockwave to blast its outer layers apart). The 
second is the violent collapse of a white dwarf (the remnants 
of a burnt-out, Sunlike star) into a much denser state. Both 
types of event can create a neutron star, within which atoms 
are broken apart into their subatomic components, the forces 
of electromagnetism are overcome and only the rules of 
quantum physics prevent a complete collapse. 
234 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 

Two paths to a supernova 
Massive, 
unstable star 
White dwarf collapse 
Sunlike star in 
binary system 
evolves into 
white dwarf 
Core exhausts 
fuel and collapses 
White dwarf pulls 
material away from 
companion star, 
increasing its mass 
Shockwave 
tears star apart 
' 
White dwarf 
becomes unstable 
and collapses into 
neutron star with 
burst of energy 

Neutron stars 
S
tars generate energy through nuclear fusion. reactions in their 
cores, governed by the laws of quantum phys1cs. They beg1n life 
with a supply of hydrogen and helium, and temperatures in their 
core strip these elements of their electrons, creating an electrically 
charged plasma of atomic nuclei and free-floating electrons. Fusion 
steadily creates heavier elements by f using the nuclei together, and 
in st ars with eight or more times the Sun's mass, these reactions 
ultimately fill the star's core with iron, an element whose fusion 
absorbs more energy than it releases. Fusion abruptly halts, and 
with no energy to support it, the core collapses under its own 
gravity Under normal circumstances, the collapse of a star's burnt-
out core is halted by the Pauli exclusion principle, which creates a 
'degeneracy pressure' between electrons and prevents them being 
compressed beyond a certain limit. However the co llapse of a massive 
stellar core breaks these rules. As it dwindles to a diameter of just a 
few kilometres, extreme conditions break atomic nuclei into protons 
and neutrons and force electrons and protons together to create 
more neutrons. The resulting objects are called neutron stars. 
236 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


Quark stars 
N
eutron stars are supported against gravity by a force 
known as neutron degeneracy pressure. This quantum 
property is determined by Pauli's exclusion principle, which on 
the level of neutrons states that no two particles with identical 
quantum states can share the same space. In a neutron star, all 
the lowest quantum states are filled. This creates a repulsive 
pressure, known as degeneracy, that prevents the neutrons 
from getting any closer together and halts the star's collapse. 
However, if the force of the supernova or even the neutron 
star's own gravity is great enough, it can overcome the 
neutron degeneracy pressure. The continuing collapse 
overwhelms even the strong force, and breaks neutrons into 
their individual quarks, creating an object made out of exotic 
'quark matter'. Such quark stars are still hypothetical, although 
some candidates have been identified. The confwmation of 
quark stars would provide a revolutionary new laboratory for 
testing models of particle and quantum physics. 
238 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


Black holes 
S
ometimes, the core of a star is so massive t hat, when it goes 
supernova, gravity can overwhelm neutron degeneracy pressure 
and even quark degeneracy pressure (hyopthetically created by 
strong-force interactions between quarks]. The core of the star, 
many t imes more massive than the Sun, collapses to a single point 
of near-infinite density - a black hole. We call the centre of a black 
hole a 'singularity' the physics within it goes beyond our current 
understanding, but could be described by quantum gravity (see page 
262]. In accordance with Einstein's theory of general relativity, a 
black hole warps spacetime around it. Its gravity is so strong that 
even light straying too close cannot escape: hence, the singularity is 
surrounded by an invisible barrier ca lled the 'event horizon'. 
Black holes are not theoretical objects. Stellar-mass black 
holes from supernovae have been located in objects known 
as X-ray binary systems, while monstrous supermassive black 
holes, millions or billions of times t he mass of t he Sun, have 
been identif ied at the centre of many galaxies 
240 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


Hawking radiation 
A lthough even light cannot escape the event hor izon of a 
M. black hole, t here's one caveat. In 1974, Stephen Hawking 
realized that virtual particles, forming on the inside edge of the 
event horizon thanks to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, 
cou ld potentially tunnel their way out. Hawking's idea was that 
when a particle-antiparticle pair is created, one falls into the 
black hole and gives the illusion of having negative energy, while 
the other tunnels its way to freedom. To conserve energy, it 
takes some from the black hole and becomes a real particle. 
This phenomenon, as yet unobserved, is called Hawking radiation. 
Since every escaping particle carries with it some of a black hole's 
mass/energy, it means that the black hole is gradually evaporating 
This causes something of a paradox. Does quantum information 
from objects that have fallen into the black hole j ust disappear 
from the Universe or is it conserved, and possibly even released in 
the Hawking radiation? Hawking himself is uncertain on the matter, 
but many other physicists believe that it is indeed conserved. 
242 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 

Creation/annihilation 
of virtual particles 
~ 
Event horizon 
of black hole 
At safe distance 
from event horizon, 
particle and 
antiparticle 
annihilate. 
On event horizon, 
one particle falls 
into black hole, while 
the other escapes. 
Net emission of 
Hawking radiation 

Proton decay 
S
o far as we know from observations, protons are eternal. 
Yet even though no one has ever seen a proton decay, does 
that mean they never do7 Theories attempting to combine 
the fundamental forces of the quantum Universe into a 'grand 
unif1ed theory' (GUT; see page 253) predict that protons 
decay with a half- life between 1034 and 1036 years. The Super-
Kamiokande particle experiment in Japan has searched for 
proton decay and found nothing, constraining the half-life to 
at least 1035 years. Either way, it's an extremely long time and 
means proton decay, if it happens, is very rare. 
This has consequences for the fate of the Universe. Matter 
itself wil l begin to disintegrate as protons decay into a 
neutral pion particle and a positron, or a neutral pion and a 
muon, which in turn will spontaneously decay into gamma- ray 
photons. If these theories are correct (and the Universe lasts 
that long). then more than one trillion trillion trillion years into 
the future all matter wi ll have decayed into radiation. 
244 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


Vacuum decay 
D
uring the inflation epoch, a tiny fraction of a second after 
the Big Bang, the Universe is said to have been in a stat e 
of 'false vacuum'; that is, t he quantum f1elds underlying t he 
Universe were at a higher energy level, a bit like an electron in a 
higher energy level around an atomic nucleus. The ground state 
of the Universe is termed the 'true vacuum'. (In t his case a 
vacuum means space almost devoid of energy, r ather than air.) 
The theory of eternal inflation suggests that some pockets of 
space are always in a false vacuum state, and there's circumstantial 
evidence that our Universe could be one of t hem. False vacuums are 
'metastable' they can survive for a long time, but eventually decay, 
quant um t unnelling into a t rue vacuum If t his were to happen, it 
would create a bubble of true vacuum emanating from the point at 
which the tunnelling occurred, expanding at the speed of light and 
annihilating everything in its path until t he entire Universe is a true 
vacuum. Fortunately, even if our Universe is in a false vacuum stat e, 
it's unli kely to decay for billions of years. 
246 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


Fates of the Universe 
B
efore the processes of vacuum decay or proton decay can 
destroy the Universe, dark energy and gravity may get the 
f1nal say. If left unchecked, the cosmic expansion driven by dark 
energy (see page 232) could keep accelerating until space itself is 
torn apart in a 'Big Rip'. However, if scientists can show that dark 
energy has not remained constant in the past, this could indicate 
that, one day in the future, the rate of acceleration will decrease, 
sparing us from this fate. 
Combatting dark energy in a cosmic tug-of-war is the force of 
gravity. Dark energy may not need to decrease by too much for 
the mass of the Universe to win out. Perhaps gravity will slow 
the expansion to a halt, creating a static Universe in which gas is 
spread so thinly that no new stars can form (a 'Big Chill' scenario) 
Alternatively, gravity might even reverse the expansion altogether, 
causing everything to come together again in a 'Big Crunch' 
governed by the unknown laws of quantum gravity (see page 262), 
and perhaps sparking a new Big Bang event in its aftermath. 
248 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


Before the Big Bang? 
M
any cosmological models that utilize quantum mechanics 
suggest that the Big Bang may not have been the 
beginning of everything after all. Eternal inflation, for example, 
describes how a multitude of Big Bangs could keep happening 
in different parts of the Universe as a result of quantum 
fluctuations in the false vacuum (see page 246). 
Another way for something to have existed before the Big Bang 
is if the Universe is cyclical. This would only happen if dark energy 
diminishes and there is sufficient matter for gravity to pull the 
Universe back to a 'Big Crunch'. During such an event, all the 
matter and energy in the Universe would be condensed down to 
a singularity of incredibly high temperature and density, in which 
the force of quantum gravity would once again reign supreme 
and perhaps begin the chain of events all over again. However, 
measurements of the mass density of the Universe so far seem 
to suggest that it is not above the required 'critical density', so 
we may be doomed to the cold fate of an expanding cosmos. 
250 QUANTUM PHYSICS AND THE UNIVERSE 


The theory of everything 
Q
uantum mechanics unif1es three of the four fundamental 
forces in nature: the strong and weak forces at work 
inside atoms, and the electromagnetic force. Gravity is 
excluded, and theoreticians investigating the operation of 
gravity on a quantum scale see it as the key to a grand 'theory 
of everything'. Such a theory would not only explain where the 
fundamental forces are coming from, but also the structure of 
the Universe and even, perhaps, its origins. 
Unifying Einstein's general theory of relativity with quantum 
mechanics is not easy, however. Gravity operates on the 
largest scales, where the more mass there is, the more gravity 
there is In contrast, quantum mechanics describes the physics 
of the very small- things like particles and individual photons 
of light. Quantum mechanics and gravity only come together in 
extreme environments- during the Big Bang or inside a black 
hole, for example. But if physicists can f1gure out how to unify 
them, the new physics revealed cou ld prove revolutionary. 
252 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 

Unifying the theories of physics 
Electricity 
Magnetism 
Electronuclear force/ 
Grand Unif1ed Theory (GUT) 
Quantum gravity 
Theory of Everything 

Quantum f1eld theory 
Q
uantum f1eld theory (OFT) is the f oundation upon which 
the modern understanding of quantum physics is built. A 
'f1eld' in this context is a way of defining how a chosen quantity 
operates at every possible point in spacetime. For example, 
the electromagnetic f1eld def1nes the electromagnetic force 
at any point in space and time. A quantum f1eld is JUst the 
quantization of a classical f1eld like electromagnetism 
OFT describes how f1elds are able to transmit their influence 
using force-carrying messenger particles called gauge bosons. 
Particles are simply afterthoughts to the f1eld, a way of making 
real the f1eld's quantization. A f1eld theory is also handy when 
dealing with the unspecified number of virtual particles that 
result from Heisenberg's uncertainty principle when a particle 
has a relativistic energy, since the Schrbdinger wave equation 
only works for one particle at a time It's also worth noting that, 
since gravity is also a f1eld, any theory that combines quantum 
mechanics with gravity is itself going to be a f1eld theory. 
254 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 


Symmetry 
N
ature is full of symmetries and quantum mechanics is no 
different. When physicists refer t o 'symmetry', th ey are 
discussing properties that are unchanged when they undergo 
a transformation An everyday example of symmetry is a 
mirror image: hold some writing up to a mirror and some of 
the letters are reversed; the reflection has changed them, 
so they are not symmetrical. Other letters do not change and 
look exactly the same in the reflection. These are symmetrical. 
In quantum f1eld theory, 'gauge symmetry' is a special type of 
symmetry that explains why particles of a specific type, be 
they protons, electrons or quarks, are identica l, or symmetric, 
to every other particle of their type Gauge symmetry also 
plays a role in unifying the f undamental forces of nature: at 
increasingly high energies, forces become symmetrical and 
operate identically. First the electromagnetic and weak forces, 
then the strong force, and f1nally gravity all start to behave in 
the same way. 
256 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 

Common types of symmetry 
Reflection 
Rotation 
Translation 
Glide-reflection 

Quantum 
electrodynamics 
Q
uantum electrodynamics (OED) is the f1eld theory 
describing how the electromagnetic force interacts wit h 
matter. A common situation involves t wo electrons col liding 
and being repelled and scattered by their like charges. The 
force between them is a quantized electromagnetic f1eld, 
carried by photons. To explain the theory visua lly, US physicist 
Richard Feynman developed Feynman diagrams (see page 202), 
essentially a pictorial depiction of the equation governing the 
interaction. Eit her side of the interaction in a diagram should 
balance in terms of mass/energy, charge, momentum and any 
other conserved properties. 
The middle part of the diagram, where the interaction occurs, 
must incorporate all possibilities, like t he mult iple peaks of a wave 
function. However, Feynman diagrams offer a way to determine 
which process is most likely. The points where photons are 
emitted or absorbed are called vertices, and t he more vertices 
there are, the less likely that particular process will happen. 
258 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 

Feynman diagrams 
for the simplest 
(top) and a more 
complex version 
of an interaction 
between two 
electrons. The 
simplest interaction 
is also the most likely 
to occur. 

Quantum 
chromodynamics 
Q
uantum chromodynamics (QCD) explains the strong force 
that holds protons and neutrons together. In essence, it 
is the quantum theory of quarks, which exist within protons 
and neutrons in trios This seemingly presents a problem, since 
two of each trio are either both up or both down quarks, with 
identical spin and charge. This violates Pauli's exclusion principle 
(see page 76), since two particles with the exact same quantum 
numbers should not be in the same place at the same time. 
Physicist Murray Geii-Mann proposed that there must be 
another unknown quantum number at work to differentiate 
between the two up or two down quarks. He called this 
property 'colour', hence the term 'chromodynamics'. QCD 
results in two important properties, namely 'asymptotic 
freedom', which describes the strange effect of the strong 
force becoming stronger with distance rather than weaker, 
and 'confinement' which prevents particles with the colour 
property from existing individually. 
260 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 

Green+ red+ 
blue=white 
Anti green +anti red 
+ antiblue =white 
QCD proposes that all quarks 
carry one of six 'colour charges', 
and that they combine in trios 
or quark-antiquark pairs that 
appear colour-neutral or 'white' 
from outside. 

Quantum gravity 
G
ravity is the only force not yet reconciled wit h quantum 
mechanics. Einstein's general theory of relativity doesn't 
describe it as a force, but as a distortion of spacetime by the 
mass of objects. Yet a theory describing it as a quantized f1eld is 
required to explain how it operates on very small scales, in dense 
regions such as black holes or during the Big Bang. 
One major problem is that, because Heisenberg's uncertainty 
principle prevents us from precisely pinning down both the 
position and momentum of particles, we cannot know the exact 
gravitational force they will feel. Another is that the bending of 
spacetime by relativity robs us of a f1xed coordinate system: 
how can we determine the probability of a particle existing in a 
given location if space itself is constantly changing? If gravity 
can be quantized, then it should have a force -carrying boson 
particle of its own, but this hypothetical particle, the graviton, 
remains undetected, perhaps because its energy lies far 
beyond even that achievable in the Large Hadron Collider. 
262 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 


Electroweak theory 
A bove temperatures of a thousand trillion degrees, the 
M. electromagnetic force that governs light and the weak 
force that controls the radioactivity of elements become 
unif1ed and symmetric. This 'electroweak' force, discovered by 
Steven Weinberg, Abdus Salam and Sheldon Glashow in the 
1960s, existed in nature shortly after the Big Bang. 
At distances of JUSt w -ts metres (a billion billionths of a metre), 
the weak force and electromagnetic force still retain much the 
same strength. At large distances, however, the weak force 
rapidly declines. This is because its force carriers, theW and Z 
bosons, are among the most massive particles known, so their 
'virtual particles' do not travel far, while the photon, as carrier 
of the electromagnetic force, has no mass at all and hence 
a theoretically limitless range. Physicists suspect the radical 
difference in mass between force carriers is due to some 
kind of interaction with the Higgs f1eld (see page 120), when 
symmetry was broken and the two forces separated. 
264 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 


Loop quantum gravity 
0 
ne possible solution to the problem of quantum gravity is 
that space itself is quantized. Physicists Lee Smolin and 
Theodore Jacobson proposed this idea in 1986, envisaging 
space as being formed by myriad interlinking quantum 'loops', 
each no bigger than the smallest size that is theoretically 
measurable [the so - called 'Planck length' of 1.6 x 10-35 metres). 
If such loops exist, then it means that space is granular at 
quantum scales. Networks of interlinked loops are known as 
'spin networks', while a 'spin foam' describes how a spin network 
changes over time as a result of varying gravitational f1elds. 
One advantage of this 'loop quantum gravity' [LOG) theory 
is that it removes the need to worry about precise location 
Loops can be moved around by the warping of space without 
changing how they respond to gravity. However, LOG is still 
very much a work in progress, and it also makes no predictions 
regarding the graviton, a particle considered essential to a 
quantum f1eld theory of gravity. 
266 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 

Spin networks 
are a type of 
diagram used to 
model interactions 
between particles 
and fields, and used 
by Smolin and others 
in the development 
of LQG. 
1 

String theory 
A
more popular riva l to loop quantum gravity, string theory 
posits that all matter is made of tiny vibrating str1ngs 
no longer than the Planck length. These strings vibrate at 
different frequencies, creating a variety of 'notes', to use a 
musical analogy. Each note manifests the quantum numbers 
of a different particle, giving rise to all the particles in the 
Standard Model The theory depicts interactions between 
particles in terms of strings splitting apart and rejoining. 
Furthermore, it is dependent on the existence of the graviton 
and the maths wi ll not work without it. Add the fact that 
the maths of string theory does not give rise to awkward 
mathematical infinities, and it makes for an extremely 
attractive theory of everything. 
However, although some discoveries have been argued to 
corroborate it, string theory is untestable. Its maths may describe 
reality accurately, but as yet there is no way to experimentally 
confirm whether particles really are vibrating strings. 
268 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 


Planck epoch 
W
hat makes physicists believe that all four fundamental 
forces of nature really can be unif1ed in a single quantum 
theory? The main reason is because scientists know that in 
the distant past they were united in just such a way This 
moment, known as the Planck epoch, happened in the f1rst 
instant after the Big Bang and before inflation, when the 
Universe was no more than 10-43 seconds old. 
At the time, the Universe was still compressed into a 
minuscule volume, yet it contained the same amount 
of energy that it does today, leading to incredibly high 
temperatures of around 1034° C. Under these circumstances, 
electromagnetism and the strong and weak forces, closely 
united with each other in a so-called 'Grand Unif1ed Theory', 
merged togther with quantum gravity to act as a single 
superforce with uniform properties. The splitting apart of 
this superforce gave rise to every law of nature that we see 
in the Universe today. 
270 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 

This schematic shows 
the order in which the 
fundamental forces are 
thought to have separated 
from each other during 
and shortly after the 
Planck epoch. 

Symmetry breaking 
At the end of the Planck epoch, 10-43 seconds after the Big 
M. Bang, the four elements of the primordial superforce began 
to separate, no longer acting as one. The forces split apart, one 
at a t ime, as temperatures dropped. Each separation marked a 
'phase change' in the laws of physics, analogous to the changes we 
see when steam condenses into water and then freezes into ice. 
Those familiar changes involve a pause in the drop in temperature 
as reconf1guration of bonds releases energy, and something similar 
happened in these more fundamental transitions. The period of 
phase changes is known as symmetry breaking [the symmetry being 
the way the unif1ed forces init ially displayed identical strength) 
The fwst force to break off was gravity, and energy released in the 
phase change created the quantum foam of spacetime. At 10-36 
seconds, the strong force separated, releasing a burst of energy 
that may have driven cosmic inflation Finally, electromagnetism 
and the weak force sp lit at between 10-12 and 10-6 seconds as the 
Universe cooled past 10 quadrillion ° C. 
272 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 

Phase transitions involve changes in the arrangement 
of matter. Though triggered by changes in temperature, 
they typically involve a brief pause in that change, as 
when ice melts into water at freezing point. 

Supersymmetry 
A
hypothetical model of particle physics, called supersymmetry, 
says that the Standard Model1s symmetric, w1th each boson 
symmetrically linked to a fermion, known as its 'superpartner'. 
The masses, charges and other quantum numbers of symmetric 
particles are identical; only their spin differs, since that is what 
def1nes bosons and fermions. 
So why don't we see these superpartners in nature? Their 
apparent absence means that if supersymmetry is real, it must 
be a 'broken symmetry', such that the superpartners have far 
higher mass-energies between 100 and 1000 billion eV (higher 
than even the Higgs Boson). So why do physicists persist with 
this theory? Supersymmetry turns out to have many benef1ts 
essential to producing working models of string theory, and 
also offers a potential identity for the Universe's dark matter. 
What's more, it could also be a key player in unifying the four 
fundamental forces, since it causes their very different 
strengths to converge when traced back to the Planck epoch. 
274 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 

Superpartners of the Standard Model particles 
-
- """' - """' -
-
Charge 
2/3 u 6
3C 
6
3t 
1~2 y 
~~2H 
Spin 
0 
en 
scharm 
stop 
photino 
Higgsino 
~ 
sup 
a: 
<( 
::! 
0 en 
-b
3a -
-6
36 -
6
3S 
~29 
en 
'" 
sdown 
"- sstrange 
sbottom 
gluino 
0 z 
(!j 
::! 
<( 
-
-
-
-o 
(!) 
ov 
~'X ov 
~2z 
0 
e 
0 
't 
en 
selectron 
smuon 
stau 
Zlno 
z 
sneutrino 
sneutrino 
sneutrino 
0 1-a. 
~~ ) 
w 
"""' 
...J 
en -
-
-± 
-1 e 
~1~ 
+1w 
0 
1f2 
selectron 
Wino 
II 
Ill 
Sfermion generations 

Higher dimensions 
W
e experience our Universe in four dimensions: three of 
space and one of time. So when the orig1nal equations 
of string theory came up with results that needed 26 
dimensions of spacetime in order to work, there were naturally 
reservations. Things got a little better with the introduction of 
supersymmetry to string theory, which reduced the required 
dimensions to ten (nine of space, plus time) A recently developed 
model,called M-theory, unif1es f1ve rival versions of string theory, 
but needs 11 dimensions to work. 
If any of these theories are correct, then where are the 
extra dimensions, and why don't we experience them? One 
possibility, known as compactif1cation, involves them being 
wrapped up very t ightly on such microscopic scales that we 
cannot detect them. Another option is that the dimensions 
are very large and that our three-dimensional Universe 
resides inside them as a sort of 'membrane' floating through 
higher- dimensional space. 
276 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 

Higher dimensions may be imperceptible 
to us because they are compactifted on 
very tiny scales. An analogy is the way 
we can curl a sheet of paper into a tube, 
which appears as a one-dimensional line 
when seen from a great distance. 

Calabi-Yau space 
I
f string theory is correct, and the extra dimensions it requires 
compactif1ed, where do they lurk? The answer may l1e in a place 
called a Calabi-Yau manifold, named after mathematical theorists 
Eugenio Calabi and Shing-Tung Yau. The idea is that the entrance 
into six-dimensional space within the Calabi-Yau manifold is tiny, 
on the scale of 10-15 metres across. 'Unravelling' the manifold to 
make the effect of any of its dimensions measurable requires 
huge amounts of energy, but scientists at the LHC hope to f1nd 
some evidence of Calabi-Yau space in energetic particle collisions. 
Calabi-Yau space is appealing to proponents of superstrings, 
because the compactif1cation of dimensions allows for a 
partially unbroken supersymmetry String theory allows for 
many different types of six-dimensional spaces, and predicts 
that Calabi -Yau space should contains 'holes', corresponding 
to the number of particle families If this is correct, we can 
narrow the possible solutions down to Calabi-Yau spaces with 
three holes (corresponding to fermions, quarks and bosons). 
278 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 

This graphical representation shows how a 
multidimensional Calabi-Yau space might 
be perceived in three-dimensional space. 

Brane theory 
A
spin-off from string theory, brane theory describes a 
scenario involving a higher-dimensional space with extended 
dimensions, sometimes called hyperspace or 'the bulk'. A brane 
(derived from the word membrane) is a physical representation 
of a dimension, or collection of dimensions, in hyperspace. 
Individual objects are described by p -branes, where p is the 
number of dimensions involved. A point particle like an electron, 
with no physical size, would therefore be a 0-brane, a string would 
be a 1- brane as it exists in one dimension, and so on. Strings can 
either be looped or open-ended, and in the latter case the ends 
of the strings are attached to so-called 0-branes, which are 
multidimensional objects moving through hyperspace. 
According to the so-called 'braneworld' cosmology, our Universe 
is JUSt such a brane. It has even been suggested that the Big 
Bang occurred when two branes collided, with the subsequent 
expansion of the Universe caused by the two branes then 
moving apart 
280 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 

Brane cosmology 
Extended 
hyperspace 
dimension 
Looped strings 
pass between 
branes 
0 
D-brane 
0 
Six extra dimensions curled 
up as Calabi-Yau space 
0 
0 
0 

AdS/CFT 
correspondence 
W
e live in a Universe dominated by dark energy, a mysterious 
force accelerating cosmic expansion. A popular explanation is 
that dark energy is the cosmological constant, a hypothetical energy 
f1eld that fwst cropped up in solutions to Einstein's f1eld equations 
of spacetime. A Universe dominated by a positive cosmological 
constant is called a 'de Sitter space', after Dutch scientist Willem de 
Sitter. Anti de Sitter (AdS) space, in contrast, would have a negative 
cosmological constant causing expansion to decelerate. 
In 1997, Argentinian Juan Maldacena made an astonishing discovery: 
if we extend an AdS into f1ve dimensions, then 'our' four-dimensional 
Universe appears on its 'boundary surface'. Furthermore, t here is a 
relationship between f1ve-dimensonal gravity and a group of quantum 
f1eld theories called conformal f1eld theories (CFTs) in four dimensions. 
Maldacena's discovery marked a maJor advance in the search for a 
theory of everything, since it appears to conf1rm t he holographic 
principle, a proposed property of quantum gravity t hat 'encodes' its 
higher-dimensional properties onto four-dimensional spacetime. 
282 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 


The best theory? 
F
or several decades, string theory has been the leading 
contender for a theory of everything t hat unif1es 
the fundamental forces, explains the Standard Model 
and describes a quantum theory of gravity. It does have 
detractors, however, with its unproven extra dimensions a 
particular focus for criticism. The discovery of superpartner 
particles [see page 274) wou ld provide good, albeit indirect, 
evidence for string theory. These particles should have 
energies in the range of 100 to 1,000 billion electronvolts. 
Presently, the LHC can only probe the bottom end of this 
energy scale, however, and so far there's no sign of even the 
lightest proposed superpartner. 
This might seem like good news for loop quantum gravity, in 
which supersymmetry is optional. But LOG has its own problems; 
crit ics point out that spin networks do not incorporate time, 
and also fail t o explain the Standard Model. It seems that 
there's still a long way to go to f1nd a theory of everything. 
284 THE THEORY OF EVERYTHING 

Potential theories 
of everything 

Many-worlds 
interpretation 
0 
ne of the most stunning consequences of quantum theory 
is that our reality might not be the only one; there could be 
an infinite number of parallel universes in which every possible 
event can occur. According to the Copenhagen interpretation 
[see page 54), the wave function is simply our best attempt 
at describing the inherent uncertainty in quantum mechanics. 
Once an observation is made, it collapses to produce a single 
outcome. In 1957, however, physicist Hugh Everett Ill suggested 
an astonishing alternative: what if the wave function never 
collapses and, instead, reality itself diverges, allowing every 
possibility it describes to happen somewhere in an alternative 
universe? Everett's idea, now known as the 'many-worlds' 
interpretation, is a leading alternative to Copenhagen. 
It's not the only quantum theory of parallel worlds. Eternal 
inflation, sparked by quantum fluctuations, could create 
myriad new universes, each with their own characteristics and 
realities and possibly even an infinite number of you. 
286 MULTIVERSES 


Types of multiverse 
T
he multiverse is the name given to a collection of different 
universes that are possibly infinite in number. Max Tegmark, 
a cosmologist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT), hypothesizes that there are four different types (see 
opposite). The simplest, Levell mult iverse, rel ies simply on 
the overall Universe being very, very big, much larger than the 
'observable Universe' whose edges are limited by the speed of 
light (see page 222). 
Factoring in cosmic expansion, our observable Universe is 
around 96 billion light years across. If we took every single atom 
within it, put them in a bag and shook them around, there is only 
a f1nite number of ways in which they could be rearranged. In 
an infinite Universe this means every possible arrangement will 
eventually be repeated - not just once, but an infinite number 
of times. If the idea is correct, then somewhere out there, at an 
unimaginable distance, there is another you at the centre of a 
sphere that looks just like our own observable Universe. 
288 MULTIVERSES 

Tegmark's 4 levels of 
multiverse 
1. The extension of normal spacetime beyond 
the limits of our observable Universe 
2. The multiverse of Universes with different 
physical properties produced by processes 
such as eternal inflation 
3. The multiverse of parallel Universes arising 
from the many-worlds interpretation of 
quantum mechanics 
4. The 'ultimate ensemble', a set of 
mathematical structures capable of 
describing any possible multiverse 
including those in Levels 1 to 3 

The inflationary 
multiverse 
I
f a Levell multiverse has 'more space' and is similar to our 
own but repeated to infinity, Tegmark's Level 2 multiverse 
is more varied. Eternal inflation (see page 226) predicts that 
parts of the Universe are constantly 'budding off', thanks to 
quantum fluctuations that drive new bouts of inflation. This 
creates a multitude of new universes, expanding away so fast 
that nothing in our Universe could ever reach and enter them 
If string theory is broadly correct, then each of these new 
universes could potentially have completely different laws 
of physics to our own. This is because the equations of 
string theory may have some 10500 potential solutions, each 
of which could describe a universe with different laws of 
physics- a different mix of dimensions, different strengths 
of fundamental forces and different fundamental particles. 
Chaotic inflation could produce an infinite number of such 
universes and, furthermore, many of these could be Levell 
multiverses in their own right. 
290 MULTIVERSES 


The uncollapsible 
wave function 
I
n the early days of quantum physics, many scientists were unhappy 
with the Copenhagen interpretation, since certain readings of it 
implied that vast expanses of the cosmos could exist in probabilistic 
limbo until observed. Among them was Hugh Everett Ill, whose many-
worlds interpretation suggests that wave functions don't really 
collapse when observed, they JUst present an illusion of collapse 
Everett pointed out that it's not only the object being observed 
that is in a state of quantum flux; so, too, is the observer. If an 
electron has a possibility of existing at one of several points, 
then the observer also has a wave function describing the 
possibility of their observing the electron in each location. The 
electron and the observer's quantum states are 'entangled', 
with the outcome of one related to the outcome of the other. 
Each possible outcome for the observer is superposed over 
the other, and in each outcome the observer sees their version 
of the wave function collapse. In general, the wave function is 
uncollapsible, but we can experience only one of its outcomes. 
292 MULTIVERSES 

Entanglement 
between observer 
and quantum object 
I 
·---r--. 
It 
I 
1~1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Wavefunction never collapses 
within wider multiverse 
=-~-· 
I 
Observers see wavefunction collapse in 
different ways in different Universes 
. --- ~ 

The many-worlds 
multiverse 
A ccording to the many-worlds interpretation (see page 286), 
M. every possible outcome of every wave function occurs 
somewhere - but where does this all take place? The answer, it 
seems, lies in the existence of parallel worlds, classified by Max 
Tegmark as the Level 3 multiverse. 
Unfortunately the many-worlds theory has little to say on the 
subject of how the continual divergence into parallel universes 
happens, or where these infinite parallel realities exist relative 
to each other. Since our entire world is built on quantum 
foundations, everything that happens is probabilistic in 
nature, and every possibility branches off from each other, like 
branches on a tree. In one universe, Schri:idinger's cat lives, in 
a multitude of others that branch off from the fwst universe 
every second, the cat dies. But the cat will only ever know the 
universe in which it survives. This gives rise to an intriguing 
'test' of the many-worlds theory, known as the quantum 
suicide experiment. 
294 MULTIVERSES 


Quantum suicide 
I
n the many-worlds interpretation, Schrbdinger's cat never 
experiences a universe in which it dies. That's t he astonishing 
conclusion of a thought experiment called quantum suicide. The 
experiment [not to be attempted I) is a kind of quantum Russian 
roulette, a modification of Schrbdinger's original idea, but with the 
experimenter themselves standing in for t he cat. A gun is connected 
to a particle in a st ate of quantum superposition and measured 
every second. If t he part icle is found to be in one particular state, 
the gun fwes a bullet; if it is in the ot her state, the gun holds f we. 
Ordinarily, the experimenter might be lucky and survive the fwst 
few times, but within a few seconds they will be shot and killed. 
However, in the many-worlds interpretation, t he experimenter 
survives every time; the wave funct ion never collapses from 
their point of view, so they always perceive a universe in which 
they survive. Only an outside observer will see the wave function 
collapse and the experi menter die, while the experimenter lives on 
in a parallel reality 
296 MULTIVERSES 


A testable theory? 
T
he many-worlds interpretation provides a compelling 
solution to counterintuitive aspects of the Copenhagen 
interpretation. It removes the paradox of Schrbdinger's cat, 
and does away with the necessity for the Universe to be 
observed in order to exist in a given state. It also offers an 
explanation for the 'f1ne-tuning' problem. 
However, without observational evidence to support it, the 
many-worlds interpretation has received criticism for being an 
untestable theory. The scientific method on which all modern 
science relies is based on empirical observation and testable 
predictions, but no one has yet conceived an experiment that 
could test the multiverse theory because, so far as we know, 
the different universes would not interact after splitting. With 
no satisfactory explanation for exactly how different quantum 
universes branch off from one another, at present it seems 
that belief in many worlds depends on how much faith you put 
in the logic and mathematics behind the theory. 
298 MULTIVERSES 


Cyclical universes 
T
he question of what came before the Big Bang has often 
been dism1ssed as meaningless; the Big Bang created 
everything, including time, so there should have been nothing 
at all before it, not even empty space. 
But this is not necessarily true. For a start, if eternal inflation 
(see page 226) might today be continually branching new 
universes off from our own, then presumably our Universe 
would once have budded off another, even older universe. Brane 
theory (see page 280) gives us another alternative, the cyclical 
universe. Cosmologists Neil Turok and Paul Steinhardt ask us to 
imagine two parallel branes moving towards one another, then 
colliding and rebounding. The collision causes a big bang and the 
dark energy that is causing our Universe to expand is a force 
felt between the two branes as they move away. Eventually, 
the branes move closer once more and our Universe begins to 
contract, resulting in a 'Big Crunch' that immediately creates a 
new Big Bang, and the cycle repeats again. 
300 MULTIVERSES 


The anthropic principle 
0 
ne of the strangest aspects of our Universe is t he way in which 
fundamental constants that l1e beh1nd many fundamental 
physical processes seem peculiar ly f1ne-tuned to create a cosmos 
capable of support ing life For example, if the strong force was JUSt 
slightly weaker, quarks would not be able to hold together and form 
baryons. If it was slightly stronger, it would have caused all the 
hydrogen in the early Universe to fuse into helium, robbing stars of 
their f uel supply The speed of light, the charge of the electron and 
the strength of gravity also have values that are JUSt right for l1fe. 
Cosmologists explain this f1ne-tuning with an idea called the 
anthropic principle. The 'weak' form of the principle argues that 
we should expect to measure values like these, since we cou ld not 
exist in a Universe that is not suitable for life. The 'strong' form, 
in contrast, looks for a reason behind the f1ne -tuning: perhaps 
it is a consequence of the theory of everything, or perhaps our 
Universe is indeed one among an infinitely varied multiverse, not 
all of which have given rise to life. 
302 MULTIVERSES 


Playing dice 
W
hen Albert Einstein declared that 'God doesn't play dice with 
the world', he was bemoan1ng the apparent randomness 
of the Copenhagen interpretation's probabilistic wave function. 
This has consequences far beyond whether light or electrons are 
particles or waves; the Heisenberg uncertainty principle means 
that at the quantum level, nature is fundamentally random and 
cannot be predicted to any degree of accuracy. 
Einstein utterly rejected this notion. To him, the apparent 
randomness just meant that our understanding of quantum 
physics was incomplete; there must be more information 
buried within the properties of particles to describe their 
behaviour in a predictable, deterministic manner However, 
Einstein admitted his objection was based on gut instinct and 
our intuition is, of course, biased by our observations of an 
everyday world that is predictable and deterministic. Ultimately, 
Einstein was proved wrong about quantum mechanics by an 
experiment of his own devising. 
304 THE SPOOKY UNIVERSE 


Quantum entanglement 
and the EPA paradox 
I
n 1935 Einstein, along with fellow physicists Boris Podolsky 
and Nathan Rosen, set out their concerns about the 
Copenhagen interpretation in what became known as the 
EPR paradox. Suppose an atomic nucleus decays into a pair 
of particles that move apart in opposite directions. Because 
they formed in a state of superposition, their quantum 
properties are entangled. So if, for example, one particle's 
spin is measured and found to be 'spin down', then according 
to Copenhagen the other particle's wave function must 
simultaneously collapse and force the other electron to be 
'spin up', even if by now it is on the far side of the Universe. 
Einstein famously described the phenomenon as 'spooky action 
at a distance', but since information cannot travel faster than 
light, he could not see how it was possible. Yet experiments 
have shown that entanglement is exactly what happens 
quantum mechanics operates on a principle of 'nonlocality' 
that goes against our classical understanding of physics. 
306 THE SPOOKY UNIVERSE 

Entangled particle pairs have 
properties that remain uncertain 
until they are observed, but 
which nevertheless must be 
opposite or complementary 
to each other. 

Hidden variables and 
Bell's theorem 
I
rish-born John Bell expanded the EPR paradox in a series of 
thought experiments from which he made predictions that 
have subsequently been borne out. Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen 
believed that there must be some 'hidden variables', as-yet-
undetected properties, t hat carry the information to let each 
particle know which state it is in. If these factors existed, 
then both the faster-than-light communication paradox of 
entanglement and t he uncertainty inherent in the Copenhagen 
interpretation could be avoided. 
Bell put the EPR paradox through a strict mathematical test, now 
known as Bell's theorem. The nature of a particle's quantum spin 
means that t he probabilit y of measuring a given spin depends on 
the angle from which it is measured, so Bell performed a statistical 
analysis, calculating the odds of measuring a given spin from a 
given angle. He could f1nd no evidence for a relationship between 
the probabilities and the angles that suggested hidden variables 
existed. Instead, entanglement must be rea l. 
308 THE SPOOKY UNIVERSE 

()) c 
·a_ 
()) 
Ql u 
:;:; 
<-
"' 
a. 
-
-
-
-
-
-
Classical 
Quantum 
1 
c 0 ~------------~-------------,------------~-------------1 
Ql 
Ql 
5: 
...., 
Ql 
.!l 
c 
0 
:;:; 
"' 
Qi 
<-<-0 u 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/
90 
180 
I 
1 
Angle between detectors (degrees) 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ ' ' ' 
3 0 
-1 ~~------------------------------------------------'~
-
Experiments to test Bell's theorem by measuring the spin of entangled particles 
produce results that match the quantum mechanical, rather than classical, 
distribution. A classical distribution could be explained by hidden variables, but 
the true quantum distribution cannot-hence entanglement is real. 

Defying causality 
T
he main reason Einstein was wrong about entanglement is 
that he assumed that cause and effect operated on the 
basis of 'locality', where information propagates outwards from 
the location of the 'cause' at the speed of light. This is one of 
the most intuitive principles in physics: if you commit an action, 
the consequences of that action should naturally follow 
Quantum entanglement, however, seems to operate on a principle 
of nonlocality; the distance between entangled particles doesn't 
matter It's hugely counterintuitive and still not fully understood, 
but it means that normal rules of cause and effect no longer 
app ly John Bell likened this bizarre behaviour to his friend Dr 
Reinhold Bertlmann, who liked to wear odd socks of different 
colours, one blue and one green, on randomly different feet each 
day If one morning you saw him wearing a blue sock on his right 
foot then you cou ld instantly know that the green sock was on his 
left foot without taking the time to look, just as entanglement can 
defy causality by conveying information in a non-local way. 
310 THE SPOOKY UNIVERSE 

Particles separated by 
distance or other barrier 
Measurement 
of one photon 
resolves its state 
Entangled 
particle pair 
created 
Entangled partner 
instantaneously takes 
opposite state 

Determinism 
C
lassical physics relies on the principle of determinism, 
the idea that the state of an object is completely 
determined by its earlier states. Take, for example, kicking a 
football: the ball's physical properties [such as its shape and 
weight) and the forces acting upon it [the strength of the 
kick, location of contact, wind strength and so on) all affect 
where the ball is eventually going to land. If you have access 
to all such information, the behaviour of the ball is perfectly 
predictable However, if that ball exists in a series of 
quantum states, then the Heisenberg uncertainty principle 
means that its future states are inherently unpredictable 
and capable of changing instantly. 
Entanglement is another means of determining the future 
state of a particle without that linear progression of 
cause and effect [see page 310) This is the fundamental 
difference between classical physics and quantum physics: 
one is deterministic, while the other is probabilistic. 
312 THE SPOOKY UNIVERSE 


Faster than light? 
I
t's little wonder that Albert Einstein was not a fan of the 
notion of quantum entanglement, since his special theory 
of relativity declares that nothing can travel through the 
Universe faster than the speed of light. However, if information 
about entangled quantum states can travel faster than light 
[see page 310) does this mean that other information can also 
be communicated instantly across vast distances? 
Einstein's postulate regarding the speed of light survives 
because of a technicality. It's not information regarding the 
quantum state of a particle that is being communicated faster 
than the speed of light. Instead, it is some kind of signal for the 
particle to reveal its quantum state that is propagating faster 
than the speed of light. The information is already contained 
within the particle's wave function. This subtle distinction 
means that there may be limits to how we can apply quantum 
entanglement to our advantage - we may still be prevented 
from sending 'useful' information at faster- than - light speeds. 
314 THE SPOOKY UNIVERSE 

A light cone is a way of visualizing 
how cause and effect ripple across 
spacetime, limited by the fixed 
speed of light. 
Locations within 
future light cone can see 
events at point 0 and be 
influenced by them. 
Traveller from point 0 can 
reach this point without 
breaking speed of light. 
Traveller can only break 
out of cone by travelling 
faster than light. 
SPACE 
Events within past 
light cone can affect 
an observer at point 0 . 

Quantum teleportation 
Q
uantum entanglement opens the door to teleportation of 
a kind. Physical objects cannot be sent instantaneously 
over great distances, but their quantum states can, allowing 
for the creation of replicas. For teleportation to work, we need 
three objects: two of them (particles X andY) are entangled 
and begin to move apart. At some indeterminate distance from 
each other, X encounters particle Z Quantum information 
from Z transfers to X, and X's quantum state is then instantly 
communicated from X toY, transforming Y into a replica of Z. 
One complication is that the quantum state of Z is destroyed 
in the process. This may make human teleportation, if it ever 
becomes a reality, a somewhat scary process. What's more, 
a Star-Trek-style transporter would need a supply of atoms 
at the destination ready to take on quantum information. The 
sheer amount of information involved in sending any large 
object would mean the process would take a very long time, 
and decoherence might create further stumbling blocks. 
316 THE SPOOKY UNIVERSE 


Teleportation 
experiments 
Q
uantum teleportation isn't just a theoretical fancy; 
scientists have already succeeded in teleporting particle 
information. The fwst successful experiment was conducted 
in 1998: just f1ve years after the fwst theoretical thesis on 
the possibility had been written, researchers succeeded in 
teleporting the quantum state of a photon across a table -
top. In 2004, scientists teleported an atom for the f1rst time 
Since then, the range of teleportation has grown substantially 
The current record for teleporting the quantum state of 
a photon stands at 144 kilometres (89 miles), achieved by a 
team led by Anton Zeilinger of the University of Vienna. That 
experiment was conducted across 'free space', but in 2015 
American scientists at the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology were able to teleport the quantum states of 
photons down 102 kilometres (63 miles) of f1bre optic cable. In 
the future, such techniques could prove useful for setting up 
secure communication systems using quantum entanglement. 
318 THE SPOOKY UNIVERSE 


Quantum time 
I
n the everyday world of classical physics, the flow of t ime 
coincides with increasing entropy (the natural and inevitable loss 
of order in thermodynamic systems, see page 22) On quantum 
scales, however, entropy doesn't have quite the same hold that it 
does on macroscopic scales. Thanks to Heisenberg's uncertainty 
principle, a handful of particles could turn from an ordered, low-
entropy state into a disordered, high-entropy state and back again 
almost at random. So what def1nes t ime on the quantum level? 
Seth Lloyd of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 
believes that the f low of time is def1ned by an increasing loss of 
information. Decoherence and the collapse of wave functions 
are certainly irreversible ways of losing quantum information, 
but at its heart, says Lloyd, is entanglement. Imagine a cooling 
cup of tea. In Lloyd's picture of time, the tea's atoms gradually 
become entangled with their surroundings, moving the system 
towards greater equilibrium with the Universe, but losing the 
tea's quantum information in an irreversible process. 
320 THE SPOOKY UNIVERSE 


Time running backwards? 
T
he principle of cause and effect seems locked to the 
forward flow of time, but aspects of the quantum world 
suggest things aren't always that simple. For example, in 
the dual-slit experiment, interference fringes are caused by 
wavelike behaviour (opposite, top]. If you were to measure 
which slit each photon passes through [observing the photons 
as particles and not waves), the interference fringes would 
disappear (opposite, bottom]. Suppose, however, that you 
change the experiment to measure which slit entangled 
photons pass through only after they have passed through 
it. Cause and effect says that you should be able to see the 
interference fringes, yet that's not what happens. Instead, we 
still observe the photons acting as particles: it seems that 
somehow the measurement in the present has affected the 
particle's behaviour in the past. Is this phenomenon, known as 
retrocausality, evidence for information travelling backwards 
in time? Perhaps, but most physicists believe it to be a result 
of quantum effects rather than actual time travel. 
322 THE SPOOKY UNIVERSE 

I 
Light waves 
diffract and overlap 
))) 
1 
~ l ~ l 
Light detected 
e ) 
as waves 
forming 
f 
interference 
pattern on 
screen 
Dual-slit 
barrier 
Light 
source 
Light detected as 
photons on straight-line 
paths through slits 

Boltzmann brains 
A lthough we describe the flow oftime as linked to irreversible 
M processes, in truth, nothing is Irreversible given enough 
time. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle means that there's 
a tiny chance of such processes reversing themselves; for 
example, if two canisters containing two different gases are 
mixed, there is a tiny probability, given aeons of time, that all the 
atoms will unmix and end up back in their respective canisters 
Another bizarre consequence of the passage of aeons are 
'Boltzmann brains', f1rst put forward by 19th-century physicist 
Ludwig Boltzmann. Boltzmann believed that we live in a chance 
fluctuation of low entropy and relative organization in a high-
entropy Universe, and that other low-entropy fluctuations 
could naturally lead to the appearance of consciousness. 
Although Boltzmann had no knowledge of the quantum realm, 
there's a quantum mechanical analogy to this in the form of the 
quantum fluctuations that fill space. Given enough time, such 
fluctuations could fashion anything, even a conscious entity. 
3 2 4 THE SPOOKY UNIVERSE 


Quantum mechanical 
applications 
A lthough the bizarre behaviour of particles in the quantum 
M. world seems remote from everyday experience, this does 
not mean that quantum physics is an abstract f1eld that is of 
interest to theoretical physicists alone. In fact, nothing cou ld 
be further from the truth: quantum physics is a practical 
science that has integrated itself into numerous aspects of 
our day-to-day lives. It lurks everywhere, from our electronics 
to our telecommunications, and from our smart phones to 
mundane visits to the supermarket. 
Some technologies deliberately take advantage of quantum 
mechanical effects, while others were invented and applied 
long before the theory behind them was fully understood. 
Without quantum mechanics, much of the technology we take 
for granted in the modern world would not have come to exist. 
Quantum science also operates in living things, underying many 
chemical processes vital to life. Perhaps it even acts as the 
basis for our consciousness. 
326 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 


Lasers 
U
biquitous in modern technology, laser s are powerful beams 
of light that owe thew un1que properties to the fact that 
their individual photons are all 'coherent'. This means that the 
peaks and troughs of their waves are locked in st ep with each 
other, allowing them to form intense, tightly focused beams. 
The word laser is an acr onym f or 'light amplification by 
stimulated emission of radiation'. It relies on a material called a 
lasing medium, in the form of a crystal or a gas. When electrons 
in the medium's atoms are energized by an electric f1eld or 
intense light, they jump to a higher energy level. Normally, they 
would emit photons of identical wavelengths at random as they 
naturally dropped back to the ground state However, here the 
surrounding laser 'cavity' traps these photons, bouncing them 
back and forth through the medium. As the photons interact 
with electrons each time, they trigger stimulated emission, 
forcing an electron to release another photon with identical 
properties to the fwst and amplifying the overall beam. 
328 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 

Fully reflective 
mirror 
energizes 
medium 
How a laser works 
Electron 
Cascade multiplies 
number of photons 
95% mirror reflects 
most photons back 
into medium, 
intensifying laser 
Escaping beam 
of photons 

Scanning tunnelling 
microscope 
T
he wavelike properties of electrons can be used to image 
objects on much smaller scales than is possible with visible 
light (see page 40). The scanning tunnelling microscope takes 
this a step further, making use of quantum tunnelling. It plays 
a key role in medical research and microchip manufacturing, 
among numerous other applications. 
The microscope is essentially a stylus with an extremely f1ne 
t ip that ends in a single atom that is brought within an atom's-
width distance of the sample A voltage is then applied that 
excites electrons in the surface, causing some of them to 
quantum tunnel across the distance between the surface 
and the tip and generating a so-called 'tunnelling current'. The 
t ip then scans across the surface, moving up and down with 
respect to its contours to ensure that the tunnelling current 
remains constant. By monitoring the up-and-down movements 
of the stylus, the microscope builds up an image of the surface 
at the atomic scale. 
330 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 

Principle of the scanning tunnelling microscope 
Direction of scan 
Tip trace keeps tunnelling 
current constant 
I 

Magnetic resonance 
imaging 
I
f you've ever been to hospital for a magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) scan, then you've experienced applied quantum 
physics at work in your very own body. MRI takes advantage of 
the fact that protons within hydrogen atoms inside your body's 
water and fat have a quantized spin that 'points' in one of 
two directions, each with a slightly different energy (see page 
108). During an MRI scan you move through a short cylinder 
that applies a strong magnetic f1eld. The f1eld aligns most of 
the proton spins in the direction of the f1eld, while those with 
higher spin energy are aligned in the opposite direction 
A rapidly varying radio-frequency magnetic f1eld is then applied, 
which the lower-spin energy protons absorb, causing their spin 
to 'flip' to the higher state. When the magnetic f1eld is turned off, 
the protons return to their lower state and emit radio waves 
that are detected by the scanner Protons in different tissues 
return to their lower states at different rates, allowing doctors 
to differentiate between organs and monitor their health. 
332 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 


Electronics 
M
odern microelectronics are built on silicon chips and the 
electric currents t hat move around them. Harnessing t 1ny 
flows of charged electrons through relatively small collections of 
at oms, they're a tangible example of quantum physics in action 
The electrons in silicon, as in any solid object, are distributed 
in quantized energy bands that dictate how that solid object 
conducts electrical current. The structure of the bands is unique 
t o each mat erial. By 'doping' silicon with small amounts of other 
elements, engineers can alter its conducting properties to suit a 
variety of applications, creating semiconductor mater ials that will 
only allow elect ricity t o flow in certain directions or under certain 
conditions. Layered semiconduct ors can be used to build diodes, 
transistors and other electronic components t hat are mere 
nanometres across, yet are capable of performing simple 'logical' 
f unctions Placed alongside each other on silicon chips, these 
components can be fashioned into the complex integrated circuits 
that are the basis of most modern technology. 
334 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 


Flash drives 
T
he humble computer memory stick is another quantum 
mechanical marvel. Its 'flash-drive' memory stores bits of 
digital data (ls and Os), using a device known as a floating gate 
transistor This contains two distinct logic-gate circuits- a 
'control' gate that governs the flow of current through the 
transistor (like an on/off switch) and a floating gate that acts 
as a memory cell. To preserve its state, the floating gate is 
electrically insulated from the rest of the transistor by two 
thin oxide layers. 
When we save a bit of data onto a memory stick, our computer 
sends a signal that applies a strong voltage across the 
transistor. This causes electrons to quantum tunnel their 
way across the oxide layers into the floating gate. Here, they 
become trapped and the data becomes stored in the insulated 
memory cell. To delete the data, a voltage is applied in the 
other direction so that the electrons can tunnel their way back 
through the oxide layer. 
336 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 

Structure of a floating gate transistor 
Electron source 
Electron-rich 
semiconductor 
Oxide 
layers 
Electron drain 
-~--~--~-· 
Flow of electrons 
Floating 
gate traps 
electrons 
Electron-deficient 
semiconductor material 
Electron-rich 
semiconductor 

LEOs 
1 ight emitting diodes (LEOs) are another ubiquitous feature of 
L. everyday life that operates on quantum principles. Inside an 
LED bulb is a semiconductor chip that only conducts electricity 
in certain conditions. The LED semiconductor is made of two 
layers of a crystalline material, such as gallium arsenide or 
gallium nitrate, mixed with other elements that slightly alter its 
conducting properties. This mixing leaves one of the layers with 
an excess of high-energy electrons and t he other with many 
spaces at lower energies for the electrons to fill. 
Between t he two layers is a gap known as a p-n junction (p refers 
to t he layer with spaces, n refers to the layer with the excess 
electrons) The p-n junction is a diode, meaning t he electrons can 
only f low one way when a voltage is applied. As they cross t he p-n 
junction, the electrons have to shed quanta of energy in the form 
of light, causing the diode to illuminate. The wider the junction, 
the greater the quantum jump, and the higher the energy and 
shorter the wavelength of light emitted. 
3 3 8 
QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 

>-
(!) 
a: 
w z 
w 
Structure of an LED + 
p-type material 
n- type material 
I 
holes 
excess electrons 
Energy levels at the p-njunction 
conducting electrons 
+-
~ 
~
J t'--------
,. electrons recombine 
- - - - - - - - *" 
w1th holes, los1ng energy 
0 0 O_Q 0 0 0~------
-
holes 
'-' ~ 

Atomic clocks 
T
he most accurate timekeepers in the Universe, atomic 
clocks are unsurprisingly reliant on quantum principles. 
Magnetic f1elds and blue laser light are used to cool individual 
atoms of beryllium, caesium or strontium to extremely low 
temperatures at which the atoms are hardly moving. A red 
laser is then shone onto the atoms, its wavelength specifically 
attuned to the amount of energy required for their electrons 
to make a quantum JUmp to a higher energy level. 
Once the electrons have absorbed a photon and jumped, they 
immediately emit a microwave photon and drop back down. 
As long as the atoms remain illuminated by the red laser, the 
electrons keep jumping up and down within a precise period, like a 
pendulum ticking off the seconds. Pulses of emitted microwaves 
create a measurable signal with an accuracy of one lost second 
every 300 million years. Even more accurate are 'quantum clocks' 
that measure the vibrational states of cooled ions of beryllium or 
aluminium. These clocks only lose a second every 3.86 billion years. 
340 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 


Quantum cryptography 
S
ecure encryption of data plays an increasingly important role 
in our Information age. It usually involves algorithms based 
on long strings of numbers that are virtually impossible to break 
using traditional computing techniques In the future, however, 
quantum comput ers may easily crack t hese codes, so systems 
are likely to rely on undecipherable quantum encryption. 
In a typical quantum cryptography system, the sender encodes 
photons with binary data by adjusting their spin alignment . 
The receiver passes the photons through a filter (either+ or 
x- shaped), and openly asks the sender if they chose the correct 
filter at each stage (see opposite). This tells the receiver the 
correct filter sequence, but the non-quantum information 
relayed is meaningless to eavesdroppers without context. Any 
attempt to intercept the signal will alt er the spin states of the 
photons, showing that someone has been interfering. For even 
greater security, photons don't need t o be beamed at all: the 
information could, instead, be sent using quantum t eleportation. 
342 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 

Alice puts photons through filters to encode information before sending them 
to Bob. Photons cannot be intercepted without disrupting the message. 
t 
Alice t 
1 
Bob puts photons through one of two filters and measures result. 
Bob 
Bob openly sends Alice a list of the filters he used. 
irn rn rn rn [g) [g) ) 
Alice confirms which filters were right or wrong. rt 
(YES 
YES 
NO 
NO 
YES 
YES 
I 1 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
I 
Alice 
(Not 1) 
(Not 0) 
Bob can now deduce the filters Alice used, 
and fmd the original information. 
t 
Bob 
t 
Bob 
0 

Telecommunications 
M
odern telecommunications are built around microwaves, 
lasers and optical f1bres. Lasers in particular are a 
quantum phenomenon created by manipulating the way in which 
photons are emitted by electrons as they jump between energy 
levels (see page 328). Their intensity allows digital signals, in the 
form of pulses of laser light, to be transmitted across huge 
distances by f1bre optic cables without losing strength. 
In the near future, with data security becoming ever more 
important, tamper-proof quantum cryptography is sure to be 
more widely implemented acros telecommunications networks. 
In 2016, China launched the f~rst quantum communications 
satellite, named Mozi. The satellite incorporates quantum key 
encryption and, if successful, will create an unhackable wireless 
network. The initial steps in setting up quantum-encrypted links 
to and from a distant satellite are complex, but in the next few 
years the Chinese government intend to have the f1rst quantum 
communications network running between Europe and Asia. 
344 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 


Radiometric dating 
A n ingenious application of the quantum phenomenon of 
M. radioactivity (see page 128), radiometric dating uses t he 
probabilistic decay of radioactive atoms to determine the age of 
everything from rocks to organic matter. The best-known method 
is carbon dating, widely used by archaeologists. A radioactive 
form of carbon, carbon-14, is continually produced in Earth's 
atmosphere as particles from space collide with nitrogen atoms 
Radiation intensity 100% 
Radiation intensity 50% 
~· 
..... \ 
..... 
... ... 
Directly after death 
5,730 years after death 
346 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 

All living things contain a small amount of radioactive carbon that 
is constantly being recycled in and out of the environment. 
Once an organism dies, however, this exchange stops, and t he 
quantum process of radioactive decay takes hold. Carbon -14 has 
a half- life of 5,730 years, meaning it takes that long for half of the 
atoms in a sample t o decay. Scientists can t herefore measure the 
surviving amount of carbon -14 and work backwards to f1nd t he 
age of a sample. Carbon-14's half-life is relat ively short, limiting 
t he technique t o relics dating back just 50,000 years, but similar 
t echniques can be used to date billion-year-old rock sam ples. 
Radiation intensity 25% 
\ ... 
11,460 years after death 
Radiation intensity 12.5% 
17,190 years after death 
QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 347 

Quantum dots 
Q
uantum dots are tiny pieces of semiconductor (usually 
silicon or germanium ),just a few dozen atoms across. 
Atoms in the dot are so close that their electrons influence 
each other. However, because Pauli's exclusion principle forbids 
them to share the same quantum states, a new arrangement 
forms, creating new energy levels around the dot, rather like the 
electron orbitals around a single atom. For this reason, quantum 
dots are sometimes referred to as 'artificial atoms'. 
As in an individual atom, electrons in the dot can absorb 
photons, jumping to higher energy levels and then emitting a 
photon as they drop back down, which causes the dots to glow. 
The size of the dot dictates the colour it glows: in larger dots 
the energy levels are more closely spaced, so the energy of t he 
photon is lower and the light redder. Smaller dots have more 
broadly spaced energy levels and so produce higher energy, 
bluer photons. Quantum dots can be used as biosensors, in 
solar cells, or even as LEOs in next-generation television sets. 
348 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 

Illumination 
from blue light 
Dot size 
(nanometres) 
450 
depends 
on size 
500 
Quantum dots: size and colour 
.. , 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
\ 
\ 
550 
Wavelength (nm) 
600 
650 

Superfluids 
W
hen certain liquids, such as liquid helium, are cooled t o just 
a few degrees above absolute zero, they lose all frictional 
resistance. Given a litt le momentum, t hey will keep flowing 
uphill or will creep out of containers and over obstacles. Set a 
superfluid spinning and it creates quantum vortices that carry 
quantized angular momentum, and can keep swirling indefinitely. 
Superfluids are Bose-Einstein condensates (see page 114), 
systems in which atomic bosons drop to the lowest possible 
energy level and hence avoid col lisions, dramatically lowering 
their viscosity. As quantum solvents, superfluids can dissolve 
chemicals into clumps of just a few molecules, surrounded by a 
'quantum solvation shell' that allows them to rotate freely. This 
proves useful for studying individual gas molecules. Frictionless 
superfluids have also been used in a high- pr ecision gyroscope, 
and also as a means of 'trapping' electromagnetic radiation· 
interaction between photons and superfluids can slow the 
speed of light to just 17 metres (56ft) per second. 
350 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 

FERMIONS 
Fermions obey Pauli's exclusion 
principle-particles are forced to 
occupy different quantum states. 
BOSONS 
Cooled bosons can all fall into 
lowest-energy state, allowing them 
to exhibit identical behaviour such 
as superfluid properties. 

Superconductivity 
W
hen some metals, such as lead, niobium, mercury and 
rhodium, are chilled to a few degrees above absolute 
zero, they experience a sudden drop in electrical resistance 
to practically zero. They become superconductors, capable of 
holding an electrical current without losing energy, in theory 
for billions of years. Superconductors also repel magnetic 
f1elds, which is the secret behind magnetic levitation 
Inside the metals, ions (charged atomic nuclei) are arranged 
in a lattice structure, surrounded by electrons. Normally, 
ions vibrate and collide with the electrons flowing past them, 
creating electrical resistance. But when cooled below a critical 
temperature, the electrons begin to form pairs that defy 
Pauli's exclusion principle by having similar quantum states. The 
energy of these 'Cooper pairs' dramatically lowers and, in the 
lattice structure, an energy gap opens up above the electrons. 
Because they don't have enough energy to cross the gap, they 
can't collide with the ions, so there is no electrical resistance. 
352 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 

Crystal-
line lattice of 
conducting 
material 
lattice deforms 
to create trough 
of positive charge 
that aids flow of 
electrons 
Metal ions-
centres of 
positive 
charge 
Inside a superconductor 

Quantum chemistry 
S
ince it deals with molecules rather than individual atoms 
or particles, chemistry is generally considered to be a step 
up in scale from particle physics. Nevertheless, the quantum 
properties of atoms still have an effect on many aspects of 
chemistry. Chemical bonds are formed by the exchange or 
sharing of electrons between different atoms in order for 
each to achieve a relatively stable shell configuration (either 
full or half full), so it's understandable that quantum physics, by 
changing our understanding of the electrons and their orbits, 
also has an impact on our understanding of these bonds. 
German physicists Walter Heitler and Fritz London used 
the newly minted Schri:idinger wave equation to model the 
structure of the bond between two hydrogen atoms as early 
as 1927. Today's quantum chemists use a variety of different 
techniques, including computer modelling, to better understand 
how electron properties are distributed around more complex 
molecules, and how this can affect their larger- scale properties. 
354 QUANTUM APPLICATIONS 

Using quantum mechanics to model the distribution of electrons, 
scientists can better understand the shape and functionality of 
complex chemicals such as this insulin molecule. 

Quantum biology 
A ll living things rely on the transfer and conversion of energy 
M to keep themselves alive, and wherever energy is being 
converted, a quantum process is usually involved. The growing 
f1eld of quantum biology seeks to explain biological processes 
through the prism of quantum mechanics. 
Most functions of plant and animal life rely on chemical reactions 
that are themselves predicated on the quantum behaviour of 
electrons. Absorption of light can be used to generate chemical 
energy or send information to sensory organs. Neurons in our 
brains, meanwhile, are the nodes of chemical and electrical 
networks that operate on a quantum level. Enzymes, the 
biological workhorses that catalyse chemical reactions in our 
body, seem to use quantum tunnelling to help move electrons 
through otherwise insurmountable energy barriers around 
molecules. If we can understand how these processes work, we 
may be able to create artificial catalysts to generate energy and 
form new molecules in environmentally friendly ways. 
3 56 QUANTUM BIOLOGY 


Biological compasses 
S
ome animals display a sixth sense that makes them aware 
of Earth's magnetic f1eld. This is most obvious in migrating 
birds, which follow f1eld lines to navigate across the planet. 
For birds, one possible explanation is the presence in the 
sensory system of an iron - oxide mineral called magnetite, 
which is highly magnetic, allowing ind ividual grains to 
al ign with Earth's own magnetism. Another explanation, 
however, invokes quantum mechanics. Certain proteins, 
sensitive to blue light, create a pair of 'radicals', highly 
reactive atoms or molecules with a single valence electron, 
rather tha n a pair. The effect of Earth's magnetism on 
their quantum spins causes the blue-sensitive proteins 
to remain active for longer and creates a colour shift in 
vision that a migrating bird can detect. It has even been 
suggested that valence electrons in each of the rad icals 
cou ld be entangled, ensuring that when one aligns with the 
magnetic field, so does the other. 
358 QUANTUM BIOLOGY 


Quantum photosynthesis 
P
erhaps surprisingly, one of the key processes that permits 
life on Earth also owes its success to quantum physics. 
Plants gain energy through photosynthesis, using energy from 
the Sun to convert water and carbon dioxide into glucose. The 
key to this process is the green pigment molecule chlorophyll 
and, specifically, elements called chromophores that capture 
the energy of sunlight in the fwst place. 
When a photon is absor bed by chlorophyll, it s energy creates 
molecular vibrations in a pair of chromophores that can only be 
described in quantum terms. The vibrations transport the energy 
around a leaf's cellular st ructure, and the efficiency of this energy 
transport is increased when the energy of a pair of vibrating 
chromophores matches their vibrational transitions, leading 
t o the exchange of a quanta of energy. Remarkably, chlorophyll 
demonstrates this quantum behaviour in war m temperatures 
where we might expect it to be drowned out by other molecular 
vibrations. There's much we can learn from t he humble tree leaf. 
360 QUANTUM BIOLOGY 


Quantum vision 
0 
ur eyes are biological sensors for detecting photons of 
light, so it's unsurprising that the vision process involves 
quantum physics. The retina at the back of the eye is lined 
with photoreceptor cells that convert photons of light into 
electrical signals using a chemical called retinal, which changes 
its structure when it absorbs light energy. This is the fwst step 
on an electrochemical pathway that ends with signals to the 
brain. However, in a biological analogue of the photoelectric 
effect, a photon must carry a certain quantized amount of 
energy in order to stimulate the retinal 
This explains a biological oddity. Our warm bodies produce large 
amounts of thermal [infrared) radiation, which inevitably leaks 
into our eyes. A million times more photons enter our eyes from 
our bodies than from the outside world, so why do we not see 
all this thermal radiation when we close our eyes? The answer is 
that, even though there are more of them, none of these thermal 
photons carry sufficient energy to stimulate retinal 
362 QUANTUM BIOLOGY 


Quantum consciousness 
C 
auld quantum physics lie at the root of human 
consciousness? Numerous physicists have speculated 
on these lines, including Niels Bohr and Eugene Wigner. The 
current champion for quantum consciousness is British 
physicist Roger Penrose. Together with an anaesthesiologist 
named Stuart Hameroff, Penrose has proposed a theory, 
called orchestrated objective reduction, that describes 
consciousness as a consequence of quantum gravity. 
Penrose and Hameroff's idea is that quantum gravity 
manifests itself as spacetime vibrations inside tiny 
protein polymers ca lled microtubules that reside in the 
neurons of the brain. A superposition of quantum states 
generated by the microtubules decays steadily rather than 
instantly, creating the moment-to - moment awareness of 
consciousness. In 2014, Penrose and Hameroff went further, 
claiming the rhythm of brain waves as evidence for the 
presence of spacetime vibrations within the microtubules. 
364 QUANTUM BIOLOGY 

-Axon 
Structure of a neuron 
Complex molecules called microtubules 
are a crucial component of cells in most 
living organisms. Some scientists have 
argued that the molecular structure of 
microtubules within the neurons of the brain 
makes them an ideal location for quantum 
behaviour that could form the basis 
of consciousness. 

Against quantum 
consciousness 
M
any scientists have poured cold water on claims that 
human consciousness arises from quantum effects. 
Chief among these sceptics has been Max Tegmark of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Pointing out 
that the brain is a hot and very complex structure, he ran 
calculations suggesting any quantum superpositions that 
might arise in the brain would decohere faster than neurons 
can signal each other. This means that, should these quantum 
states exist, they could have no effect on brain processing. 
Since Tegmark's analysis, however, studies have shown that 
living creatures can indeed use quantum effects to their 
benef1t These include photosynthesis in plants and the 
magnetoreception sense of migrating birds. Ultimately, the 
human brain is far too complex for us to model properly yet, 
which means there is still space for theories of quantum 
consciousness alongside the better-supported theories that 
our brain can be described by classical physics. 
366 QUANTUM BIOLOGY 


No free will? 
F
rom a philosophical point of view, the most significant effect 
of quantum mechanics is whether or not 1t allows us free 
will. Many quantum physicists and philosophers believe that 
determinism, which says the Universe is predictable, results in 
all our actions and decisions being essentially predictable, 
too (if, of course, one had the computing power, a complete 
understanding of the processes involved and access to all 
necessary information about the Universe). Conversely, some 
also suggest that the probabilistic randomness of quantum 
mechanics effectively removes free will: if nothing can be 
predicted with accuracy, we don't really get any say in what 
happens as a result of our actions. 
In either case, free wi ll would be an illusion, and German physicist 
Sabine Hossenfelder has proposed the existence of 'free-will 
functions', hidden laws that could give rise to something that 
appears to be free will. Whether that distinction is enough to 
affect our own perception, however, is another matter. 
3 6 8 
QUANTUM BIOLOGY 

3.141592653589793238462643383279502884197169 
+ 
+ 
~ 
Apparently random- 979323846264338327 
str1ng of numbers 
9 
3 
7 
5284308268998026826046187032954494790285015 
3 
4 
2 
1 
865132823066470938 _Apparently random 
str1ng of numbers 
+ 
+ 
1 
7067982148086513282306647093844609550582231 
7 
2 
5 
3 
5 
... 5011258391072014820547111848218049 
Printer 
Sabine Hossenfelder compares her 'free will 
functions' to a machine that sequentially 
prints one digit of pi every second: if you 
read part of the printout from such a 
machine without knowing anything about 
it, the digits would appear random and 
unpredictable. 

Quantum computing 
Q
uantum computers promise to change the world in ways 
we can't imagine. Our information age sees us swamped in 
data - from social media to the results of scientific experiments 
-and t raditional digital computers struggle when analysing huge 
amounts of information. Quantum computers, however, have the 
parallel processing power to take on these challenges. 
While digital computers store information as binary 'bits' that 
take a value of either 0 or 1, quantum computers use the 
superposition of quantum states of particles to store information 
in elements called qubits. Superposition boosts the processing 
speed of quantum computers: while an ordinary computer works 
on just one computation at once, a quantum computer can be 
working on millions of computations simultaneously In the future, 
t hese powerful devices will be able to sift and analyse enormous 
amounts of data, solving complex mathematical problems that 
can be applied to areas such as modelling the environment, curing 
disease and investigating the quantum world itself. 
370 QUANTUM COMPUTING 


Qubits 
T
hink of a qubit as a quantum of information -the simplest 
and smallest unit of information possible. The difference 
between a qubit and a digital bit is that, whereas a normal bit 
can be in only one of two states (0 or 1, true or false, yes or 
no), a qubit can exist as both 0 and 1, true and false, yes and 
no. This is because its quantum states are superposed, like 
Schrodinger's cat, until a measurement is made. Qubits can be 
individual atoms, ions, electrons, Bose-Einstein condensates, 
superconducting circuits called Josephson junctions or even 
photons of light 
The information in a qubit is encoded into its quantum properties, 
such as the spin of an electron or the polarization of a photon. 
The number of possible states equals 2N for N qubits, so two 
qubits can process four states simultaneously, and six qubits 
can process 64 states simultaneously Each qubit can ultimately 
produce just one answer when measured, but the superposition 
of states provides extraordinary processing power. 
372 QUANTUM COMPUTING 

Classical and quantum bits 
Value= 1 
t 
Classical bit 
Value= 0 
A normal binary digit of 
information can only take 
on two states, 1 or 0. 
A quantum qubit can exist in a 
superposition of 1 and 0 states, allowing 
an array of qubits to process huge 
amounts of information simultaneously. 

Types of quantum 
computer 
P
hysicists developing quantum computers don't expect 
to build a top-of-the-range model immediately. Instead, 
the development of quantum computers is expected to pass 
through three stages or milestones. The most basic, called 
a quantum annealer, considers variable quantum states as 
something like a topographical map with hills and valleys (see 
opposite) Whi le devices capab le of this step have been built, 
the technique is only useful for specific problems, and quantum 
annealers have not proved to be significantly faster than 
ordinary computers. 
The next step, a so- called 'analog quantum computer', wou ld be 
faster than a regular computer. Such a machine wou ld operate 
with JUSt 50-100 qubits and, again, could only solve a few types 
of problems. But it would be an important milestone on the way 
to a true universal quantum computer. Equipped with around 
100,000 qubits, such a device wou ld be exponentially faster 
than normal computers. 
374 QUANTUM COMPUTING 

3 
.... 
c: 
0 
:;:; 
0 c: 
~ 
n; 
0 :;:; 
<11 
E 
(I) 
.c: 
~ 
<11 
::2 
Quantum annealing 
,.,..,. ... , 
, 
' 
, 
\ 
I 
\ 
Classical computing assesses 
I 
\ 
solutions by measuring gradients 
I 
\ 
1 
\ across map to identify local 
1 
\ and global minima. 
: . 
I 
I 
' ' 
\ 
Quantum annealing 
tunnels straight to 
global minimum 
-· 
Optimal solution 
Variable x 
Quantum annealing considers mathematical problems in a way analogous to an 
elevation map, with hills and valleys, and a solution at the bottom of the lowest 
valley on the map (the 'global minimum'). A classical computer would have to 
search the entire map to fmd the right solution, but a quantum computer can 
effectively 'tunnel' through the hills to find the answer in moments. 

Problems of decoherence 
T
he biggest problem facing quantum computers is decoherence, 
the decay of the wave funct1on when a qubit's quantum state 
is measured [see page 176] Decoherence would eradicate a qubit's 
superposition so that, instead, of being in a state of both 0 and 1, 
it would be forced to take on one value or the other. 
Decoherence turns a quantum computer into a regular classical 
computer, and it will be hard to avoid. Qubits will have to be 
kept isolated from outside interference that would cause their 
wave functions to decay. Entanglement offers one possible way 
of measuring the state of the computer without disturbing 
the qubits doing the processing. However, many scientists 
developing quantum computer systems take the attitude that 
decoherence is something to manage; it's always going to be 
present, and there's a certain amount that can be tolerated. 
This can be done by having a computer with a large number of 
qubits, so that the error rate caused by decoherence is small 
compared with the number of qubits. 
376 QUANTUM COMPUTING 

Decohering 
logic gate 
Decoupling 
protection 
Quantum 
Electron-
spin qubit 
suffers rapid 
decoherence 
Qubits coupled 
in logic gate 
A two qubit logic 
gate (see page 380) 
loses fidelity through 
interactions with its 
environment. 
Isolating qubits 
preserves information, 
but prevents them 
from functioning in 
a logic gate. 
Protected gate 
Nuclear-spin qubit: 
slower calculations 
but greater stability 
'Protected' gates can 
entangle two different 
qubits together while 
isolating the system 
from decoherence. 

Controlling qubits 
I
solating a quantum computer's qubits in order to avoid 
decoherence requ1res some means of trapp1ng and 
holding them without causing their wave functions to decay. 
Computers that use atoms as their qubits can use a grid of 
lasers called an optical lattice to create potential wel ls where 
the beams intersect, trapping the atoms in these regions. 
Electrically charged ions, meanwhile, could be conf1ned by 
electromagnetic f1elds, and might convey information through 
their collective motions as their charges influence each other. 
Quantum dots (see page 348) can be used to control the 
electrons that arrange themselves in orbits around them, 
but quantum computers based on light are more problematic, 
since photons don't interact with one another. Mirrors and 
devices called beam - splitters might be one way of conf1ning 
the light, as are so-ca lled 'Rydberg atoms' - large atoms 
that can collectively slow light to a crawl - paving the way for 
quantum computer 'circuits' made from light itself 
378 QUANTUM COMPUTING 

Simulated wave function of 
a Rydberg atom- a possible 
means of confining photons for 
use in quantum computing 

Quantum logic gates 
A
classical computer uses small components called logic 
gates that carry out simple logical functions based on the 
electronic signals (bits of binary data) that are fed into them. 
For example, an AND gate multiplies two inputs, an OR gate 
adds two inputs and a NOT gate inverts a single input. There 
are other variations of these gates, but only the NOT gate is 
reversible; the others are one-way only. 
Quantum logic gates, in contrast, are all reversible. Sequences 
of quantum gates form 'quantum circuits', and since they only 
perform functions based on one or two inputs, their behaviour 
can be described in terms of either 2 x 2 or 4 x 4 matrices. There 
can be many more quantum gates than ordinary logic gates, 
each performing a different function on the qubits. In the past, 
quantum gates have been bu ilt out of such exotic materials as 
Rydberg atoms and photons, but in 2015 researchers were able to 
build a quantum gate out of silicon for the f1rst t ime, a maJor step 
towards making quantum computers practical. 
3 80 QUANTUM COMPUTING 

A CNOT gate performs a binary 'NOT' operation on a qubit, flipping its 
state from 0 to 1 or vice versa, but only if a second control qui bit is in 
state '1'. In 2013 researchers succeeded in building such a gate using 
a photon and a quantum dot (see page 348). 
Quantum dot in 
state 1 is invisible to 
photon, which leaks 
out with its 
polarization 
changed by the 
surrounding crystal. 
Quantum dot in 
state 0 absorbs 
photon, and emits 
a new one whose 
polarization is 
identical to the 
original. 
Crystal cavity 
I 1\ rl 
1 Vertically 
polarized 
photon in 
\. __ + Jl././.,_ _Horizontally 
wrr. 
polarized 
0 photon out 
1 
,----4--t~ll'tl\r-- Vertically 
polarized 
photon in 
'---~~JH~--andout 
1 

Quantum algorithms 
A n algorithm is a step-by-step procedure that tells a 
M. computer how to solve a problem or perform a task. 
Normal algorithms can run on quantum computers, but there 
are also quantum algorithms specia lly designed to take 
advantage of qubits' inherent ability for parallel processing. 
Because these algorithms work on the principle of finding a 
solution from one of two answers (0 or 1, true or false and 
so on), they can't do anything that is illogical, or theoretically 
impossible for a normal computer to accomplish. What they can 
do, however, is solve problems much faster. A task that might 
take a normal computer centuries might be completed using a 
quantum algorithm in a matter of minutes. 
The algorithms utilize quantum logic gates to act on a given 
number of qubits of input data, cu lminating in a measurement 
that reveals a resu lt. Among the most important are Grover's 
algorithm (shown opposite) and Shor's algorithm. 
382 QUANTUM COMPUTING 

Grover's algorithm 
is a simple quantum 
algorithm for sorting 
through an unordered 
database and frnding a 
specific item. 
Grover's algorithm 
Database of n items 
Classical solution: n queries required 
to guarantee finding target. 
Quantum solution: v n queries 
required to guarantee finding target. 

Quantum error 
correction 
Q
uantum computers are so delicate that you can quite 
literally change the state of qubits by looking at them. 
Decoherence will inevitably introduce 'noise' and logic gates 
will introduce occasional errors, just as they do in classical 
computers. Traditionally, the simplest way to f1x such errors has 
been through redundancy; bits of information are copied and sent 
multiple times. If there are errors, the repetition may become 
scrambled and the computer can detect and correct the mistake. 
Unfortunately, this procedure doesn't work for qubits. We 
cannot copy their quantum states because we don't know what 
they are. This is called the 'no cloning theorem'. However, the 
information stored on a qubit can be spread across multiple 
qubits by entanglement, for instance encoding it into the spins of 
three electrons. Once this is done, errors can be spotted using 
a so-called 'syndrome measurement' that doesn't disturb the 
superposition, and suggests various recovery procedures that 
can f1x the errors without causing further decoherence. 
3 84 QUANTUM COMPUTING 

Simplified error correction procedure 
l . lnformation entangled on 
three separate qubits 
3. Error corrected 
I • 

Quantum simulations 
U 
nsurprisingly, quantum processes and systems are 
difficult to simulate in nonquantum computers, so a major 
application of quantum computing will be to better understand 
quantum physics itself, along with its applications 
Take, for example, collisions in a particle accelerator like 
the Large Hadron Collider. A powerful quantum computer 
could model these collisions in a virtual experiment, showing 
the energies created and the daughter particles released 
in high detail before the actual experiment is performed 
More exotically, quantum computers could be used to 
describe conditions at the cores of neutron stars, where the 
temperatures and pressures are so great that matter could 
take the form of superconducting superfluids governed by the 
strong nuclear force. More down-to- earth applications could 
include allowing greater understanding of high-temperature 
(that is, closer to 0 o C/32° F) superconducting materials, and 
even designing better quantum computers! 
3 86 QUANTUM COMPUTING 


Building quantum 
computers 
Q
uantum computing is still in its infancy: the f1rst 
experimental test of a quantum algorithm took place in 
1998 in Oxford, using just two qubits held in an MRI machine. 
The same year a three-qubit computer was built and, by 2000, 
the Los Alamos National Laboratory in the United States had 
a seven-qubit magnetic resonance quantum computer up and 
running. These systems, however, were so basic that they could 
only solve the simplest of problems. In 2001, Shor's algorithm 
was fwst demonstrated at Stanford University. The quantum 
computer that achieved this (calculating that the two prime 
factors of 15 are 3 and 5) also had just seven qubits. 
In 2012, however, a Canadian company called 0-Wave claimed 
to have built an 84-qubit computer using quantum annealing, 
and in 2015 they announced the fwst 1,000- qubit chip. However, 
many sceptical scientists have pointed out that, while these 
may technically be described as quantum computers, in 
practice they are no faster than ordinary computers. 
3 88 QUANTUM COMPUTING 


Future challenges 
Q
uantum mechanics is not some isolated corner of the 
scientific world. It underlies almost every aspect of physics, 
chemistry and even biology - from electronics to astrophysics 
and from medicine to materials science As we seek to make new 
advances in these areas and others, our understanding of the 
quantum realm is sure to play a pivotal role. New technologies, 
new energy sources and the use of quantum computing will all be 
part of our quantum future. 
But it's not only applications that will develop. Fundamental 
question marks still remain over the meaning of some crucial 
aspects of quantum mechanics. Is the wave function a real 
wave or just an abstract concept? Is human consciousness 
a key element in defining the quantum reality around us7 Can 
we unify quantum mechanics with other theories7 Will we ever 
learn the origin of the Big Bang and the true nature of the 
Universe? These are big questions, but if we can crack these 
quantum challenges, the rewards will be tremendous. 
390 THE FUTURE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


The observer's role 
I
f the act of observing and measuring a wave function causes 
it to collapse, this raises a number of philosophical questions. 
If something is never observed, does it exist, or does it remain 
in a state of superposition? If the latter is true, then vast 
expanses of the Universe in which there are no observers 
would remain as uncollapsed wave functions. Most quantum 
physicists disregard this avenue of thought, pointing out 
that the wave function of an object is not the actual physical 
object itself, but just a way of describing the object's quantum 
properties. Furthermore, 'measurements' may be made simply 
by interaction with other particles and radiation, causing 
decoherence regardless of whether anybody is watching. 
But not all physicists are ready to discount the role of the 
observer. American theoretical physicist John Wheeler argued 
that the Universe and the observer are mutually dependent; 
one needs the other, and simply making a measurement is not 
enough: a conscious mind needs to read that measurement. 
3 9 2 THE FUTURE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Objective collapse 
T
he Copenhagen interpretation is famously noncommittal on 
some Important facet s of quantum mechanics. For example, 
it makes no j udgement as to whether the wave f unction is real, 
but merely treats it as a description of the probabilistic nature 
of quantum states. The many-worlds interpretation removes this 
vagueness by stating t hat the wave is real and branches off into 
different universes, though this in turn raises many new questions 
These two extremes leave room for other models between them, 
one of which is objective collapse theory. As its name suggest s, 
this treats t he wave function as a real phenomenon, with a 
collapse t hat is also objectively real. However, once the wave 
f unction has collapsed, that's the end of it; there is no 'branching 
off' as in many worlds. What's more, objective collapse happens 
either at random or at a certain scale threshold, with no special 
role for the observer. However, critics point to a problem that has 
not yet been resolved; in order for energy to be conserved, a small 
part of the wave funct ion must somehow remai n uncollapsed. 
394 THE FUTURE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Objective collapse allows 
wave functions to collapse 
without an observer. Matter 
starts to form localized 
clumps that act as seeds for 
large-scale cosmic structur e. 
Some scientists argue that 
oQjective collapse is a necessity in 
order for our matter-rich Universe 
to emerge from the Big Bang. 
In the strictest version of the 
Copenhagen interpretation, the 
lack of some form of observer in 
the aftermath of the Big Bang 
should mean that wave functions 
do not collapse and matter 
remains delocalized. 

The early Universe 
R
ecreating the conditions of the Big Bang seem out 
of reach for any particle accelerator on Earth in the 
foreseeable future. At present, our best way of understanding 
the origins of the Universe is to probe the depths of space 
and observe how astronomical objects were influenced by 
quantum gravity in the fwst fraction of a second after the 
Big Bang. This requires a better understanding of inflation, 
of dark energy and of the large-scale structure of matter 
in the Universe today. 
The key lies in the cosmic microwave background radiation 
[CMBR, see page 218). the faint glow of radio waves imprinted 
with the conditions of the early Universe. The best observations 
of the CMBR so far came from the European Space Agency's 
Planck spacecraft (opposite) between 2009 and 2013, but 
future missions to study the CMBR should be able to rule out 
up to three-quarters of the potential models for inflation, 
bringing us closer to understanding the early quantum Universe. 
396 THE FUTURE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Is information destroyed? 
I
n 1974, Stephen Hawking made his reputation with the discovery 
that black holes are not qu1t e as inescapable as they may f wst 
seem. Virt ual particles formed on the edge of a black hole can 
producing Hawking radiation [see page 242), red ucing the black 
hole's mass until it evaporates completely. None of this Hawking 
radiation contains information from inside the black hole, however. 
When matter falls into a black hole, it contains information in the 
form of its quantum stat es, but Hawking [opposit e) could see no 
way for his radiation to conserve this information He made a bet 
with US physicist John Preskill that information was destroyed, 
but conceded t he bet in 2004. Why? AdS/C FT correspondence 
[see page 282) provides a new description of black holes as 
particles on the boundary between our four dimensions and a f1fth 
dimension, from which our Universe is projected like a hologram. 
These particles operate by t he laws of quantum mechanics, and so 
must conserve information. But exactly how information survives 
a black hole remains a mystery 
398 THE FUTURE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


A varying speed of light? 
A ccording to conventional physics, the speed of light in 
M a vacuum is a constant 299,792,458 metres per second 
[186,282 miles per second) wherever you are in the Universe. 
So why do some scientists suspect it can change? One reason 
is that, thanks to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, space 
is filled with virtual particles. Photons travelling through 
the vacuum of space will inevitably bump into them, and the 
energies of the particles could potentially impart a tiny effect 
on the photons, slowing their speed by a hundred trillionths of 
a second every metre Across billions of light years of space, 
this cou ld build up into a detectable difference. 
A varying speed of light has also been suggested as an 
alternative to the burst of inflation wide ly believed to have 
occurred shortly after the Big Bang [see page 214). If 
fundamental constants can change, then laws of physics can 
also change with them, presenting all kinds of problems for 
our understanding of the Universe. 
400 THE FUTURE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Extreme matter 
U
nderstanding the behaviour of matter under extreme 
conditions of temperature and pressure remains a huge 
challenge to physicists. Within the gas- giant planet Jupiter 
(opposite), pressures 40 million times greater than those on 
Earth's surface turn hydrogen into an electrically conducting 
liquid, in which the quantum states of hydrogen atoms could 
create matter that is both superfluid and superconducting at 
the same time. Things get even stranger inside neutron stars, 
where pressures can be 100 billion trillion trillion times greater 
than on Earth. Some scientists speculate that neutrons could 
break down into individual quarks, forming a new form of matter 
that is a plasma of quarks and gluons. 
Even greater pressures and temperatures, like those in the Big 
Bang, are in the realm where different quantum fteld theories 
become unifted (see page 262) Future particle accelerators, 
capable of reaching energies of 100 trillion eV (12 times that 
achievable by the LHC), will aim to probe these conditions. 
40 2 THE FUTURE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Alternatives to strings 
W
hile string theory (see page 268) is still considered the 
most l1kely candidate for a viable theory of everything, 
not everyone is happy with it. The vast number of potential 
solutions offered by its equations make it incredibly hard to 
falsify, since exponents of the theory can suggest any one of 
10500 potential vacuum states as an alternative to any that 
are shown to be wrong. Another criticism is that string theory 
is not 'background dependent': strings vibrate in space and 
through time, but don't tell us how space and time come to be. 
Lee Smolin, the inventor of loop quantum gravity (see page 
266), argues that string theory eschews experimental 
results in favour of elegant mathematics, describing multiple 
dimensions and parallel worlds without considering whether 
they can be tested. In 1999, Smolin and backer Mike Lazaridis 
helped set up the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics 
in Canada, where researchers are free to investigate not just 
string theory, but alternative theories of quantum gravity. 
404 THE FUTURE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 

Potential theory of 
everything 
Supersymmetric 
particles 
10 or 11 dimensions 
Continuous spacetime 
Graviton particles 
with spin of 2 
Composition-
dependent variation 
in gravity 
Quantum theory of 
gravity, removing need 
for theory of everything 
No supersymmetric 
particles 
4 dimensions 
(can incorporate more) 
Quantized spacetime 
White holes (spacetime 
objects where matter 
swallowed by black holes 
escapes) 
Varying speed of light 
at highest energies 
(gamma rays) 

Is Copenhagen right? 
T
he Copenhagen interpretation has dominated quantum 
mechanics for almost a century, but how literally should 
we take it? Niels Bohr still considered particles and atoms as 
inherently deterministic, and viewed the wave function as simply 
our best attempt to conceptualize it. This works f1ne for when 
it comes to solving standard quantum mechanical problems. 
Explaining Young's interference fringes or the orbitals of 
electrons doesn't really depend on whether the wave function is 
a physical thing or an abstract idea; the maths work either way. 
But dig a little deeper into nature, and the question becomes 
more important. The difference between a literal wave and a 
conceptual wave could be an infinite array of parallel universes 
or the key to the secret of quantum gravity The challenge for 
quantum physicists over the coming decades is to decide which of 
these concepts is the correct one Depending on the answer, our 
understanding not only of nature, but of our place in the Universe 
[or multiverse], could look very different. 
406 THE FUTURE OF QUANTUM PHYSICS 


Glossary 
Alpha particle 
A particle re leased by radioactive 
decay that consists of two protons 
and t wo neutrons - equivalent to t he 
nucleus of a helium atom 
Angular momentum 
A property of rotating objects 
analogous to momentum, and linked 
to their inertia and rate of rotation 
around an axis of rotation 
Atom 
The smallest indivisible unit of 
matter that displays the properties 
of a chemical element. Atoms have 
a compact nucleus consisting of 
positively charged protons and 
uncharged neutrons, surrounded by a 
cloud of negat ively charged electrons 
whose number balances the number 
of protons 
408 GLOSSARY 
Beta particle 
A particle released by radioactive 
beta decay- usually an electron but, 
rarely, a positron. Beta particles are 
released from unstable atomic nuclei 
when a neutron transforms into a 
proton or, more rarely, vice versa. 
Boson 
A particle with zero or whole- number 
'spin.' Element ary particles known 
as gauge bosons, often created as 
virtual particles, play a vital role in 
transmitting the fundamental forces 
of nature between fermions 
Electromagnetic radiation 
A natural phenomenon consisting 
of electrical and magnetic waves 
interfering with and reinforcing 
one another. It can exhibit very 
dif ferent properties depending 

on its wavelength, frequency and 
energy, and travels in discrete energy 
packets called photons that display 
both wave and particle properties 
Electron 
A low- mass elementary particle 
carrying negative electrical charge 
Electrons are found in the orbital 
shells surrounding an atomic nucleus 
Fermion 
Any particle wit h a half-integer spin, 
including all the elementary matter 
particles [known as quarks and 
leptons J Fermions are governed by 
Pauli's exclusion principle 
Fundamental force 
One of four forces governing the 
way that matter particles interact 
in nat ure. Three of the fundamental 
forces, electromagnetism and 
the weak and strong forces, are 
described by quantum physics, but 
the fourth, gravitation, is currently 
only described by general relativity. 
Gamma radiation 
A form of high-energy 
electromagnetic radiation released 
by vari ous processes such as 
radioactive decay 
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle 
A relationship stating the 
impossibility of measuring two 
'complementary' quantum properties 
[for example, a particle's position and 
momentum) with perfect accuracy at 
the same time 
Imaginary numbers 
A system of numbers based on the 
square root of -1, denoted i. Although 
i does not exist as a 'real' number, it 
is often required to solve complex 
equations including many of those 
describing quantum physics 
Lepton 
Any member of a family of elementary 
particles that are not susceptible to 
the strong nuclear force, including 
electrons and neutrinos 
GLOSSARY 409 

Magnetic moment 
A property determining the strength 
of the magnetic f1eld created by an 
object, and its susceptibility to the 
influence of other magnetic f1elds. 
Neutron 
An electrically neutral subatomic 
particle made up of two down quarks 
and an up quark, found in the nuclei 
of atoms. 
Orbital shell 
A region surrounding an atomic 
nucleus, in which electrons ar e found 
The size of an orbital determines the 
energy of electrons found there 
Pauli's exclusion principle 
A law that prevents fermion particles 
from occupying identical "states" in a 
system, and is ther efore responsible 
for much of the st ruct ure of matt er 
Photon 
A discrete packet of electromagnetic 
energy that can display wavelike, as 
well as particlelike, behaviour 
410 GLOSSARY 
Planck's constant 
A physical constant that helps defme 
quantum-scale relations such as that 
between the frequency of a photon 
and the energy it contains 
Proton 
A heavy subatomic particle with 
posit ive electric charge, found in t he 
atomic nucleus and composed of t wo 
up quarks and a down quark 
Quantum 
The minimum possible amount of 
a particular property that may be 
involved in a physical interaction 
Certain phenomena, such as the 
energies of light waves and of 
electrons in an atom, are inherently 
'quantized' on t he smallest scale. 
Quantum physics describes t he strange 
and sometimes counterintuitive 
behaviour that arises as a result 
Quark 
An elementary particle found in six 
different 'flavours', responsible for 
most of the mass in matter 

Spectral lines 
Lines in a spect rum of light with 
specific wavelengths, caused by the 
emission or absorption of light as 
electrons move between orbital 
shells and energy levels within atoms 
Spin 
A pr operty of subatomic particles, 
analogous t o angular momentum in 
larger object s, which affect s many 
aspects of their behaviour 
Wave function 
A descri ption of the quantum state 
of a system, often denoted by 
the Greek letter '4 (psi) The wave 
function describes t he probability 
of a measurement performed on 
Scientific notation: 
a quantum system producing a 
particular result 
Vector 
A mathematical object with both a 
magnitude and a specified direction 
Many quantum properties are 
described in vect or terms. 
Virtual particle 
A particle t hat spont aneously comes 
into existence and exists for an 
extremely short time as a result of 
Heisenberg's uncertaint y principle as 
it applies t o t ime and energy. Virtual 
particles are produced as particle-
ant iparticle pairs, and act as gauge 
bosons t ransmitting the fundamental 
forces of nature. 
This book inevitably deals wit h some very large and very small numbers. To 
simplify their presentation, scientific not ation is used where appropr iate, 
with numbers presented in the form ax lOb (that is, a times 10 to t he 
power of b) Hence 3 x 106 = 3,000,000 (3 followed by six zeroes] In this 
system, negative values of b indicate multiplication by 1/lOb, so for 
example 3 x 10-6 = 3 x 0.000001 = 0.000003 
GLOSSARY 411 

Index 
AdS/CFT correspondence 
282, 398 
aether 10, 16 
algorithms, quantum 
382, 388 
alpha decay 128, 130, 168 
anthropic principle 302 
antimatter 164, 166 
applications, quantum 
326-68 
atomic clocks 340 
atomic structure 42, 44, 
46, 58- 60 
baryons 110, 124 
Bell's theorem 308 
beta decay 126, 128, 132 
Big Bang 214, 216, 224, 230, 
250, 280, 300, 
396, 402 
'Big Crunch' 248, 250, 300 
biological compasses 358 
biology, quantum 356 
black body radiation 24, 26, 
28, 34 
black holes 240, 242, 398 
Bohr, Niels 44, 54, 178, 182, 
206, 406 
412 INDEX 
Boltzmann brains 324 
Born, Max 188, 150 
Born rule 150 
Bose-Einstein 
condensates 112, 114, 
350 
bosons 112, 114, 120, 126, 
136, 274, 350 
brain 364, 366 
brane theory 280, 300 
Calabi-Yau space 278 
carbon dating 346 
Casimir effect 136 
cathode rays 30 
chemistry, quantum 354 
chirality 104, 126 
clocks, quantum 340 
complementarity 182 
Compton scattering 36 
computing, quantum 
370-88 
conformal field theories 
[CFTs) 282 
consciousness, quantum 
364, 366 
Copenhagen 
interpretation 54, 144, 
146, 156, 178, 180, 286, 
292, 304, 306, 394, 406 
corpuscular theory 12, 14 
correspondence principle 
206, 208 
cosm1c microwave 
background radiation 
(CMBR) 218, 396 
cosmological constant 
232, 282 
Coulomb barrier 130, 168, 
170 
cryptography, quantum 
342, 344 
cyclical universes 300 
dark energy 230, 232, 248, 
282 
dark matter 98 
de Broglie wavelength 38, 
40, 46 
decoherence, quantum 
176, 376, 378, 384 
degeneracy, quantum 72, 
236, 238 
determinism 312, 368 
dice, playing 304 
Dirac equation 164 

Dirac, Paul 164, 194, 200 
Doppler effect 228 
dots, quantum 348, 378 
double- slit experiment 12, 
14, 154, 200, 208, 322 
E=mc2 equation 50, 
160, 216 
eigenfunctions 198, 204 
Einstein, Albert 28, 32, 34, 
48, 50, 52, 114, 146, 160, 
304, 306, 310, 314 
electric charge 100 
electromagnetic force 
18, 20, 122, 254, 258, 
264, 272 
electron tunnelling 
microscope 330 
electronics 334 
electron(s) 30, 34, 44, 46, 
58, 60 - 80, 100, 104, 106, 
108, 174 
diffraction 40 
energy levels 64-6 
excited 68, 74, 134 
forbidden transitions 83 
shells 60, 62, 68, 70, 76 
subshells 62, 70 
electroweak theory 264 
emission lines 80 
energy, conservation of 82 
entanglement, quantum 
306, 308, 310, 312, 314, 
316, 320, 376 
entropy 22, 320, 324 
EPR paradox 306, 308 
error correction, quantum 
384 
Everett, Hugh 286, 292 
expanding Universe 214, 
228, 230, 234 
extreme matter 402 
eyes 362 
Faraday, Michael 
18, 106 
fermions 110, 274 
Feynman diagrams 
202, 258 
Feynman, Richard 200 
flash drives 336 
Fraunhofer lines 78 
free will 368 
future of quantum physics 
390-406 
galaxies, origins of 220 
gamma decay 134 
general re lativity 48, 206, 
240, 252, 262 
gluons 94, 112, 136 
grand unified theory (GUT) 
244, 270 
graviton 262 
gravity, quantum 240, 
248, 250, 252, 262, 
266, 272 
ground-state electrons 
68, 74 
Guth, Alan 224, 226 
hadrons 94, 116 
Hamiltonian operator 196, 
198, 204, 210 
harmonic oscillators, 
quantum 158, 210 
Hawking radiation 242, 
398 
Heisenberg, Werner 46, 52, 
172, 188 
Heisenberg's uncertainty 
principle 52, 140, 172, 174, 
182, 242, 254, 262, 304, 
312, 320, 324, 400 
hidden variables 308 
Higgs boson 88, 118, 120 
higher dimensions 276 
Hilbert space 192, 194 
horizon problem 222, 224 
Hubble, Edwin 228 
Hund's rules 74, 76 
Huygens, Christiaan 10, 16 
inflation 224, 226, 246, 250, 
290, 300, 400 
inflationary multiverse 290 
Klein-Gordon equation 
162, 164 
Lamb shift 138 
INDEX 413 

Large Hadron Collider 
Michelson-Morley 
Penrose, Roger 364 
(LHC) 116, 118, 166, 
experiment 16 
perturbation theory 210 
284, 386 
momentum, conservation 
photoelectric effect 
lasers 328, 344 
of 82 
32, 34 
leptons 96, 110 
Mozi satellite 344 
photons 32, 34, 36, 122, 
light emitting diodes 
multiverses 286- 302 
136, 138, 174, 258, 362, 
(LEOs) 338 
400 
light, speed of 314, 400 
neutrinos 96, 98, 100 
photosynthesis, quantum 
limits of the quantum 
neutron stars 234, 236, 
360 
realm 208 
238, 386, 402 
Planck epoch 270, 272, 274 
logic gates, quantum 380, 
neutrons 42, 58, 100, 
Planck, Max 24, 26, 28, 
382, 384 
126, 132 
32, 34 
loop quantum gravity 
Newton, Isaac 10, 12 
Planck relation 44 
(LOG) 266, 284, 404 
nucleus, atomic 58, 60 
Planck constant 28, 38, 66 
positrons 100, 166 
magnetic moment 102, 
objective collapse theory 
probabilities, quantum 
106, 108 
394 
148, 150 
magnetic resonance 
observable Universe 288 
probability wave function 
imaging (MRI) 174, 332 
observer's role 392 
144 
many-worlds 
operators, quantum 196, 
protons 42, 58, 100, 132, 
interpretation 54, 144, 
198, 204 
332 
286, 292, 294, 296, 
decay of 244 
298, 394 
parity 104 
mass-energy equivalence 
particle angular 
quanta 28 
48, 50 
momentum 102 
quantum chromodynamics 
mathematics, quantum 
particle physics 88- 140 
(OCD) 94, 260 
184- 210 
particle theory 12, 14, 
quantum electrodynamics 
matrix/matrix mechanics 
36, 38 
(OED) 258 
186, 188, 190, 194 
path integral formulation 
quantum field theory (OFT) 
Maxwell, James Clerk 18 
200 
254, 402 
Maxwell's equations 20 
Pauli's exclusion principle 
quantum fluctuations 216 
memory stick 336 
76, 94, 110, 236, 238, 
quantum mechanical 
mesons 112, 124 
260, 348 
atom 46 
quantum number s 62, 152 
414 
INDEX 

quantum states 152, 156 
Standard Model 88, 90 
tunnelling, quantum 
quantum suicide 294, 296 
Stark effect 210 
130, 148, 168, 170, 174, 
quark stars 238 
stars 24, 234-8 
330, 356 
quarks 58, 90, 92, 94, 110, 
death of 234 
ultraviolet catastrophe 
124, 132, 260 
string theory 192, 268, 
26, 32 
qubits 370, 372, 376, 
274, 276, 278, 284, 
uncollapsible wave 
378, 384 
290, 404 
function 286, 292, 296, 
quintessence 232 
strong force 124, 260, 
392, 394 
272 
Universe 212- 50, 396 
radioactivity 128, 130, 132, 
superconductivity 352 
fates of the 248 
134, 346 
superfluids 350 
radiometric dating 346 
supernovae 230, 234 
vacuum decay 246 
relativity 48, 160, 162, 206, 
superpositions, quantum 
vacuum energy 140, 232 
214, 240, 252, 262, 314 
154, 176, 178 
virtual particles 136, 140, 
Rutherford, Ernest 42, 44 
superstrings 106, 278 
174, 214, 216, 242, 254, 
Rydberg constant 66 
supersymmetry 118, 274, 
398, 400 
276, 284 
vision, quantum 362 
Schrodinger's cat 178, 180, 
symmetry 256 
294, 296 
symmetry breaking 272 
wave function 142- 82, 
Schrodinger's wave 
190, 200, 204, 286, 292, 
equation 70, 156, 162, 
Tegmark, Max 288, 290 
392, 394, 406 
188, 190, 194, 198, 204, 
telecommunications 344 
wave-particle duality 38, 
210, 254 
teleportation, quantum 
40, 42, 46, 142, 188, 208 
simulations, quantum 386 
316 - 18 
wave theory 10, 12, 14, 16, 
Solvay Conference 
'theory of everything' 192, 
18, 20, 38 
(1927) 52 
252-84, 404 
weak force 126, 264, 272 
special relativity 48, 160, 
thermodynamics 22, 82 
162, 314 
Thomson, J.J. 30, 42 
Young, Thomas 14, 16, 146 
spectroscopy 44, 56 
time, quantum 320-4 
spin, quantum 62, 86, 102, 
time running backwards 
Zeeman effect 62, 86 
104, 106, 110, 332 
322 
spin-orbit interactions 
transformation theory 194 
108 
INDEX 415 

First published in Great Britain in 2017 by 
Quercus Editions Ltd 
Carmelite House 
50 Victoria Embankment 
London EC4Y ODZ 
An Hachette UK company 
Copyright (0 Quercus 
Editions Ltd 2017 
Text by Gemma Lavender 
Design and editorial by 
Pikala Imaging 
All rights reserved. No part of this 
publication may be reproduced or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopy, recording, or any information 
storage and retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publisher 
A CIP catalogue record for this book is 
available from the British Library 
PB ISBN 97B 1786481214 
EBOOK ISBN 978178648 122 1 
Every effort has been made to contact 
copyright holders. However, the publishers 
will be glad to rectify in future editions 
any inadvertent omissions brought to 
their attention 
The picture credits constitute an 
extension to this copyright notice 
Quercus Editions Ltd hereby exclude all 
liability to the extent permitted by law for 
any errors or omissions in this book and 
for any loss, damage or expense (whether 
direct or indirect) suffered by a third 
party relying on any information contained 
in this book 
Picture credits 2: general-fmv via Shutterstock, Inc.; 11: Fouad A Saad 
via Shutterstock, Inc.; 13: Mopic via Shutterstock, Inc.; 19: Fouad A Saad 
via Shutterstock, Inc.; 71: Patricia.fidi via Wikimedia; 79: N.A.Sharp, NOAO/ 
NSO/Kitt Peak FTS/AUANNSF; 81: ESO/H. Grass et al.; 85: NASA: 89 
CERN/BEBC; 99: ESA/Hubble & NASA; 109: Johnwalton via Wikimedia; 
115: Courtesy National Institute of Standards and Technology; 119: Julian 
Herzog via Wikimedia; 121: CERN for the ATLAS and CMS Collaborations; 
123: FurryScaly/ Flickr; 143: BenBritton via Wikimedia; 153: Poorleno via 
Wikimedia; 159: Alexander Sakhatovsky via Shutterstock, Inc.; 161: NASA; 
181: Rhoeo via Shutterstock, Inc.; 189: GFHund via Wikimedia; 193: Jorge 
Stolfi via Wikimedia; 201: Matt Mclrvin via Wikimedia; 211: Michael Courtney 
via Wikimedia; 213: NASA, ESA, S. Beckwith (STScl) and the HUDF Team; 217 
GiroScience via Shutterstock, Inc.; 219: NASA I WMAP Science Team; 221 
Max Planck Institute for Astrophysics/Springe! et al., 2005; 227: Juergen 
Faelchle via Shutterstock, Inc.; 237: NASA/CXC/SAO/F.Seward et al.; 247: 
Vadim Sadovski via Shutterstock, Inc.; 251: Mikkel Juul Jensen/Science 
Photo Library; 255: Tenth Seal via Shutterstock, Inc.; 263: Markus Gann 
via Shutterstock, Inc.; 265: CMS/CEAN; 269: DrHitch via Shutterstock, 
Inc.; 273: r.classen via Shutterstock, Inc.; 279: Lunch via Wikimedia; 283 
Fritz Gore/Contributor/Getty Images; 287: Detlev van Ravenswaay/ 
Science Photo Library; 291: Henning Dalhoff /Science Photo Library; 295 
Rhoeo via Shutterstock, Inc.; 297: ktsdesign via Shutterstock, Inc.; 299 
Victor Habbick via Shutterstock, Inc.; 301: Nicolle A. Fuller/Science Photo 
Library; 305: Mega Pixel via Shutterstock, Inc.; 313: PHOTOCREO Michal 
Bednarek via Shutterstock, Inc.; 319: Volker Steger/Science Photo Library; 
321: Svetlana Lukienko via Shutterstock, Inc.; 325: Johan Swanepoel via 
Shutterstock, Inc.; 327: ORNU Jill Hemman; 329: Designua via Shutterstock, 
Inc.; 335: Robert Lucian Crusitu via Shutterstock, Inc.; 341: ESA - J. Huart; 
345: Sebastian Kaulitzki via Shutterstock, Inc.; 355: Simen Reine-UIO; 
357: Andrii Vodolazhskyi via Shutterstock, Inc.; 359: FotoRequest via 
Shutterstock, Inc.; 361: Smit via Shutterstock, Inc.; 363: Roland Oeschain 
via Wikimedia; 365: Ali Ia Medical Media via Shutterstock, Inc.; 367: AkeSak 
via Shutterstock, Inc.; 371: Mopic via Shutterstock, Inc.; 379: Hweimer 
via Wikimedia; 387: general-fmv via Shutterstock, Inc.; 389: 0 -Wave 
Systems, Inc. via Wikimedia; 391: Fomanu via Wikimedia; 393: Aleksandar 
Mijatovic via Shutterstock, Inc.; 397: ESA - AOES Medialab; 399: Martin 
Hoscik via Shutterstock, Inc.; 401: NASA/ESA, ESO, Frederic Courbin 
(Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Switzerland) 5 Pierre Magain 
(Universite de Liege, Belgium); 403: NASA/ JPUSpace Science Institute 
All other illustrations by Tim Brown 

