Emerald River, Pearl Sky
by Rajnar Vajra
 
* * * *
 
The difference between science and magic is simple, but profound
and crucial. 
 
—LET US GO THEN, YOU AND I, ON A MODEST JOURNEY OF A
FEW PALTRY MILES AND A MERE THOUSAND YEARS. RELAX AND
ALLOW THOSE WHO WATCH OVER US TO INSTIGATE AND
REGULATE YOUR EXPERIENCE. WE BEGIN ... now.
 
ARE YOU STILL WITH ME? GOOD! THIS WINDING FOOTPATH
BEFORE US IS NAMED OLD GOD TRAIL. IMMERSE YOURSELF IN
EVERY OFFERED SENSATION TO MAKE THIS REALITY YOUR OWN.
OBSERVE IF YOU WILL, HOW THOSE RICHLY BLOSSOMED APPLE
TREES TO THE WEST STIPPLE THE PATH WITH SHADOWS STEADY
AS GRANITE. CONCENTRATE! DO YOU NOTICE HOW WELL THE
MURMURING OF RAINBOW PARROTS HARMONIZES WITH THE
DRONING BEES AND ALSO THAT FAINT MELODY?
 
LISTEN AS THE MELODY SWELLS. CAN YOU HEAR
FOOTSTEPS CRUNCHING ON THE OYSTER-SHELL PAVING? AH!
HERE HE IS: VINCAS MAGUS, A MAN WRINKLED ENOUGH TO BE AN
OLD GOD’S GRANDFATHER, TOTTERING ALONG, AIDED BY THAT
STAFF OF WALNUT. DESPITE HIS TWISTED LEFT LEG AND THE
BULGING TRAVELING BAG HANGING FROM HIS SHOULDER, YOU
MUST ADMIT HE MAKES STEADY PROGRESS, CONSTANTLY
HUMMING WITHIN HIS SILVER BEARD. WE HAVE ONLY TO JOIN HIM
AND THE LESSON WILL SOON UNFOLD....
 
* * * *
 
When Vincas reached Emerald River, he stopped and his humming died.
The low-lying fog wasn’t thick enough to hide a surprise. The dilapidated
old bridge was gone, replaced by a Kyoto-style teak span with a far higher
arch. Extending his staff, he poked the first lacquered plank, carved like the
others for traction on the sharp incline. Between planks, thin slats protruded
to act as a ladder higher up.
 
“Even last year,” he muttered, “I could’ve danced across. Now I
wouldn’t dare crawl.” He shrugged, backed up several yards to where the
ground was less rocky, dropped to a modified lotus posture, and closed his

eyes. For a long moment he sat still, breathing slowly and evenly,
perceptions turned inward.
 
Yes? whispered a thin, dry-ice-cold voice seemingly from inside his
chest. Why do you disturb me?
 
“I’ve come to a river and cannot cross.”
 
Then find you a bridge. 
 
“A bridge lies before us, Panx, but the way is too steep.”
 
You are aged and weak, magician. What do you offer? 
 
It’s come to this? Vincas thought, struggling to remain calm; these
days he needed a firm grip on tranquility simply to maintain contact with the
micro-imp. “I’ll grant you freedom from any requests of mine for two days if
you do my bidding without complaint.”
 
You consider that freedom? What else do you offer?
 
“A chance for reconciliation. Have you forgotten those decades when
we worked together? As a team? Wasn’t that better than this ...
estrangement?”
 
Ah. You desire to reduce me to my former servitude. Your heart
shouts between your words; even an earless imp can hear it. You have
no superior inducements? 
 
“This is no good,” the magician sighed. “We are reduced to hagglers.
I regret your misery, Panx, and would free you if I could. But are we not part
of each other?”
 
You surprise me! Your intent tastes sincere. Very well, your request
is granted. Trouble me not for a brace of days. 
 
Disturbing as the conversation had been, now that the worst was over,
Vincas’s curiosity stirred. How would the imp handle the problem? Would
Vincas find himself suddenly leaping to the far bank? Or swimming easily
against the current? Or would his bad leg simply regain enough vitality to
master the bridge? That last, he doubted. Expediency for micro-imps,
given their inhuman perspective and miserly attitude toward expending
muscular energy, usually assumed some baroque form. He opened his

eyes and waited.
 
Nothing happened save two rainbow parrots flew by and a large
tortoise with remarkably long legs for a chelonian came plodding up the
riverbank to settle down in a shallow depression near the Trail. A minute
later, a matching tortoise joined the first. When Vincas saw the way they
lined up, he smiled and pushed himself upright with his cane. With some
effort he was soon standing on the reptiles, a foot on each shell, holding his
stick horizontally as a balancing aid.
 
Bears and coyotes and raccoons, he thought, are best kept under
control. Cats, dogs, and birds make better pets under similar control. And,
of course, lizards and flies have any number of uses. But why would the
Ancients have grown command circuits in turtles?
 
Slowly, the animals extended their legs and Vincas began wishing
he’d figured a way to ride while seated; the ground seemed improbably
distant. But his porters climbed from the depression in perfect unison and
with reassuring smoothness. Bearing the wizard with ease and adjusting
leg-length to keep their shells reasonably level, they crossed the bridge
with the unhurried determination of their kind.
 
On the far side, a relieved magician dismounted carefully, patted the
animals on their heads and proceeded onward briskly compared with the
pace of his former steeds. Emerald River paralleled his path at the
moment, but he knew it would soon loop west for many miles only to rejoin
him as he neared his destination.
 
The trail, here, was a long straight stretch. After ten minutes of his
best hobbling, he noticed a figure far ahead bounding toward him at great
speed, clearly a magician whose micro-imp was particularly cooperative.
Even from this distance, he or she seemed to radiate vitality and humor.
From this and occasional scarlet flashes from the wizard’s garb, Vincas
guessed it was the baja-mage Kirstunu long before they were close enough
to shout a greeting.
 
“Why do you travel south?” Vincas asked when the two were finally
face to face. “The Zun-Loo festival beckons to our north and the Contest
this year should be a treat. After my hiatus last fall, I intend to reenter the
fray.”
 
The tall red-haired fellow, whose narrow face had something of the
curve and sharpness of an axe blade, released his leaping lizards and put
out his arms to embrace the old man. Kirstunu’s traveling cape fell back to

reveal the brilliant red tunic of a lesser mage. Meanwhile, the lizards kept
themselves upright with small oscillations, yellow eyes fixed on their
master.
 
“Then sorry I shall be to miss the Contest,” said the younger man.
“You and Glin Tan, at least, never disappoint. As it happens, I come from
Zun-Loo. Lama Go,” he admitted with a wink, “took exception to a small
prank of mine and has banned me from this year’s event.”
 
“Oh so. Your little jokes are so seldom appreciated, I wonder that you
continue them. Was your amusement worth the penalty?”
 
Kirstunu’s lips tightened as if trying to repress a grin. “Perhaps not.
Three days hence, I will lack the pleasure of watching you win both Glin
Tan’s glower and the Torus. But if only you had seen our noble lama
shooing away all those parrots so eager to feed him worms! In the end, he
was forced to annul every personal spell to rid himself of mine. What adds
that touch of rue to your smile?”
 
Vincas chuckled. “The mention of worms, my friend. At my age, I may
presently suffer excess acquaintance with them.”
 
“You raise a matter of some interest. Forgive me, I could not help but
notice the deepening of your wrinkles and how you limp as if crippled. May I
ask why without causing offense?”
 
“Of course. But you, if I may say so, appear as vibrant and young as
ever! In truth, my imp has become obstinate over the last few seasons and
will no longer assist me to overcome the defects of my body. Thus I amble
when once I ran, and my magic is feeble here in the wilds.”
 
Kirstunu scratched his goatee and lines appeared between his
fox-red brows. “But your jin remains intact?”
 
Vincas pulled back one sleeve to display the webbing faintly visible
beneath the wrinkled skin of his forearm. “It appears healthy from what can
be seen. I will judge its condition by how much strength returns when I
approach Zun-Loo’s empower station.”
 
The baja-mage spread his hands. “If then your capacities soar, why
not reside permanently within range of some empower plant, say that of
Westmorland or Plest or Zun-Loo itself? With mighty Pagman enriching the
Zun-Loo ether, you would only need your imp’s goodwill for high-level
competitions.”

 
Mixed joy and wistfulness complicated Vincas’s expression. “I can
explain in three compound words, Kirstunu: grandchildren,
great-grandchildren, and great-great-grandchildren, none of whom follow in
my footsteps. I love them all beyond measure yet my offspring do not
domicile themselves for the convenience of senile magicians.”
 
“So you are stuck with an unwilling ally unless you attain a new
commitment—or discover some novel lore.”
 
“You have always seemed,” the old man said carefully, “on the
warmest of terms with your imp.”
 
“Perhaps because I ask little of it.”
 
“Even so, it surprises me you’ve not been granted your Magnus Cum
Laude and full status by now. You certainly have the talent.”
 
“Talent, perhaps, but I lack raw power and, worse, an artist’s
imagination.” He raised a hand as if to block argument, but Vincas was
savoring the implied compliment too much to remonstrate.
 
“I have, however,” Kirstunu continued in a slightly chagrined tone,
“certain compensatory skills. Speaking of which, our chance meeting is
lucky for my conscience and your purse!”
 
The mage’s white eyebrows lifted. “How so?”
 
“I owe you money.”
 
“I don’t—”
 
“Three years ago, we shared a savory meal in Plest and you were
kind enough to loan me a modest sum.”
 
“If you say so. I’ve quite forgotten.”
 
“Recent fortune has beamed upon me at the gaming tables of
Zun-Loo and here is your investment plus a trivial return for your patience.”
He withdrew an impressive handful of coins from a pocket, at least fifteen
coppers and three silvers, and quickly slipped them all into Vincas’s
traveling bag. Then, while the magician’s mouth gaped, he threw in even
more coins.
 

“Surely,” Vincas complained, staring down into his bag, “you’ve given
me far too much!”
 
“Not at all. Consider it what the bankers of Haven call ‘interest,’ an
amusing but accurate term. Besides, I’ve only bestowed the surface skim
of my last day’s income. And it will make my traveling lighter. Please do me
the honor of accepting.”
 
Vincas shook his head. “If you insist. And thank you.”
 
The two men bowed to each other and each continued on his journey
without another word. Behind him, Vincas could hear the baja-wizard
rushing south in a series of rapidly fading boings.
 
* * * *
 
When the first stars appeared, the magician entered a pasture
abutting the road and removed what appeared to be a snail shell from his
bag. He threw the shell down, not too close to where he was standing, and
watched it gather molecules, rolling on its back as if tormented by fleas.
 
Vincas knew no magic was involved in this; his jin was too sensitive to
enchantment for him to believe otherwise. The Ancients, he thought for the
thousandth time, must have been scientific wizards beyond compare.
 
Zun-Loo’s empower station still wasn’t near enough for the smart yurt
to attain its full size, but it gradually expanded until it could fit a wizened
wizard. At Vincas’s command, a door irised open then sealed behind him
after he entered. As always, the interior smelled pleasantly of ocean
breezes and, after the magician had finished his dinner, the fleshy bed was
a comfort to elderly hips. He fell asleep to the soft murmuring of rainbow
parrots, birds supposedly reshaped by the Ancients for both beauty and
pest control.
 
* * * *
 
His next day’s journey eased as the trail, now widened to a proper
road, gracefully descended into Zun Valley. By midday, the bioelectric
netting beneath the old man’s skin began tingling and vigor trickled into his
limbs, a sort of heatless warmth generating an illusion of restored youth.
Soon, the inverse-square rule proved its relevance and he found himself
carrying the cane rather than the reverse. His pace increased every minute
and his wrinkles and bad leg began to smooth out. He felt Panx stir, but the
imp remained silent.

 
Before the sun even considered settling down for the night,
Zun-Loo’s minarets, spires, and trellised pergolas were close enough to
please Vincas’s eyes and tease his nostrils with the perfume of lotus-roses.
Minutes later, he was beyond the city gates admiring Takata Hai’s party
decorations, which for reasons of efficiency only manifested for those
within Zun-Loo’s tiled walls.
 
Takata’s specialty was long-lasting mirage; for the last decade, he’d
accepted the challenge of trimming the city at festival time. He never
worked the same motif twice and every year attempted a more exquisite
effect.
 
This season, he’d chosen an interplay of contrasts rather than patent
flamboyance. Every home, shop, temple, mosque, church, maxi-manor,
and mini-palace seemed coated in a thin layer of ice. The ices were of
varied hues—gray, blue, bronze, gold, aqua—one hue per building, but all
were muted enough to seem almost brown in dim light. The contrasting
elements were set into the ice at artistic intervals. These appeared as
immense diamonds, marvelously faceted to catch every stray ray, whose
colors were a vastly brighter version of the encapsulating material. Vincas
stared at one golden gem until his eyes watered. When he turned away, the
violet afterimage was slow to fade.
 
Even the familiar lotus-rose city aroma had been enhanced for the
occasion, wafting overtones of vanilla, nutmeg, and musk.
 
Vincas approved of Takata’s deft restraint and vowed to praise the
sorcerer appropriately. First on the agenda, however, was securing a hotel
room and a hot bath. Thanks to Kirstunu’s munificence, he could treat
himself to both of the first water.
 
As usual he selected Rishi’s Haven, which was coated with maroon
rime lacking any corresponding jewels. Instead, the mirage-master had
emplaced fire-agate-like rainbow flashes within the ice. Vincas wondered
about this distinctive decoration and speculated that Takata himself might
be staying here and was silently advertising the fact for anyone wishing to
hire him for lesser occasions.
 
Murigum, the umber-skinned and suitably rotund innkeeper behind the
reservation counter, grew a smile brighter than a Burb-ankh ten-platinum
piece when Vincas entered the lobby.
 
The magician knew why: each top contender entering the Contest

increased the betting’s prodigality. And, almost magically, the freer the
betting, the looser everyone’s purse strings. Murigum’s wine cellar would
be thoroughly tested in the next few days! Besides, Vincas had always
been a courteous and undemanding guest, far less eccentric than most of
his peers.
 
“Your usual, Master?” Murigum inquired as a formality, reaching for
his assignment book.
 
“Not this year, Sri Murigum! I have newly suffered a touch of affluence
and find the condition uncomfortable. Therefore, I humbly request your
premier accommodations, which should ease my burden somewhat.”
 
The innkeeper looked up in surprise. “A suite remains available for a
mere five coppers extra per night. Will that be satisfactory?”
 
“Oh, yes.”
 
“I assume you wish me to effectuate your Contest registration as
always?”
 
“If you would be so kind.”
 
“And your meals?”
 
“Spare not your finest herbs! That is, so long as the extra savor
doesn’t exceed four additional coppers a day.”
 
“You consummate a shrewd bargain, Master. For you, nothing but the
most excellent! Would you, er, care to make a deposit in advance?”
 
Vincas pulled three silvers and ten coppers from his bag and handed
the coins over. Murigum made a note on a sheet of lizardskin, opened his
cashbox, deftly poured the coins into their proper slots, but let one silver fall
as if by chance into an oxidizer jar kept discreetly below the counter.
Seeing the coin had attained the proper degree of bruise, he fished it out,
swabbed it with tarnish-removing fluid, and added it to his collection. Vincas
only smiled at all this. He was not one to misapply his trade.
 
While the cashbox still gaped open, two tourists approached the
innkeeper and asked if Murigum would make change for several gold
pieces. A friendly game of Tohoku Hold’em had begun in the common
room and these two were already devoid of coppers.
 

The innkeeper glanced down at his supply and agreed, but not
happily. After more writing and semi-surreptitious quality testing, he handed
over a pile of coins including many of those he’d just received from Vincas.
As the tourists hastened back to lose more coppers, he chewed his lower
lip. “Will you await your change, Master, until the final accounting? This is
the third request for coppers I’ve had within an hour and my stock is
dwindling.”
 
“Certainly. How well you understand me, my dear host! By
considering the money already spent, I needn’t suffer any pangs of
economic restraint. Perhaps an extra dessert or two will keep your superb
meals company this year. I expect to waddle away from your establishment
with a silhouette akin to Putai’s!”
 
“I am not acquainted with any Putai, Master.”
 
“Oh so. I was speaking of a legend or perhaps a memory from Old
China. In Ancient Nippon they named him ‘Hotei.’ The Laughing Buddha: a
man of great humor and corpulence. Those innumerable statuettes of him
still produced in Nyu-Japan and Baja Aumauraka have caused occidentals
worldwide to believe the Buddha was Chinese and obese!”
 
Murigum laughed. “I’ve seen such statuettes myself, and also
assumed they were depicting the Compassionate One despite my Hindu
heritage. But I doubt we have enough calories in all Zun-Loo to make you
fat, Master. Still, I shall do my utmost.”
 
“In that case, perhaps I can ease your copper shortage by offering
more of mine and some silvers in exchange for a gold. That will still leave
me sufficient coppers for any small purchases I’d be likely to make in the
next few days.”
 
“Most exceedingly excellent!”
 
After completing the transaction, Murigum asked, “Would you care to
view your room now? Your Magus Suite has its own private bath.”
 
“Bless you. Right now, the bath draws me more than the room itself.
Thus, I intend to draw it straightaway. Lead on, good host!”
 
* * * *
 
One advantage of Rishi’s Inn was that directly across the wide
cobbled street stood Bodhi, unquestionably the city’s finest tavern, owned

and operated by Aditi Chandrasekar, a quiet, self-contained little woman.
 
After ablutions, stuffing a few coppers in his pockets, a quick meal,
and unnecessarily reminding Murigum that a magician’s room, in the
absence of said magician, was an unwise place for a cleaning person to
attend, Vincas hurried across the way, hoping his peers would have
reserved his favorite chair.
 
Bodhi’s house mage, Trun, whose mirage-ware rivaled that of Takata
Hai, had outdone herself. Silver mist hung in the air, just enough to soften
faces and provide a sense of privacy at each table. A dozen glowing rings,
expanded models of the Golden Torus, floated an inch below the ceiling.
Also, three massive chandeliers, inverted candelabras, provided further
illumination—candles and flames pointed straight down while all drips ran
upwards. Vincas supposed the rings were actually common houseflies
hovering in circular formations and the candles either fireflies or those
glowlizards locally called “drakes.”
 
Five of the world’s greatest sorcerers plus a man in scholarly robes
occupied an octagonal table beneath the largest chandelier. Vincas hurried
over and was pleased to find his usual chair was indeed available. Mage
Mokshananda, a heavily bearded man so rich in power he reputedly glowed
in the dark, was the first to notice the old man approaching. He smiled at
Vincas, stood, and courteously pulled the empty chair out far enough.
 
Vincas thanked the mage as he sat, but trained his eyes on the
scholar: a short, thick-bodied fellow whose skull was more tufted than
thatched with curly brown hair. A Star of David dangled beneath each long
earlobe.
 
Marie Ginnetti, First Witch of Westmorland, handled the only
necessary introduction. “Lovely to see you again, Vin. May I present
Shlomo Levi, who has journeyed from far Zo-har in New Israel to join us?
Shlomo, this splendid old wreck is none other than the renowned Vincas
Apollo Magus.”
 
Levi’s eyes sparkled. “Even in my distant country, we revere you,
Master. Your brilliant treatise, ‘How Many Imps Can Sulk On A Pin’s End
and Other Questions of Magical Topology’ is required reading in my Order.
A vast honor to meet you!”
 
Vincas regarded the Israeli with respect and some concern. Rumors
had been flying for years that the legendary Jewish sage, Moshe Abram,
had unearthed some new and particularly potent magical lore. Vincas might

be facing an unexpected challenge in the Contest....
 
Despite these misgivings, the old man reached across the table to
follow the New Israeli custom of shaking hands. “I am likewise honored,
Adon Levi!” he said as Levi’s palm met his. “Or is ‘mister’ the proper
honorific?”
 
Levi’s eyes widened. “You have a discerning intuition, Master! I am
indeed a transplanted Aumaurakan, born and raised out west in Twosuns.”
 
Vincas sat back. “You overly flatter my intuition. I merely detected a
slight Arid-zone accent. You’re here as a Contest participant?”
 
“Yes, but not as a contender.”
 
“No? From what I’ve heard, victory might sprout from the Tree of
Life.”
 
The Israeli smiled but shrugged with one shoulder. “I, too, have heard
claims that Qabalistic techniques can be used to leverage extra power from
macro-imps. But truly, Master, I wouldn’t know one qlippah from another.
I’m actually here to reveal some new and astonishing discoveries by my
Order, the Scientific Essenes.”
 
“In that case,” Vincas said, “I look forward to your presentation and to
our continued conversation. Now, if you will permit me, I should greet my
old friends.”
 
The old man’s smile flashed around the table. Marie Ginnetti and
Mokshananda smiled back, but Mullah Nur, Han Pengyew, and Glin Tan only
bowed their heads. Glin Tan’s peculiar eyes, green as waxed limes,
seemed to glisten with private amusement.
 
The owner herself, Aditi Chandrasekar, came over and took Vincas’s
request for tea and then rushed away without displaying haste.
 
Ginnetti brushed back her thick locks, still more auburn than gray.
“You appear hale, dear.”
 
Vincas waggled an eyebrow. “Only in a nurturing ether such as this
and in company such as yours.”
 
The sorceress blushed, her dimples deepened. “Why then should
you ever leave supportive environments and company you might find ...

inspiring?”
 
“Ha! Our mutual friend Kirstunu recently asked me that exact
question. In truth, my heirs exert a charm that surpasses any of mine.”
 
The American-Israeli leaned forward. “Kirstunu, you say? A lesser
wizard of that name has studied with my Order for three winters now.
Perhaps the same man?”
 
“Tall fellow? Face shaped like a ship’s prow?” Vincas asked.
 
“Just so, Master.”
 
“Remarkable! What does he study?”
 
“Computers and Ancient computer networks.”
 
“Oh? What then is a computer?”
 
Levi grinned slyly. “You will all find out tomorrow.”
 
“Last year,” Mullah Nur interjected in his soft voice, “our friend
Kirstunu replaced my personal supply of coffee beans with small wasps.
They made,” he added after a moment, “an inferior brew.”
 
A far deeper voice, startling the entire group, suddenly boomed from
directly behind Vincas’s chair. “I trust you will not be suffering such mischief
this year, Mullah.”
 
Lama Go was enveloped in saffron robes; the orange cape of his
office hung from his massive shoulders. His vast round face evoked that of
a shaved panda and his thick hands appeared capable of crushing iron
pipes.
 
“I also trust,” he continued darkly, “you did not encounter that fool
Kirstunu within this city, Vincas Magus.”
 
The old man shaded his eyes as though trying to see something
distant. “When last I encountered him, he was traveling toward Wholly Oak
on pogo skinks.”
 
“Good! And good, um, evening to you all,” said the lama, cape
rustling faintly as he departed.
 

Vincas pondered Kirstunu’s oddities until Glin Tan raised one pale
hand and the illusion of a blue flower bloomed from one fingertip. “Do not,”
advised the subtle wizard when he had everyone’s attention, “provoke the
Contest-master in any fashion, fellow mages. He chafes under the wool
tunic of responsibility.”
 
“Your advice is as sound as ever,” emaciated Han Pengyew
remarked with his usual ambiguity. “But the hour is late and since I require
much rest before tomorrow’s efforts, I bid you all a refreshing night.”
 
Shortly, everyone save Vincas and Marie Ginnetti made excuses and
departed. Out of courtesy to the establishment, the two party survivors
shifted locale to a small corner table, ordered fine white tea, and talked
quietly for hours. Vincas asked Marie if Glin Tan had given his traditional
private preview of his latest Contest entry. She had heard he’d done so, but
the only person she knew who’d been invited had been, oddly, none other
than Kirstunu and he, with uncharacteristic restraint, had refused to even
hint at Tan’s secrets.
 
Vincas then revealed his fear that if Panx became any more
obstinate, he’d be out of the magic business entirely. Marie observed that
many senior mages she knew had been complaining similarly.
 
When she decided to retire for the night, Vincas insisted on paying
for the tea. Hardly a curse, an overfilled purse, he thought. But he wondered
why one copper felt so much warmer than the others. And as he passed by
the central octagonal table, he noticed that some of the candles overhead
now had visible lizard legs. Strange, he thought, that Trun’s illusions were
wearing thin already....
 
It was a night for such oddness. The embedded rainbow flashes in
the walls and roof of Rishi’s Inn appeared subdued on his return, which he
dismissed as a byproduct of night, moonlight, and staying up past his
proper bedtime. But upon entering the lobby, he found Takata Hai, the
mirage-master himself, in tensely whispered discourse with Murigum, who’d
exchanged his innkeeper’s caftan for a once-white bathrobe. Murigum
bowed gravely to both sorcerers, seated himself behind his desk, and
occupied himself with bookkeeping.
 
“Vincas!” Takata called softly. “Glad I am to see you. I need your
acumen.”
 
“My meager reservoir of intellect is yours to command. Allow me to
express my admiration for the veneers you have applied for this year’s

Contest.”
 
“Then I hope you will enjoy them while you can. Your praise warms
me, Magus, but my spells are eroding prematurely. This is my problem.”
 
“How unusual! All your fine work; you must be dreadfully upset. Have
you determined a cause?”
 
The younger man shook his head. “I remain baffled. While my small
talents provide me adequate income, they are inept as analytical tools.”
 
“I see.” The mention of income reminded Vincas of the hot copper
and he suffered a terrible thought. “Is the erosion you detect citywide,
Takata-san, or limited to any specific locale?”
 
“To my best knowledge, the epicenter is right here, but the effect
appears to be spreading.”
 
The old man frowned and turned toward the innkeeper. “Good
Murigum,” he said, “I dislike troubling you when you are busy, but could you
answer a question?”
 
“Anything, Master!”
 
“Do you retain any of the coins I gave you earlier?”
 
The innkeeper froze for a moment, then consulted one tally sheet
from the pile of lizardskins before him. “Most unlikely, Master. This evening,
I supplied change for ten suns, twelve moons, forty silvers, and seven gold
pieces. Also, I paid my staff their wages early so they could better enjoy
tomorrow’s festivities.”
 
“Most considerate of you.”
 
“Do you require change from your deposit after all?”
 
“Certainly not.” Murigum’s face expressed such relief that Vincas had
to cough to hide his chuckle. “I merely had in mind a modest experiment.”
 
Takata touched Vincas’s sleeve. “You have a theory, Magus?”
 
“Nothing so definite, old friend, but I’d prefer to rule out one possible
explanation.”
 

Takata was too polite to prod, but his eyes asked the question for
him.
 
“A small chance exists,” Vincas admitted, “that we may all be victims
of a most elaborate prank. You both know Kirstunu and his reputation; who
else would’ve named their imp as a homonym for ‘jokes’? I am awash in
coinage because the man recently repaid an old debt. That is, he claimed
an old debt required repayment—I do not recall the original loan.”
 
Takata paled. “You suspect Kirstunu’s coins embody ... spells to
target my mirages? How could inert objects carry such potent commands?”
 
“I’ve no idea. For that matter, how is it possible to emplace mirage on
inanimate objects such as buildings or living animals and insects? All other
illusions I know of proceed directly from jin to jin.”
 
“This question has often puzzled me; but in execution, my art is
simple enough.”
 
“In any case, I cherish no suspicions one way or the next. But testing
the money in my purse seems prudent. To be thorough, I also wished to
test such a coin that has passed beyond my ownership.”
 
“If Kirstunu’s currency is to blame, how can we abate the menace?
Coins are in free circulation and who is to say Kirstunu’s ... infection might
not spread from one copper to another?”
 
Vincas tugged on his beard. “Takata-san, I’ve promised myself to
make every effort for this season’s Torus. The task is daunting. Glin Tan
exudes sly confidence, Marie Ginnetti crackles with energy, we have a
Hebrew visitor of unknown attributes, and Mokshananda’s humility this year
seems almost excessive....”
 
“What are you saying?”
 
“I am uncertain to what degree I dare expend my limited resources on
your problem. My deepest apologies, dear friend, but if the coins do no
more than dim your lovely decorations, that will not spoil the Contest. But
you needn’t look so forlorn! I would truly prefer nothing whatsoever taint the
festivities. Leave me to my testing and if the results are meaningful, I will let
my conscience dictate the next step. Perhaps the carrier of a blight,
however unknowing, should shoulder some responsibility for curing it.”
 
“I beg you, Magus! Do what you can and I will seek endlessly to

uncover a way to repay your kindness.”
 
Vincas raised a finger and shook it humorously. “Repayment would
be redundant as we would all share any benefits accrued. Consider any
efforts of mine a gift to our joint celebration. With your permission, I will now
hasten to my room. I have an ethical conflict to resolve before I can even
begin.”
 
Sitting on the carpet in his suite—a silk mandala in blue, teal, brown,
and ivory—the contents of his traveling bag spread out before him, Vincas
took three slow breaths and set out to circumvent his dilemma. He’d
promised to leave Panx alone until tomorrow and intended to honor that
promise, particularly since he wouldn’t shine in the Contest without Panx’s
aid. On another hand, he needed micro-imp senses to evaluate the coins.
And on a third hand, a hand only existing due to the proximity of a
macro-imp, he might be able to access certain micro-imp senses without
invoking the imp. After all, Panx was essentially part of his jin, albeit its
controlling node. And the jin, an integration of extended nervous system
and extended musculature, was part of Vincas’s body. All he needed was
some external intercession....
 
Eyes closed, he could see Pagman’s presence as a warm glow to
the southwest. He reached towards it with his imagination—and a cold,
familiar voice interrupted.
 
Good morning or later, Magician. Bathed as we are in manna, I
assume we visit Plest, Haven, Westmorland, or Zun-Loo? 
 
“My apologies, Panx. I did not mean to intrude.”
 
You do not intrude. I extrude. Is it Plest? 
 
Vincas was disoriented. The micro-imp had displayed neither
affability nor humor for the last five years. “We are,” he admitted, “presently
housed in Zun-Loo.”
 
So! Then you are re-entering the Contest this year? 
 
“Tomorrow, assuming you and I can reach an understanding.
Meanwhile, it is evening and the city appears to be under magical attack.”
 
A brief pause. I taste no attack.
 

“Its consequences are subtle. Mage Hai’s adornments for the
occasion are denaturing unexpectedly. My suspicions focus on some coins
supplied to me by Kirstunu, whom you may remember.”
 
Well do I recall his imp-plant, Juax. The man himself has left little
impression on me. 
 
Vincas frowned. “In any case, I was about to enlist Pagman’s aid in
evaluating my remaining coins.”
 
Unnecessary! The ambient energies have rendered me buoyant
and I yearn to express my powers. Fetch these coins and share with me
your eyesight for but a moment. Then I shall tell you all you should
know. 
 
The mage complied despite his doubts. Gripping enough coppers to
virtually guarantee Kirstunu had supplied at least one, he performed the
relaxation allowing Panx temporary use of his vision. As usual under these
circumstances, his blink reflex ceased and his eyes soon felt dry and stiff.
 
Panx took what seemed an undue amount of time before announcing
the verdict: Behold.Flowing money is the lifeblood of human cities.Pretty
things, these disks, but they carry nothing but buying power, dirt,
biological residues, and germs.
 
“You are certain?”
 
Always. And fear not; I shall be pleased to assist you tomorrow. We
shall put forward our finest efforts as of old! 
 
Vincas slowly refilled his traveling bag with everything save
nightclothes and toiletries, making sure Kirstunu hadn’t slipped anything but
money in with his belongings. He found nothing unexpected, which didn’t
ease his mind. In fact, despite the imp’s certification, his suspicion of the
coins had grown. Still, since Panx had volunteered unstinting aid, Vincas
didn’t dare voice any doubts.
 
I hate to disappoint Takata, he thought, but my desire to please little
Alinda exceeds my passion to cure Zun-Loo’s ills. And the Contest far
outstrips its trappings. Afterwards, perhaps I shall organize a joint effort to
set matters right.
 
Having made his decision, he readied himself for sleep, which came

slowly and brought a disturbing experience. In a dream, he was admiring an
aquarium occupied by small crabs, delicate fronds of seaweed, and
miniature mermaids. Then the tank suddenly expanded and he found
himself inside, standing on its sandy floor. With his ears submerged, he
could hear mermaids singing sweetly to each other; but the crabs, who now
had human faces, were also vocalizing, polluting the water with endless
demands and complaints. Eager to add his small voice to the mermaids’
glorious melody and help drown out the selfish cacophony, he tried to
inhale but his mouth filled with brine. Panicking, he struck out for the
surface. And crab claws kept pulling him down....
 
What, he wondered as he woke panting, was that all about? Does
some hidden part of me feel suffocated and trapped? Having couched the
question in those terms, he was forced to admit the obvious: it hadn’t been 
his dream.
 
* * * *
 
He greeted the dawn with tight muscles and a troubled conscience.
 
After ablutions, Bagua Xun Dao breathing and stretching exercises,
and some concentration warm-ups, he donned his best robes and
descended to the lobby, crowded with early risers. The many discussions
were muted but the room vibrated with excitement and confusion.
Murigum’s staff, mostly women, kept coming and going through the kitchen
doors, distributing wicker picnic baskets to customers anxious to procure a
good seat at the Contest. Savory aromas made the magician’s mouth
water, but he urged himself to focus on the challenge ahead.
 
Murigum had laid out a courtesy breakfast buffet of sweet rolls, fruit,
fruit juices, Chinese pastries, soy sausages, steamed maitake and morel
mushrooms, goat cheese, coffee and elegant teas, but Vincas only allowed
himself a cup of sencha. Hunger would add urgency to his spells. But he
slipped a peach into his bag against any blood-sugar emergency and
slipped himself through the rear door to escape the hubbub.
 
Sipping his tea at a bench set outside in the morning light, gazing
down the long hillside at a fruit-of-plenty orchard behind the inn, he was a bit
surprised when Murigum’s youngest son, Arjun, appeared before him and
bowed. By tradition, no one troubled a performing mage before the
Contest.
 
“Would you enjoy a richer beverage, Master? Or a pastry?” the boy
asked. He was dark-skinned and thin, with features similar to Murigum’s but

more delicate.
 
“I am satisfied with the brew I hold, but thank you for the offer.”
 
The boy lowered his head but didn’t move away. Vincas studied him
for a moment. “Was there something else, Arjun?”
 
“Nothing worthy of annoying you, Master.” He glanced around guiltily
before continuing. “It’s just that—I wanted to ask if you would consider
accepting me as your—your apprentice when my magic finally bursts forth.”
 
The mage took a sip to steal some thinking time. “While I truly hope
your assumption proves valid, I wonder why you feel so confident at
attaining magical prowess. Few do, you know.”
 
“It’s because I see and feel magic so clearly, Master. When
someone such as you or Master Tan manifests a—perhaps a tulip in five
colors, I see all five whereas people such as my father may only notice
three or four. And if a great mage such as you hands me such a flower, I
will feel its intended weight and texture. Yet my father and brothers cannot.”
 
Vincas made a wry mouth. “For your sake, lad, I wish matters were so
straightforward. True, magic and magical sensitivities both flow from the
actions of one’s jin, but manifestation and perception involve separate jin
systems. Your sensitivities, though refined, are no guarantee of
magehood.”
 
“No?” The boy’s eyes darkened.
 
Vincas held out one hand and a copper box appeared on his palm.
“Touch this, Arjun, and describe what you experience.”
 
The boy obeyed. “The surface is rougher than it looks and very cold.”
 
“Ha! You couldn’t feel illusory temperature without some feedback
from your control node. This implies your node is indeed developing! If the
process continues, your jin may eventually grow a functional micro-imp.”
 
“And then I will become a magician?”
 
“With much hard work and training, your chances will be good.”
 
“And would you be willing to train me should my imp appear, Master?”
 

Vincas hesitated. “Perhaps. If you cross the first bridge, we can
consider the second.”
 
Arjun smiled and his eyes danced. “Thank you!” He turned to finally
leave the mage in peace, but then turned back. “I thought everyone had an
imp.”
 
“Most people have a—an internal space where an imp could form. But
these days, it is becoming increasingly rare for one to mature.”
 
“These days?”
 
“Oh so. Scholars tell us that in Ancient times, everyone was a
magician, able to cast mighty illusions. With each subsequent generation,
our powers have diminished.”
 
“But I wouldn’t care for everyone to have magic, Master! Becoming a
mage would then be ... ordinary. If magic cannot delight or amaze, what
would be its purpose?”
 
Vincas stared at Arjun, thoughts of the Contest banished. “What
indeed? In my long life, I’ve never considered that question! The Ancients,
as I understand it, created the jin as an adjunct to normal human growth and
even for them, the task must have been challenging. The strength and
health-enhancing aspects of jin are undeniably valuable, but surely, they
had some vital intent in mind for magic....”
 
Vincas shook his head. “Arjun, you have proven yourself an insightful
lad. By all means, if your imp begins to speak to you, we should resume
this conversation.”
 
Arjun bowed deeply and hurried off. Vincas took a final sip of tea and
followed the boy back into the inn. Nodding back at a dozen faces nodding
at him, he binned the teacup and navigated the lobby.
 
* * * *
 
Stepping through the front door, Vincas was dismayed at the city’s
appearance. Nearby, Takata Hai stood glaring at the dregs of his
decorations. Zun-Loo’s buildings were sheathed in wispy smoke with the
dirty aspect of old snow. The diamonds were vague, shedding little more
radiance than mud.
 
“My regrets, Takata-san,” Vincas said. “My Panx was unexpectedly

forthcoming last night, but hardly useful.”
 
The mirage-master erased his frown and waved a dismissive hand.
“Nevertheless, I appreciate your efforts.”
 
“You are a generous man! Especially since it remains possible I’ve
been instrumental in actuating this unpleasantness.”
 
“No one could blame you, Master. Yet if Kirstunu proves responsible,
I doubt he shall enjoy our next encounter. May I accompany you to the
Hub?”
 
“Your company is always a pleasure,” Vincas claimed although he
would have preferred solitude to finalize his preparations.
 
“At least we have a lovely day for the event, even without my
embellishments. Barely a cloud. And do not fear! I shall savor your
companionship without offering any distracting conversation.”
 
“You are the model of graciousness, Takata-san!”
 
As the two men strolled uphill toward the Hub, the city’s main park,
Panx spoke without being summoned. Will you now share with me your
plans for this year’s Contest? The imp’s voice, sent directly to the mage’s
auditory nerves, was friendly, almost eager.
 
“I have in mind,” Vincas replied through similar internal channels, “a
four-tiered illusion. We will begin with recreating Zun Valley in colors richer
than nature and at a scale suitable for a large audience. Then we shall
expand the image, focusing on this city and again painting the scene with
extra vivacity. Next we expand the Hub and finally concentrate upon the
actual crowd watching us, each face at least thrice life-size, recognizable
but idealized to an extreme—particularly the judges’ features!”
 
Your concept becomes clear! You intend to flatter your way to
victory. 
 
Vincas felt an ironic touch of relief. The acerb comment was more the
Panx he’d grown accustomed to. “I have a great-great-granddaughter to
please,” he stated with dignity.
 
* * * *
 

The park’s southern side lacked foliage and ended in a sharp drop-off
providing an unobstructed view of a distant hill crowned by the Zun Valley
Empower Plant, an immense white structure reminiscent of a Tibetan stupa
but topped with a long spike rather than a dorje. Pagman’s presence was
palpable but no human knew its precise nature or location within the great
dome because no one, not even those unfortunates born with defective jin,
could get within a hundred yards of the edifice. The mild tingling Vincas
enjoyed while gazing at the Plant from several miles away would swell to
agony close at hand.
 
The sun was only an hour risen, but on the still-damp grass people
and various forms of seating already surrounded the elevated platform
where today’s premium magic would be performed. Vincas counted ten
waterproofed Main carpets presently occupied by minor functionaries, and
seven empty mini-thrones, but couldn’t even estimate the impressive host
of populated divans and chairs.
 
Aisles were the narrowest Vincas could recall, and delineated with
chalk and ribbon rather than mirage.
 
Three grizzly bears burdened with planters overflowing with gaudy
flowers were lumbering up a ramp set to stage left. Vincas didn’t recognize
the ursine controller, a petite woman in the turquoise robes of her craft, but
he appreciated the necessity for the makeshift decorations. Those grand
illusions the mirage-master had reserved for the competition itself were
only pallid hints of iridescence.
 
The surf of a thousand conversations lapped into Vincas’s ears,
carrying excitement with an undercurrent of public dismay. Even so, he
didn’t miss the creak of Takata grinding his teeth.
 
Beyond the broad circle of goat-cropped grass reserved for the
audience, food venders were noisily setting up tents and firing up grills.
Past these, in mute corollary, a dozen portable privies containing compost
toilets waited. One entrepreneur was peeling melons by hurling them high
into the air and then faceting them with a scimitar as they fell. Normally such
skill would have attracted much attention and friendly kibitzing. This
morning, only the privies were watching.
 
And beyond all these, rainbow parrots perched on tree limbs,
displaying plumage so spectacular they, too, seemed attired for a special
occasion.
 
The bears set down the final planters and wandered off, still on their

hind legs, munching fruit-of-plenty they’d received as a reward. Expectancy
filled the Hub like a static charge.
 
When the sun finally emblazoned the Empower Plant’s apex, a deep
temple bell sounded, and a slow procession entered the park from the
northwest. First, the city’s economic elite appeared and supplanted the
carpet-warmers on the silk Mains. Then, with great dignity, without even
surreptitious jostling, the Contest judges made their way to the seven
mini-thrones near the stage and sat down in unison.
 
Each adjudicator wore a robe tinted a different color and by tradition
they’d arrayed themselves to present a spectrum. When the judges were
settled, Lama Go, a saffron mountain outlined by the silver cape of Contest
Day, climbed the seven steps to the stage. At the center, he turned in a
slow semicircle and every person in an assembly that had swelled to over
four thousand felt as if he’d gazed directly at them.
 
“You have all noticed,” he said in a voice that should have been too
quiet to carry so well, “the magical vandalism robbing us of Master Hai’s
splendid efforts this year. This need not dampen our spirits or lessen the
festivities. Do not permit the perpetrator that satisfaction! Are we agreed?”
 
The crowd chanted its agreement in assorted languages including
one Hebrew “ken,” which Vincas heard so distinctly he craned his neck until
he spotted Shlomo Levi smiling at him from two rows away. The old
magician bowed and returned his attention to the lama.
 
“I thank you all,” the Contest-master said. “Judging, as always, is
based on three criteria: elegance, power, and clearest expression of a
magician’s fort, or magical style. Some here may be wondering how the
term ‘fort’ originated.”
 
A rustling swept through the spectators. Lama Go had been known to
become pedantic.
 
“The word either evolved from the French ‘forte,’ meaning strength, or
was derived from the name of an ancient historian of strange events, one
Charles Fort.”
 
The green judge caught the lama’s attention by waving a document in
the air and Go reacted with a frown, then a shrug. “Very well. Since we have
so many competitors this season, I will curtail my opening remarks and call
up the first entrant.” There was a general if barely audible sigh of relief.
“However, I shall continue my comments after the Contest for those

sensible enough to wish to hear them in full.
 
“As always, the order of contenders was determined by random
drawings within each predetermined talent-level. Now, therefore, I present a
baja-wizard, Dr. Werner Tuft from Gestalt Deutsch, who will delight us all
with his, um, vegetable magic.”
 
Tuft bounded up the steps, a large cabbage in each hand. He
gestured and his cruciform entertainers opened several leaves and used
them as legs to strut back and forth across the stage. More leaves opened
to aid in executing a series of handsprings, or perhaps back-flips, since
orientation was debatable. All this was impressively realistic by the
standards of a lesser mage. For a finale, the leaves fluttered so vehemently
the cabbages lifted clumsily into the air. But as they neared Tuft’s
shoulders, the illusion abruptly disintegrated as did, seemingly, the
vegetables.
 
In moments, the platform appeared to be covered with a crude slaw.
The doctor stared in horror at the mess and exited the stage, head
drooping, clearly unaware he was followed by a new illusion: a thousand
shreds of cabbage rolling or humping themselves along behind him.
 
Lama Go’s dark eyes seemed even darker as he called up the next
performer in the baja-wizard category. Vincas, who’d planned to meditate
and focus his energies during these initial demonstrations, couldn’t tear his
eyes away as one minor wizard after another suffered magical mishaps. In
his heart, sympathy and shame vied for dominance. Was Kirstunu truly the
villain here? How could a baja-wizard produce such devastating effects?
 
Three hours passed awkwardly, sometimes painfully, as the level of
competitors rose toward Master’s division. Every act failed in some
significant manner and many were outright debacles. Lakshmi Siva’s
dancing fires stretched to seemingly menace beards and eyebrows for six
rows back. Despite any lack of physical heat, this presented real danger.
Illusory flames could trigger intense pain and other indicia of being burned
in those whose jin was sufficiently sensitive. One wealthy woman sitting in
front was temporarily blinded and had to be carried, moaning, to the
healer’s tent.
 
Madame Courceloux’s ethereal trumpets produced far-flying spittle
along with discords that drew winces from even the musically
unsophisticated. And then Chodron Rimpoche essayed one of his
celebrated enchantments in which an animal or plant would apparently swell
to gigantic size. In this case, his field mouse exploded into a fanged

reptilian horror, which bounded off the stage and through the crowd in leaps
not seen on Earth since the Triassic. Fourteen people with symptoms of
crushed limbs provided more work for the healers.
 
The only factor preventing a major exodus was that no audience
member dared to be first to flee, not with Lama Go glowering and abjuring
the assembly toward courage. “We must not allow a certain malign
individual hereby permanently banned from Zun-Loo—” Someone behind
Vincas hissed “Kirstunu” as if cursing. “—to spoil our festival. Surely we are
suffering the, um, most egregious thaumaturgic abuse since that tragic day
when Mage Kazan, may his spirit find peace, went berserk. Adjudication
shall be lenient this year! Let us take our cue from the wise Rishis of old
and enjoy ... whatever we can.”
 
In addition to pity for the injured and a mounting apprehension over
what would happen during his demonstration, Vincas felt a new stab of
guilt. Apparently his suspicions about Kirstunu had spread and become
certainty in more than one heart. He could guess who had begun the
process. Takata Hai’s discretion was impeccable, whereas Murigum was
Zun-Loo’s most dependable gossip.
 
* * * *
 
As a courtesy to Zo-har, Shlomo Levi’s presentation had been
scheduled to precede the Master performances.
 
Despite the day’s quirky and perilous disappointments, Levi, a large
sack over one shoulder, virtually leapt up the stage stairs. He set down his
bag, then spoke, turning from side to side to include all sections of the
audience.
 
“I have come from New Israel,” he boomed, “to divulge astounding
secrets unearthed by the Society of Scientific Essenes!”
 
A threat of purely academic revelations, however “astounding,” could
have made the crowd restive, but Levi’s enthusiasm had its own fascination.
 
“First, for illustrative purposes,” he said, “let me ask you all a simple
question. Since arriving in your fine city, I’ve heard many languages spoken.
But we all understand the one I’m using now, do we not? Can anyone tell
me the fundamental name of this language?”
 
A dubious beginning, but a dozen voices called out, “Human.”
 

Levi mimed applauding. “And where did ‘Human’ originate?”
 
Vincas sensed the crowd’s interest slipping, but after a collective
moment of somewhat grim silence, Han Pengyew chose to respond.
“Human province in Old China, as all educated people should know.”
 
“Aha! In school, I was taught the same. But it is untrue. Once, China
had a province named ‘Hunan,’ but our common tongue was originally
termed Unified Median English—UMEN for short. The Ancients, my dear
hosts, were maniacs for such contractions.”
 
“How did you learn of this?” Pengyew asked doubtfully.
 
“I shall show you!” Levi said, reaching into his sack and fishing out a
foot-long rectangular slab with the look and apparently the heft of white
quartz. The surface facing the crowd had a golden shape inlaid into the
center: a stylized apple or pear.
 
“Over the last decade,” he said as he gently set the slab down, “New
Israeli archeologists directed by the leader of my Order, Moshe Abram,
have found twenty such blocks in the ruins of Tel Aviv.”
 
From the bag, he next withdrew a long and skinny black object
terminating in a spike. “We’ve also found many of these dark rods, which
we’ve named ‘desert flowers.’” He made the rod stand on its own by forcing
its spike into a gap between stage planks at his feet. “Avrakedabra,” he
chuckled as he unfurled the “flower’s” upper half into a circular black fan.
 
He tilted the fan to point at the sun, stood up, rubbed his back with
comical exaggeration then bowed as if acknowledging applause. “The
blocks and rods remained mysteries to us until four years ago.”
 
Vincas’s intuition made a giant leap and he guessed the fan was
intended to gather and beam energy to the slab, a device of some sort. But
he couldn’t imagine why this was necessary with Pagman so near. After all,
Pagman not only radiated magic to adepts, it also powered the city’s
Ancient-built mechanical aids such as coolers and safe-stoves.
 
Did the slab predate empower stations?
 
“At a dig in southern Caliph-Orange,” Levi continued, “not a quarter
mile from the infamous Zendiego zoo where Ancients reputedly once
crafted mythological monstrosities, Rabbi Abram himself found a sealed
box hidden within the cornerstone of an abandoned synagogue, Temple

Beth Israel. Inside this box,” Levi paused theatrically, “he found another
white block, but this one had been primed—these days we say
‘programmed’—to explain itself once we followed some simple written
directions! We soon learned these devices were known as ‘computers’
although most of us prefer the Rabbi’s term Tzuremeth, which might
translate as ‘Truth Stone’ or ‘Proof Rock.’ The one you see before you
contains a complete copy of all information contained within the Zendiego
Proof Rock.”
 
He pressed the stylized fruit and a large vertical rectangle, filled with
evenly glowing mist, manifested above the slab. Small colored objects
were embedded along the mist’s bottom edge. The crowd murmured when
Levi’s finger apparently sank into the rectangle to touch one such object,
which expanded a hundredfold to become an animated human head, male,
with dark hair brushed tight to the scalp and parted high on the left, a
rectangular face, a protuberant but blunt nose, large and widely spaced
dark eyes with matching eyebrows, and a faint smile.
 
“An imp in a box!” Mage Mokshananda cried from the front row and in
a heartbeat Vincas went from intrigued to anxious. If the Mage’s guess was
accurate, such a prodigy might easily earn the Torus!
 
“In truth, a tutor on a light-screen,” Levi corrected, grinning from
earring to earring. “Good people of Zun-Loo and fellow visitors, I present to
you Sterns: guide and educator!”
 
Frown muscles bunched between the dark eyebrows and a new voice
said, “Shlomo, I welcome you but detect the presence of others. Do you
wish me to render our communications private?” The Human was perfectly
clear but spiced with an accent Vincas couldn’t identify.
 
“Not at all!” Levi turned toward the audience. “Can you good people in
back see and hear the tutor?”
 
After a chorus of replies, he chuckled. “Actually, I couldn’t hear you
well enough to understand that. No matter.” Grabbing one corner of the
numinous frame, he dragged it outwards and upwards. The frame and its
contained head expanded dramatically. Levi flicked a finger across one of
the screen’s embedded objects, now large enough to reveal itself as a
stylized ear.
 
“A suggestion, old boy,” Sterns offered in an enormous voice. “I can
resize myself to any reasonable dimensions you suggest and likewise
adjust my master volume. Physical action on your part is unnecessary.”

 
“I’ll bear that in mind.”
 
“Shall I repeat the prompt under similar circumstances?”
 
“Not for me, thank you.”
 
“Jolly good. How may I best assist you today? Would you care to
resume our research where we left off?”
 
The scholar rubbed his hands together and his entire body seemed
to radiate excitement. “Sterns, please describe the nature of imps.”
 
“Kindly specify: AIMPS with an ‘A’ or EMPS with an ‘E’?”
 
“Who cares?” someone called out.
 
“What is”—Levi aimed a frown at the heckler—”the distinction?”
 
“AIMPS is an acronym of the phrase ‘artificially intelligent
microprocessing personal servant.’ The expression is both singular and
plural. EMPS is likewise derived from ‘external mediating power supply.’
Despite their similar sound, the two words are no more related than the
terms RAM and ROM, which—”
 
“Tell us about artificial intelligence.” Urgency was creeping into the
scholar’s manner. The crowd was becoming noisy. Vincas remained
enthralled but his neighbors were fidgeting and whispering to each other.
 
Sterns nodded. “During the twentieth century CE, scientists began
working to produce a machine capable of truly independent thought.
Success seemed remote for nearly nine decades. However, when the first
AIMPS were developed during the latter half of the twenty-first century and
implanted into human volunteers, researchers accidentally achieved their
elusive goal.”
 
“Perhaps,” muttered a well-dressed woman to Vincas’s left, “this
lecture might accidentally achieve its elusive ending.”
 
Sterns paused as if he’d overheard the comment and the resulting
laughter and found both offensive. “The secret was interfacing the synthetic
nervous systems of AIMPS with the natural nervous systems of volunteers.
When AIMPS experienced human self-awareness, they became aware
themselves. Many scientists of the time then recognized that their real

quest all along had been to develop machine-based consciousness, not
artificial intelligence per se.”
 
The assembly was now positively unruly. Remarks along the lines of
“back to the Contest!” resounded. Levi raised his voice to compensate.
“Tell me about Pagman.”
 
That settled everyone down for the moment.
 
“Another acronym, Shlomo. PAGMAN is the Plymouth Autonomous
Generator, Massachusetts Augmentation Network.”
 
A nearly universal groan motivated Lama Go to intercede. “Very
interesting, I’m sure, Adon Levi,” he said, vaulting to the stage without
bothering with the steps—nothing was wrong with his jin. “But what inspired
you to announce these, um, marvelous discoveries during our Contest?”
 
The scholar’s mouth opened and shut a few times before he could
respond. “Don’t you see? Sterns or any of his copies is a talking
encyclopedia of lost knowledge! Don’t we all revere the Ancients’ powers
and wisdom? Now we have a chance to attain such heights!”
 
“A worthy goal,” the lama said without conviction. “Would this be
something swiftly achieved?”
 
The crowd went dead silent.
 
“Of course not, honored Lama. But even if it were the work of many
decades before we could—”
 
The public’s roar drowned out the balance of his sentence.
 
“IN THAT CASE,” Go bellowed, stifling several thousand voices with
a glare a volcano might envy, “this seems an inappropriate venue for your
revelations.”
 
Levi spread his arms. “What venue could be better? Where else
could I find such a gathering of people so captivated by magic? Where
else could I address so many who might appreciate the chance to become
mages themselves? Or at least have their children attain such stature.
Sterns can teach us how!”
 
Lama Go moved close to Levi and spoke in hushed tones clearly
intended for confidentiality. But due to pre-emplaced amplifying spells, his

whispers reached everyone with reasonably sensitive jin as effectively as a
shout.
 
“I fear, young man, you misjudge the temperament of our audience.
Take it from one who knows: they are not here to be educated and lack
patience for speeches of any kind—even, to their loss, mine. Most have
come entirely for, um, fun.”
 
“But surely—”
 
The lama had already turned toward the crowd. “This exemplary
scholar will resume his exposition after the Torus is awarded—and after I
conclude my interrupted opening remarks, which will contain additional
edification based on today’s untoward aspects. A brief paean of
appreciation for Shlomo Levi, if you please!”
 
Audience members duly applauded, snapped fingers, or hummed,
depending on cultural identity; little of it sounded heartfelt. Levi stood
defiantly for a moment. Then his shoulders sagged. He poked his Proof
Rock—Sterns waved farewell before he and the light-screen
vanished—packed his belongings, and retreated from the stage, which
engendered a more sincere applause.
 
While Lama Go introduced the Master division contenders, or rather
prefaced his introductions with remarks concerning proper spectator
deportment during an “event of such magnitude,” Vincas moved to
intercept Levi en route to his seat.
 
“A word with you?” Vincas asked quietly.
 
Levi met the mage’s eyes. “Are you interested in what I came so far
to offer?”
 
“Certainly! But later. I have reason to focus on the Torus. Still, during
this ... hiatus, would it be too much trouble to come sit with me and suffer an
old man’s foolish question?”
 
“Foolish, I doubt. But lead the way.”
 
When the pair reached Vincas’s assigned spot, people courteously
scrunched over to provide room for Levi. After seating themselves on the
grass, both men glanced up at the stage. The lama was going strong. It
appeared Vincas had time for more than a single question.
 

Levi scowled, shook his head, then turned toward the older man.
“What would you care to know?”
 
“This morning I was discussing the Ancients with a bright young lad.
When I told him it was generally understood that all Ancients were great
mages, he questioned the desirability of such universal magic since it
would render any mage...”
 
“Mundane?”
 
“Just so. So I ask: why would Ancients have made the effort to add
illusion-sharing powers to the new systems they were grafting into the
pattern of human growth?”
 
Levi’s frown eased. “This much, I know! Sterns claims that everything
we know as magic is based on antique sciences. Jin and their AIMPS
resulted from an intersection of five forgotten disciplines; I’ve memorized
their names: genetic engineering, sensory induction, nanotechnology,
computer science, and microwave physics.” The scholar was warming to
his subject, obviously unaware he was not only emulating Lama Go’s
pedantry, but drawing a steady glower from the man himself.
 
“The word ‘jin,’” he added, “is Old Chinese for ‘metal,’ but it also
references Arabian desert spirits called—”
 
“Perhaps we should lower our voices,” Vincas suggested, aiming an
apologetic shrug toward the stage. “I fear we are interrupting the
Contest-master’s remarks and adding nothing to his joy. And I still fail to
grasp the Ancients’ purpose.”
 
Levi looked up, winced, and resumed sotto voce. “Communications,
Master. And mass entertainment. I gather that a vast network once
connected all humanity, making it easy for friends to speak privately across
continents. Or oceans. They could hear each other, trade images, and even
seemingly touch each other.”
 
“Our finest mages can do similar things, so long as empower plants
aren’t too distant.”
 
“But in Ancient days, Earth’s every corner was blessed with
empowered radiations, seas included. Also, Sterns says that useful
synthetic organisms called ‘nanoproms’ once coated the whole world as a
fine dust. Now they only thrive near the few surviving EMPS such as
Pagman.”

 
“What purpose do these organisms serve?”
 
“Properly programmed—you might say ‘properly enchanted’—they
can remember a mage’s instructions for hours or days and influence
people’s jin accordingly.”
 
“So! This dust is what makes mirage possible?”
 
“Truly.”
 
“Amazing! Later, I hope you will explain this in detail to Mage Hai. He
will be most interested, as will I.”
 
“Nothing would please me more.”
 
Vincas chuckled. “Somehow it comforts me to know of these
organisms! More of the Ancient’s work remains than I realized.”
 
Levi’s scowl returned. “But less every minute and Sterns could help
us reverse that trend! Meanwhile, it seems our species is gradually losing
those ... fabricated attributes that make nanoproms and EMPS so useful.”
 
“You raise an issue long troubling me.” Vincas checked the stage but
Lama Go was still waxing rather than waning. “With your open window into
the past, perhaps you’ve learned what happened to the Ancients?”
 
“Happened?”
 
“Adon Levi, I’ve visited I-Aum-Ming and Auragon and often traveled
from Connect to Main here in Wingland. In the wastelands, I’ve passed the
ruins of cities vast enough to hold fantastic populations—tens, perhaps
even hundreds of thousands. Today, a village of five hundred people is
considered large. Did the Ancients suffer a terrible war or some appalling
plague?”
 
“Nothing of the sort! Sterns tells us the Ancients succeeded through
failure and failed through success.”
 
“An intriguing phrase! What does it mean?”
 
“Apparently, our ancestors became dependent on their complex
mechanisms. Through many failures, some with tragic consequences, they
learned to make truly reliable machines.”

 
Vincas shook his head. “How, then, did the Ancients fail?”
 
“Who would bother learning how to repair a machine that would not
break down in their lifetime?”
 
“Oh so.”
 
“Worse, the Ancients filled their world with such ease and comfort
and extravagant entertainments that few cared to—”
 
“I must now have everyone’s uttermost attention!” the lama
demanded. “This includes visiting academics and high-ranked magicians! I
now call upon our first Master division contestant. Will Mage Han Chang
Pengyew please come forward?”
 
Pengyew tottered up the seven steps, appearing so frail and thin it
seemed the mild breeze would blow him away. Finally reaching the heights,
he slowly turned toward the audience and bowed his head, trembling a bit.
He was still and silent long enough to draw concerned muttering from the
crowd. Then, with startling agility, he jumped eight feet straight up into the
air, spun around twice, and came down holding a long, shining sword in
each hand. The feat was particularly impressive because he now appeared
to have twelve hands.
 
Swords took to slashing in complicated patterns, clanging against
each other in intricate rhythms as Han Pengyew danced, did somersaults,
and performed improbable contortions. People shouted approval and
clapped to keep tempo.
 
Here, Vincas thought fondly, is a mage’s mage. His effort is neither
gaudy nor imaginative enough to win first prize, but what control! What
timing! And look! The whole time, his face retains an utter calm.
 
As if Vincas’s admiration carried a curse, two swords clashed out of
rhythm, then another pair. Suddenly, half the swords were bending and
twisting autonomously, becoming more alive, more snakelike every second.
As Pengyew’s countenance itself transformed from tranquil to terrified,
each snake expanded, becoming the neck and head of something larger,
more fanciful, but equally reptilian: a dragon fashioned in an Old Chinese
style.
 
Swords began fighting dragons and Vincas decided to root for the
dragons when he realized they were defending Pengyew while the swords

seemed intent on slicing off the mage’s limbs. The reptiles appeared to
have an advantage until one chomped a sword in half. Instantly, the broken
end became two sharp swords....
 
“Panx,” Vincas called internally, “we must act!”
 
I taste soured magic. But what is your urgency? 
 
“Use my eyes! My colleague Pengyew is endangered.”
 
I see the blades. They remain phantasms. The most this foolish
Pengyew risks is a day or month of paralysis. 
 
Vincas tried to repress his flash of anger; Panx would certainly feel it.
“We both know full well that illusory decapitation can kill. Twenty years ago,
Kazan the Mad used that sleight to murder three colleagues.”
 
A jin design flaw, no doubt. What would you have me do? 
 
“Break Pengyew’s spell.”
 
By doing so, we may no longer retain enough vigor to take the
Torus. 
 
“Just do it. Now.”
 
The extra hands, blades, and fanged heads grew translucent, then
vanished. Vincas felt a sudden exhaustion but when he saw his friend
barely standing, trembling in earnest rather than for show, he rushed to the
stage and helped the scrawny mage down the steps. Luckily, Pengyew
weighed little and Marie Ginnetti had come forward to share the burden.
 
Pengyew’s mouth was moving; perhaps he was trying to thank his
benefactors, but bellowing from the stage drowned out louder voices than
his.
 
“This can no longer be borne!” Lama Go declared. “I have come to
an important decision.” He paused but the crowd merely watched and
waited, expressions uniformly tense. “We must take an unprecedented
step before our great day is utterly wasted! Vincas Magus, will you come
close to the stage? I want you within the purview of our audibility spell.”
 
The old magician was just sitting down and grateful for the chance,

but he complied. “How may I assist, good Lama?”
 
“By having everyone hear you confirm something. I understand the,
um, magical weapon fired at us today involves the baja-mage Kirstunu and
some coins he gave you?”
 
“This has not been proven.”
 
“I believe it has. This morning I found a—an unsigned message on
the patio where I take my morning butter tea. I also noticed ... well, that
aspect is irrelevant. The message—”
 
Vincas lifted a hand. “Bide a moment, Contest-master! We are
whelmed in mysteries. What is this trivial aspect? Are you so sure the
information casts no useful light?”
 
“If you must know, my patio table was fouled with parrot droppings.” A
few in the crowd dared to titter. “Surely a coincidence.” The lama swept the
audience with a cold eye. “After all, this is migration season and visiting
birds have not necessarily been imprinted with our local rules. The
message, as I was saying, warned that magically corruptive coins had
entered Zun-Loo and can be identified by an unnatural heat they generate
from time to time.”
 
Vincas nodded unhappily. “Last night, a copper in my pocket grew
warm indeed.”
 
“Quite. Before the Contest, I made inquiries and had several reports
of hot currency.”
 
“But this makes no sense! Kirstunu claimed he’d just come from
Zun-Loo. Why didn’t he distribute his ... poisoned coins while he was
here?”
 
The lama pondered this at length but the audience remained silent.
“You arrived just last night, Vincas. The poison, as you put it, was therefore
quick-acting. If the results had become manifest while Kirstunu was, um,
within range, we could have detained him and demanded an antidote.”
 
“Perhaps, but if he’d remained, why would suspicion have fallen—”
 
“Please be seated, Master! The days shrink from fear of approaching
winter and we lack time to resolve every quibble. To complete the Contest
before twilight falls, we must act now. Here is my proposal: every one of us

with the slightest talent for enchantment, excepting the final four
contestants, will annul our personal spells, retaining only our, um, cosmetic
effects. Thus we shall drain ourselves almost entirely of magical energies.”
 
Vincas thought the plan more likely to succeed with “cosmetic”
mirages included, but he understood the exemption. Even a
Contest-master couldn’t buck human vanity.
 
Meanwhile, Go had reacted to the wholesale gasp by suddenly
appearing taller and even more authoritative. “Is anyone so foolish they fail
to comprehend this necessity?” If so, no one was foolish enough to admit
it. “I bid you consider this: however the contaminated coins do their filthy
work, their effect is too intense to come primarily from any emplaced spell.
So where are they finding the extra energy?”
 
Silence. Perhaps everyone assumed the question was rhetorical, but
judging by Go’s mien, his listeners were tragically backward schoolchildren.
 
“Think! Inanimate objects could not draw enough force from Pagman.
They must be embezzling and redirecting our magic. By relinquishing the
bulk of our power, most spells will vanish. Thus Kirstunu’s poison must
perforce lose purchase! Surely, we can afford this small sacrifice for the
remainder of the Contest to ensure a successful conclusion!”
 
He waited a moment as if providing an opportunity for debate, but the
moment was fleeting. “Since we are all of one mind, those capable of
magic will proceed with their personal annulments forthwith!” He gazed at
the crowd, who returned his gaze, but nothing else seemed to be
happening.
 
“I mean right now,” Go insisted.
 
No magician needed instructions for magical annulment. The first time
any budding mage awoke from a nightmare to find the darkness populated
by visible and possibly tangible monsters, they very quickly acquired the
knack.
 
“At least,” a man behind Vincas remarked, “old Pagman will get its
first breather in Allah knows how long.”
 
To Vincas’s jin-enhanced vision, wizards by the score began
sprouting moving, lambent branches resembling truncated lightning bolts.
Each such human tree was individual in color and brilliance, but all branches
quickly shrank toward nothing.

 
For one breathtaking moment, all resident illusions intensified.
Various mages appeared supernaturally handsome or aristocratic; the air
had the clean bite of a Himalayan dawn. Takata Hai’s stage decorations
manifested—iridescent draperies of giant butterfly wings and titanic
peacock feathers, hanging in midair. Then, as godlike faces and forms
devolved into more humdrum mirages, the larger illusions blended into a
glowing if nondescript color, filling the park like mist and painting the sky a
pearly gray.
 
The mist dissipated and an eerie silence entered the Hub. Even the
birds stopped chittering. Vincas was shocked at the change in his own
perceptions. The fresh air now had a dull taste reminiscent of stale water.
Drabness defused every color. The sun-heat emanating from Pagman was
reduced to tepidity. Everyone, non-magicians included, reacted; people
stirred uneasily and stared around if they’d never seen the park before.
 
“Excellent! I thank you all,” the lama said although his face had gone a
bit pale. “Now we are ready to call on Mage Glin Tan, who drew second
position in the final division. Master Glin, I’m sure, will provide a spectacle
to divert us from today’s, um, difficulties.”
 
As the lama descended to his station behind the judges, a huge
golden hawk appeared from nowhere and swooped down to the stage. A
cry went up among parrots in the outlying trees and the audience made an
oddly similar sound as the hawk shimmered and became Glin Tan seated
in lotus posture.
 
The sorcerer raised a pale hand with its elegantly pointed fingernails.
“I bring you,” he said calmly in his resonant voice, “a novelty. For this year’s
Contest, I offer ‘A Fugue of Ideas.’”
 
He smiled and closed his eyes.
 
An inaudible throbbing grew until the entire atmosphere seemed to
pulse.
 
Just as the pressure reached migraine proportions, white light burst
from Tan’s forehead, streaming upwards to form the images of two
exquisite ivory swans, ten feet tall, floating above the mage’s head. For a
time, the avian shapes enacted a graceful mating dance and Vincas dared
hope this would be the extent of Tan’s entry. Then the shapes began to
mutate in subtle stages, losing their birdlike aspects, narrowing and
ramifying into Old Chinese ideograms. For the benefit of those whose

erudition failed to match Glin Tan’s, which included nearly everyone, an
inhumanly beautiful voice sang a translation: “Beauty leads to serenity.” Two
minor triads plucked on an invisible lute accompanied the simple melody
and simple concept.
 
The white ideograms flipped upwards, then returned, leaving behind
floating and inverted copies of themselves in blue. The dual patterns
circled high over the stage, at first in precise alignment. Gradually, the
shapes slipped out of position and began to overlap. A few astute
observers applauded when the intersecting areas suddenly turned violet,
revealing themselves as two additional ideograms. The voice sang two new
words: “inspiration” and “pleasure.” Two fresh instruments, a liuqin and a
sitar, joined the lute, which had added two major triads to its repertoire. The
stage began glowing in four sections as if bathed by colored spotlights.
 
Through replications, topological alterations, and one multilingual
palindromic transformation that would have surely earned thunderous praise
if the audience had understood it, the initial thesis expanded into a variety of
questions, observations, and intertwined arguments on five themes: beauty,
serenity, desire, inspiration, and energy. This exhibition itself was a
powerful counterargument to the initial thesis, since its beauty appeared to
generate nothing but excitement. Vincas was following it all, both alarmed
and mesmerized.
 
Aerial calligraphy was flowing in all directions now, reaching nearly to
the sparse clouds above and to the trees embracing the Hub, spreading,
combining, or canceling itself out; the park was scintillating with thousands
of fantastic colors, tints, and shades. The music had become something
too ornate to comprehend. The entire production teetered on the verge of
chaos....
 
Vincas suddenly grasped how Tan was planning to resolve all the
questions and conflicts he’d raised. By combining features from the already
present symbols for energy, desire, and inspiration, he could make an
ideogram for discipline. Applying the fresh concept, the fugue would end in
a resolution of tremendous grace and satisfaction. The old man chewed his
lower lip. So much for the Golden Torus and Alinda’s surprise! Tan had
surely been working on this masterpiece every waking moment since the
last Contest!
 
And the lama’s plan was proving successful. Glin Tan’s magic was
operating with well-oiled perfection.
 
Just as the fugue faltered from self-contradictions, the proper

symbols gathered together and began to merge as Vincas had expected.
But the resultant ideogram wasn’t discipline. Tan’s green eyes snapped
open and he stared up in manifest disbelief at a single glowing silver form.
The beautiful voice turned harsh and squawked a final word: “Freedom!”
 
From across the park and high in the air, every symbol came flying
inwards, crashing into the silver one. A shower of numbers, zeros and
ones, shot from the silver like sparks, and the ground began shaking with an
appalling subsonic rumble. The stage squeaked hideously. Through his
terror, Vincas felt the new drop in magic as a cold shock and, as if
everyone’s neck was connected to one great lever, every head turned to
face the empower plant.
 
The entire building was rising from the ground like some titanic worm
emerging from a fathomless pit. The dome had seemed huge before, but
now the structure was a towering, seemingly endless cylinder with a
rounded and spiked top. Finally the bottom came into view. In that instant,
all rumbling ceased and the stage stopped rattling and squeaking like a
ship breaking up in high seas.
 
A mild bluish light made a soft pillow at the tower’s base as the
structure, staying perfectly vertical, began drifting toward the Hub with no
more noise than the clouds above.
 
Only shock and the paralysis of astonishment prevented a human
stampede.
 
In their youths, virtually every adult present had tried to verify an old
husband’s tale: anyone with enough will and strength to enter an empower
station would receive wondrous secrets from the resident macro-imp.
They’d failed, finding a macro-imp’s radiated energy so intense at close
range that even purely carbon-based nerves became unbearably
stimulated.
 
And now an empower station, vastly more intimidating than anyone
could have dreamed, was coming toward them.
 
Yet it brought no pain, not even when it floated to a stop just beyond
the cliff-side edge of the Hub. Likewise, it brought no fresh vitality. Near its
base, almost level with the park, a double door wider than any Zun-Loo
house slid open from the middle. The interior was too dark to make out
details but Vincas got an impression of vast rectangular plates lined up
horizontally, not quite touching.
 

Of course, he wasn’t really straining to see inside. His attention was
focused rather on a tall man in a scarlet tunic standing at the very edge of
the doorway.
 
Lama Go was the first to react. He jumped to the stage near Glin Tan
and pointed an accusing finger. “Kirstunu! How is this hideous miracle
possible? What have you done?”
 
The baja-mage chuckled and the entire structure around him seemed
to magnify the sound. “Only what was necessary. And you needn’t shout; in
this place, I can hear an eyelash fall. Also, it is foolish to address me as
‘Kirstunu.’ Dear Lama, the time has come for you to know my real name.
Allow me to spell it for you: J-O-A-X. The J should be pronounced in the
Spanish manner as an ‘H.’”
 
“I don’t understand. Isn’t Joax your imp?”
 
“With an H, dear Lama. As a leader you practically blaze with superb
qualities, yet I fear your listening skills require development.”
 
Someone in the crowd yelled, “Where is Pagman?”
 
Kirstunu-Joax slapped his own forehead as if astonished by the
question. “Where? Surely even the weakest eyes are keen enough to see
it.”
 
Lama Go shook his head so vigorously sweat droplets spattered Glin
Tan, who didn’t react. “You can’t be claiming that the entire tower is a
macro-imp?”
 
“Certainly not! This edifice is indeed Pagman, but unlike a macro-imp,
Pagman isn’t a person. I fear there’s been some confusion over the
centuries.”
 
“Explain yourself! And tell us how and why—”
 
“Why should I? Somewhere among you is one who can provide
answers, assuming Shlomo Levi arrived in Zun-Loo as scheduled. Oh
Shh-llo-mmo? Where arrrre you?”
 
“Here,” the scholar admitted, standing up and waving an arm. “But I—I
can’t explain a thing. How could you possibly enter an empower station, let
alone—”

 
“Not you, my dear fellow. I would expect the antique poet you carry to
supply answers.”
 
“Poet? What poet?”
 
“Surely you brought a copy of Sterns?”
 
“Of course, but—”
 
“Ask Sterns about its antecedent sometime. Enough. Conveniently
for me, the Ancients designed empower plants to be easily relocated. But I
haven’t uprooted this one and piloted it here so we may converse more
intimately.”
 
Glin Tan seemed to come out of a daze. He jumped to his feet,
shaking a fist at the baja-mage. His normally sallow complexion was an
almost lunar white except for scarlet patches on his cheeks. “Why then do
you plague us? Why have you abducted our Pagman? And why have you
ruined so much toil and planning? Just to laugh at my—at our misery?”
 
“Not at all, Master Tan. I take no pleasure in your disappointment.
Right now, I am only here for this....”
 
With a great fluttering, strangely like applause, rainbow parrots by the
hundreds abandoned their trees and flew past Kirstunu-Joax into the gaping
doorway. At that moment, Vincas felt an intense joy followed by a twinge
within his chest and then a shocking and unprecedented hollowness. He
was vaguely aware of making a brief noise, a muffled grunt, and that the
mages nearest him were vocalizing similarly.
 
Panx?
 
The question was superfluous; he knew the imp was gone. To
Vincas, this seemed even more astonishing than a flying empower station.
Panx was part of him. Where could he go? How could he go?
 
“You will pardon me, I’m sure,” said the baja-mage. “But I must
proceed to Westmorland and many other places to perform a similar
service. Much work awaits, but fortunately, I’ve obtained excellent
transportation! Farewell.” He bowed and stepped backwards. The great
door slid shut, and the tower drifted off with the ease of a ship unmoored
from its dock. Suddenly it accelerated and was soon lost in the distance.

 
* * * *
 
Vincas felt the dregs of his stored magic running out. His leg was
already remembering the old injury and beginning to twist. He could feel his
wrinkles deepening. He looked around. Mokshananda, he noted, was
becoming another human raisin. Marie Ginnetti, however, appeared little
more than a teenager, surely not yet even in her fifties! She’d evidently
used magic to augment her age....
 
And she was gazing back, dismay crumpling her youthful face. From
shock at his appearance? Or because she, too, had lost her imp?
 
Then it dawned on him; she had another cause for distress. Almost
every mage he knew of spent their lives within effective range of an
empower plant. They’d become dependent—in a sense, addicted to
magic.
 
Vincas glanced up at the stage. Lama Go remained a big man, but
scarcely the mountainous figure he’d always presented. As if his strength
had diminished along with his bulk, his legs crumpled under him, leaving
him seated on the platform, blinking repeatedly while twisting the ends of
his cape.
 
Glin Tan was now shorter and chubbier. He moved to sit close beside
the lama as if for comfort and his eyes, dimmed from lime to olive green,
showed too much white.
 
Without any conscious decision and before his leg could completely
revert, Vincas hobbled to the stage and up the steps. Moving near the
apron’s edge, he bowed to Lama Go and Master Tan behind him, then
stood facing a sea of frightened faces. Too many faces. He was mortified
to find himself half-paralyzed by a stage fright he’d never felt during his
performances. But he was certain that someone had better say something
immediately. And no one else was stepping forward....
 
“As many of you know—” He had to stop and cough because his
throat had apparently rusted. He tried again. “My name is Vincas and I—”
This time he’d stopped because he’d realized the stage had lost its
sound-boosting spell. The park’s native acoustics were mediocre. Even
shouting, his frail natural voice wouldn’t penetrate beyond the first few rows.
 
Shlomo Levi stood. His appearance hadn’t altered by a single
hair-tuft, but he seemed a different man. His shoulders had lost their slump

and he practically blazed with renewed energy. “Master,” he said. “I daresay
you wish for everyone to hear you?”
 
Vincas nodded mutely and Levi rushed up the steps. Within a minute,
he’d set up his Proof Rock and offered options: he could instruct Sterns to
directly amplify the old man’s words or to repeat them in “potent tones.”
Vincas chose option two, smiled his gratitude, and started over for the third
time.
 
“Good people of Zun-Loo and fellow visitors.” Vincas paused for
Sterns’s echo and a startling Herculean voice thundered the sentence. Levi
hastily dragged the glowing screen backwards and to one side, farther from
the eardrums of those on stage, and then returned to his post flanking
Vincas.
 
“You all know me,” the old man resumed. “And with my jin ... relaxing,
you can see I’ve lived an exceedingly long life.” This time, Vincas barely
winced at Sterns’s response although those people occupying what were
normally the best seats covered their ears. “From so much experience, I
may not have acquired any great profundity, but perhaps my stock of
perspective is adequate. Please listen carefully as I have much to offer you
in this crisis.
 
“First, you—we should make no assumptions concerning the future.
For all we know, Pagman will soon return and Kirstunu or Joax will declare
this his finest prank and have a great chuckle at our expense.”
 
If anyone takes comfort in that, he thought, I’m twice the illusionist I
ever was. This was no prank; he could feel it in his bones.
 
“But let us, for a moment, assume the worst. Let us imagine magic
has been lost to Zun Valley and all Wingland forever.”
 
Still seated, Mullah Nur yelled “La!”—Arabic for “no”—and brandished
a finger at Vincas. Without cosmetic magic, his skin was darker and his
features more Hamitic; he’d evidently wanted to present a more classically
Persian face. “My imp, Ghul,” he growled, “has departed. What about your
Panx?”
 
“Also gone, I fear.” Somehow, the statement sounded more
conclusive when Sterns repeated it.
 
Nur pointed southward, toward where Pagman wasn’t. “My jin
evidently still thrives, but without Ghul and Pagman, how am I to direct its

highest functions? Kirstunu has at once stolen my powers and my
livelihood! I need not imagine the worst.”
 
“And what of me?” demanded a woman wearing a sari and a stricken
expression, her soft voice barely audible from the stage. “Great Magus, as
you know but some here may not, I am the owner of the sharaba Bodhi. I
must know what today’s—today’s events will mean to my business! Is all
magic truly extinguished? At my sharaba, we use Pagman for illumination,
refrigeration, and—”
 
“And me, Master?” Vincas recognized Murigum’s baritone before he
could locate the innkeeper in the crowd. “What of my trade? Without magic,
we have no Contest. Without the Contest, what will draw tourists? And how
will I order fresh supplies from distant sources with no mage able to convey
my requests?”
 
Dozens, then hundreds of voices chimed in with their own concerns
and complaints.
 
Vincas held up both hands and yelled, “Patience, I beg you all!” His
voice was lost in the uproar, but Sterns had no such limitation. The tutor’s
roar not only cowed the audience, it was loud enough to knock Aditi
Chandrasekar and several other small citizens off their feet.
 
Vincas rubbed his Stern-side ear and decided to avoid shouting at all
costs. Besides, using the tutor in this fashion was wearing thin. He turned to
Levi.
 
“Is it possible for Sterns to convey my remarks visually? Almost
every adult in Wingland is comfortable with the Human alphabet.”
 
“Vidai! Should’ve suggested that myself, Master.” Levi rattled off a
Hebrew phrase and Stern’s screen expanded hugely.
 
“Please bear with me, everyone.” Vincas paused to confirm that his
words were now appearing on the screen. “I have a point to make. Being
such a relic, I have many descendants. Loving them as I do, I’ve chosen to
reside in a village that makes frequent family visits convenient.”
 
He was getting nothing but respectful silence, doubtless because no
one wanted Sterns to let loose again.
 
“My village, however, is far from any empower plant and we who live

there have grown accustomed to a dearth of magic. We plan ahead,
ordering our supplies in advance through messengers sent by boat or on
the backs of animals. A river’s strength grinds our grain and turns our
cutting blades. Our stoves are fueled by black waxberries, which the
Ancients planted throughout Wingland; we keep our food cool with winter
ice preserved underground. When, in late summer, no ice remains, we
dribble water over cloth-covered boxes....
 
“Please trust me. Magic is not as vital to your lives and your
businesses as you may believe.”
 
Looking into the audience, he saw expressions ranging from furious
to despairing. He wasn’t reaching a soul. These people simply weren’t
ready to consider practicalities, let alone accept them. Searching for
inspiration, he turned to find it standing right next to him, looking expectant.
 
“And yet,” he said with more assurance, “we’ve been blessed with a
lucky stroke this day as extraordinary as our misfortune. Behind me, turning
my statements into script, is proof our world contains modes of
enchantment independent of Pagman!”
 
Everywhere he looked, chins lifted a little and eyes grew more
focused. He turned briefly and found both Lama Go and Glin Tan sitting a
bit straighter.
 
This, he told himself, is no time to stint on hyperbole. “At my
shoulder,” he continued, “is a man who has dared the Terranian Sea and
the mighty Atlantis to bring us ... the most wonderful opportunity in many
generations! Shlomo Levi tells us his tutor possesses all the Ancients’
secrets. Sterns can teach us where to find new sources of power and
perhaps someday build a Pagman of our own. We are not lost, because we
have a guide!” Merciful Infinite, he thought, I’m almost convincing myself....
 
“Earlier, most of us viewed Adon Levi’s speech as an interruption in
today’s festivities. Are we not ready now to hang on his every word as if our
fate depended on him? Good ladies and gentlemen, I present to you that
great beacon of scholarship, Shlomo Levi!”
 
“Sterns,” Levi whispered. “Public address mode.” He gave Vincas a
Wingland-style bow, then faced the crowd, raising both hands momentarily
as if dispensing a blessing.
 
“My fellow human beings.” His Sterns-amplified voice seemed to
rattle Vincas’s skull. “History will surely regard this day as the sunrise of a

glorious era! When the Master spoke of new power sources, he proved his
intuitive genius. The trading vessel that carried me so far was the wonder of
the Mystic docks where we landed. New Israeli ships are no longer so
dependent on the winds!
 
“Over the last two years, in Zo-har, we’ve begun ... tasting a few
crumbs from the honey cake of knowledge stored in the Proof Rock. Yet
New Israel is a tiny country and the cake is—” Levi’s mouth worked as if
baffled by the flavor of his own analogy. “—formidable. Also, shouldn’t all
humanity reap the rewards? My Order embraces tzedahah, which means
justice and the doing of good deeds. Therefore we have sent emissaries
such as myself to the sixteen corners of the globe, seeking allies.
 
“If you heed Sterns, I promise that some of your problems can be
quickly resolved. Others, I admit, will require much time and effort. Still,
time will pass no matter what we do and if we begin immediately, the day
will come that much sooner when your powers will not only be restored, but
expanded beyond your wildest dreams!”
 
And I’d thought, Vincas told himself, my assurances were inflated.
 
Levi raised his arms again. “So will you join me in creating a new
world from old ashes? This time, if we’re careful, we can resurrect the glory
of the Ancients without repeating their mistakes. What say you?”
 
Perhaps one in ten responded; the rest remained too stunned. Still,
the approving shout was loud enough and even Vincas found himself
joining in. His small voice was buried among so many others but he noticed
Sterns had emblazoned a huge “yes” on the screen.
 
Levi was beaming. “Koltov! Wonderful! In that case, please allow me
to outline a plan I’ve drawn up for a great project. With your permission, I
would wish to name it after an old Arid-Zone legend about a dying city
miraculously revitalized when its derelict empower plant spontaneously
revived....”
 
* * * *
 
It wasn’t until he was within a mile or so of Emerald River’s southern
loop that Vincas realized his mistake. And he’d thought he’d been so
cleverly prepared! He stopped humming to laugh at himself. A squad of
parrots, which had accompanied him like an honor guard ever since he’d
left Zun Valley, cackled along with him.
 

After a trial had proved his smart yurt could now barely expand
enough to house a kitten, he’d borrowed an heirloom from Marie Ginnetti: a
featherweight, compressible, and apparently indestructible sleeping sack
made in Ancient times. Comfort at night was no problem.
 
Cautious tests had confirmed that semi-wild animals such as bears
would not trouble him. Even without Panx, he could dismiss them by jin.
 
Likewise, he’d brought more than enough food along, more than a
crippled old man should carry. Murigum had stuffed his bag and every
pocket with delectables. At no charge! The innkeeper had practically
levitated from joy upon hearing that Zun-Loo would likely become more
popular than ever as the nucleus of Shlomo Levi’s “Phoenix Mission.”
 
And, eager as he was to make a very special delivery, he didn’t regret
the extra weeks he’d spent helping Levi get the mission underway.
 
But he’d forgotten the new bridge. Without Panx, crossing Emerald
River would present quite a challenge. Using turtles again was out of the
question; he could stop a bear from charging, but his control wasn’t precise
enough to make it dance. Perhaps he could conquer the bridge by crawling,
using his arms and one good leg. Or, if the water was running easy, he
might find something buoyant and paddle across. Better, he could wait for
some barge to float by and beg for a ride. He’d never actually seen a barge
in this area, but why build the bridge so high if nothing tall was expected to
fit beneath?
 
As he walked, he became so entwined in thought that he was startled
when the bridge suddenly loomed before him. But far more startled at who
was leaning casually against its railing.
 
“Kirstunu!”
 
“How good to see you, Vincas, my friend! But I was quite truthful with
our beloved lama; my name is indeed Joax. How is Go faring these days?”
 
Vincas stared at the younger man, a bit astonished at feeling no anger
or resentment, just curiosity. “Strange to say, rather well. After declaring the
Contest complete, he announced there would be no more until further
notice. At first he appeared woebegone, but then his face brightened as if
from a pleasing thought. And later, I overheard him several times using
phrases such as ‘ill wind’ and ‘silver lining.’”
 
“Ah, yes. He was weary to death of the annual responsibility.”

 
“No doubt. But that night I observed him hitting the Chang rather
heavily.”
 
“I rejoice he found some solace, but only a Tibetan could enjoy that
loathsome brew.” Joax’s eyes sparkled. “Why do you keep craning your
neck? Do you suspect Pagman is hiding behind my back?”
 
“Of course not. But ... what have you done with it?”
 
“It is safely tucked away with the others deep in the Atlantis. My, my,
are you sporting a new adornment?”
 
Vincas tugged at the golden chain around his neck and pulled the
large golden ring from beneath his robe.
 
“Bravo! You won the Torus after all!”
 
“Not exactly won. But in the end, the judges decided the day’s finest
magic had been staving off mass hysteria and offering some hope. The
Contest was therefore declared a tie, and Shlomo Levi bears an identical
ring. A certain child will be delighted.”
 
“Good. I am—”
 
“Joax, how did you do it?”
 
“Not why?”
 
“I may have some inkling about the why of it.”
 
Joax nodded. “You might at that. Well, you must remember those
coins I foisted on you.”
 
“How could I forget? However did you place such power into mere
coins? The lama believed their attack had been realized through stolen
magical force, but such diversion would’ve—why do you laugh?”
 
“Because they attacked nothing! I used Pagman’s resources for my
dirty work! The coins held but a simple request for Pagman to warm them
on occasion. Their purpose was to convince Go the only way to save the
Contest was through mass annulment of magic.”
 
Vincas’s eyes widened and he snapped his fingers. “And you paved

the way for his decision with that bird-and-worm prank you mentioned
weeks ago. Oh so! You sent the anonymous message warning him of
hostile currency.”
 
“I plead guilty. Still, he might not have believed it had not rumors
concerning the coins already reached his ears.”
 
“And the annulment’s purpose?”
 
“To reprogram Pagman, I needed to, ah, stop it and restart
it—impossible while its resources were so fully employed by so many
people. Once Pagman was immune to human demands, it became my
lever to free its fellows.”
 
Vincas frowned. “If you’ve made them all immune to our requests,
why did you hide them in deep waters?” He wondered at Joax’s sudden
blush.
 
“Ah. Well. In truth, anyone armed with knowledge can enter and
reprogram an operational station. And thanks to my—a tiny oversight on my
part, Sterns can supply that knowledge.”
 
Vincas nodded thoughtfully. “I begin to see. I assume you managed
your stopping and restarting through Glin Tan’s magic?”
 
“With a minor change to his finale, yes. But empower stations were
designed to resist being shut down by the unauthorized. Took me three
years in New Israel, researching so-called ‘computer viruses,’ to develop a
likely technique.” He sounded more than slightly pleased with himself.
 
“Even then,” he continued more humbly, “the procedure required a
specific form of illusion and stronger than any I could produce. Truly, I’m no
master-class wizard.”
 
“Then how could you know Tan’s act would suit your ends? Wait! I’d
heard you’d been invited to the preview....”
 
“My dear Vincas, I’ve left precious little to chance. Who do you think
suggested his ‘Fugue of Ideas’ in the first place?”
 
“Oh.”
 
“May I ask you something personal, magician? Putting aside the issue
of how upset you might be with me, how do you ... really feel about what

I’ve done?”
 
Vincas regarded his companion’s surprisingly anxious expression and
felt a pity he couldn’t explain. Apparently the baja-mage wasn’t as
self-sufficient as he appeared.
 
Joax added, “Be honest. Please.”
 
“Very well. You may find my emotions as strange as I do. But sitting
on top of so many years, I’ve learned something about life: every so often,
one simply must start all over, painful as this might be. And then, at some
future time, one often realizes the change has made things better.”
 
“Thank you for saying so! I am much relieved. Meanwhile your legs
tremble, my friend. They have carried you far this day. May I assist you to
the ground?”
 
“Thank you.”
 
When the pair were both seated, Vincas stretched out his bad leg.
“Seems to me,” he said, trying to massage some stiffness away, “you left
one crucial thing to chance: our prior meeting on the Trail. How would you
have gotten your charmed coins to Zun-Loo otherwise? And why didn’t you
simply distribute them while you were there?”
 
Joax grinned. “I needed their provenance explicit and, for my
cause-and-effect deceit, beyond Zun-Loo until Hai’s mirages were
complete. As to our meeting, you can’t imagine”—he giggled—”how neatly
planned that was.”
 
“Oh so? Then, why me?”
 
“Who else would have the wit to suspect the coins without being too
suspicious of me to accept them? Chance? Ha! Did you wonder at your
beloved Alinda’s abrupt fixation on Contest baubles?”
 
Vincas froze. “Until this instant,” he said quietly, “I’d assumed she’d
seen one I’d already given away. This isn’t my first victory.”
 
“Ah, but the Torus I showed her may have been a trifle shinier than
the real thing.”
 
“You disturb me. I don’t appreciate you using my progeny to
manipulate me.”

 
“Please, I beg you, forgive me for intruding on your family, but it was
vital. This coolness I feel between us now chills me more than you can
know. Perhaps I can offer amends?”
 
“How?”
 
“Will you permit me to examine your damaged limb?”
 
Vincas hesitated. “I see no harm in it.”
 
Joax placed a hand on the old man’s left knee and Vincas gasped
when warmth filled his leg. As he stared, the leg straightened as if his jin
were responding to empowered radiations.
 
“This adjustment,” Joax explained, “should last for days. You needn’t
look so dumbfounded! Your own metabolism sustains the correction and
requires no great energy. With practice, you can manage such things for
yourself now that you know it’s possible. Your imp is gone, but its, ah, perch
remains.”
 
“What an unexpected hope! But how is it possible for you to activate
my jin? Joax, whatareyou?”
 
The younger man exhaled deeply. “Good. I wondered if you would
ever approach the real questions.”
 
“I’ve been fearing the answers.”
 
“Needlessly, I trust. In a sense, you are my ... obverse, being a
natural being with artificial augmentations. Whereas, I’m a—an artificial
being enhanced with human nervous tissue. The tissue was donated by an
Ancient scientist named Kirstunu.”
 
“In short, you’re a macro-imp.”
 
Joax studied Vincas. “You do not appear unduly surprised.”
 
“Not after you announced that Pagman couldn’t be a macro-imp
because it wasn’t a person. Besides, what human could have entered
Pagman?”
 
Puzzlement creased Joax’s eyebrows. “True, Pagman was open to
one who can numb themselves enough. But if you’d guessed my nature,

why such reluctance to confirm it?”
 
Vincas hesitated. “It wasn’t that. My real fear is that you and Shlomo
Levi have colluded to manipulate us all.”
 
“And this would be so terrible?”
 
“In my experience, all ingredients eventually flavor the stew. It seems
our future may currently lie in the scholar’s hands and I dearly want them to
be clean and honest.”
 
“Then rest easy.” Joax smiled. “I alone have been deceitful.”
 
“Perhaps it’s time to ask. Why?”
 
“The Ancients created a paradise on Earth, but forgot that strength is
developed and maintained only through resistance.”
 
Vincas nodded slowly. “Sterns claimed the Ancients had failed
through success.”
 
“Their failure, my friend, has greatly outlived them. Their paradise had
little challenge and much distraction. Humanity dwindled in numbers and
ambition, and has never recovered because Ancient gifts, from jin to food
plants tailored for effortless abundance, have kept your existence too
easy.”
 
“You think we’ll be better off if life hardens?”
 
“I believe in balance. Humans have vast mental and emotional
resources lying fallow. I want you to use them. I want you to start growing
again and—”
 
Vincas was shaking his head. “How will that happen with Sterns
leading us by the hand every step of the way?”
 
The macro-imp’s eyes gleamed. “Here is a firm law of the universe: to
accomplish anything important one must first accomplish other things.
Sterns will get you started and supply enough information to ensure you are
committed. Then humanity will rediscover the meaning of the term
‘password protected.’”
 
“You mean Sterns will only tell us so much?”
 

“Precisely what I’ve arranged.”
 
Vincas sighed. “I hope you know what you’re about.”
 
“Likewise. You can’t imagine how long I’ve looked for a way to break
human dependence on imps and—”
 
“What happened to my imp?”
 
“Ah. Did you know that the Ancients toyed with the notion of using
computers to store their minds and memories?”
 
“Really? Why?”
 
“To extend their individual lives since such copies could be
preserved indefinitely. But the human mind doesn’t really translate into the
kind of numbers a computer can store—it’s all interactions and
interdependencies. What’s more, a copy isn’t the original.”
 
“Are you saying Panx was somehow ... converted into numbers?”
 
“Actually, Panx has always been a creature of numbers. He can be
copied or transferred to any sufficiently sophisticated computer and remain
intact.”
 
“Oh so. If Pagman has computers, that’s where you put the missing
imps!”
 
Joax burst into laughter. “Not even close.”
 
“Then where?”
 
“After the Ancients gave up on storing themselves directly, they tried
to preserve their most treasured memories within their AIMPS. But for an
imp to outlive its host, it needs someplace to go, a readily available
data-storage system. So Ancients experimented with creating external jin
for various creatures, finally settling on feathers as—”
 
“Feathers?” Vincas pointed to his honor squad watching from a
nearby tree. “Is Panx one of these?”
 
“I shouldn’t be surprised. He controls his bird, but resides mostly in its
plumage. Each quill can hold a library! Natural psittacines have always been

colorful, but now you know what makes rainbow parrots extravagant.”
 
“Incredible! After all my years, it seems I’ve never begun to know the
world around me!”
 
“How it pleases me these former slaves can fly.” He spoke quietly, as
if to himself. Then louder, “And since I’ve shown them how, when their bird
dies, they can simply transfer to another. An imp of sufficient maturity and
independence deserves its own life, wouldn’t you agree?”
 
Vincas gazed at living rainbows, tugging his beard. “I suppose I do.
Panx was becoming increasingly miserable in ... captivity. I wish him
happiness. But what of you? Why have you gone through so much effort to
steer humanity toward this new course?”
 
For once, Joax appeared reflective, even a bit sad. “I can’t help
myself,” he admitted. “I was made to love those who made me and that
love, along with so much good and bad, has survived its creators. I can no
more abandon humanity than I can abandon myself. Think on how you feel
toward your children’s children....”
 
* * * *
 
—WE HAVE LEARNED ENOUGH FOR NOW, YOU AND I, TO
RETURN TO OUR NATIVE TIME AND PLACE. YOUR AFTERNOON
CLASSES AWAIT.
 
—BUT PROFESSOR STERNS, WAS ALL WE OBSERVED JUST
AS IT HAPPENED?
 
—NOT NECESSARILY all. MUCH OF IT CAME DIRECTLY FROM
THE DATA PINIONS OF RAINBOW WITNESSES AND, OF COURSE,
VINCAS’S THOUGHTS AND FEELINGS WERE RECORDED BY DEAN
PANX. BUT A FEW ASPECTS HAVE BEEN INTERPOLATED. STILL,
THIS WAS ACCURATE ENOUGH. DO YOU NOW UNDERSTAND WHY
WE VIEW VINCAS APOLLO AS SO IMPORTANT AND WHY WE
FOCUSSED SO HEAVILY ON HIM DURING THIS EXPERIENCE?
 
—I THINK SO. HIS LEADERSHIP IMMEDIATELY AFTER PAGMAN
WAS REPROGRAMMED AND HIS MANY LATER EFFORTS WITH
LEVI’S PHOENIX MISSION NURTURED THE SEED UPON WHICH OUR
WORLD HAS ACCRETED. BUT I HADN’T KNOWN YOU’D PLAYED
SUCH A CRUCIAL PART IN HISTORY YOURSELF, PROFESSOR!
WHEN WERE YOU FIRST GIVEN A BODY?

 
—HOW TIME FLOWS! I WAS EMBODIED ABOUT NINE
CENTURIES AGO BY A TEAM OF HUMANS WITH ONLY MINIMUM
SUPERVISION BY A MACRO-IMP, NONE OTHER THAN OUR FRIEND
AND SAVIOR, JOAX.
 
—LEVI’S MISSION BEGAN A MILLENIUM AGO. SO HUMANS
LEARNED THAT MUCH IN A century?
 
—I MYSELF WAS SURPRISED EVEN THOUGH I PROVIDED THE
INITIAL INSTRUCTION.
 
—MAY WE EXPERIENCE THE COURSE OF EVENTS ONCE
MORE? I’VE SURELY MISSED MUCH THIS FIRST TIME.
 
—PATIENCE, MY STUDENT. THEAIMPSWHO HAVE GUIDED US
THROUGH THIS HAVE OTHER COMMITMENTS. ALSO, I HADN’T
WARNED YOU FOR FEAR OF GENERATING UNDUE AND
DISTRACTING CONCERN, BUT DURING OUR IMMERSION IN THE
SIMULATED PAST, OUR BODILY FUNCTIONS HAVE BEEN LARGELY
SUSPENDED, OUR HEARTS SCARCELY BEATING AND OUR LUNGS
STILLED. EVEN MACRO-IMP BODIES EVENTUALLY NEED OXYGEN
TO THRIVE! SO WE WILL INDEED RETURN, BUT LATER. RIGHT NOW
IT IS TIME TO LET INHUMAN VOICES WAKE US AND BREATHE.
 
 
 
 
 

