

Jim Kalbach
Rapid Techniques for
Mapping Experiences
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-97122-2
[LSI]
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences
by Jim Kalbach
Copyright © 2017 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://oreilly.com/safari). For more
information, contact our corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938 or
corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Angela Rufino
Production Editor: Colleen Cole
Copyeditor: Octal Publishing, Inc.
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Illustrator: Rebecca Demarest
December 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-12-22: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Rapid Techniques
for Mapping Experiences, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of
O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Visualizing the Experience                                                                      2
A General Process for Rapid Mapping                                                  7
Initiate: Make It Relevant                                                                         8
Investigate: Make It Real                                                                        15
Illustrate: Make It Visual                                                                        20
Align and Envision: Make It Actionable                                              24
Experiment                                                                                              33
Conclusion                                                                                               36
iii


1 Steve Jobs in a town hall at Apple, 1997.
2 Theodore Levitt, “Marketing Myopia”, Harvard Business Review (1960).
Rapid Techniques for
Mapping Experiences
In 1997, Steve Jobs returned to Apple after having been asked to
leave the company he founded. In a town hall meeting, he said:1
You’ve got to start with the customer experience and work back
toward the technology.
With this, he gave insight into how he was going to turn Apple
around: by reversing the equation of product development.
At the time, his approach that lead to the meteoric rise of Apple
seemed revolutionary. To some degree it was. But it wasn’t necessar‐
ily new. In 1960, writing in his famous article “Marketing Myopia,”
Theodore Levitt, the famous Harvard professor wrote:2
An industry begins with the customer and his needs, not with a
patent, a raw material, or a selling skill…The industry develops
backwards, first concerning itself with the physical delivery of cus‐
tomer satisfaction.
Much of the business literature of 1950s and 1960s reflects similar
perspectives. So, Jobs’ comment really represents a return to core
business principles that were already present in theory but not in
practice. The notion of “starting with the experience and working
back toward the technology” symbolizes the renaissance in
customer-centric thinking.
1

3 Mark Benioff, “A Call for Stakeholder Activists”, Huffington Post (2015).
4 Michael Porter and Mark R. Kramer, “Creating Shared Value”, Harvard Business Review
(Jan 2011).
5 For example, Steve Denning’s article “The Copernican Revolution In Management”,
Forbes (2013).
We see other signs of a shift in business thinking. For instance, in
2015 Mark Benioff, the CEO of SalesForce said:3
The business of business isn’t just about creating profits for share‐
holders—it’s also about improving the state of the world and driv‐
ing stakeholder value.
Most notable, the notion of “shared value,” a concept in business put
forth by business strategy guru Michael Porter, also reflects change
in business thinking.4 With shared value, companies gain competi‐
tive advantage by innovating business models that consider the end
consumer and society as a whole first.
The signs are there: we’re witnessing a shift in business of Coperni‐
can proportions: today, customers don’t revolve around the busi‐
ness; rather, the businesses must figure out how they fit into the lives
of their customers.5 This requires a new mindset.
Visualizing the Experience
In 1543, Copernicus created the diagram shown in Figure 1-1 to
explain his observations of the solar system. This allowed others to
grasp his revolutionary discovery: the earth revolves around the
sun, not the other way around.
Just as Copernicus modeled his observations of the solar system,
organizations can model their customer experiences. A diagram of
the individual’s experience serves as a tangible model around which
the teams can rally. More important, visualizations allow the viewer
to grasp interlocking relationships at once.
2 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Figure 1-1. The Copernican model of the solar system
You might have seen such diagrams. They go by many names: cus‐
tomer journey maps, experience maps, and service blueprints, among
others. A quick search on the web produces many examples.
Figure 1-2 shows an example of such a diagram. In this case, it’s an
experience map for organizing an event such as a conference. The
map reflects the perspective of the organizers. It aligns many facets
of information (rows) across different stages in a timeline (col‐
umns). With this, teams can assess how they fit into the customer’s
universe.
Overall, these diagrams seek to align an internal organizational per‐
spective to the outside world. They’re models of the experience indi‐
viduals have when interacting with a company’s offering, or when
they are just trying to get a job done.
Visualizing the Experience 
| 
3

Figure 1-2. An example of a hi-fidelity experience map, in this case for
the experience of organizing a conference
But creating a diagram is not about artistic talent. It’s about creating
a visualization that breaks organizational silos and aligns teams
around a common view of the experience. You can do this quickly
and with low-fidelity diagrams.
Consider the diagram in Figure 1-3 created by Eric Berkman, a
design strategist and author of Designing Mobile Interfaces (O’Reilly,
2011). It’s visually minimal, but reveals key insights about both neg‐
ative and positive service aspects at a Starbucks coffee shop.
As Figure 1-4 demonstrates, you can even create a diagram by using
sticky notes on the wall. Done as a team, this is an effective way to
achieve alignment. Depending on your situation, this might be all
that’s needed to communicate observations of an experience to oth‐
ers.
4 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Figure 1-3. A simple but effective diagram for a visit to Starbucks
Figure 1-4. An example of a user story map created on a wall with
sticky notes
Visualizing the Experience 
| 
5

This report focuses on specific techniques to map experiences in a
short time frame—within a week or two from beginning to end. A
key point to remember is that you should involve others throughout
the process. In rapid contexts, the map will be co-created, with input
at each of the stages.
Benefits of Mapping Experiences
From my work with dozens of companies, I have seen teams with
the best intentions focused too much on internal processes. They
are wrapped up in a type of organizational navel-gazing. Many sim‐
ply don’t know what customers actually go through.
What’s needed is a change in viewpoint—from inside-out to
outside-in. Organizations must have a clear understanding of the
experiences they create. This is not limited to just frontline person‐
nel; everyone must empathize with the individuals they serve.
Organizational silos prevent alignment. Aligned organizations
instead work across functional boundaries. They have a relentless
focus on doing whatever it takes to ensure that their constituents
have great experiences.
There are many benefits to mapping experiences:
• They build empathy, shifting an organization’s view from
inside-out to outside-in.
• Mapping experiences gives teams a common big picture.
• Mapping experiences help break organization silos.
• Visualizations bring focus to organizations.
• Alignment diagrams point to opportunities for improvement
and innovation.
The key is to focus on gaining an outside-in perspective of your
customers and fostering team alignment. There are many types of
diagrams that can help do this, and they don’t need to take long to
create.
6 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

A General Process for Rapid Mapping
Mapping helps us to understand complex systems of interaction,
particularly when dealing with abstract concepts like experience. But
the map itself doesn’t make decisions for you. Instead, an organiza‐
tion must use the diagram as a means to foster discussion and
debate to arrive at a shared sense of reality.
The key is to focus on the verb mapping rather than the noun map.
The journey is as important—if not more so—than the destination.
It’s better that your team has the same perspective and the same
basis for decision-making than having a good-looking diagram. And
that can be accomplished with a simple, low-fidelity map.
Figure 1-5 shows the four steps of mapping. We can use these stages
to describe any effort, small or large. Note that the process might not
be completely linear, and iteration within and between each stage
might be possible, as well.
Figure 1-5. The four stages of mapping experiences
The sections that follow detail each of these stages for mapping
experiences. Here’s a brief overview:
Initiate
You initiate a mapping project by ensuring the diagram is rele‐
vant to the organization.
Investigate
Investigate the experience with research so that your map is
grounded in reality. This outlines how to perform research
before creating a diagram.
Illustrate
Create an illustration of the experience so that others can visual‐
ize it and come to a common understanding.
A General Process for Rapid Mapping 
| 
7

Align
Align the team to the experience in a workshop, and use that
opportunity to envision future experiences and solutions.
It’s important to reiterate that visualizations don’t provide answers
outright; they foster conversations. Diagrams are compelling arti‐
facts that draw interest and attention from others in the organiza‐
tion. They are a means to engage others in discourse. Visualizations
point to opportunities and serve as springboards into innovation.
Initiate: Make It Relevant
I’m often asked how to get started. Knowing where to begin isn’t
easy. There are many questions to address before embarking on the
effort.
Part of the problems is that experience defies precise definition. It’s a
broad and fuzzy concept. You need to first untangle it and figure out
what’s most appropriate.
Ultimately it’s a matter of selection. As the mapmaker, it’s up to you
to decide on which aspects to include and which to leave out. Maps
are purposefully created, and it’s up to you to frame the effort appro‐
priately.
This includes setting client and stakeholder expectations from the
outset. You won’t be able to map every experience of every actor in
your ecosystem of customer interactions. You need to decide and
define which experiences and which elements you’ll include and, at
the same time, what you’ll leave out.
To get started, answer the five key questions for setting up a map‐
ping effort. For some of them, the answer might be obvious and take
no deliberation. In other cases, you might need to meet with your
client or project sponsor to negotiate a decision. Either way, you can
typically initiate an effort in a single, extended meeting at most.
The goal is to ensure that the diagram is relevant to the organiza‐
tion. Focus on answering the following five questions to get started.
1. What is your point of view?
Mapping experiences requires a common thread or a “bouncing
ball” to follow. The point of view answers the questions: whose expe‐
riences are you mapping and which experiences are included?
8 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

For instance, a news magazine might serve multiple audiences: read‐
ers and advertisers. They also deal with journalists and have distribu‐
tors. You could map the experience of any of these actors and their
interactions with the publisher.
One thing I recommend doing up front is to create a concept map of
all of the actors and entities involved, called a stakeholder map. The
example in Figure 1-6 shows a high-level map of an ecosystem for a
news magazine publisher.
Figure 1-6. An example stakeholder map
From left to right, we can follow the interaction between stakehold‐
ers: journalists write content that is printed by the publisher in the
magazine. Advertisers pay for advertising, which is a main source of
revenue for the publisher. Then, the publisher distributes the maga‐
zine to news outlets. The reader consumes the news after buying it
from an outlet. Advertisers see value in their advertising only after
readers have purchased and read the magazine.
Such a simple sketch can help you zoom in on the people and expe‐
riences you want to map. Then, determine what type of diagram you
might need. Typically, mapping experiences focuses on key relation‐
ships, not all of them.
Initiate: Make It Relevant 
| 
9

You can also derive personas from the stakeholder map. If you don’t
already have personas, create proto-personas quickly. They are
depictions of who you believe your target audience is, based on what
you know today.
Proto-personas can be outlined on a simple grid with four squares,
as shown in Figure 1-7. There are four main elements: name and
sketch, demographic and psychographic details, behaviors and
actions, needs and pain points.
Figure 1-7. A simple proto-persona based on current knowledge and
assumptions
The proto-persona gives the team an easy way to refer to the indi‐
viduals involved in the mapping effort early on. Instead of saying
user, you can refer to Mary, for instance. Fully-fledged personas can
then be created later as the project unfolds, if needed, after you’ve
completed more in-depth research.
2. What is the scope of the experience?
Scope refers to the breadth of the experience, from beginning to end.
What are the boundaries? Where does it begin and end? There are
no right or wrongs, only appropriate or not appropriate for your
context.
10 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

For a chronological journey map, for instance, the scope is begin‐
ning and end of the timeline, or the left and right of the diagram, as
demonstrated in Figure 1-8.
Figure 1-8. The scope of the diagram determines when it begins and
ends
In a customer journey map, for example, the experience often begins
with becoming aware of a product or service. But it also could begin
with the individual’s prior knowledge or experience just before she
becomes aware. On the other end, the journey might end with
renewing a subscription, but it could also entail leaving a service and
even returning.
The point is that you’ll need to determine the scope of the experi‐
ence and what parts you’ll include and not include.
3. What is your focus?
The mapmaker also chooses the focus of the diagram, or which
aspects come to the foreground and which don’t (see Figure 1-9).
There are many types of elements to consider.
Initiate: Make It Relevant 
| 
11

Typically, maps of an experience focus on physical artifacts, actions,
thoughts, and feelings. But you also could highlight needs, goals,
and challenges. And, there are specific situations you might include,
such as mobile contexts or the interaction with other actors.
There is no right or wrong, so it’s up to you to find out what aspects
are most relevant to your organization. For a chronological diagram,
think of your focus as the rows of information you’re going to
include.
Figure 1-9. The focus of a diagram determines what aspects and ele‐
ments you’ll include to visualize the experience
4. How will you structure the diagram?
Diagrams differ in structure. The most common scheme is chrono‐
logical. This is usually represented in a large table-like arrangement
with rows and columns.
Apart from chronological maps, other organizational schemes are
possible. These include hierarchical arrangements, spatial organiza‐
tion scheme, or network structures. Figure 1-10 shows the four ways
to organize information in your diagram.
12 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Figure 1-10. Structure: how will you arrange and represent the infor‐
mation in the diagram?
Even at very early stages of the mapping project, you can create a
back-of-the-napkin sketch of what you think the diagram might end
up looking like. This gives you a chance to involve others and solicit
input from stakeholders, helping to further set their expectations. It
also will help you to move faster later on because you’ll have the
overall target format toward which you’re working.
5. How will you use the map?
Finally, keep the intended use of a diagram in mind from the very
beginning.
First, consider who will be consuming the information in your dia‐
gram. Keep the map usable for your target audience. Too much
detail can overwhelm certain stakeholders; not enough detail will
leave others wanting more.
Initiate: Make It Relevant 
| 
13

Also, consider what the purpose is of the diagrams. Frame the effort
in a way that is appropriate for your team’s needs. What questions
does the organization have that a diagram can address? What gaps
in knowledge does it fill?
Finally, ask yourself how the diagram will be used. Typically, you’ll
facilitate work sessions that engage a diverse team with the map (see
the section “Align and Envision: Make It Actionable” later in this
report). Schedule this well in advance to ensure that you’ll get every‐
one’s time and attention.
Summary of Rapid Techniques for Initiating
Table 1-1 presents a synopsis of the activities you’ll perform when
initiating a mapping project.
Table 1-1. A summary of activities when initiating a mapping project
Stage
Duration
People
Outcome
1. Answer the five
questions to getting
started
1 hour (or less) 2–3 people,
including
sponsors or
decision
makers
Set expectations on objective of
the effort
2. Create a stakeholder
map
1–2 hours
3–5 people
Understand all possible, relevant
experiences to include and decide
which to focus on
3. Rough sketch of the
form of the map
1 hour (or less)
Get alignment on the possible
ways to structure a diagram
4. Schedule an extended
working session
1 hour (or less) 2–3 people
Ensure that you’ll get time for a
workshop with the extended team
Total time
Half day
In the end, there is no right or wrong way to map experiences. It’s up
to you as the mapmaker to ensure that the effort is on target and
appropriate for your situation.
When working rapidly, you can initiate a project in about a half day
or less. The important thing to keep in mind is your goal at this
stage: ensuring that the effort is relevant to the team and to the orga‐
nization.
14 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Investigate: Make It Real
The aim at this stage is to ground your mapping effort in reality. Of
course, many teams might already know a lot about the individual’s
experience. That’s a good sign, and you should take advantage of
existing knowledge where and when you can.
However, further research into the experience is typically eye-
opening. There’s a healthy reality check for everyone involved. I tend
to uncover insights that the organization didn’t know about or even
suspect. Those unknown insights are often the most interesting and
provide the best source of inspiration for innovation.
How much investigation is needed? There is no right or wrong
answer. But some investigation is better than none. In a rapid con‐
text, as outlined in this report, you’ll want to limit this stage to few
days of work.
Note that due to dependencies on other people and activities, such
as recruiting participants, the actual duration of time needed can be
spread out beyond a few days. In other words, you might not be able
to move from initiating a project to investigation from one day to
the next due to scheduling. However, the total person-hours should
add up to only a few days when working rapidly.
There are four activities to include in your investigation, which I
outline in the following sections.
1. Review Existing Sources of Information
Begin with existing sources of information. Review previous mar‐
keting studies, usability test findings, customer support log data,
and even industry reports and whitepapers.
You probably won’t find a single source of information about an
end-to-end customer experience. Most industry reports and white‐
papers only focus on slices of an overall experience. And unless your
organization has already done work mapping experiences, it’s
unlikely that you’ll have any preexisting research in house.
Instead, you’ll need to pick through and identify the relevant bits of
information. This is a bottom-up process that takes patience to
uncover related insight. An industry report, for instance, might
include only a few facts useful for your particular project.
Investigate: Make It Real 
| 
15

Comb through existing data and create a list of relevant observa‐
tions. Be sure to note the sources for each fact so that you can refer‐
ence the data in your diagram later, if needed.
I often consolidate information from existing sources in a simple
table. Table 1-2 shows an example of this approach, in this case for a
software company investigating its onboarding and installation pro‐
cess.
Table 1-2. Source 1: Email Feedback
Evidence
Interpretations
Experience
Implications
Many emails indicate trouble with
installation, e.g.:
“After going through the
instructions and process several
times, I gave up.” + —Trial
customer
People lack the skills and knowledge
to complete the installation process
and thus become frustrated.
People don’t have the time or
patience to read the instructions
carefully.
Installation is a
problematic phase in
the journey.
There were frequent questions
about having administrator rights
to install the software, e.g.:
“I got the message ‘Please contact
your IT admin’ and didn’t know
what to do.”
For security reasons, many companies
don’t allow employees to install
software.
It can be difficult or time consuming
for employees to contact an IT
administrator.
For users without
administrator rights,
installation ends their
experience: it’s a show
stopper.
Some emails praised customer
support, e.g.:
“The customer service agent I spoke
with was really knowledgeable and
helpful!”
People like to be able to speak with a
“real” person.
People feel like they are getting
personal attention with live agents.
Customer support is a
positive aspect of the
current experience.
After you have a list of relevant insights, you can find interesting
patterns that might inform the creation of your diagram.
2. Create a Touchpoint Inventory
Take inventory of current touchpoints between the individual and
the organization. One way to do this is with mystery shopping, a type
of role playing in which you go through a process as if you were a
customer.
As you experience the product or service, record the touchpoints
they come in contact with, including physical evidence, digital
touchpoints, and in-person encounters. The objective is to gather a
list of all possible points of interaction between an individual and an
organization.
16 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Figure 1-11 shows an example of a simple touchpoint inventory, in
this case created by Chris Risdon of Adaptive Path for a service
called Rail Europe. It’s a simple table with a list of existing points of
interaction.
Figure 1-11. A touchpoint inventory
You should include images and screenshots of key points in the
experience for reference. You also should include quantitative infor‐
mation about the experience. Keep this information on hand to
include in your final diagram.
Overall, creating a touchpoint inventory will help you to understand
the details and interactions of the current experience.
3. Interview Internal Stakeholders
Mapping experiences necessarily involves investigation with people
within the organization. Seek out a range of people to interview
beyond just the main client or project sponsors. Include managers,
sales representatives, engineers and technicians, and frontline per‐
sonnel.
At this point, your investigation is exploratory: you want to uncover
the main themes to research further with real customers. The sam‐
ple of people you have access to might be fairly small—about four to
six stakeholders.
Investigate: Make It Real 
| 
17

Internal stakeholder interviews can be informal and take anywhere
from 30 to 60 minutes. If the stakeholders work in the same loca‐
tion, it might take only a day to complete. Phone interviews also are
possible if you can’t get with everyone face-to-face.
Ask them to sketch their interactions with customers in a rough dia‐
gram. Use your conversations with them to uncover what the orga‐
nization already knows about the experience you’re trying to map.
For instance, Figure 1-12 shows a rough sketch I collected during a
stakeholder interview for a large mapping project involving the
workflow of lawyers. This helped to not only focus my subsequent
interviews with external customers, but also provided important
clues on how to map the experience.
Figure 1-12. Example of a sketch created during a stakeholder inter‐
view
18 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

4. Conduct Research Externally
Research with actual customers typically focuses on qualitative
interviews and observations. I recommend conducting interviews
on location so that you can also make direct observations of the cus‐
tomer’s environment. An alternative is to conduct remote interviews
by phone, and teleconferencing software is also a viable option.
When interviewing, keep your questions open and avoid getting yes
or no answers. Let participants speak about their experience in their
own words. Prompt them to keep talking with phrases like, “tell me
more about that,” or, “help me understand that better.” Dig deep to
find key insights to include in your diagram.
Take notes during each interview and record the audio of the session
if you can. After each interview, begin compiling your insights in a
table that resembles your target diagram. Use the phases of your
touchpoint map or draft diagram to structure the table.
For instance, Figure 1-13 shows a spreadsheet that that you can use
to capture research findings across several interviews. This is a
modified version of a data-collection sheet I used on a past project
investigating a chronic, life-threatening illness. It allowed multiple
people to contribute the research and helped focus the effort to col‐
lect relevant information only.
Figure 1-13. Capture research insights in a spreadsheet to organize
them quickly
Investigate: Make It Real 
| 
19

Summary of Rapid Techniques for Investigating
Table 1-3 presents an overview of the activities you’ll perform when
investigating a mapping project.
Table 1-3. A summary of activities when investigating a mapping project
Step
Duration
People
Outcome
1. Review existing
sources of information
2–4 hours
1–2 people, including the
key investigators and
mapmakers
Gather initial data from
existing sources
2. Create a touchpoint
inventory
4 hours
1–2 investigators
Understand the interactions of
the current experience
3. Conduct internal
interviews
4–8 hours
1–2 researchers plus 5–8
stakeholders to interview
Research what others already
know about the customer
experience
4. Conduct external
research
1–2 days
2–3 investigators plus 5–8
participants
Ground your investigation in
reality through direct contact
with customers
Total time
3–4 days
Note that recruiting external users might take some coordination
and contribute to delays in these estimates in terms of overall dura‐
tion. Plan ahead as much as possible and strive to keep the timelines
short.
Illustrate: Make It Visual
Creating a diagram is not about artistic talent. You don’t need to be a
graphic designer to map an experience. As you can see so far, the
process is really about including others and engaging your team.
But have no doubt about one thing: visualization is a key part of the
technique. A written report summarizing the findings of your inves‐
tigation might span 10 or more pages, but you know it won’t be read
carefully, if at all.
Instead, a visualization allows others to grasp the entirety of the
experience at once without necessarily leaving out the detail. A vis‐
ual representation is compelling and engaging, and it invites conver‐
sation as a team.
20 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

There are two approaches to building a diagram at this point:
Create a diagram together with your team
Schedule a workshop with an extended team of 8 to 12 people to
build the diagram together. You can do this by using sticky
notes on a whiteboard or wall. This typically needs four hours
to complete as a group. Making this is a team activity helps gal‐
vanize understanding and buy-in. After all, people support what
they help make.
Draft a diagram ahead of time
Take all of the information gathered so far and create a first ver‐
sion of a diagram. Then, schedule a workshop and present the
map as a centerpiece for discussion. Use the diagram to engage
others in activities, such as brainstorming and ideation.
A combination of these two approaches is also possible. Use the
information you’ve gathered so far to create a partially complete dia‐
gram to bring into a team workshop. For instance, you can deter‐
mine the point of view and define the scope with some high-level
phases. Then, you can complete a few rows of information in the
diagram but leave others blank for the team to fill in.
The advantage of bringing a partially complete map to a team work‐
shop is that you’ll avoid becoming derailed over disagreements on
things like whose experience are you focusing on and what the pha‐
ses of interaction are. Determine those elements in advance to let
the group focus on more important issues, such as the interaction
around touchpoints and where the customer experience breaks
down.
Regardless of your approach, there are three key considerations
when illustrating the diagram, which we’ll look at in the following
sections.
1. Lay Out the Diagram
Typically, diagrams have a table-like structure. But it’s worthwhile to
consider alternative forms, as well. Used correctly, the layout itself
can enhance the overall story the diagram tells. For instance, for
repetitive processes, a circular diagram might be more appropriate
than a table.
Figure 1-14 shows some possible layouts and formats.
Illustrate: Make It Visual 
| 
21

Figure 1-14. A summary of possible layouts for alignment diagrams of
various kinds
2. Compile the Content
Diagrams don’t include raw data collected during your investigation.
Instead, reduce the information to just the key points that are more
meaningful to your team. This is more difficult than it sounds, and
you can lose a lot of time consolidating information. Try to move
quickly by keeping the objectives of the overall effort in mind.
Note that at this point that you’re focused on describing the current
state experience. It’s important to first understand how the world
currently works before envisioning a new future. In the next stage
(see the section “Align and Envision: Make It Actionable” later in
this report), you’ll be looking at ways to improve and innovate.
3. Represent the Information
People like information that is rich in presentation. Content that is
presented with color, texture, and style has relevance to our lives
and our work. The visual presentation of a diagram influences how
others understand the information.
Even when creating a diagram in real time using sticky notes with
your team, strive to create a consistent visual language that amplifies
your storyline. What insights should be highlighted? What are the
key messages that you want to communicate? How can you make
the diagram approachable, aesthetically pleasing, and more compel‐
ling?
22 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Pay attention to things like color coding, position of elements, and
consistent use of language. You can hack simple spreadsheets to
make a meaningful diagram that have a consistent representation of
information. For instance, the diagram in Figure 1-15 is a customer
journey map for a service for finding architects internationally. It
was created using Excel.
Figure 1-15. It isn’t necessary to create diagrams in graphics programs
to be effective; this example was created in Excel
Summary of Rapid Techniques for Illustrating
Table 1-4 presents an overview of the activities you’ll perform when
illustrating a mapping project.
Table 1-4. A summary of activities when illustrating a mapping project
Step
Duration
People
Outcome
1. Layout the
diagram
1 hour
1–2 people, including the key
mapmaker and a key sponsor
Determine the
arrangement of
information on the
diagram
2. Compile the
content
4–8 hours
1–2 people, including the key
mapmaker and a key sponsor
Reduce the information
you want to include
3. Design the
information
2–4 hours
1–2 people, including the key
mapmaker and a key sponsor
Finalize the diagram with
graphic elements, color,
etc.
Total time
Half day to 2
days
Illustrate: Make It Visual 
| 
23

Align and Envision: Make It Actionable
Answers to your organization’s questions don’t magically fall out of
the diagram. The map itself is important, but not the ultimate goal:
it’s a means to engage others in discourse. Your job is to make this
discourse happen.
At this point, your role switches from mapmaker to facilitator. You
don’t want to attach your final diagram as an email attachment and
hope others read it. Instead, you need to actively guide your team
through the mapping process.
Hold an extended workshop with your team to engage them. First
understand the current experience. Then envision possible future
experiences as a group. Schedule this workshop in advance to ensure
maximum participation.
A workshop typically has three main parts:
1. Empathize
Empathy is about seeing the world through someone else’s eyes. It’s
about an implicit sense of what an experience is like, what people
value, and what emotions are involved. It’s not enough that you
empathize with the experiences people have. You need to ensure that
others gain that same deep understanding.
Use the diagram to walk through an experience in slow motion,
helping to create empathy within the team. If you’re presenting a
completed diagram or partially completed diagram, ask others to
help complete it (Figure 1-16). Don’t just present it as a final prod‐
uct. Contributing to the map will help you get understanding and
buy-in across the team.
24 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Figure 1-16. Present the map in a workshop and ask others to contrib‐
ute to it
Next, evaluate the organization’s ability to support the experience at
each step. There are several ways to do this quickly:
Grade performance
How well does the organization perform at each stage? Assign a
simple school grade to each phase.
Identify moments of truth
Where are the most intense moments in the experience for the
individual? Have the team vote and then discuss the results.
Vote on importance to the organization
How important is each point in the experience to the organiza‐
tion? Find the most impactful points in the experience together.
The aim is to identify opportunities based on the customers’ reality.
How can the organization create value for the individual? Look for
gaps in service, pain points to address, and unmet needs to fulfill, as
well as inefficiencies in the current service and opportunities for
optimization.
Align and Envision: Make It Actionable 
| 
25

6 Dave Gray et al, Gamestorming (O’Reilly, 2010).
2. Envision
Use your collective empathy for the current experience as a spring‐
board into envisioning future solutions. At this point, the process is
one of going wide, or divergent thinking.
Ideate new experiences. For instance, begin with a general round of
brainstorming. I find it helpful to let people get out their initial ideas
quickly—even ideas they had before the workshop—so that they are
open to further ideation later on.
To guide the brainstorming, create specific statements to which the
group can react. These can be derived from the main pain points
you want to overcome, for instance.
• “How might we…?” shifts attention from the current to the
future state. For example, a software company might find pain
points around the onboarding experience. They might then ask,
“How might we make onboarding more frictionless?” Having
participants respond to specific statements like this produces
better brainstorming results.
• “What if…?” helps change direction and dig deeper. For exam‐
ple, in the previous scenario, you might ask, “What if we had to
onboard a million people at once?” Phrasing a challenge state‐
ment this way shifts thinking and opens up the brainstorming.
As the facilitator, plan further exercises to keep the creativity of the
group moving. An excellent source of ideas is the book Gamestorm‐
ing (O’Reilly, 2010) by Dave Gray et al.6 This is a collection of activi‐
ties to engage groups of people to playfully explore a given problem
space and find innovative solutions.
After the group generates a lot of ideas, select the ones to move for‐
ward. At this point you’ll switch from divergent thinking to conver‐
gent thinking.
One framework to help you select concepts is a simple matrix
(Figure 1-17). Typically, you’ll be looking at feasibility versus value,
or importance versus difficulty. Place the ideas you’ve generate so far
on the matrix and then decide together as a team which you want to
develop further.
26 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Figure 1-17. A simple matrix can help select concepts and ideas to
move forward
As quickly as possible, articulate the ideas you want to evaluate.
Even within a few hours you can create representations of your
main ideas for evaluation. This “debugs” your thinking and can
prove or disprove the value of an idea quickly, as well.
Here are a few techniques to try:
Write scenarios
Write out the details of a concept in prose. Be as detailed as pos‐
sible in terms of the anticipated experience. Even the simplest of
concepts can easily fill multiple pages of text. Let others read
and critique it.
Create storyboards
Represent the intended experience in a series of graphic panels.
Then critique the idea as a group.
Draw a flowchart
Quickly express the steps of your idea as steps in a flowchart.
This will help you to make connections and see all of the mov‐
ing parts at once.
Sketch ideas
Quickly draw an image of the product or service to share with
others.
Wireframe solutions
Create simple grayscale versions of screens for interaction.
Align and Envision: Make It Actionable 
| 
27

Build a prototype
With easy-to-use online prototyping tools such as UX Pin, it’s
very simple to simulate working software. You can create a con‐
vincing prototype in a matter of hours, as illustrated in
Figure 1-18. When working with physical products, you can use
cardboard and clay to articulate the concept as a prototype for
evaluation.
Figure 1-18. A clickable prototype created on the last day of a multiday
workshop for testing with potential users
3. Evaluate and Test
Schedule time in the workshop to evaluate the artifacts you created
rapidly. They will be based on presumptions at this point, but that’s
OK. In fact, it is better to presume and fail than to over-rationalize
the merit of an idea based on its face value alone.
Get feedback on your prototypes as quickly as possible. This will not
be controlled, scientific research. Instead, the aim is to understand
your assumptions better. Are you solving the right problems? Does
your idea address the problem in the right way?
Here are some lightweight ways to evaluate the leading concepts
from the workshop in a rapid way:
28 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Hallway testing
Get feedback from people close by who are not a part of the
workshop. Colleagues in other departments can provide quick,
initial reactions on your concepts, for instance.
Online tests
There are many online services that provide feedback on con‐
cepts and prototypes; for example, UserTesting. You’ll usually
get results within a matter of hours.
Focus groups
Recruit people in advance of the workshop to give direct feed‐
back. Invite them into the workshop and present the concepts to
them to see how they react.
Moderated concept tests
Enlist a moderator to get reactions from text participants as
they interact with your prototype. You’ll need to recruit partici‐
pants in advance for this. Figure 1-19 shows a concept test at the
end of multiday workshop. The tests were conducted in a sepa‐
rate room, viewable by the workshop team via video camera.
Figure 1-19. An example of a concept test during a workshop
Align and Envision: Make It Actionable 
| 
29

Running a Workshop as Sprints
The process for a team workshop outlined in this report—empathy,
envisioning, and evaluating—has no time frame. The process has
the form shown in Figure 1-20.
Figure 1-20. Regardless of duration, the mapping workshop takes a
similar form, moving from empathy and the envisioning, and then
onto evaluating and experimenting
When working rapidly, you can do this in a matter of days. I have
found that multiday workshops are effective for gaining momen‐
tum quickly.
Figure 1-21 show approximate schedules for workshops across one,
two, and three days, respectively.
Figure 1-21. Possible breakdown of one-, two-, and three-day work‐
shops.
30 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

7 Richard Banfield, C. Todd Lombardo & Trace Wax. Design Sprint (O’Reilly, 2015).
8 Jake Knapp. Sprint (Simon & Schuster, 2016).
This approach resembles design sprints, a popular format for bring‐
ing teams together to solve design challenges. For more, see Design
Sprints by Richard Banfield et al.7 and Sprint by Jake Knapp.8
Regardless of the label, the intent is the same: begin with a collec‐
tive understanding of the experience and then find solutions from
there.
Facilitating rapid sessions and workshops takes some effort and
forethought. As the facilitator, it’s your job to keep the team on
track to get the results you’re looking for.
In planning a workshop, you need to prepare well, run the work‐
shop, and then follow up. Here are some aspects to consider for
each:
1. Prepare
Organize the alignment workshop well in advance. Include it in
your initial proposal, and schedule the event early.
Invite a range of stakeholders
Groups between 6 to 12 participants work best.
Find a date and time
Book the workshop early. In many organizations getting people
to commit for a entire day or multiple days is difficult.
Reserve a room
Book an oversized room for the number of people you’ve invi‐
ted. This can be onsite or offsite.
Plan logistics
Secure equipment and supplies in advance. You will also need
several large, printed copies of the diagram.
Arrange catering
It’s important to take breaks and have snacks. Get out of the
workshop room for lunch, but try to stay close by.
Hold a preworkshop meeting
Schedule a meeting or call a week before the workshop.
Align and Envision: Make It Actionable 
| 
31

2. Run the Workshop
Set the stage
Explain the parts of the workshop: empathizing, envisioning,
and evaluating.
Engage with the diagram
Plan exercises that make people absorb the information in the
diagram
Facilitate divergent thinking
Brainstorming is the principle way to generate new ideas.
Create artifacts
Sketch, draw, and prototype your ideas quickly.
Select concepts
Focus on ideas that have high value to customers and to the
organization.
Run tests
Quickly evaluate the leading concepts.
Plan social activities
Include a social event such as an evening dinner. This helps
build trust and respect.
3. Follow Up
Get feedback on the session
Follow up with a brief survey.
Update the diagram
Take the feedback you get from the session and update the dia‐
gram.
Distribute materials
Collate the output of the workshop and distribute it to others
who didn’t participate.
Make the diagrams visible
Create different forms of the diagram and make them visible.
Finally, the effort does not end with the workshop. Ensure that the
experiments are actually conducted. Keep the momentum going
with an action plan and assigned owners of each experiment. Hold
weekly checkpoints to track progress.
32 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Summary of Rapid Techniques for Aligning and
Envisioning
Table 1-5 presents a synopsis of the activities you’ll perform when
aligning and envisioning a mapping project.
Table 1-5. A summary of activities when aligning and envisioning a
mapping project
Step
Duration
People
Objective
1. Empathize
2–4 hours
5–15 people, including mix of
stakeholders
See the experience from the
individual’s perspective
2. Envision
2–4 hours
5–15 people, including mix of
stakeholders
Ideate solutions for improvement and
innovation
3. Evaluate
2–8 hours
5–15 people, including mix of
stakeholders
Assess early-stage ideas to filter and
prioritize, as well as develop them
further
Total time
1–3 days
Experiment
Some of the ideas that result from a mapping effort are no-brainers.
These tend to be incremental improvements. For instance, it might
be an easy win to update the text of an onboarding email to avoid
confusion. Or, you might be able to better coordinate marketing and
sales efforts with a weekly sync-up meeting. By all mean, act on
ideas that just make sense.
Other ideas coming out of a mapping effort can be less clear. These
tend to be more innovative initiatives that might question the status
quo. For instance, a significant change to your pricing model can
have many dependencies and unknown effects. Or, updating an
online checkout process might have consequences on revenue.
These ideas need further experimentation.
Ideas alone have no value. Even a prototype of a concept you created
and tested has no value. Although you already have initial feedback
on your ideas, you still don’t know how either the market or the rest
of the organization will react to the proposed innovation. An idea
on a sticky note is far from being ready to implement.
Mapping experiences is an ongoing conversation with your team
and organization. It doesn’t end with a brainstorming session. Don’t
Experiment 
| 
33

leave the workshop with a wall full of sticky notes and few concept
prototypes. That won’t keep the conversation going.
Instead, think of new concepts emerging from mapping effort as
hypotheses. The outcome of the mapping workshop, then, should be
to plan experiments. Aim to create well-formed hypotheses state‐
ments for each of the concepts you’ve decided to move forward.
Structurally, there are three parts:
• We believe that providing [solution, service] for [individual,
customer, user]
• Will likely result in [desired outcome, assumed effect]
• We will know this when we see [result, measurable impact]
Notice that the hypothesis is phrased as a belief. You won’t know the
impact until you introduce it into the market. Also note that if there
is not a measurable outcome, you don’t have a testable hypothesis.
Be sure to include a metric.
Set the right expectations in advance: you won’t end the workshop
with ready-to-implement new concepts. Instead, prepare everyone
for further testing and development. Think about it as a type of
“idea R&D” rather than a source of backlog items.
More important, before the workshop even begins, arrange for the
time and resources you’ll need to conduct experiments afterward.
Involve project managers to start scheduling follow-on activities.
Make sure you have a team to continue working after the session is
over. Set clear targets and goals, and set up check points to measure
progress over the next weeks and months.
Keep in mind that you’re not necessarily building a product or
launching a service. The aim is to prove out business viability with
the minimum effort. Some specific, light-weight approaches include
the following:
Explanatory video
Create a video explaining your service and circulate it on the
internet. Measure interest via traffic and response rates.
Landing page
Sometimes called a “fake storefront,” or announcing of the ficti‐
tious launch of your proposed service (Figure 1-22).
34 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Working prototype
Simulate a functioning version of your concept. Test this with
potential customers and measure concrete aspects such as task
completion and satisfaction.
Concierge service
Begin with a simulated version of your service. Invite a very
limited set of potential customers to sign up and then provide
the service manually.
Limited product release
Create a version of your service with only one or two function‐
ing features. Measure the success and appeal of those features.
Combinations of the above are also possible. For instance, after one
recent workshop I conducted, we developed both an explanatory
video and a landing page (Figure 1-22). Visitors could view the
video and then sign up to be notified for a beta release. There was a
short, three-question survey we introduced after signing up, as well.
Figure 1-22. SnapSupport began as a concept video and landing page
to test market reactions to the idea before a working prototype was
built
Experiment 
| 
35

9 Eric Reis, Lean Startup (O’Reilly, 2011).
10 Ash Maurya, Running Lean (O’Reilly, 2012).
11 Jeff Gothelf, Lean UX (O’Reilly, 2013).
12 Michael Schrage, The Innovator’s Hypothesis (MIT Press, 2014).
From these touchpoints, we were able to measure traffic to the web‐
site over a given period of time, the number of sign-ups, and
responses to our survey. We also spoke with selected individuals to
better understand their motivations and what excited them about
our value proposition.
Those familiar with the current literature on “lean” techniques will
recognize some of these approaches. Other techniques and tests are
also possible. For more on defining and running market experi‐
ments, see Eric Reis’s Lean Startup9 and Ash Maurya’s Running
Lean.10 Also recommended are Lean UX by Jeff Gothelf11 and The
Innovator’s Hypothesis by Michael Schrage.12
The point here is to try activities together. As the facilitator, it’s up to
you to start a conversation about how your organization will inno‐
vate as well as seeing that conclusion to its end.
Conclusion
Mapping experiences is a broad set of activities that engage others.
Though often focused on heavy-upfront research and hi-fidelity vis‐
ualizations, these need not be the case. The benefits of mapping can
be realized in a short period of time—about one to two weeks in
total duration.
The process has four modes of activity, as shown in Figure 1-23,
which are followed by ongoing research and development. This
report has outlined and highlight specific techniques to move
through each quickly.
Figure 1-23. The four modes of the mapping process
36 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Table 1-6 presents a summary of estimates for a mapping project
with low and high estimates. Your situation might require more or
less time at each stage. Note also that due to external dependencies
such as recruiting customers to interview, the duration of these esti‐
mates might be longer in between each stage.
Table 1-6. Estimated time needed for each stage of a mapping project
Stage
Low rapid
estimate
High rapid
estimate
Objective
Initiate
1 hour
1 day
Ensure the effort is relevant to the
organization
Investigate
1–2 days
3–4 days
Ground the effort in reality with research
and feedback from real people
Illustrate
Half day
2 days
Visualize the experience for the whole
organization to see
Align and
Envision
1–2 days
3–4 days
Foster conversations and activities around
the experience to come up with solutions
Total
~1 week
~2 weeks
These estimates also don’t include ongoing experimentation. In
rapid context, this can be limited in time, as well. For instance, select
three experiments to move forward with small teams over the next
month. By the end of the month, schedule a session to present the
results of the experiments and updated concepts. Plan more experi‐
ments or next steps after that time period is up.
Experimentation represents larger commitment from the organiza‐
tion. It is a mindset shift—from delivering products and services to
discovering about new ones. In this sense, mapping experiences is a
catalyst for change. It helps you to shift perspectives from inside-out
to outside-in and lets you become a grass roots strategic contributor
within the organization.
Conclusion 
| 
37

Rapid Mapping and Design Workshop
MURAL is a leading virtual whiteboard for design collaboration. It’s
a cloud-based service that lets you work visually online, from wher‐
ever you are. I joined the MURAL team in March 2015.
We used our own product to examine the onboarding experience of
MURAL and make improvements. To do this, we held a one-and-a-
half–day workshop in Buenos Aires with a group of eight people
with different roles. The workshop had three parts.
Part 1: Empathize
The aim was to first understand the user’s experience. To do this, I
mapped out elements of the experience using MURAL in advance
of the session (Figure 1-24) There were three main sections to
mural I created:
Value chain (upper left)
To understand the flow of value, I mapped the customer value
chain. This provides an overview of the actors involved and
their relationships to one another.
Proto-Personas
In the upper right of Figure 1-24, you’ll see three proto-
personas. These were based on the actors in the value chain
diagram. Sophia, the design lead, was our primary persona for
this exercise.
Experience Map
In the middle was an experience map. It is based on prior
research I conducted on team collaboration as well as recent
customer interviews. The circular shapes represent repeat
behavior.
As a group, we discussed each of these elements to understand the
broader experience. The digital format of the diagram allowed us to
add and update it on-the-fly. For instance, we added details to the
proto-personas as we discussed them.
38 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

Figure 1-24. A combination of value chain, proto-personas, and expe‐
rience all in one mural
Part 2: Envision
We then brainstormed about barriers to consumption. We asked,
“What is keeping the primary persona from using our service
repeatedly?”
With a large virtual area to work on, it was easy to record answers
directly below the experience map. These were clustered and priori‐
tized by using the dot voting feature built in to MURAL.
We then conducted an exercise to find solutions, called a design
studio. For each barrier we identified, participants individually
sketched possible solutions. The sketches were photographed and
uploaded to another mural for everyone in the workshop to see
(Figure 1-25).
Conclusion 
| 
39

Figure 1-25. The results of a design studio using MURAL
Part 3: Evaluate
After lunch the team broke into two groups. Each focused on con‐
solidating the sketches into a single solution. Our aim was to create
testable artifacts by the end of the day.
Using UserTesting, an online, unmoderated, remote testing service,
we quickly got feedback on our proposed solutions. The tests ran
overnight, and by the next morning we had initial results.
Some of our assumptions were validated, others were disproven.
We took the test feedback and iterated the proposed designs. In a
final step, we created a concrete plan for implementation.
Conclusion
This rapid approach allowed us to go from understanding the expe‐
rience, to prototyping, to testing, in less than two days. There were
no written proposals, reports, or other documents.
Experience mapping does not have to be a lengthy process. Using
an online tool like MURAL allowed us to combine elements in one
place for a better overview. Creating the experience map online also
made the process ongoing rather than a one-time event. We were
able to loop in others who were not present at the workshop,
regardless of where they were located.
40 
| 
Rapid Techniques for Mapping Experiences

About the Author
Jim Kalbach is a noted author, speaker, and instructor in user expe‐
rience design, information architecture, and strategy. He is currently
the Head of Customer Success at MURAL, a leading visual online
workspace for remote collaboration.
Jim has worked with large companies, such as eBay, Audi, SONY,
Elsevier Science, LexisNexis, and Citrix. Before returning to the US
in 2013 after living in Germany for fifteen years, Jim was the
cofounder of the European Information Architecture conferences.
He also cofounded the IA Konferenz series in Germany.
Jim plays jazz bass in jam sessions and combos in Jersey City, where
he currently lives. In 2007 Jim published his first full-length book
with O’Reilly, Designing Web Navigation. His second book, Mapping
Experiences, was released in December 2015. He blogs at experien‐
cinginformation.com and tweets under @jimkalbach.

